D2629 09808383 44134
John Dunton at ye Black Rauen in the Poultrey over agianst the Stocks MArkett London— T: Catlett Sc
THE INFORMER'S DOOM: OR, AN Amazing and Seasonable Letter FROM UTOPIA, Directed to the Man in the MOON. Giving a full and pleasant Account of the Arraignment, Tryal, and Condemnation, of all those grand and bitter Enemies, that disturb and molest all Kingdoms and States, throughout the Christian World. To which is added (as a caution to honest Coun∣try-men) the Arraignment, Tryal, and Condemnation, of the Kna∣very and Cheats, that are used in every particular Trade in the City of LONDON. Presented to the consideration of all the Tantivy-Lads and Lasses in VROPE, by a true Son of the Church of ENGLAND. Curiously Illustrated with about Threescore Cuts. Entred according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Dunton, at the Black-Raven, in the Poultrey, over-against Stocks-Market. 1683.
THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON. Gentlemen, YOu have here presented to your candid View, a full and impartial Account (with many other remarkable things) of the Arraign∣ment, Tryal, and Condemnation, of all those grand and bitter Enemies, that disturb all Kingdoms and States, throughout the Christian World, &c. But the Application and Improvment of them is to be (if you tender your Temporal or Eternal Interest) made by you, your selves. I am not Insensible that by the exposing this Book I shall expose my self too, to the censure of those who take measure of every thing by their
petulant humours, and have no other way to set off eir own barren Inventions, but by perpetual In∣ctives against the multitude of Books which ap∣pear every day in the World. Whereas indeed the mischiefs which they complain of have pro∣ceeded not from their number, but quality. For should every Man write an exact Narra∣tive of the various Experiences and Circumstan∣ces of his Life, comprehending as well his Vices as Vertues, and have them with simplicity rela∣ted, how useful would this prove to the publick, tho' it would much increase the number of Books, but this so impartial an Account may rather be wisht for than expected, since Men have ever pre∣ferred their own private Reputation before the real good of themselves or others. I have comprized this Treatise in an Eighteen Penny Book, (though considering the Cuts, it can∣not be well afforded so) that as it is of real use and publick concern, so it might be the better disperst throughout this English Nation. I Rest, Dear Fellow-Citizens, Your most Humble Servant, PHILAGATHVS.
AN ACCOUNT FROM UTOPIA, OF The late Famous and Remarka∣ble Tryals of all those grand and bit∣ter Enemies that disturb and molest all Kingdoms and States throughout the Christian World. WHen the Assizes were in Vtopia, Conscience the Iudge of that Coun∣try, (attended on by the Sheriff, the Iustices of the Peace, and such as necessarily were to be there) being seated on the Bench of Impartiality, caused the Commission of Oyer and Terminer to be
Read, for the speedy Tryal of all those grand and bitter Enemies that disturbed and molested that Country, and all other King∣doms and States throughout the Christian World. And the very first that was called to the Bar, was that Grand-He-Rogue Inno∣cent the XI. Pope of Rome. Iayler, set Pope Innocent the XI. to the Bar. Pope, Pope, Hold up thy Hand. Pope, Thou art here In∣dicted by the Name of Pope Innocent the XI.The Pope Ar∣raigned and In∣dicted. of the Fa∣mous City of Rome, in the Pa∣rish of Babylon; That thou being an illegi∣timate Son, begotten of Falshood, Murthers,
Assasinations, Heresie, Paganism, Iudism, hast by great Violence murder'd the Ter∣ritories of the Church of God, and by Spa∣nish Inquisition. bloody Massacres, stabbing, poysoning, and killing of Kings, Gun-owder Plots, Treasons, Rebellions, and other hel∣lish Practices, usurped Authority; and thrust upon God's People their humane Traditions, Inventions, Superstitions, Will-worship, He∣resies, Iewish Ceremonies, add Paganish Ido∣latry, to the damnation of many Christian Souls, contrary to the Peace of our Sove∣raign Lord the King, his Crown and Digni∣ty: What sayest thou hereunto? Art thou guilty, or not guilty? Not guilty my Lord. By whom wilt thou be tryed? By God and the Country. But (good my Lord) let me have a Jury of my own choosing.The Pope's Pe∣tition. Iudge, Because neither thou, nor any of thy slanderous Favourites may say, that thou hast been proceeded against rigorously and unjustly, without respect to the Truth of the Cause. I am content to call a Jury of thine approbation, if here we can have so many as will make up the number. I humbly thank you (my good Lord) God reward your Lordship for it.
Mr. Sheriff, Impannel a Jury of very substantial men, the chiefest you can find, and fittest to go upon this Prisoner now at the Bar. My Lord, I supposed, that as he would crave, so from your Lordships upright∣ness, he should obtain this Favour, there∣fore have I prepared a full Iury to this pur∣pose. It was done wisely of you (Mr. Sheriff) let them be called. Cryer,A Iury against Pope Inno∣cent. Call in the Iury. 1. Call Common Principles. Vous aves Common princi∣ples. 2. Call Apostles Creed; Vous aves, The Creed. 3. Call Second Commandment. Second Commandment, come in. My Lord, I cannot get in. What's the matter? My Lord (saith the Cryer) the Papists keep him out. Command to let him in: Vous aves, the second Commandment. 4. Call Pater noster: Vous aves, Pater noster. 5. Call Holy Scriptures: Vous aves, Ho∣ly Scriptures. 6. Call the Apocripha: Vous aves, A∣pocripha.
7. Call Counsels: Vous aves, Counsels. 8. Call Ancient Fathers for the first six hundred years after Christ: Vous aves, An∣cient Fathers. 9. Call Contradiction among themselves: Vuos aves, Contradiction. 10. Call Absurdity of Opinion: Vous aves, Absurdity of Opinion. 11. Call Consent of their own men: Vous Consent. 12. Call Testimony of Martyrs: Vous aves, Testimony of Martyrs. Count, saith the Clerk. Then the Cryer bids them answer to their Names. Common Principles,By these twelve means the Pope may be confuted. one; Creed two; Commandments three; Pater noster four; Ho∣ly Scriptures five; Apocrypha, six; Counsels seven; Fathers eight; Con∣tradiction, nine; Absurdity, ten; Consent of their own men, eleven; Testimony of Mar∣tyrs, twelve: Good men and true stand to∣gether, and hear your Charge. My Lord, here are some more sum∣moned by Master Sheriff's Authority. Who be they Master Sheriff? Master Law with his Sons, Civil, Canon, Common, and Municipal. Well, let them attend the Court for
the King's service, for use if need be. Pope, If thou canst justly accept against any, I give thee leave to challenge any such of the Iury. Good my Lord,Holy Scripture is excepted a∣gainst, for Pa∣pists may be confuted by their own Translation. only one of the Iury I except against, which is Holy Scripture, ex∣cept it be our own Transla∣tion. Holy Scriptures excepted against by Pope Innocent. Well, saith the Iudge, I am content it shall be so, let it be either Montanus, or the Rhemist, or the Vulgar Edition; we desire a
just Proceeding with all the indifferency that may be. Then the Cryer called aloud; If any man can give Evidence, or can say any thing against the Prisoner at the Bar, let him come in, for he stands upon his De∣liverance. Here is my Lord, two worthy Gentle∣men, Mr. Sincerity, and Mr. Protestant. Mr. Sincerity and Mr. Protestant witnesses against Pope Innocent. the XI. Master Sincerity come near, what can you say concerning the soner at the Bar?
My Lord, this I am able to jstifie: First, That he hath been a False-teacher from the beginning, fraught with Errour and Heresies, teaching as the False-teachers did, such as be recorded in Scripture, if they were paralled together, as the Doctrine of Devils, 1 Tim. 4.1, 2. Traditions and Com∣mandments of men, Matth. 1. 52. Mar. 7, 8, 9, 33. Col. 2. 22. Venial sins, Matth. 2316, 18. Childrens neglect of Parents for Churches profit, as they pretented, Matth. 15.5. Mark 7.11. Superstitious observation in meats and holy days, Matth. 15.11. Col. 2.16.21. Lay∣ing heavy burthens upon the people, Luke 11.46. Iustification by works, therewith troubling the Churches, Gal. 2.18. & 3.2. & 5.4, 12. Voluntary Religion, and Will-worship, Col. 2.4.18.23. The worship of Angels, Col. 2.18. Carnal liberty, 2 Pet. 2.19. Rev. 2.15.20. And teaching for filthy lucre, 2 Tit. 11. Thus are they, as were the false Teachers (as the Scriptures in the New Testament set them out) like in all these things. How like they are (my Lord) to after Hereticks, learned Whitaker in his Book De Ecclesia, in the first Question, sheweth in many particulars. Secondly (my Lord) he hath used the very same Practices which False-teachers have used; hdoth to make way for his
Doctne, Worship, and Advancement, even as they did. They played the Hy∣pocrites in outward humility in lay Prayers and forms of Devotion, and so misled silly Women. They graced their Do∣ctrine with shew of Fore-fathers. They took away the Key of Knowledge, and neither would enter into life, nor suffer others. They told the pleople old Wives Fables, and told Lyes in Hypocrisie. They used slights and cunning craftiness to deceive. They boast∣ed of their Learning, using prophane and vain babling, and oppositions of Sciences as they termed it. They pretended Revela∣tions, Apostolical Traditions, and alledged counterfeit Writings. They had the Pro∣phetical Women, and deceiving Prophetesses. They had their Miracle-workers, Casters out of Devils, and Dreamers if Dreams. They would slander men's persons, and the Doctrine of faithful Teachers, and lay to their charge what they could not prove, speak∣ing of them contemptuously, and railing on them. They boasted to be the true Church, and that by Succession they were of the Fa∣thers. They would use fair and smoothing words, and teach with enticing words, and did strive for excellency of speech of man's isdom to deceive. When they could not prevail by fair means, th they would
suborn false Witnesses. They threated, beat, imprisoned, banished, and slew the faith∣ful Teachers and Christian Believers. They would plot Conspiracies to the shedding of blood, and the Priests must be acquaintd herewith before-hand, to encourage them hereto. They would make open Insur∣rections, and stirs up great Personages to take part with them. And what Rebellion, Treasons, Conspiracis, Insurrections, and Persecutions this Pope hath wrought, my Lord Bishop of Lincoln, hath openly dis∣covered to the World. And this (my Lord) is not what I could, but what I thought sufficient to testifie at this time, because I would not be tedious. Mr. Sincerty, By this you have utter∣ed, it is easie to see how this man hath fol∣lowed, both the False-teachers in Doctrine, and the Enemies of the Gospel in their Pra∣ctices. If there be any more Witnesses, let them come forth. Yes, my Lord, here is Mr. Protestant. Mr. Proestant, What is it that you have to say against this Prisoner at the Bar? My Lord, I was commanded to be here to Day to give Evidence what I know a∣gainst
this man; and this I am willing to do for the Service of my Soveraign. This it is (my Lord) which I have to say, That this man with his Associates, hath instead of Christian Religion, set up a Service of Iudaism and Paganism, which I am able to prove in a multiude of Parti∣culars; but because I am loath to be tedi∣ous in my relation, I have brought here with me Three Books, that the Iury may judge of all the Particulars; or that they may be read before the Prisoner, if your Lordship shall be pleased to have it also. What Books, Mr. Protestant? My Lord, One is that, that is called the Three Conformities set our lately. The other is, De Origine Papatus, set out by one Doctor Morisin, and Dedicated to his late Majesty: And our third is, our learned Country-man, Doctor Raynolds, his Con∣ference with Hart, never answered by any Papist to this day; who sheweth how the Popish Service is like unto the Iewish in ve∣ry many particulars, and wherein they be more Heathenish than Iewish. I am content to have them read, to spare your speech, touching the Iewish Ser∣vice. So having been read, the Iudge yet wished Mr. Protestant to declare openly,
how Pagan-like the Pope is, nay, he is as bad as the Heathenish Idolaters in Israel and Iu∣dah were. My Lord, I shall (saith Mr. Protestant) perform this task with as great brevity as I may; that this Prisoner (if it be possible) may see how wickedly he hath dealt with Mens Souls, to set up instead of Gods Ser∣vice an Idolatrous, and Pagan-like Wor∣ship. These Pagans set forth God like a Man. The Idolatrous Isralites had a Queen of Hea∣ven; they had Images of Gold and Silvr, Brass, Iron, Wood and Stone, and some of Clay; some molten, some carved and graven, some portrayed upon Walls, and other Pictures; some were like men, Lam. 3. 1. 1 Sam. 5.3, 4. and some like women, Act. 19.27. 2 Maccab. 1.13. 1 Sam. 31.10. some like beasts (like St. George and the Dragon) Exod. 34. Wisdom. 11.15. They adorned them with silver and gold. Ier. 10.4. and set Crowns upon some of their heads, covering them with costly garments, and of divers colours, Deut. 7.25. Heb. 2.19. Baruc. 6.8.9, 14, 15 29, 39, 30, 55, 58. E∣zek. 16.18. Aisd. 13.14. carrying a Scep∣ter in the hand, or a Dagger, or an Axe, Baruc. 6.14.15. They set them up with great devotion and solemnity, with musick
and melody, Dan. 3.3. with singing dan∣cing, and other delights, Exod. 32.5. They built Temples for these Images, Ioel, 3.5. 2 Maccab. 1.13.15. Baruch, 6.18. which were the houses of their gods, Iudg. 17. 4. 1 Sam. 5.2. and called them Sanctuaries, Isa. 16.12. They had Chappels for them, Amos, 7.12. Yea, they set upon tops of hills, 1 King. 14.23. 2 King. 17.10. They had them in private houses, Iudg. 17.18. in Chambers, Ezek. 8.12. and in secret places, Deut. 17.15. they had their pleasant Groves planted, Ier. 17.2. 1 King. 14.23. 2 Cor. 15.16. 2 King. 17.10. They had their standing Pillars and Images, as the Pa∣pists their Crosses. Deut. 12.3, & 16.22. 2 King. 17.10. Lev. 16.1. These were in the head of high-wayes, and streets of Cities, Ezek. 16.31. Ier. 11.13. The multitude were allured by the gorgeous decking of them, Wis. 14.20. & 15.5, 6. Yea, they doted upon them, Ezek. 8.10, 11. They worshiped them, bowed unto them, and fell down before them, Dan. 13 2. Isa. 44.7. Ios. 23.6. They would lift up their eyes unto them, Ezek. 33.25. Pray unto them 1 King. 18.26. Hab. 2.16. Isa. 44. 17. Kiss them, Hos. 13.2. King. 19.8. set up Candles before them, Baruch. 6.19. Make vows on them, Baruch, 6.35. and go
Pilgrimage to some of them very far, Ier. 51.44. expecting some miraculous cure from the Image, Baruch, 6.41. In entring into their Temples they sprinkled themselves with water. Altars they had of stone, Isa. 65.3. They used vain repetitios in their prayers, Matth. 6.7. They measured their Religion, and goodness thereof by plenty, Ier. 44.7. They had their sacrificing Priests, Act. 14.13. and they were shaven Priests, Baruch, 6.31.32. Sometimes they were of the basest of the people, 1 King. 12.31. whosoever would, might for money, or for money-worth, make himself a Priest, 1 King. 12.31. 2 Chron. 13.9. And some served for base wages, Iudg. 17. They had their Concubines, Baruch, 6.11. Hos. 4.14. Some of them would wear their hair-cloaths, and torment themselves, 1 Kings 18.26.28. Zach. 13.4. and of a Devotion in a Will∣worship, macerate their bodies, punishing and not sparing their bodies, Col. 2.23. Their Teachers taught for hire, Mich. 3. 11. 2 Pet. 2.13, 15. Rev. 2. Tit. 1.11. For gifts, they would promise life and peace, Ezek. 13.22. Ier. 23.14, 17 In their ser∣vice they had variety of musick, Dan. 3. Their set holy days▪ Exod. 32. 2 King. 13. They had their holy women attending their Idol-service, Ezek. 8. ver. 14. working for
them, 13.18. 2 King. 23.7. and prophe∣sying lies Ezek. 13.22. and were great wor∣shippers of the Queen of Heaven, Ier. 7.18. & 44.19. They had also their several Gods for their several Countries, as Papists have their Saints, 2 King. 17.29 & 18.34. They would pray to these, and swear by them, Ier. 57. & 12.16. Gen. 31.53. 1 King. 19, 2. 2 King. 17.35. Zep. 1.5. Some in Israel which fell to Heathenish Idolatry were like Church-Papists; for they would worship Idols, and yet go to God's House, and hear his Prophets, Ier. 7.8, 10. 2 King. 17.14.Ezek. 14.3, 7, & 20. 1, 31. & 23. 29. When Idolatry was cast out of the Churh (as we have done the Idolatry of Rome) the Idolaters would condemn it as an ll act in them, and speaking against the serving of God aright, as Papists do against us, 2 Kings, 18.22. They worshipped towards the East, Ezek. 8.16. They were very super∣stitious, Acts 19. They lived in very gross ignorance of the Truth, and in liberty of sinning, Isa. 44.18, 19. & 45.29. Eph. 4. 18, 19. Wisd. 14.15, 16, 17. They wor∣shipped they knew not what, Iohn 4.22. Their Festivals after their Idol Service they spent in Eating, Drinking, Singing, Dan∣cing, Exod. 32.6, 18, 19. They had their Revellings and Meetings, full of Excess
and Riot, 1 Pet. 4.3. And wonder at, and speak ill of such as would not be like them. They had Brothel-houses, Ezek. 16.24. 2 Kings 23.17. 1 Kings 15.12, 13. & 14.24. & 22.26. They had amongst them Conjurers, Wizards, Charmers, Observers of times, South∣sayers, Astrologers, Star-gazers, and such like. To these the People resorted and con∣sulted with, 2 Kings 21.6. 1 Sam. 5.2. 1 Chron. 10.13. Hest. 37. & 9.24. Deut. 18.14. Isa. 19.3. & 47.1213 Hos. 4.12 Ezek. 21. 21. Ier. 8.17. Act. 8.10. They sacrificed to Nets, and burnt incense to Drags, Hab. 1. 16. They believed that some of their I∣mages were approved of their great God from Heaven, Act. 15.35. They were cru∣el and bloodily minded against all that were against their Idolatry, Hos. 10.14. & 13. 16. 2 King. 21.15, 16. Iudg. 6.30. 2 Chr. 24.18.21. The Idolaters in Israel and Iu∣dah brought in the Heathen, as Gods plague upon them, to punish them for their Idola∣try, 2 Chro. 24, 23. & 21.16, 17. & 33.11. & 30.6, 10, 17. King. 17.18. as the Papists have brought the Turks upon the Christian World by their Imagery and Idolatry, Re∣velations, 9. They were stupid, and with∣out understanding in their Idol-making, and in setting them up to worship them, Isa. 44.14, 20. and so continued therein ob∣stinate,
as the Papists do. And thus have I shewed what I can say (my Lord) touch∣ing the Heathenish Idolaters and their pra∣ctices. Your evidence is so clear (Mr. Protestant) as hereby all may see how Pagan-like the Pope is in his Imagery, Priests and Temples. Is there any further vidence? Then stands up Mr. Atturney General; and did prove him to be guilty of high Treason, both against the Person and the Laws of his Sovereign. My Lord (saith he) this Fellow under pretence of Religion (for all must be covered with this shadow) hath set up another spiritual Head over the Church, besides Christ (even Antichrist his greatest enemy (as is sufficiently pro∣ved. He hath set up also Mediatos of In∣tercession besides Christ; also in his rebelli∣ous pride of heart he hath exalted Man's merit, & made him a part Saviour of him∣self, by satisfactory punishments, either here, or in thrir feigned Purgatory. Thus is he a Rebel, and an Abettor of Rebels a∣gainst Christ. Again, the Law of Christ (the holy Scri∣pture) he hath notoriously corrupted, and abused many ways. 1. He maketh it no perfect rule. 2. He teacheth blasphemously that the Original is corrupt, and so shaketh the Faith
of all such as rest on the Scriptures. 3. He hath added to them Man's Wri∣tings, called Apocrypha, to make them Canonical. 4. He hath feigned a Traditional word, and equalleth the same with the Scri∣tures. 5. He debarred for a long time the Translating of God's Word into a known Tongue, to keep the people from the un∣derstanding thereof. 6. Being enforced at length to translate it, he hath of urpose done it corruptly, and with many uouth and obscure words, hath hidden the Truth still, to keep the people in blindness. 7. Yet this their so corrupt and obscure Translation is not admitted indifferently to all, but to some, and to those under license, for which they pay money. 8. These Parties, though they may read the Scriptures, yet must it be with the Popes Spectacles, and may not see farther han the False-teacher pleaseth, nor con∣ceive otherwise of the sense, than he sug∣gesteth, though the Text be never so clear of it self. 9. He doth blasphemously publish, that the Scriptures are a Nose of Wa, a dead letter, sowterly Ink; dumb Iudges, and a black Gospel,
Inkie Divinity; and may have one sense one time, and another at another time, ac∣cording to the Churches state and condition. 10. They set up a corrupt Latine Trans∣lation; far as authentical as the Originals in the Hebrew and the Greek. 11. And lastly, He brought into the Church instead of the Holy Bible, a Book of Lyes to be read. Thus is the wicked Wretch guilty of High-treason against our Sove∣raign. Besides that, He hath counterfeited his Majesty's broad Seal, inventing new Sacra∣ments, never of Christ's nstitution; and hath conspired and plotted the Death of innumerable multitude of his Majesty's Subjects in a most cruel and bloody man∣ner: My Lord; he is no way longer to be endured; for we shall never be at peace, as long as he may have liberty to live, for he is a rank Traytor to our King and State, and Underminer of Religion, and the true Church of Christ, and an Enemy to our Peace and Welfare in the Commonwealth. Gentlemen (saith the Iudge) you of the Iury have heard Mr. Attorneys Witness; also what both Mr. Sincerity, and Mr. Pro∣testant have spoken against him: Now that you have heard the Evidence so fully, what say you touching the Prisoner, Is he guilty or no?
Then the Fore-man in the Name of all the rest, answereth, Guilty, my Lord. Whereupon the Iudge turneth to the Prisoner, and saith, Pope Innocent, thou hearest what grievous Iniquities, foul and fil∣thy Abominations, Murthers and Massacres have been laid to thy charge; thou hast heard the Verdict of these so learned and well-approved Gentlemen, chosen without all partiality to go upon thee: And they in their Judgments, upon their Conscien∣ces, have found thee Guilty, what canst thou say for thy self, that Sentence of Death should not be pronounced against thee? My Lord, the Iury assuredly is corrupt∣ed by some means or other, else would they never have found me guilty; for our learn∣ed men have cited many of these in my behalf, and therefore I appeal from them to a General Council, for the tryal of their Honesty in this Verdict. Upon this lewd Surmise, and brazen-faced Accusation, all the Iury fell a mur∣muring, being much grieved to be taxed of Faithlesness and Perjury. So the worshipful Gentlemen, the Iustices and Mr. Sheriff began to speak in their behalf, but the Iudge standing up, stayed them, and made answer for them.
Iudge, To be brief with thee, Thou art shamelesly impudent to accuse these wor∣thy Gentlemen, for justly proceeding ac∣cording to the clear Evidence to thy face. For thy learned men, they have onely ci∣ted the Names of some of these, but with∣out their knowledge or consent. Yea, ma∣ny Testimonies they bring under their Names, which indeed are proved to be Counterfeits, abusing their unadvised Rea∣ders in their unjust defence of thee. As for thy Appeal to a General Council, it is but to set a good face upon an ill Cause; for thou knowest that we have long desired a Free General Council? but not a gathering to∣gether, like the lewd Convention of Trent. But art thou not ashamed to conceit the bringing of these mens verdict to the tryal? we must by them be tried, and not they by us. But what canst thou try the Prin∣ciples of Religion? Wilt thou deny them? Must Fathers, Councils, Scriptures, and all be brought under our judgments? Thou hadst no cause to tax the Jury, if any had been in fault, it should have been the Wit∣nesses; but canst thou tax Mr. Sincerity of lying, or Mr.Protestant of falshood? As for Mr. Attorney, his speech is no mor than your own words, writings, and pra∣ctice do testifie.
Hear therefore thy Sentence, justly de∣served before God and men. Iudge, Thou hast been Indicted by the Name of Pope Inocent, of all these former Treasons, Rebellions, Conspiracies, Gun∣powder-plots, Murthers, Massacres, False∣hoods, Heresies, Judaism, and Paganism, and of that thy detestable Idolatry; and for the same hast been arraigned: Thou hast pleaded Not guilty, hast put thy self upon the Tryal, and being found guilty, having no more to say for thy self, this is the Law. That thou the Mster of Iniquity, with the old Serent, calleed the Devil, or Satan, thy Father with thy lewd Mother that great Whore, drunk with the blood of the Mar∣tys of Iesus, which sitteth upon a Scarlet couloured Beast; as also with that false Pro∣phet, the Son of Perdition, thy Guide and Governour, shall be cast alive where the Dagon is, into the Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstore, there to be tormented with all the marked Ones in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, without rest day and night, the smoak of which Torment shall ascend up for ever and for ever, without mercy or hope of redemption.
And so Orders came to the Iayler, that he should be Executed out of hand. The Execution of Pope Innocent the XI. And so the Judge and Court command∣ed Mr. Implacable a Justice of the Peace in Vtopia to be set to the Bar. Iayler, Set Justice Implacable to the Bar.
Iustice Implacable holds up his hand to the Bar. His Indictment. Judge, Iustice Imlacable, Thou art here Indicted by the Name of Iustice Implacable, In the Parish of Goodness-spight; for that perniciously and sinfully thou hast main∣tained and asserted, That no Moderation ought to be shewed to them that differ from thee, in those things which thou thy self callest Indifferent, and this thou hast done in contempt of that Sacred Word, which says, Let your moderation be shewn unto all men. And also, that thou art a man of no good Principles, but a perfect ha∣ter of all Pious men, be they of what Per∣swasion
they will. And also, that thou makest daiy Commotions and Divisions where ever thou comest. Implacable's Answer. Then Implacable answered and said, That he ws in no respect guilty of those Crimes that were laid to his Charge: And said, As for Disturbances I make none, beng my self a man of Peace, and therefore I defie any man for what he can do against me; I fear not Belzebu himself, no nor all the raging-roaring Devils in Hell. Proclamation was made. Then Proclamation was made, That they that had ought to say for the Lord the King against the Prisoner at the Bar, should forthwith appear and give in their Evidence; so there came in three Witnes∣ses, Mr. Moderation, Mr. Heal-breach, and Mr. Quiet. They were then asked, if they knew the Prisoner at the Bar, and what they had to say for their Lord the King a∣gainst him.
Moderation begins. Then stood forth Mr. Moderation, and said to this effect, My Lord, I have known this man a long time, and will attest upon my Oath before this Honourable Bench, That he is— Iuge, Hold, give him his Oath; so they swore him: Then he said, My Lord. This man, not withstanding what he hath said, is a wicked Fllow; nay, his very Name shews him to be so, he is, as I can call in several Neighbours to attest, one of the vilest men in our Country, he neither re∣gardeth Prince nor People, Law nor Gos∣pel, Civility nor Custom; but doth all that he came to possess all men with cer∣tain of his disloyal Notions; and in particu∣lar, I heard him once my self affirm, that the true Religion was diametrically o posite to his daily practice: By which saving, my Lord, he doth at once not only condem all laud∣able Things, but us in the doing of them. Iudge, Then did the Iudge say to him, Hast thou any more to say. Moderation, My Lord, I could say much more, only I would not be tedious to the Court; yet, if need be, when the other Gentlemen have given in their Evidence,
rather than any thing shall be wanting that will dispatch him, I will enlarge my Testi∣mony against him: So he was bid stand by. Then they called Mr. Heal-breach, and bid him look upon the Prisoner: They al∣so asked, What he could say for their Lord the King against him? Then they sware him; so he began. Mr. Heal-breach, My Lord, I have no great acquaintance with this man, nor do I desire to have farther knowledge of him; However this I know, That he is a very pestilent Fellow, from some discourse that the other day I had with him in this Town; for then talking with him, I heard him say, That our Religion was naught, and such by which a man could by no means please God: which saying of his, my Lord,your Lordship very well knows, what necessarily thence will follow; to wit, That we still do worship in vain, are yet in our sins, and fi∣nally shall be damned. And my Lord, he cannot endure a faithful Minister in his Parish. and to be sure, if he knows where such an one preaches, he forthwith sends for a Constable, commanding of him to take him and carry him away to Prison. And my Lord, heee stands Mr. Constable ready to attest what I now say.
Mr. Constable ready to attest against Iu∣stice Implacable. Then was Mr. Quiet sworn, and bid say what he knew, in behalf of the Lord the King, against the Prisoner at the Bar. Mr. Quiets Testimony. Mr. Quiet, My Lord and you Gentle∣men all, This Fellow I have known of a long time, and have heard him speak things that ought not to be spoe. He rails daily against Mr. Belief, Mr. True-heart, Mr. Vp∣right, Mr. Hatebad, Mr. Love-God, Mr. See Truth, Mr. Moderate, Mr. Good-work, Mr. Humble, Mr. Seriousness, and against all
that are friends to these worthy persons. And he hath said moreover, That if all men were of his mind, if possible, there is not one of these Gentlemen should have a∣ny longer a being in this Town; Besides he hath not been afraid to rail on you my Lord,, who are now appointed to be his Iudge, calling you an ungodly Villain, with many other such like villifying terms, with which he hath bespattered most of the Gentry of our Town. When Mr. Quiet had told his Tale, the Iudge directed his Speech to the Prisoner at the Bar; saying, Thou Runnagate, Here∣tick, and Traytor, hast thou heard what these honest Gentlemen have witnessed a∣gainst thee? Implacable, May I speak a few words in my own defence? Iude, Sirrah, Sirrah, Thou deservest to live no longer, but to be slain immediately upon the place; yet that all men may see our Gentleness towards thee, though thou art violent towards others; Let us hear what thou vile Runnagate hast to say. Implacable's last Speech. My Lord, I must confess that I am not altogether free from breaking the Laws,
from Violence and Passion; but yet, good my Lord, for this once, save my life, but if you will not, the Lord have mercy upon my Soul. The Iudges Speech to the Iury. Then the Iudge called to the Iury (who all this while stood by, to hear and ob∣serve;) Gentlemen of the Iury, you see this man about whom so great an uproat∣hath been made in this Town; you have also heard what these worthy Gentlemen have witnessed against him; also you have heard his Reply and Confession: It lieth now in your breast to hang him, or save his life, therefore do as your judge meet. As soon as ever the Iudge had ended his Speech to the Iury, Mr. Huff a Corporal came into the Court, and said, That if his Lordship pleased to hear his Evidence, he had much to say for the Prisoner at the Bar.
Mr. Huff a Corporal takes Implacable's part. But the Iudge told him, That he lookt like a swaggering Fellow, and therefore he and the Iury should give no credit to what he said. Then went the Iury out, whose Names were, Mr. Love-good, Mr. Patience, Mr. Hate-lust, Mr. Live-well, Mr. Low-mind, Mr. Hate-lyes, Mr. Love-light, Mr. Heavenly-mind, Mr. Zealous for God, Mr. Meek-heart, Mr. Piety, Mr. Fidelity: And every one gave in his private Verdict against him a∣mong themselves, and afterwards unani∣mously concluded to bring him in guilty before the Iudge. And first among them∣selves,
Mr. Love-good the Foreman, said, I see clearly that this man is an Heretick. Then said Mr. Patience, Away with such a Fellow from the Earth. Ay, said Mr. Hate-lust, for I hate the very looks of him. Then said Mr. Live-well, I could never endure him. Nor I said Mr. Low-mind, for he would al∣ways be condemning my way. Hang him, hang him, said Mr. Hate-lyes. A sorry Scrub, said Mr. Love-light. My heart riseth against him, said Mr. Heavenly-mind. He is a Rogue, said Mr. Zeal for God. Hanging is too good for him, said Mr. Meek-heart. Let's dispatch him out of the way, said Mr. Piety. Then said Mr. Fidelity, Might I have all the world given me, I could not be reconciled to him; therefore let us forthwith bring him in guilty of death. A Spy set a work by Mr. Implacable.
Besides, yonder stands a Spy, one that he set to watch Sincere Christians, for fear they should serve God, and he not having timely notice to disturb them, that can tell more of his Tricks; but we have enough against him without his Evidence. And so he was presently condemned, to be had from the place where he was, to the place from whence he came, and there to be hanged. They therefore brought him out to be hanged. Thus came Implacable to his end. And 'twas observed by some, that there stood a Chariot and a couple of Horses be∣hind the rejoycing multitude that went to see Implacable hanged) to post away his Soul to Hell. Mr. Implacable posting to Hell.
As soon as ever his body was dead, they opened it, and found in his belly twelve In∣formers, whose Names were as followeth; Viz. Mr. No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. Love∣lack, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. High∣mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Lyar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, Mr. Falsity, and Mr. Vn∣charitable. And in his Heart they found (to their greater amazement) Mr. Hot-spur the Constastble, Mr. Envy-good the chief Informer in Vtopia, and Mr. Violence an Headborough (one that was Brother to Mr. Imlacable the Justice) whose Tryals follow next in order. So Mr. Hot-spur was first set to the Bar. Mr. Hot-spur the Constable holding up his hand at the Bar.
Then said the Clerk, Hot-spur, Hold up thy hand, Thou art indicted by the name of Hot-spur, For that thou hast wickedly taught and main∣tained that there is no God, and so no heed to be taken to Serious Religion. This thou hast done against the being, honour, and glory of the King, and against the peace and safety of the Kingdom. What sayest thou? Art thou guilty of this Indictment, or not? Hot-spur, Not guilty. Cryer, Call Mr. Honesty, Mr. Vouch∣truth, and Mr. Hate-rogue into the Court. So they were called, and they appeared. Clerk, Then said the Clerk, You te Wit∣nesses for the King, look upon the Prisoner at the Bar, Do you know him? Mr. Honesty giving in his Testimony.
Then said Master Honesty, Yes, my Lord, we know him, his name is Hot∣spur, he has been a very pestilent Fellow for many years in this Country. Clerk, You are sure you know him? Honesty, Know him! Yes, my Lord, I have heretofore too often been in his com∣pany, to be at this time ignorant of him. He is a Tantivy Hot-spur, the Son of a Tantivy Hot-spur, I knew his Grandfather, and his Father, his Brethren, and his Sisters. Clerk, Well said, He standeth here in∣dicted by the name of Hot-spur, &c. and is charged, that he hath maintained and taught that there is no God, and so no heed need be ta∣ken to any Religion: What say you the Kings Witnesses, to this? is he guilty or not? Honestly. My Lord, I and he were once in Villains-Lane together, and he at that time did briskly talk of divers Opinions, and then and there I heard him say, That for his part he did believe that there was no God. But, said he, I can profess one, and be Religious too, if the company I am in, and the circumstances of other things, said he, shall put me upon it. Clerk. You are sure you heard him say thus. Vouch-Truth. Upon mine Oath, I heard him say thus.
Then said the Clerk, Mr. Vouch-Truth, What say you to the Kings Iudges, touching the Prisoner at the Bar? Mr. Vouch-Truth, giving in his Te∣stimony. Vouch-Truth. My Lord, I formerly was a great Companion of his, (for the which I now repent me) and I have often heard him say, and that with great stomachfulness, that he believed there was neither God, An∣gel, nor Spirit. Cler. Where did you hear him say so? Vouch-Truth. In Blackmouth-lane, and Blashemers-row, and in many other places besides, in the Country of Vtopia. Cler. Have you much knowledge of him?
Vouch-Truth. I know him to be a Rascal, the Son of a Rascal, and an horrible Man, to deny a Deity; his Fathers Name was Never be good, and he had more Children than this Hot-spur. I have no more to say. Clerk. Mr. Hate-Rogue, look upon the Prisoner at the Bar, do you know him? Hate-Rogue. My Lord, this Hot-spur is one of the vilest wretches that ever I came near, or had to do with in my Life. I have heard him say that there is no God, I have heard him say that there is no World to come, no Sin, nor Punishment hereafter: and moreover, I have heard him say, That 'twas as good to go to a Whore-house, as to go and hear a Sermon in a Meeting-house. Cler. Where did you hear him say these things? Hate-Rogue. In Drunkards-row, just at Rascal-Lanes-end, at a house in which Mr. Imiety lived. Besides, he doth Devillishly and Trayterously practice evil things, and say filthy words: He says it is lawful and profitable to a Man to give way to his Car∣nal desires, and that for his part, he ne∣ver will deny himself of any sinful delight, as long as his Name is Hot-sur.
Mr. Hotspur pleading on his Knees. Then said Mr. Hot-spur, being on his Knees, My Lord, I am a Man of high birth, and have been used to a pleasures and pa∣stimes of greatness. I have not been wont to be snub'd for my doings, but have been left to follow my will as if it were Law. And it seems strange to me that I should this day be called into Question for that, that not only I, but many Men, do either secretly or openly countenance. Cler. Sir, we concern not our selves with your greatness (for the higher, the better you should have been) but we are concerned, and so are you now, about an Indictment prefer∣red
against you. How say you, are you guilty of it, or not? Hot-spur. Not guilty. Clerk. Cryer, call up more Witnesses to stand forth, and give their Evidence. Cryer. Gentlemen, you the rest of the Witnesses for the King, come in and give in yout Evidence for Our Lord the King, against the Prisoner at the Bar. Mr. Well-doe giving in his Testimony at the Bar. Clerk. Come Mr. Well-doe, look upon the Prisoner at the Bar, do you know him? Well-do. Yes, my Lord, I know him? Clerk. What's his Name?
Well-do His name is Hotspur, he was the Son of one Beastly, and his Mother bare him in Flesh-street; she was one Evil-concupiscen∣ces Daughter. I knew all the Generation of them. Cler. Well said, You have here heard his Indictment, what say you to it, is he guilty of those things charged against him, or no? Well-do, My Lord, he has as he saith, been a great man indeed; and greater in Wickedness than by Pedigree, more than a thousand-fold. Cler. But what do you know of his particu∣lar Actions. and especially with reference to his Indictment? Well-do, I know him to be a Swearer, a Lyer, a Sabbath-breaker; I know him to be a Fornicator, and an unclean Person; I know him to be guilty of abundance of Evils. He has been to my knowledge a very filthy man. Cler. But where did he use to commit his wickedness, in some private corners, or was he more open and shameless? Well-do, All the Town over, my Lord. Cler. Come Mr. Good-deed, what have you to say for our Lord the King against the Prisoner at the Bar? Good-deed, My Lord, all that the first Witness has said I know to be true, and a great deal more besides.
Cler. Mr. Hot-spur, do you hear what these three other Gentlemen say? Hot-spur, I was ever of Opinion that the happiest life that a man could live on earth, was to keep himself from nothing that he desired in the World, and Idefie them all. Several Constables rush in to rescue Mr. Hot-spur As soon as he had said so, he calls seve∣ral other Constables, for his rescue per∣ceving, it would go ill on his side, but they were kept out o'th' Court. Court. Then said the Court, There hath proceeded enough from his own mouth to lay him open to condemnation, wherefore set him by Jayler, and set Mr. Envy-good the chief Informer in this Country to the .
Envy-good set to the Bar. Cler. Mr. Envy-good, Thou art here In∣dicted by the name of Mr. Envy-good (an Informer in Utopia) for that thou doest wickedly, illegaly and unseasonably, disturb all good men, where they live; and dost instigate others to do the same; and wilt sooner inform against a good Preacher than a Bawdy-house, a Drunkad, or a Swearer Then said Envy-good, I am guilty of no such thing, what I do I do out of Consci∣ence. Court. Then said the Court, the man as you see is incorrigible, he is for maintain∣ing
his Villanies by stoutnes of words, and his Rebellion with impudent confidence. Then said Envy-good, Gentlemen, and at this time my Judges, as to the Indictment by which I stand of several Crimes accused before you; pray attribute my Crimes to mine Age, and not to my wilfulness; to the craziness of my Brain, and not to the carelessness of my Mind, and then I hope I may by your charity, be excused from great punishment, though I be guilty. Then said the Court, Thy Crimes were not simply of frailty, but of purpose, and for that thou didst loath to keep vertuous things in thy mind. What was bad thou couldest re∣tain, but what was good thou couldst not abide to think of, thy Age therefore, and thy pre∣tended Craziness, thou makest use of to blind the Court withal, and as a cloak to cover thy Knavery. But let us hear what the Witnesses have to say for the King against the Prisoner at the Bar, is he guilty of this Indictment or no? Mr. Integrity, My Lord, I have heard this Envy-good, the Informer, say, That he could never abide to think of goodness, no not for a quarter oan hour and he lives next door to the Sign of the Conscience feared with an hot Iron. Cler. Mr. Peaceable, what can you say
for our Lord the King, against the Prisoner at the Bar? My Lord, I know this man well, he is a Knave, the son of a Knave? he is the scum and froth of the Earth, and a perfect run∣nagate; his Fathers name was Love-bad, and as for him I have often heard him say, that he counted the very thoughts of goodness the most burdensome thing in the World. Clerk. Where have you heard him say these words? Mr. Peaceable. In Flesh-lane, right op∣posite to the Church. Then said the Clerk, Come Mr. Love the Peace, give in your Evidence concerning the Prisoner at the Bar, about that for which he stands here, indicted before this honour∣able Court. Love the Peace, My Lord, I have heard him often say, he had rather think of the vilest thing, than of what is contained in the Holy Scriptures. Clerk. Where did you hear him say such grievous words? Love the Peace, Where I in a great many places? particularly in Nauseous street, in the house of one Shameless, and in Fith∣lane, at the sign of the Resprobate, next door to the Descent into the pit.
Envy-good, My Lord, I never knew what remorse or sorrow meant in all my life; I am impenetrable, I care for no man, nor can I be pierced with Mens Griefs, their Groans will not enter into my heart; whomever I mischief, whomever I wrong, to me it is musick, when to others mourn∣ing, therefore 'tis that I love, not the Scriptures, therefore pray my Lord acquit me. A Ghost appears to Mr. Envy-good publickly. As he was thus speaking, an affrighting Ghost appears to him in the Court, and says that Hell groaned for Him, and guilty he was But Gentlemen, and you now appointed
to be my Judges, I deny that my name is Envy-good, and if your Honours shall please to send for any that do intimately know me, or for the Midwife that laid my Mo∣ther of me, or for the Gossips that was at my Christning, they will any, or all of them, prove that my name is not Envy-good. Wherefore I cannot plead to this Indictment, for as much as my name is not incerted therein, and as is my true name, so also are my conditions. I was always a man that loved to live at quiet, and what I loved my self, that I thought others might love also. Wherefore when I saw any of my Neighbours to labour under a disquieted mind, I endeavoured to help them what I could, and instances of this good temper of mine, many I could give: As First, When ever I saw any to be dis∣quieted in Vtopia, I presently sought out means to get them quiet again 2. When the ways of the old World, and of Sodom, were in fashion; if any thing happened to molest those that were for the customs of those times, I laboured to make them quiet again, and to cause them to act without molestation. 3. To come nearer home, if in Vtopia I saw any troubled for sin, I endeavoured
by someway, device, invention or other, to labour to bring them to peace again. Wherefore, since I have been always a man of so vertuous a temper, as some say a peace-maker is, and if a peace-maker be so deserving a man, as some have been bold to attest he is, then let me, Gentlemen, be accounted by you, who have a great name for Justice and Equity, for a man that deserveth not this inhumane way of treatment, but liberty, and also a licence to seek damage of those that have been my accusers. Then said the Clerk, Cryer, make a Pro∣clamation. Cryer, O Yes, for as much as the Prisoner at the Bar hath denied his name to be that which is mentioned in the Indictment, the Court requireth that if there be any in this place, that can give information to the Court of the orginal and right name of the Prisoner, they would come forth and give in their Evi∣dence for the Prisoner stands upon his own innocency. Then came two into the Court and de∣sired that they might have leave to speak what they knew concerning the Prisoner at the Bar: The name of the one was Find-right, and the name of the other Tell∣truth; so the Court demanded of these
men, if they knew the Prisoner, and what they could say concerning him, for he stands, said they, upon his own Vindica∣tion? Then said Mr. Find-right, My Lord, I— Court. Hold, Give him his Oath, then they sware him. So he proceeded. Find-right. My Lord, I know, and have known this Man from a Child, and can at∣test that his name is Envy-good; I knew his Father, whose dame was Mr. Dissembler, and his Mother before she was married, was Mrs. Hypocrite. Mr. Envy-goods Mother, used often to chuck him under the Chin, and play with him, to encourage him in his bad practices.
called by the name of Mrs. Hippocrite, and these two when they came together, lived not long without this Son, and when he was born, they called his name Envy-good. I was his Play-fellow, only I was somewhat older than he; and when his Mother did use to call him home from his play, she used to say Envy-good, Envy-good, come home quick, or I'll fetch you. Yea, I knew him when he sucked; and though I was then but little, yet I can remember that when his Mother did use to sit at the door with him, or did play with him in her Arms, she would call him twenty times together, chucking him under the Chin, My little Envy-good, my pretty En∣vy-good, and O my sweet Rogue Evy-good; and again, O my little bird Envy-good; and how do I love my Child! The Gos∣siips also know it is thus, though he has the face to deny it in open Court. Then Mr. Tell-truth was called upon to speak what he knew of him. So they sware him. Then said Mr. Tell-truth, My Lord, all that the former Witness hath said is true; his name is Envy-good, the Son of Mr. Dislembler, and of Mrs. Hippocrite his mo∣ther. And I have in former times seen him angry with those that have called him
any thing else but Envy-good, for h would say, that all such did mock and nick-name him, but this was in the time when Mr. Envy-good was a great man, and when the Informers were the bravest men in Vto id. Court. Gentlemen, you have heard what these two men have sworn against the Prisoner at the Bar: and now Mr. Envy-good to you, You have denied your name to be Envy-good, yet you see that these honest men have sworn that that is your name. As to your Plea, in that you are quité besides the matter of your Indict∣ment, you have pleaded for your self, is, that you have denied your name, &c. but here you see we have Witnesses to prove that you are the man. For the peace that you so much boast of making among your Neighbours; know, that peace that is not a com∣panion of truth and holiness, but that which is without this foundation, is groun∣ded upon a lye, and is both deceitful and damnable: thy Plea therefore has not delivered thee from what by the Indict∣ment thou art charged with, but rather it doth fasten all upon thee. But thou shalt have very fair play; let us call the Witnesses that are to testifie, as o mattter of fact, and see what they have
to say for our Lord the King against the Prisoner at the Bar. Clerk Mr. Peaceable, What say you for our Lord the King, against the Prisoner at the Bar. Peaceable, My Lord, This man hath of a long time made it, to my knowledge, his business to keep Vtopia in a sinful quietness in the midst of all her lewdness, filthiness, and turmoils; and hath said, and that in my hearing, Come, come, let us fly from all trouble on what ground soever it comes, and let us be for a quiet and peaceable life, though it wanteth a good foundation. Clerk. Come Mr. Love the Peace, what have you to say? Love the Peace, My Lord, I have heard him say, That peace, though in a way of unrighteousness, is better than trouble with truth. Clerk. Where did you hear him say this? Love the peace, I heard him say it in Folly-yard, at the house of one Mr. Simple, next door to the sign of the Self-deceiver. Yea, he hath said this to my knowledge twenty times in that place. Besides, he sets himself to deface, and untterly to spoil all the remainders of goodness in Vtopia. Clerk. Mr. Envy-good, How could you have the face to plead, Not guilty, when
you are manifestly the Doer of so much wickedness? Envy-good, Sir, I thought I must say some∣thing, and as my name is, so I speak: I have been advantaged by lyes before now, and did not know but by speaking lyes, I might have reaped the same benefit now. Clerk. Set him by Iayler, and set Mr. Violence the Headborough to the Bar. Mr. Violence the Headborough brought to the Bar. Mr. Violence, thou art here Indicted by the name of Violence, for that thou dost most trayterously and wickedly shut up all bowels of compassion to the Ministers of Christ: And for that thou dost hale and
rout them from place to place, and dost at all times fly from those thoughts that had in them a tendency to lead thee to repent∣ance. What sayst thou to this Indictment? Guilty or not guilty? Not guilty of Violence, my Lord, I'le assure you. Clerk. Call for the Witnesses: What say you the Witnesses to this Prisoner? Mr. Know-much, My Lord, his Name is Violence, so he hath writ himself in all Pa∣pers of concers where he has had to do. But these Violent-men love to counterfeit their Names: Mr. Avarice covers himself with the name of Frugality, or the like; Mr. Flanting can when need is, call himself Mr. Piety, or the like, and so of all the rest of them. Clerk. Mr. Sober, what say you? Sober, His name is Violence, my Lord; I have known him from a Child, and he hath done all that wickedness whereof he stands charged in the Indictment; but there is a company of men that are not acquainted with the danger of damning, therefore make no bones of cursing and damning, and lying.
Mr. Violence kills a man, and pleads he did it in his passion. Violence, My Lord. I have always been a man of Courage and Valour, and have not used, when under the greatest clouds, to sneak or hang down the head like a bulrush: And though t' other day I kill'd a man, 'twas in passion, and therefore it is I am thus accused. 'Tis true, I did not use to consider who was my Foe, nor what the cause was in which I was engaged. 'Twas enough to me if I carried it bravely, fought like a man, and came off like a Victor. Therefore my Lord, let me be acquitted.
Court. Mr. Violence, You are not here Indicted for that you have been a valiant man, nor for our courage and stoutness in times of distress, but for that you have made use of this your pretended valour to draw men into acts of rebellion both against Peace and Love. This is the crime and the thing wherewith thou art charged within the Indictment. But he made no answer to that. Now when the Court had thus far pro∣ceeded against the Prisoners at the Bar, then they put them over to the Verdict of their Jury, to whom they did apply themselves after this manner. Gentlemen of the Iury, You have been here, and have seen these men; you have heard their Indictments, their Pleas, and what the Witnesses have testified against them. Now what remains, is, that you do forthwith with∣draw your selves to some place, where with∣out confusion you may consider of what Ver∣dict in a way of truth and righteousnes you ought to bring in for the King against them, and so bring it in accordingly. Then the Iury, to wit, Mr. Prudent, Mr. Harmless, Mr. Good-heed, Mr. Christian, Mr. Love-worth, Mr. Free-love, Mr. Temperate, Mr. Hope-well, Mr. Compassion, Mr. Mer∣cifull, Mr. Self-denial, Mr. Love the peace, withdrew themselves in order to their work:
And when they were shut up by them∣selves, they fell to discourse among them selves in order to the drawing up of their Verdict. And thus Mr. Prudent, for he was the Foreman, began: Gentlemen, quoth he, for the men, the Prisoners at the Bar; for my part I believe they all deserve death. Very right, said Mr. Harmless, I am wholly of your opinion: O what a mercy is it, said Mr. Good-heed, that such Villains as these are apprehended! Ai, ai, said Mr. Christian, this is one of the joyfullest days that ever I saw in my life. Then said Mr. Love-worth, I know that if we judge them to death, our Verdict shall stand. Nor do I at all question it, said Mr. Free-love, He said moreover, When all such Beasts as these are cast out of Utopia, what a goodly Country will it be then! Then said Mr. Tem∣perate, it is not my manner to pass my judgment with rashness, but for these their Crimes are so notorious, and the Witness so palpable, that that man must be wilfully blind who saith, the Prisoners ought not to die. Blessed be God, said Mr. Hope-well, that the Traytors are in safe custody. And I joyn with you in this upon my bare knees, said Mr. Compassion. I am glad also, said Mr. Mer∣cifull. Then said the warm man, and true
hearted Mr. Self-denial, Cut theoff, they have been the plague, and have sought the destrution of Utopia, and the Protestant World. Thus therefore being all agreed in their Verdict, they come instantly into the Court. Clerk. Gentlemen of the Iury, answer all to your Names, Mr. Prudent, Mr. Harm∣less, Mr. Good-heed, Mr. Christian, Mr Love-worth, Mr. Free-love, Mr. Temperate, Mr. Hope-well, Mr. Compassion, Mr. Merciful, Mr. Self-denial, Mr. Vouch-truth, twelve: Good men and true, stand together in your Verdict; are you all agreed? Iury. Yes my Lord. Clerk. Who shall speak for you? Iury. Our Fore-man. Clerk. You the Gentlemen of the Iury be∣ing Impanelled for our Lord the King, to serve here in a matter of life and death, hae eard the tryals of each of these men the Pri∣soners at the Bar: What say you? Are they guilty of that, and those Crimes for which they stand here Indicted; or are they not guilty? Foreman, Guilty my Lord. Clerk. Look to your Prisoner, Jayler.
This was done in the morning, and in the afternoon they received the Sentence of death according to the Law. The Iayler therefore having received such a Charge, put them all in the inward Prison, to preserve them there till the day of Execution, which was to be the next day in the morning. After all these Tryals were over, there came then Constables into the Court puffing and blowing, with all the several distinct sorts of Witches that were in Vto∣pia. And the chief Constable told the Iudge, that he had Orders to bring those Withces that were there in the Court before his Lordship, that they might be tried for their lives. When the Constable had done speak∣ing, the Iudge commanded the Iayler to set them to the Bar, and they were accord∣ingly set to the Bar, and their Indictment was read, which was this. (VIZ.) The several Names given to Witches. Holt, Iarmara, Vinegar-Tom, Sack and Sugar, and you old Hag with your four mps, Elemuzer, Pyewacket, Peck in the
Crown, Grizzel Greedigt, &c. Hold up your hands, and hear your Charge; so they all held up their hands whilst their In∣dictment was read. Which was; You whose Names are now called over, are Indicted and Arraigned, for that you are all notorious and malicious Witches, and make it your constant trade to bewitch Men, Women, and Children, Cows, Horses, Sheep, Oxen, and every thing besides that disturbs or molests you in the least punctilio; and that you are the Verminie of the place where you live, and di∣sturbers of the whole Kingdom of Utopia. As soon as ever the Indictment was read, they all cried out unanimously, Not guilty my Lord,; so the Iudge ordered the Wit∣nesses to be called in, and said, they should (to make short work of it) be all tryed at the Bar together: Then there came into the Court Mr. Witch-fnder General, Mr. Hate-device, and Mr. Spy-Imp, and said, They could prove all the Prisoners at the Bar guilty of hainous Crimes and Offences, and that they were real Witches.
Mr. Witch-finder General stands up and gives in his Testimony. With that Mr. Witch-finder General told the Iudge, he could say much against the Prisoners at the Bar, and if his Lordship pleased, would begin to declare what he had to say. Iudge, Pray Mr. Witch-finder let's hear then what you can say against the Pri∣soners. Mr. Witch-finder General, my Lord, then first as to Vinegar-Tom, He is a Witch in grain.
Vinegar-Tom's Effigies. He is one that can transform himself in∣to all shapes, (all infallible sign of a Witch) Sometimes he appears to me like a long-legg'd Greyhound, with an head like an Ox, a long Tail, and broad Eyes; sometimes he transforms himself into the shape of a Child of four years old; sometimes into the shape of an old Woman sitting upon a green Pitcher, and then straight-ways va∣nisheth away, and this I have seen him do often. Iudge. I pray Sir, how gained you the knowledge of these things. Mr. Witch-finder, my Lord, I never tra∣velled
far for it, for there was twelve or thirteen Witches in the Town where I li∣ved, who with abundance of Witches from adjacent parts, met every Friday-night at my house, and had there several solemn Sacrifices offered to the Devil, among whom Vinegar-Tom was chief. Iudge, Was Vinegar-Tom (as you call him) us'd to have a Teat or hard bunch of flesh under his Arm-pits to demonstrate him a Witch. Mr. Witch-finder, Yes my Lord, he had, and at those Teats his Imps Tog-raggin, Ba∣conface, Long-tayl, Mungrell-nose, and Will-tellus, were used every Night to suck. Mr. Recorder, Of what nature are those Teats, Mr. Witch-finder, they are most com∣monly insenble, and feel neither Pin, Nee∣dle, or Awl, if you thrust them through; these Teats have their frequent mutations, and variations, sometimes of one colour, and sometimes of another; sometimes higher, and sometimes lower; sometimes big, and sometimes little. Mr. Attorney Ceneral, Pray Mr Witch-finder, How comes it to pass, that the Devil being a Spirit (and so consequentially want∣ing no Nutriment or Sustentation, should desire to suck any blood; and indeed as he is a Spirit he cannot draw any excressences,
having neither flesh nor bone, and cannot be felt. Mr. Witchfinder, He seeks not their blood, as if he could not subfist without that Nourishment, but he often repairs to them and gets it, the more to aggravate the Witches Damnation, and to put her in mind of her Covenant; and as he is a Spi∣rit and Prince of the Air, he appears to them in any shape, what he pleases, which shape is assumed by him through joyning of condenced thickned air together; and by this means 'tis, he doth assume the shapes of many Creatures; but to create a∣ny thing, he cannot do it, it is only proper to C. The Devil also useth the Organs of that body he assumes to speak withal, to make his compact up with the Witches. Iudge, I pray Sir resolve me in one thing (now we are upon the tryal of Witches) and that is this; viz. Is it a truth that Witches will swim like a Duck, if they are flung (tyed by the Thumbs) into a Pond of Water. Witch-finder General, my Lord, It is a real truth. and the reason is this, because Witches deny their Baptism, when they covenant with the Devil, and Water be∣ing the sole Element of Baptism, when they be heaved into the Water, the Water
refuseth to receive them into her bosoe, they being such miscreants to deny their Batism but causeth them to float on the top of it; and this was likewise King Iames his Opinion. Iudge. One Question more I pray re∣solve me, and that is this, What is the reason that Witches, when they are called either Whores or Thiev▪ or any other bad names, are so ready to wring their hands, and cry out with abundance of tears, running, usually, to some Iustice of the Peace to complain of the wrong that is done unto them; and when they are accused of this damnable sin of Witch-craft, they never alter their countenances, nor let so much as one tear fall. Witch-finder, My Lord, The reason of this is because the Devil hath so hardned their hearts, that they look upon their Heaven-daring sin, of giving up their Souls to the Devil, but as a small thing; but they think the approbious name of Whore and Thief, will spoil their credit amongst men; and therefore they are more con∣cern'd for that. Iudge, Well Sir, You may now stand by, for you have very well satisfied us of the nature of Witches in general; and you have likewise proved satisfactorily, that Vinegar-Tom is a real Witch. But before we proceed to pass Sentence, we will hear
what the other two Witnesses, Mr. Hate-devil, and Mr. Spy-imp, have likewise to say against Vinegar-Tom, Sack and Sugar, News Iarmara, Holt the old Hag, and her four Imps, Illemauzer; Pye-wacket, Peck in the Crown, and Griezel Greedigut, &c. Mr. Hate-devil stands up and speaks to the Iudge. Mr. Hate-devil, My Lord, Mr. Witch-finder General having said enough against Vinegar-Tom, to prove him a Witch, and wor∣thy of death, I pass him by, and shall only give in my Testimony against Sack and Sugar, News Iarmara, &c. And in a word, my Lord, They are notorious Witches all, and deserve Death (and seeing, my Lord, that the Sacred Scripture says, That thou shalt not suffer a Witch to live, I hope your Lordship will sentence them all to Death.
But, my Lord, to come to particulars, they had all of them (as my Brother Spy-Imp can tell) an hand in bewitching se∣veral men and women, and an whole herd of Cattel in this Country; and besides, they can, like Vinegar-Tom, trans∣form themselves into all shapes at pleasure. Spy-Imp confirms Hate-devils Testimony. Then stood up Mr. Spy-Imp, and told the Iudge, that he knew what Mr. Hate-devil had attested against the Prisoners at the Bar was really a truth; and for his own part, he could say no more but what had been said, and what had been said he would swear too, if his Lordship desired it.
The old Hag stands up and answers for her self, confessing her Imps Names to the Judge, and the reason how she come to turn Witch. Hag. My Lord, I must confess I am a Witch, and have several Imps, whose Names are Illemauzer, Pye-wacket, Peck in the Crown, Griezel Greedigut; but I hope your Lordship will spare my life. The reason why some become Witches. Because I had never been a Witch had not Poverty come upon me like an armed man. and that continuing, filled my mind with discontent; and in that discontented humuor, the Devil striking in, told me, if I would give up my self to him, I should not want as long as I lived. Oh, pay my Lord, therefore spare me, spare me, for I had never been a Witch had it not been for Poverty! Poverty! Poverty! and a dis∣contented mind. When she had done speaking, up sta
Holt speaks to the Judge, and as she speaks her Imp Scondrel comes and licks her Fingers. And likewise beg'd of the Iudge that her Life might be spar'd, adding withal, that if the Iudge would forgive her, she would confess to his Lordship, The Cheats and De∣lusions the Devil imposeth upon Witches, and many other remarkable things. When she had done speaking, the Iudge told her, He could not save her life, but if she would make any Confession, he would not put her to so severe Death as she deserv'd both by the Law of God and Man. Holt makes large Confessions of the Wiles of the Devil. Holt, My Lord, (to begin then) The Devil doth (as I now can tell by dreadful experience) often play th Deluder and
Impostor with Witches, in perswading them that they are the cause of such and such a Murther, and that he hope them in the effecting of it, when indeed neither he nor they had any hand in it: And he be∣ing of long standing, above six thousand years, must needs be a great Scholar in all knowledges of Arts and Tongues, and so have the best skill in Physick, judgment in Physiognomy, and knowledge of what Disease is reigning or predominant in this or that mans body, (and so for Cattel too) by reason of his long experience. This subtile Tempter knowing such a man liable to some sudden disease, (as by experience I have found) As Plurisie, Imposthume, &c. he resorts to divers Witches; If they know the man, he seeks to make a difference be∣tween the Witches and the party, it may be by telling them he hath threatned to have them very shortly searched, and so hanged for Witches; then they all con∣sult with Satan to save themselves, and Sa∣tan stands ready prepared. The Devil's Speech to the Witches. What will you have me to do for you, my dear and nearest children, covenanted and compacted with me in my hellish league, and sealed with your blood, my delicate firebrand-darlings. Oh thou (say they) that at the first didst
promise to save us thy Servants from any of our deadly Enemies discovery, and didst promise to avenge and slay all those, we pleased, that did offend us; Murther that Wretch suddenly who threatens the down∣fall of your loyal Subjects. He then pro∣miseth to effect it: Next news is heard, the party is dead; he comes to the Witch, and gets a world of reverence, credence, and respect for his power and activeness, when and indeed the Disease kills the party, not the Witch, nor the Devil, (only the De∣vil knew that such a Disease was predomi∣nant) and the Witch aggravates her dam∣nation by her familiarity and consent to the Devil, and so comes likewise in com∣pass of the Laws. This is Satans usual i∣postring and deluding, but not his con∣stant course of proceeding, for He and the Witch do mishief too much. Iudge, Hold, hold, set her by Iayler, she hath discovered enough to make the whole Court to tremble, and my heart to bleed. As soon as ever she was commanded back to Prison, in order to suffer Death, The Iudge orders the Iury to examine Sack and Sugar, News and Iarmara, with the rest of that vast company of Witches that were then in the Iaylers custody; but as they were coming into the Court, the Iayler acci∣dentally looking back, they took the op∣portunity
(fearing the Fate of those that went before) and vanished all away. Sack and Sugar, Jarmara, News, vanish out of the Court with the rest of the Witches that had not been examined, and it was feared they would multiply to a new brood of Witches in Utopia. As soon as ever the Iudge perceiv'd this unhappy accident, he commanded imme∣diately that the Iury should be impanelled, that Verdict forthwith might be given up∣on those that were yet in custody; and ac∣cordingly there was a very honest Iury im∣panelled, who within half an hours time brought in the Verdict, That Vinegar-Tom, Holt, the old Hag, with her four Imps, Ille∣mauzar, Pyewacket, Peck in the Crown, Griez∣zel Greedigut, & were Witches and grand Criminals, and deserved Death. The Iudge passes Sentence upon the Witches.
And so the Iudge past Sentence upon them all, which Sentence was this: Viz. You Vinegar-Tom, Holt, old Hag, with your four Imps, &c. shall return from the place whence you came, and from thence he dragged upon an Hurlde to the chiefest Street in Utopia, there to be buried alive in the mid-day, that all may see your sin and folly, and fly for ever, the first thought that ever shall dare to enter into their minds of making Contracts with a deceitful Devil. After the Tryal of Witches, Mrs. Bad-wife (otherwise called Mrs. Tittle-tattle, or Prate-to-fast, was order'd to be set to the Bar. Mrs.Bad-wife holding up her hand to the Bar. Her Indictment read by the Iudge himself. Iudge. Mrs. Bad-wife, You are here In∣dicted by the name of Mrs. Badwife (or Prate-to-fast) in the Parish of Gossiping, For that you by your daily Junketings, Reve∣lings,
Merry-makings, and for your proud and vain-glorious twatling and boasting, are a stain and blemish to Woman-kind, and a scandal to the place where you live, and a Plaque and Curse to your poor con∣tented Husband. What say you Mrs. Bad-wife, are you guilty of such irregular actions, yea or no. She denies the Crimes laid to her charge. Mrs. Bad-wife, My Lord and please you, I am no ways guilty of what is here laid to my charge, for I regulate my life and do∣mestick affairs, with unspeakable prudence, discretion, and modesty, and never was suspected to be of a gossiping temper, or junck∣eting humour, and love my dear-content∣ed husband as I love my own life. When she had pleaded Not guilty, the Kings Attorney stood up and made the fol∣lowing Speech; Viz. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Iu∣ry, My opinion is, that there is little heed to be given to the Assertions of any of the Fe∣male Sex (and none at all to what Mrs. Bad-wife avoucheth in her own behalf. Alas, the Devil knew when he first adventured to sting the woman, and tempt her as the weaker vessel, what a rare Piece he had to deal with, naturally apt to all mischiefs and folly, he knew she was ready to affect all his Plots and purposes, and that she would leap at
any opportunity, by which she might disturb the Fabrick of the whole Creation, and bring the World into a woful desolation: Nay, do but observe the Devil's after-works since the Fall, and you'l see in all ages he hath made use of the Female Sex to atchieve and compass his chiefest Plots and Designs in former times, who were the Engines in Kings, Princes, and Noble-mens Courts, to beget and maintain Vice and Folly, but the Daughters of Eve; And besides, if all things are not according to their will, there is no peace iu Court or Country, and how frequently do the lascivious sort of them un∣do men of all sorts and degrees, whilst be∣witched with their Syren-tongues, they en∣chant them and their Estates, Souls and Bodies unto utter desolation. Then were the Witnesses called out, which were, Mrs. Good-huswifry, Mrs. Nim∣le, Mrs. Timely-up, Mrs. Chaste, and Mrs. Ever-doing. Iudge, Well Mrs. Good-huswifry, what can you say concerning the Prisoner?
Mrs. Good-houswifry giving in her Testi∣mony against Mrs Bad-wife. Mrs. Good-houswifry, My Lord, this wick∣ed woman Mrs. Bad-wife, keeps holy Exer∣cises out of her house, she never takes car to have her Children instructed, she appro∣veth of niggardly house-keeping, she breedeth much contention where she liveth, and is hated by all the honest Neigbourhood. My Lord, she makes it her business to go from house to house to gossip and idle away her time; And now 'tis the property of a Good wife to set up a Sail according to the Keel of her husbands Estate; I believe, my Lord, in a little time she will bring her husband (good man) with sorrow to the Grave. But because other Witnesses stand here by me, I will trouble your Lordship with no more Com∣plaints at present.
Mrs. Nimbe giving in her . So Mrs. Nimble stood up and said, My Lord, This Prisoner Mrs. Bad-wife is a per∣son not fit to live, for we had in the Town where I liv'd a company of very good Neighbours, whose Names were Mrs. Ami∣ty, Mrs. Kindness, Mrs. Gentleness, Mrs. Love, Mrs. Peace, Mrs Charity, Mrs. Ready-good-will, Mrs. Good-turn, with many other such persons, &c. but as soon as ever she came, she routed them all by her ill example, and in their room she brought in Mr. Naked; Mr. Discord, Mr. Niggardliness, Mr. Strife, Mr. Deceit, Mr. High-mindedness, and Mr. Make-bate; Therefore my Lord, my judgment is, she ought to suffer Death, or be banisht quite out of Vtopia.
Mrs. Timely-up giving in her Testimony. As soon as Mrs. Nimble had done com∣plaining, up stands Mrs. Timely-up, and said, my Lord, I have much to say against Mrs. Bad-wife, and if your Lordship pleases I will begin to speak. Judge, Ay—pray Mrs. Timely-up begin then. Mrs. Timely-up, My Lord, this Mrs. Bad-wife hath for∣ced all Hspitallity out of door, and in his stead (at the back-door) hath let in Pride of Apparel, sumptuous Build∣ings, affectation of vain Titles, and Madam Ambition. Judge, Dd you know her before her marriage? Mrs. Timely-up, Yes my Lord, I knew her and her hus∣band both before they were married. Iudge. What kind of man was her husband. Mrs. T.V. He was a Leather-seller & a very honest man, and one of an incomparable good humour; when he was a Batchelor, I could not come to his house, but it was pre∣sently, Dear Friend, (for I was first cosin to him) How do you, Good morrow, Good-even, I am glad to see you well, will you sit down and eat; Be not so strange in my house, but take it for your own. for I am yours at command: But now since
he's married, poor contented man, he dares hardly speak to his friends, when they come to see him, and a wink and a nod, is an high favour from him; my Lord, she spoils all that come near her. Besides, my Lord, she is of a most froward and pievish temper, and her husband (do what he can) can never please her. Sometimes her cloaths are not find enough, her Diet sweet enough, her house sum∣ptuous and brave enough, her husbands friends kind e∣nough, and sometimes again she loves not the City, but must have her Country-house, forsooth, and an hundred things more she ayles every hour of the day. But my Lord, I confess I could not forbear laughing at a passage I saw t'other day between her husband and she. Iudge, What was it, speak out, that the whole Conrt may hear Her Husband strives to make her better, but in vain. Mrs. Timely-up, My Lord, It 'twas this t'other day as I went by her house, I accidently peep'd in at the window, and there I saw her husband bespeaking of her after this manner, Pray my love, my dear, my sweetig, my chick, my child, my honey, my life, my Ioy, (with an hundred more such endearing expressions) Be not angry, be not displea∣sed, ask what ever tho wilt, thou shalt have it, if that thou wilt but let me live at quiet: But, my Lord, for all this kind carriage of her husband, she call'd him Rogue,
Rascal, Knave, and bid him be gone, for she could never live at quiet for him, my Lord, I believe she'll quickly break his heart. When she had ended her speech, Mrs. Badwife stands up and desired that Mrs. Slack, Mrs. Sloathful, Mrs. Care∣less, Mrs. Wastful, Mrs. Goose-belly, Mrs. Toss-pot Mrs. Way∣ward, Mrs. Love-bed, Mrs. Drowsie, Mrs. Light-finger, Ma∣dam Go-gay, Mrs. Wanderer, Mrs. Spendal, her Witnesses might be called into the Court to speak in her behalf but the Judge stood up and said, That the Court would give no heed to the Eidence of such persons, except she had any better, for he said, their very Names bespoke them sorry persons. The Sentence upon Mrs. Bad-wife. Then said the Judge to the Prisoner, hold up thy hand and hear thy Sentence, viz. You shall return to the place from whence you came, and from thence be Carted to the Great Ducking-stool that is in this Town, and there shall you sit (in the presence of all the women in Vtopia for a warning to them) tell you expire out your poyson∣ous and infectious breath. Mrs. Bad-wife put into a Ducking-stool to suffer Death.
Soon after the Execution of these Male∣factors, the Judge in a great Passion, com∣manded Sir Iohn Fraud to be set to the Bar. Sir Iohn Fraud set to the Bar. That so likewise the Knavery of all Trades and Professions might be publickly Disco∣vered, Arraigned, and Legally Condemn∣ed; so he was set to the Bar, and his In∣dictment read: which was this; viz. His INDICTMENT. Sir John Fraud, Thou art here Indicted by the Name of Sir John Fraud, for that thou art an Vpstart, come out of Italy, begot of
Pride, nursed up by Wicked Consciences, (and brought into this Countrey by thy Father the Devil) that thou art a Raiser of Rents, an Enemy to this Kingdom, and hast insinua∣ted thy self into all Trades, Estates and Pro∣fessions throughout the Christian World. When the Indictment was read, the whole Court laughed, and clapt their hands for joy, saying, they hoped now they should see all Roguery come to light: And the Judge spake as follows to the Prisoner; Iudge. Sir Iohn Fraud, Art thou Guilty, or not Guilty of these Misdemeanors laid to thy Charge? Prisoner. Not Guilty, my Lord: And I desire to have a Jury impannelled, and then no doubt but the Verdict will be giv∣en on my side.
The First he desired for one of his Jury was a Pick-louse Taylor. As he was thus speaking to the Judge, he saw coming down a Hill afar off, a brave dapper Dick, quaintly attired in Velvet and Sattin, and a Cloak of cloth rash, with a Cambrick Ruff as smoothly set, and he as neatly spunged, as if he had been a Bride-groom; only he guess'd by his pace afar off, he should be a Taylor; his head was hol∣den up so pert,& his legs shackle-hamm'd, as if his Knees had been lac'd to his Thighs with Points. Coming more near indeed, he spied a Taylor's Morice-pike on his Breast, a Spanish Needle, and then he fitted his Salutations, not to his Suits, but to his Trade, and encountred him by a thred∣bare
Courtesie, as if he had not known him, and asked him of what Occupation he was? A Taylor, quoth he, Marry then my Friend, quoth he, you are the more welcome; for I must be tried for my Life; the Matter is come to an Issue, there must a Jury be impannelled upon me, and I would desire and intreat you to be one of the Quest. The Iudge likes not the Man. Not so, quoth the Judge, I challenge him; for I know he cheats with Silk, Lace, Cloth of Gold, of Silver, and such costly Stuff, to welt, guard, whip, stitch, edge, face, and draw out, that the Vails of one Velvet Breech amounts to I know not what: And I know there is no Taylor so precise, but he can play the Cook, and lick his own Fingers; though he look up to Heaven, yet he can cast large Shreds of such rich Stuff into Hell under his Shop-Board. Besides, he sets down like the Clerk of the Chancery, a large Bill of Rec∣konings, which because he keeps long in his pocket, he so powders for stinking, that the young upstart that needs it, feels it salt in his stomack for a month after. Be∣side, Knavery hath much advanc'd him;
for whereas in my time he was counted but Goodman Taylor, now he is grown to be called a Merchant, or Gentleman, Mer∣chant-Taylor, giving Arms, and the Holy Lamb in his Crest, where before he had no other Cognizance but a plain Spanish Nee∣dle, with a Welsh Cricket on the top; since then his Gain is so great, and his Honour so advanc'd by Knavery, I will not trt his Conscience, neither shall he come upon your Jury. Indeed you have some reason, quoth the Prisoner, to except against him; but per∣haps the Taylor doth this upon meer De∣votion, to punish Pride; and having no o∣ther Authority, nor Mean, thinks it best to pinch them by the Purse, and make them pay well, as to ask them twice so much Silk, Lace, and other stuff as would suffice, and yet to over-reach my young Master with a Bill of Reckonings, that will make him scratch where it itcheth not. Herein I hold the Taylor for a necessary Member, to teach young Novices the way to weep∣ing Cross; that when they have wasted what their Fathers left them by Pride, they may grow sparing and humble by inferred Poverty; and by this reason the Taylor after his fashion exalteth the poor, and
pulleth down the proud; for of a wealthy Esquires Son, he makes a thredbare Beg∣gar; and of a scornful Taylor, he sets up an upstart scurvy Gentleman. Yet seeing My Lord, you have made a reasonable Challenge to him, the Taylor shall be none of the Quest. The Next he desired for a Jry-man, was a Broker. As Sir Iohn bade the Taylor stand by, there was coming along the Valley towards him a square set Fellow, well fed, and as briskly apparelled, in a black Taffata Doub∣let, and a spnce Leather erken, with Cry∣stal
Buttons, a Clook fac'd afore with Velvet, and a Coventry Cap of the finest wool, his Face something Ruby Blush, Cher∣ry-cheek'd, like a shred of Scarlet, or a little darker, like the Lees of old Claret Wine, a Nose, autem Nose, purpled pre∣ciously with Pearl and Stone, like a coun∣terfeit work, and between the filthy Reu∣micast of his blood-shotten Snowt, there appeared small Holes, whereat Worms Heads peeped, as if they meant by their appearance to preach aud shew the Antiqui∣ty and Aucieutry of his House. This fiery-fac'd Churle had upon his fin∣gers as many Gold Rings as would furnish a Goldsmiths Shop, or beseem a Pandor of loug Profession to wear. Wondring what Companion this should be, he enquired of what Occupation he was? Marry Sir, quoth he, a Broker: Why do you ask? have you any Pawns at my House? No, quoth he, nor never will have; but the reason is, to have you upon a Jury. The Attorney General starts up. At this word starts up the Attorney Ge∣neral, and swore he should be none of the Quest, for he would Challenge him; for this base Churle, says he, is one of the Moths
of the Common-wealth: beside, he is a spoil of young Gentlemen, a blood-sucker of the poor, as thirsty as a Horse leach, that will never leave drinking while he burst; a knave that hath interest in the Leafes of forty Bawdy-houses, a receiver for Lifts, and a dishonourable supporter for Cutpurses. To conclude, he was gotten by an Incubus, a He Devil, and brought forth by an overworn refuse, that had spent her youth under the ruines of Bawbies Barn. Moreover this Villain is the Devils Fa∣ctor, sent from Hell to torment young Gen∣tlemen upon Earth? he hath fetcht me o∣ver in his time, only in pawns, in ten thou∣sand pound in gold. Suppose that Gentle∣men through their liberal minds may want that I need, money: let me come to him with a pawn worth ten pound, he will not lend upon it above three pound, and he will have a Bill of sale, and twelve pence in the pound for every month, so that it comes to sixteen pence, and the Bill must be renewed monthly: and if you break but your day set down in the Bill of sale, your pawn is lost, as full bought and sold, you turned out of your Goods, and he an unconscio∣nable gainer. Suppose the best, you keep your day, yet paying sixteen pence a month for twenty shillings, you pay as good for
the lone as fourscore in the hundred: is not this monstrous exacting upon Gentle∣men? Beside, the Knave will be diligently attending and waiting at dicing Houses, where we are at play, and there he is rea∣dy to lend the loser money upon Rings, and Chains, Apparrel, or any other good pawn, but the poor Gentleman pays so dear for the Lavender it is laid up in, that if it lye long at a Brookers-house, he seems to buy his ap∣parel twice. Nay, this worm eaten wrtch hath deeper pit falls yet to trap Youth in. For he being acquainted with a young Gntleman of fair living, in issue of good Parents, or assured possibility, soothes him in his mon∣strous expences, and says, he carries the mind of a Gentleman, promising if he want, he shall not lack for a hundred pound or two, if the Gentleman need. Then hath my Broker an Usurer at hand, as ill as him∣self, and he brings the money, but they tye the poor Soul in such Darbies bands, what with receiving ill Commodities, and forfei∣tures upon the band, that they dub him Sir Iohn Had-land before they leave him, and share like Wolves the poor novices wealth betwixt them as a prey. He is (Sir) to be brief, a bowzie, bawdy Miser, good for none but himself, and his trugg; a Carl that hath a filthy Carkass without a Conscience, a bo∣dy
of a man, wherein an Infernal spirit, in¦stead of a Soul, doth inhabit: the scum of the seven deadly sins, an Enemy to all good minds, a devourer of young Gentlemen, and to conclude, my mortal Enemy, and there∣fore admit of my challenge, and let him be none of the Jury. Moreover, were not Brokers bad, there would be less filching, and fewer Thieves; for they receive all is brought them, and buy that for a Crown, that is worth twenty shillings. desire of gain binds their Conscience, and they care not how it be come by, so they buy it cheap. Beside, they extort upon the poor, that are inforced through extreme want to pawn their cloaths and houshold stuff, their Pewder and Brass; and if poor souls that labour hard, miss but a day, the base-minded Broker takes the for∣feit, without remorse or pitty: It was not so in Diebus illis. I have known of late, when a poor Woman laid a silver Thimble, that was sent her from her friends for a Token, to pawn for six pence, and the Broker made her pay a half penny a week for it, which comes to two shillings a year for six pence; sith then his Conscience is so bad, let him be shuffled out amongst the Knaves, for a dis∣carded Card, and so the Broker was put by,
A Barber, a Surgeon and an Apothecary summoned to be of the Jury. When the Broker was gone Three pert Youths come up clse to Sir Iohn in a clu∣ster very nealy tyed, who questioning them what they were? the one said he was a Bar∣ber, the other a Chirugeon, and the third an Apothcary. How like you of these (quoth Si Iohn to the Judg) shall they be of my Iury? Of the Jury, (quoth the Iudge) ne∣ver a One, by my consent; for I challenge them all. And first the Brber, he cannot be but a partial man, ith he gets more by one time dresing of the Iudge than by ten times dressing of me: I come plain to be poll'd, and , eard cut, and pay him two
pence: The Judge he sits down in the chair wrapt in fine Clothes, as though the Barber were about to make him a footclothe for the Vicar of Saint fools: Then begins he to take his Scissors in his hand, and his comb, and so to snap with them as if he meant to give a warning to all the Lice in his nitty Locks for to prepare themselves, for the day of their destruction was at hand, then comes he out with his Fustian Eloquence, and making a low conge, saith Sir, will you have your Worships Hair cut after the Ita∣lian manner, short and round, and then frounst with the curling Irons, to make it look like a half Moon in a Mist? or like a Spaniard, long at the ears, and curled like to the two ends of an old cast Periwig? or will you be Frenchifyed with a Love-lock down to your shoulders, wherein you may wear your Mistriss Favour? the English cut is base, and Gentlemen scorn it, novelty is dainty: speak the word, Sir, my Scissors are ready to execute your Worships will. His head being once drest, which requires in combing and rubbing some two hours, he comes to the Bason: then being curiously washt with no worse than a Camphire ball, he descends as low as his beard, and asketh whether he pleaseth to be shaven or no? whether he will have his Peake cut short &
sharp, amiable like an Inamorato, or broad pendant like a Spade, to be terrible, like a Warrior and a Soldado? whether he will have his crates cut low like a Juniper bush, or his Suberches taken away with a Razor? if it be his pleasure to have his appendices prim'd, or his Mouchaches sostred, to turn a∣bout his ears like the branches of a Vine, or cut down to the lip with the Italian Lash to make him look like a half faced Bouby in Brass? These quaint Terms the Barber greets the Gallant withal, and at every word a snap with his Scissors, and a cring with his knee; whereas when he comes to the poor man, he either cuts his beard at his own pleasure, or else in disdain asks him if he will be trim'd round like the half of a Holland Cheese, mocking of him; for this his Kna∣very, my will is of him, he shall be none of the Jury. For you Mr. Surgeon the Statutes of Eng∣land exempt you from being of any Quest; and beside, alas, I seldom fall into your hands as being quiet, and making no brawles to have wounds or sores, neither do I frequent Whorehouses to catch the Marbles, and so to grow your Patient: I know you not, and therefore I appeal to the Statute, you shall have nothing to do with this matter. And for you Mr. Apothecary, alas, I look
not once in seven year into your Shop, with∣out it be to buy a pennyworth of wormseed to give my child to drink; or a little Treacle to drive out the Measles, or perhaps some dregs or powders, to make my sick horse a drench withal; but for my self, if I be ill at ease, I take Kitchin Phisick, I make my Wife my Doctor, and my Garden my Apotheca∣ries Shop, whereas the Town Fops cannot have a Fart awry, but he must have his Pur∣gations, Pills, and Glisters, or evacuate by Electuaries; he must, if the least spot of Morphew come on his face, have his Oyl of Tartar, his Lac Virginis, his Camphire dissolved in Verjuice, to make the Fool as fair forsooth, as if he were to play Maid-Marian in a May-game or Morrice-dance: tush, he cannot digest his Meat without Conserves, nor end his Meal without Suc∣kats; if Sir Iohn hap to have a stinking Breath, then forsooth the Apothecary must play the Perfumer to make it sweet; nay, what is it about him, that blameth not Na∣ture for framing, and formeth it anew by Art? And in all this, who but Monsieur the Apothecary? threfore, pray Sir, (quoth the Jury) let those three, as partial com∣panions, be packing.
The next desired for a Jury-man, was a Lawyer by S. Dunstans Church. Assoon as these were pack'd off, there comes stalking down from a neighbouring Grove an ancient grave Sir, in a black Vel∣vet Coat, and a black Cloth Gown, welt∣ed and faced, and after him, as he suppo∣sed, four Servingman, the most ill-favour∣ed Knaves he thought as ever he saw; one of them had on a Buff-leather Jerkin, all greasie before with the droppings of Beer, that fell from his Beard; and by his side a Skein like a Brewers Bung-knife, and muffled he was in a Cloak turn'd over his Nose, as though he had been ashamed to shew his Face. The second had a Belly like
a Bucking-tub, and a thredbare black coat unbuttoned before upon the Breast, where∣on the Map of Drunkenness was drawn, with the bawdy and bowsie xcrements that dropt from his filthy leaking mouth. The third was a long lean old slavering slangril, with a Brazil staff in one hand, and a whipcord in the other; so purblind, that he had like to have stumbled upon the com∣pany before he saw them. The fourth was a  Chaff, with a sowr look, in a black  faced with Taffata, and by his side a geat side Pouch like a Falkoner: For their Faces, all four seemed to be Brethren, they were so bumbasted with the flocks of strong Beer, and lined with the Lees of old Sack, that they look'd like four blown Bladders painted over with red Oker, or wash'd o∣ver with the Suds of an old stale Die. All these, as well the Master, as the follow∣ing Mates, would have past away, but that he stept before them, and enquired first of the foremost what he was? Marry, quoth lie, a Lawyer. Then Sir, quoth he, we have a Matter in controversie that requires Counsel, and you are the more welcom. Marry, said he, I am to be Tried for my Life, and I would have you of my Jury: At this the Lawyer smiled, but said no∣thing; he marvelled he was not so well as
the Surgeon, exempted by an Act of Par∣liament, from being of any Quest; since as the Surgeon was without pity, so he was without conscience; But presently Mr. At∣torney stepped in, and made his Challenge, saying, the Lawyer was never friend to Honesty; for when Lowliness, Neighbor∣hood and Hospitality lived in England, Westinster-Hall was a Dining-Chamber, not a Den of Controversies, when the Duke, Earl, Lord, Knight, Gentleman and E∣squire aimed at Virtue, not Pride; and wore such Breeches as was spun in his house; then the Lawyer was a simple man, and in the highest degree was but a bare Scrivener, except Judges of the Land, which took in hand serious matters, as Treasons, Mur∣ders, Felonies, and such Capital Offences, but seldom were there any Pleas put in, be∣fore the proud Lawyer, for his Mainte∣nance, invented strange Controversies; and since he began to domineer in England, he hath buz'd such a proud, busie, cove∣tous and encroaching humor upon every mans Head, that Lawyers are grown to be one of the chief Limbs of the Common∣wealth; for they do now adays de lana ca∣na caprina rixari, go to Law if a Hen do but scrape in a Neighbours Orchard; but howsoever Right be, Might carries away
the Verdict: If a poor man sue a Gentle∣man, why he shoots up to the Sky, and the Arrow falls on his own head; howsoever the Cause go, the weakest is thrust to the wall. Lawyers are troubled with the heat of the Liver, which makes the palms of their hands so hot, that they cannot be cool'd, unless they be rubb'd with the Oyl of Angels; but the poor man that gives but his bare Fee, or perhaps pleads in for∣a pauperis, he hunteth for Hares with a Tabor, and gropeth in the dark to find a Needle in a Bottle of Hay: tush, these Lawyers have such delatory and foreign Pleas, such Dormers, such Quibs and Quid∣dits, that beggaring their Clients, thye purchase to themselves whole Lordships; it booteth not men to discourse their little Conscience, & great Extortion, only let this suffice, they be not so rich as they be bad, and yet they be not too wealthy. I inveigh not against Law, nor honest Lawyers, for there be some well qualified; but against extorting Ambodexters that wring the poor; and because I know not whether this be such an one or no, I challenge him; he shall not be of the Jury. Why then (quoth Sir Iohn) his Worship may depart.
A Sergeant desired on the Iury Sir Iohn questioned what he in the Buff∣Jerkin was? Marry (quoth he) I am a Ser∣gean, Sir Iohn. He had no sooner said so, but Sir Iohn leap'd back, and drawing his Rapier, he did not only challenge him for his Jury, but protested if he strid one foot toward him, he would make him eat a piece of his Poard. And what is the reason (quoth he) that there is such mortal ha∣tred betwixt you and the Sergeant? O Sir, (quoth the Judge) search him, and I warrant you, the Knave hath Precept up∣on
on Precept to arrest me, hath worn his Mace smooth, with only clapping it on my Shoulder; he hath had me under Coram so often. Oh the Reprobate is the Usurers Executioner to bring such honest Gentle∣men to Limbo, Sir Iohn, as he hath over-thrown with his base Brocage, and bad Commodities; and as you see him a fat Knave with a foggy face, wherein a Cup of old Sack hath set a Seal, to mark the bow∣sie Drunkard to die of the Dropsie, so his Conscience is consumed, and his Heart robb'd of all remorse and pity, that for Money he will betray his own Father; for will a Cormorant but set him to arrest a young Gentleman, the Rake-hell will be so eager to catch him, as a Dog to take a Bear by the ears in Paris Garden, and when he hath laid hold upon him, he useth him as courteously as a Butchers Cur would do an Oxe-cheek when he is hungry; if he see the Gentleman hath Money in his Purse, then straight with a Cap and Knee he car∣ries him to the Tavern, and bids him send for some of his Friends to Bail him; but first he Covenants to have some brace of Angels for his pains; and besides he calls in for Wine greedily: But suppose the Gentleman wants Pence, he will either have a Pawn, or else drag him to the
Counter, without respect of Manhood or Honesty. I should spend the whole day with displaying his villanies; therefore briefly let this suffice, he was never made for any goodness, but his slovenly carcass was fram'd by the Devil, of the rotten Carrion of a Wolf, and his Soul of an U∣surers damn'd Ghost, turn'd out of Hell, into his Body, to do monstrous wickedness upon the Earth; so that he shall be none of the Jury, neither shall he come nearer than the length of my Rapier will suffer him. Indeed, quoth Sir Iohn, generally Ser∣geants be bad, but there be amongst them some honest men, that will do their duties with lawful favour; for to say truth, if Sergeants were not, how should men come by their Debts? Marry they are so cruel in their Office, that if they arrest a poor man, they will not suffer him (if he hath not Money) to stay a quarter of an hour to talk with his Creditor, although perhaps at the meeting they might take Compositi∣on; but only to the Counter with him, un∣less he will lay his Pewter, Brass, Cover∣lets, Sheets, or such Houshold stuff to them for pawn of payment of some Coyn for their staying; therefore let him depart out of the place, for his Room is better than his Company to me, because of a late Prank I played
A Sumner, a Iaylor, an Informer appear for Iury-men for Sir John. After this three other men offered their Service to Sir Iohn; the one said he was a Sumner, the other a Gaoler, and the third an Informer. Bess me (quoth the Judge) what a Gang is here gathered together! no doubt Hell is broke loose, and the De∣vil means to keep Holiday: I make Chal∣lenge against them all, as against worse men than those that gave evidence against Christ: for the Sumner, it boots me to say little more against him, than Chaucer did in his Cntebury Tales, who said he was a Knave, a Biber and a Bawd: But leaving that Authority, although it be authentical▪ yet thus much I can say of my self, that
these drunken, drowsie sons go a tooting abroad (as they themselves term it) which is to hear if any man hath got his Maid with Child, or plays the Good-fellow with his Neighbours Wife: if he find a hole in any mans Coat that is of wealth, then he hath his peremptory Citation ready, to cite him unto the Archdeacons or Officials Court, there to appear, and abide the shame and penalty of the Law: the man perhaps in good credit with his Neighbors, loth to bring his Name in question, greaseth the Sumner in the Fist, and then he wipes him out of his Book, and suffers him to get twenty with Child, so he keep him warm in the hand. He hath a Saying to wanton Wives, and they are his good Dames, and as long as they feed him with Cheee, Ba∣con, Capons, and such odd Reversions, they are honest; and be they ever so bad, he swears to the Official, Complaints are made upon Envy, and the women are o good Behaviour. Tush, what Bawdry is it he will not suffer, so he may have Money and good Chear? And if he like a Wench well, a Snatch himself; for they know all the Whores in a Country, and are as le∣cherous Companions as may be. To be brief, the Sumner lives upon Sins of Peo∣ple, and out of Harlotry gets he all his
Gains. As for the Gaoler, although I have been little troubled in Prison, to have ex∣perience of his Knavery, yet have I heard the poor prioners complain how cruel they be to them, extorting with extraordinary Fees, selling a double Curtal (as they call it) with a double Jugg of Beer for two-pence, which contains not above a pint and a half. Let a poor man be arrested into one of the Compters, though he but set his foot in them but half an hour, he shall be at al∣most an Angels Charge; what with Gar∣nish, Crossing and Wiping out of the Book, turning the Key, Paying the Chamberlain, seeing for his Jury, and twenty such Ex∣tortions, invented by themselves, and not allowed by any Statute. God bless me, Gaoler, from your Hen-houses; I'le assure you, I'le keep you from coming into the Quest. And as to you Master Informer, you that look like a Civil Citizen, or some handsom Pettifogger of the Law, although your crimson Nose betrays you can sup a cool Cup of Sack without any chewing, yet have you as much Knavery in your side-Pouch there, as would breed the confusion of forty honest men. It may be, Sir Iohn that you marvel why I exclaim against the Informer, since he highly pretends to do
all he doth against honest men, according to Law: To wipe out this, this Officer is one that abuses Law, when he should use it, and such a one I guess this Fellow to be, by the Carnation Tincture of his Ruby-Nose. Therefore let us search his Bag, and see what Trash you shall find in it; with that, although the Informer were very loth, yet we pluckt out the stuffing of his Pouch, and in it was found a hundred and odd Writs; whereat I wondred; and Mr. Attorney smiling, bad me read Labels, and the Par∣ties Names, and then examine the Informer how many of them he knew, and wherein they had offended? I followed his Counsel, and of all he knew but three, neither could he tell what they had done amiss, to be ar∣rested, and brought in question; and yet this Varlet swore they deserved punish∣ment. But the Prisoner Sir Iohn Fraud seeing me stand in amaze, began thus to resolve me in my doubt. Perhaps, quoth he, you marvel why the Informer hath all these Writs, and knows neither the parties, nor can object any offence to them? To this I answer, that it being a long vacation he learned in the rowl all those mens names, and the places where they live: Now means he to go a∣broad, and search them out and arrest
them, and though they know not wherein or for what cause they should be troubled, yet rather than they will come up to London and spend their Money, he thinks they will bestow some odd Angel upon Mr. Informer, and so sit at home in quiet. But suppose some be so stubborn as to stand to the Try∣al, yet can this cunning Knav declare a Tanquam against them, so that though they be cleared, yet can they have no recompence at all, for that he doth it in the Courts be∣half, I will not unfold all his Villanies, but he is an Abuser of good Laws, and a very knave, and so let him pack away with his Fellows.
A Collier and a Ropemaker. As they were going Sir Iohn saw two in the Valley together by the ears, the one in Leather, the other as black as the Devil; he stept to them to part the fray, and que∣stioned what they were, aad wherefore they brawled? Marry, quoth he, that lookt like Lucifer, though I am black, I am not the Devil, but indeed a Collier of Croyden and one, Sir, that have old many a man a false sack of Coals, that both wanted mea∣sure, aud was half full of dust and dross. Indeed I have been a Lieger in my time in London, and have played many mad pranks; for which cause, you may apparently see, I am made a curtal; for the Pillory (in the
sight of a great many good and sufficient Witnesses) hath eaten off both mine ears: and now, Sir, this Ropemaker (the other that was with him) hunteth me here with his halters. I guess him to be some evil Spi∣rit, that in the likeness of a man, would since I have past the Pillory, perswade me to hang my self for my old offences; and therefore I lay about his shoulders with a Crab-tree Cudgel, that he may get out of my Company. The Ropemaker replyed, that honestly journeying by the way, he acquainted him∣self with the Collyer accidentally, but I my self am an honest Man; How, quoth the Collier, can he be honest, whose Mother I guess was a Witch? For I have heard them say, that Witches say their Prayers back∣ward, and so doth the Ropemaker earn his living by going backward; and the Knaves chief Living is by making fatal Instruments, as Halters and Ropes, which divers despe∣rate men hang themselves with; so imme∣diately Sir Iohn asked them, if they would be of his Jury? The Judge answered and said in the Ropemaker he found no great Falshood, therefore he was willing he should be one; but for the Collier, he thought it necessary, that as he came so he should de∣part: so then, Sir Iohn bade the Ropema∣ker
stand by till more came, which was not long; for there came three in a Clu∣ster. The Cheats used by the Tanners, Shoema∣kers, and Curriers. As soon as they drew nigh, he spyed one, a fat Churle with a side Russet Coat to his knee, and his hands all so tanned with shift∣ing his Ouse, yet would he not take notice what they were, but questioned with them of their several occupations. Marry, quoth the first, I am a Tanner, the second a Shoemaker, and the third a Cur∣rier: then turning to the Court, he asked
them if they would allow of those parties? No, quoth the Attorney General, I make challenge unto them all, and I will yield, reasons of import against them. The Cheats used by the TANNERS. And first to you, Mr. Tanner, Are you a man worthy to be of a Jury, when your Con∣science cares not to wrong the whole Com∣mon-wealth? you respect not publick com∣modity, but private gains; not to benefit your Neighbour, but for to make the proud Princox your Son an upstart Gentleman; and because you would marry your Daugh∣ter at the least to an Esquire, that she may, if it be possible, be a Gentlewoman; and how comes this to pass? By your Tanfats forsooth: For whereas by the antient Laws and Statutes of England, you should let a, Hide lye in the Ouse, at the least nine mo∣neths, you can make good Leather of it before three months; you have your Doves dung, your Marl, your asen Bark, and a thousand things more, to bring on your Leather apace, that it is so badly Tanned, that when it comes to the wearing, then it eets away like a piece of brown Paper: And whereas your Backs of all other, should be the best tanned, you bring them so full
of Horn to the Market, that did you not grease the Sealers of Leaden-Hall through∣ly in the Fist, they should never be sealed, but turned away, and made forfeit by the Statute. I cannot at large lay open your subtle practices to beguile the poor commu∣nalty with bad Leather. But let this suffice you leave no Villany unsought, to bring the Blockhead your son to go afore the Clown his Father, trimly trickt up in a pair of vel∣vet breeches. The Cheats used by the Curriors. Now Mr. Currior, to your Cozenage; you cannot be content only to burn the Leather you dress, for fault of Liquor, because you would make the Shoomaker pay well, and you put in little stuff; and beside, when as in Backs you should only put in Tallow hard and good, you put in soft Kitchin stuff mixt, and so make the good and well tan∣ned Leather by your Villany, to fleet and waste away, but also you grow to be an ex∣torting Knave and a Forestaller of the Mar∣ket; for you will buy Leather, Sides, Backs and Calve Skins, and sell them to the poor Shoomakers at an unreasonable rate, by your false retailing, getting infinite goods by that excessive price; both undoing the poor Sho∣maker,
and causing us, that we pay extreme∣ly for Shoes. For if the Currier bought not Leather by the whole of the Tanner, the Shoomaker might have it at a more reason∣able price; but the Shoemaker being poor, is not perhaps able to deal with a dicker of Hides, nor perhaps with a couple of Backs, and the Tanner will not trust him; then the extorting and couzening Currier comes up with this, I will lend you for a day; and so pincheth him, that he is scarce able to find his Children bread. But well hath his Majesty provided by an Act of Parliament, That no Currier shall buy Leather, either Backs or Hides of the Tanner, so to bridle the extorting and forestalling Couzenage; but craftilier and subtilier hath the Knave Currier cros-bitten the Statute, in that he deals thus with the Tanner, he makes him hold his Leather unreasonably to the Shoe∣maker; and so when he cannot sell it, he lays it up in the Curriers house, under a co∣lour, whereas indeed he hath sold it him. Suppose this shift be spied and prevented, then compoundeth he with some Knave Shoemaker, some base Rakehell without a Conscience, that neither respecteth God, the Common-wealth, nor his Company, and forsooth he is half with the Currier, who letteth him have some hundred Marks
to lay out for Leather every Month, where∣as he spends not in his Shop a hundred Marks worth in a year; so the Shoemaker buys it to abuse the Statute, for the Curri∣er, and the Currier by that means undoeth the other Shoemakers: thus two crafty Knaves are met, and they need no honest Broker. The Cheats in the Shoemaking Trade. Now to you Mr. Shoemaker; you can put in the inner sole of a thin Calves Skin, when as the Shoe is a Neats-leather Shoe; which you know is clean contrary both to Consei∣ence and the Statute. Beside, you will join a Neats-Leather Vampey to a Calves Lea∣ther eel: Is not here good stuff, Mr. Shoe∣maker? Well, for your Knavery, you shall have those curses which belong unto your Craft: you shall be light-footed to travel far, light witted upon every small occasion to give your Masters bag: you shall be most of you unthrifts, and almost all perfect Goodfellows. Beside, I remember a mer∣ry jest, how Mercury brought you to a dan∣gerous Disease, for he requested a boon for you, which fell out to your great dis∣advantage: and to recreate us, hear a little Gentle-craft, what ell to your Trade by
that winged God. As it hapned on a time that Iupiter and Mercury travelling toge∣ther upon Earth, Mercury was wonderful∣ly hungry and had no Money in his Purse to buy him any food, and at last, to his great comfort he spyed where a Company of Tailors were at Dinner with buttered Pease eating their pease with their Needles points one by one: Mercury came to them, and as∣ked them his alms: they proudly bade him sit down and do as he saw they did, and with that delivered him a Needle. The poor God being passing hungry, could not con∣tent his maw with eating one by one, but turned the eye of his Needle, and eat two or three together. Which the Tailors see∣ing they start up, and said, What Fellow, a shovel and Spade to butter'd Pease? hast thou no more manners? Get out of our Company, and so they sent him packing with many strokes. Mercury coming back Iupeter demanded of him what news? and he told him how churlishly he was used a∣mongst the Tailors. Well, wandring on fur∣ther, Mercury espyed where a Company of Shoemakers were at Dinner with powdred Beef and Brewess: going to them, before he could ask them any Alms, they said, welcome good Fellow, what is thy Stomack up? wilt thou do as we do, and taste of Beef
Mercury thanked them, and sate down and eat his Belly full, and drunk double Beer, and when he had done went home to his Master. Assoon as he came, Iupeter asked him what News? and he said, I have light amongst a crew of Shoomakers, the best Fellows that I ever met withal, they have frankly fed me without grudging, and therefore grant me a Boon for them. Ask what thou wilt, Mercury, quoth he, and it shall be done: Why then, quoth he, grant, that for this good turn they have done me, they may ever spend a groat afore they can earn twopence. It shall be granted: Mercury, as∣soon as Iupeter had said the word, bethought himself, and said, Nay, but that they may earn a groat before they spend twopence for my Tongue slipt at the first. Well, Mercury, quoth he, it cannot be recalled, the first wish must stand; and hereof, by Mercuries Boon it grew, that all the Gentle-Craft are such good Fellows and Spend∣thrifts. But howsoever, none of thes three, neither Shoomaker, Tanner nor Cur∣rier shall be of the Jury.
A Parcel of Gentlemen appear next to Sir John. As they went away with Fleas in their ears, being thus taunted by the Court, Sir Iohn saw coming to him a Troop of anci∣ent Gentlemen, with their Servingmen attending upon them: The foremost was a great old man with a white Beard, all in Russes, and a fair black Cloak on his back, and attending on him he had some five men; their Cognizance, as I remember, was a Peacock without a Tail; the other two that accompanied him, seemed meaner than himself, but Gentlemen of good worship;
whereupon Sir Iohn went towards them, and saluted them, and was so bold as to questi∣on what they were, and of their Busi∣ness. And the ancientest answered, he was a Knight, and those two his Neighbours, the one an Esquire, the other a Gentleman, and that they have no urgent Affairs, but only to walk abroad to take the fresh Air. Then did he desire them all to be upon his Jury. They smiling, answered, they were content; but the Attorney General storm∣ing, stept in, and made challenge to them all, and said, thus you may guess the in∣ward Mind by the outward Apparel; and see how he is addicted by the homely Robes he is suited in; Why this Knight is a mor∣tal Enemy to Honesty, and so to me; he regardeth not Hospitality, yet aimeth at Honour; he relieves not the poor; you may see though his Lands and Revenues be great, and he able to maintain himself in great Bravery, yet he is content with home-spun Cloath; he holdeth the worth of his Gentry to be and consist in Velvet-Breeches, but valueth true Fame by the re∣port of the common sort, who praise him for his House-keeping and great Spendings. His Tenants and Farmers would if it might be
be possible, make him sink into Atoms with their Prayers and Praises; he raiseth Rent, racketh Lands, taketh Incomes, imposeth merciless Fines, envies others, buyeth Houses over his Neighbors heads, and re∣specteth not his Countrey, and the Com∣modity thereof, as dear as his Life, and therefore not fit to be in a Kingdom; he regardeth not to have the needy fed, not to have his Board garnished with full Plat∣ters, he minds to be famous, and great, and rich in Furniture and Apparel: Nay, he loveth Pride, and therefore I must pro∣claim him mine Enemy, and therefore he shall be none of the Jury; and such as him∣self I guess the Squire and the Gentleman, and therefore I challenge them all.
Next appears to Sir Iohn a Troop of Citizens. A Discovery of the Cheats used by Skinners, Ioyners, Sadlers, Watermen, Cutlers, Bellows-menders, Plaisterers and Printers. As Mr. Attorney was thus talking, there came a Troop of men, in apparel seeming poor honest Citizens, in all they were eight; he demanded of them what they were, and whither they were going? One of them that seemed the wealthiest, who was in a surr'd Jacket, made answer, that they were all friends, going to the Burial of a Neighbour of theirs, that yesternight
died, and if it would do Sir Iohn any plea∣sure to hear their Names, they were not so dainty, but they would ell them. The first said he was a Skinner; the se∣cond said he was a Joyner; the third was a Sadler; the fourth a Watermam, the fifth was a Cutler, the sixth was a Bellows-men∣der, the seventh a Plaisterer, and the eighth a Printer. In good time, quoth he, it is commendable when Neighbors love so well together; but if your speed be not over∣much, I must request you to be of a Jury; they seemed all content, and so Sir Iohn turned to the Court, and asked if they would make challenge to any of these? I scorn, quoth one of the Court to make any great Objection against them, being they are Mechanical men, and almost hold them indifferent: With that up starts the Judge himself, and said, Sir, they are not indif∣ferentmen, I challenge them all.
The Knavery of Skinners. And first with you, Mr Skinner, to whom I can say little, but only this, that whereas you should only put the Backs of Skins into Facing, you taw them, and so deceive the Buyer; beside, if you have some phanta∣stick Skin brought you, not worth two∣pence, with some strange Spots, though it be a Leopard, you will swear it is a most precious Skin, and came from Musko, or the furthest Part of Calabria. The Cheats of the Sadler. The Sadler, he stuffs his Pannels with Straw or Hay, and overglazeth them with
Hair, and makes the Leather of them of Morts, or tann'd Sheeps-skins. The Cheat of the Joyner. The Ioyner, though an honest man, yet he makes his Joynts weak, and putteth sap∣py wood in the Mortises, which should be Heart of the Tree, and all to make his Stuff tender. The Cheat of the Cutler. The Cutler is a Patron to Ruffians and Swash-Bucklers, and will sell them a Blade that may be thrust into a Bushel; but to a poor man that cannot skill of it, he sells him a Sword or Rapier new overglazed, and swears the Blade came either from Tur∣key, or Toledo.
The Knavery of the Watermen. Now, (Mr. Waterman) you will say there is no subtilty in you, for there is none so simple but knows your Fares, and wha is due between Greenwich and London, and how you earn your Money painfully, with the sweat of your Brows; all this is true, but let me whisper you one thing in your ear, you will play the good-fellow too much if you be well greas'd in the Fist; for if a young Gentleman and a pretty Wench come to you, and say, Waterman, My friend and I mean to go by Water, and to be mer∣ry a night or two, and I care not which way nor whither we go; and therefore where thou thinkest we may have best Lodging,
thither carry us: then off goes your Cap, and away they go, to Brainford, or some other place; and then you say, Hostess, I pray you use this Gentleman and his Wife well, they are come out of London to take the Air, and mean to be merry here a night or two, and to spend their Money frankly, when God wot they are neither man not wife, nor of any acquaintance, before their Match made in some Bawdy Tavern, but you know no such matter; and therefore Waterman, I pardon you. And so for you Plaisterer and Bellows mender, you shall be on the Iury. At those words of the Judge, Sir Iohn rejoyced, hoping that now quickly the Ju∣ry would be full.
A Printer made a Iury man for his Indif∣ferency. As for the Printer, he cheats the Book∣seller sometimes in working of half an Im∣pression for himself, when the Book-seller hath had his Number he is to pay for; but because the Printer only doth thus to those Book-sellers that he thinks will never pay him, he shall pass on the Jury as an indiffe∣rent honest man.
The Cheats of the Brick-layers: As Sir Iohn lookt about him, he saw one alone come running as fast as he could; he wondred what he should be that he should make such haste; when he came near him, he told the Judge he was a good honest sim∣ple man that had been long in his work, in building him a sumptuous House: I chal∣lenge him (quoth the Judge) for he is a Jugler; for though he goeth very homely in Leather, and hath his Ruler in his hand, and his Trowel at his side, and he seemeth not as one that was given to such qualities, yet he hath his Policy; when he maketh a stately place all glorious to the eye, and full of fair Chambers, and goodly Rooms, and
about his House perhaps some threescore Chimneys, yet he can so cunningly cast by his Art, that three of them shall not smoke in the Twelvemonth, and so spoils he much good Mortar and Brick. Why, quoth Sir Iohn, the Fault is not in the Workman, but the House-keeper; for now adays men build to please the Eye, not to profit the poor, they use no Rost, but for themselves and their Houshold ; nor no Fire, but a little Court-Chimney in their own Chamber: How can the poor Brick∣layer then be blamed, when the niggardli∣ness if the Lord and Master, is the Cause no more Chimnies do smoke? For would they use ancient Hospitality as their Fore∣fathers did, and value as lightly of Pride, as their great Grandfathers, then should you fee every Chimney in the House smoke, and prove that the poor Artificer had done his part. Why then (quoth the Judge) as you please, admit him on the Quest. But what be those (qouth the Judge) that come here so soberly? I hope they be honest men, for they look dmre; I will enquire, said he; and with that, stepping to them, he demanded their Names; and very courteously one said he was a Brewer, the other a Butcher, the third a Baker, and the fourth a Victualer.
Hearing what they were, the Judge was glad, guessing, since they were so honest substantial men, that they would help to make up the Jury. When he had said so, Sir Iohn Fraud, with a grim and sow coutenance, gave them this Challenge: I hold it not necessa∣ry (quoth he) that these have any thing to deal in my Cause, since I am at odds with them all, at least in forty pounds apiece; for this seven year have I been indebted unto them for Bread, Bf, Beer, and o∣ther Victuals; then since they have credit∣ed me long, and I have had so little a care to pay them, I doubt now they will revenge themselves, and pass against me in the Ver∣dict. Nay (quoth the Judge) rather will they hold on your part; for if they be honest wise men (as they seem to be) they will be careful of your preerment, seeing the more highly you are advanc'd, the more they are like to come by their own: if therefore you can object no other points of Dishonesty against them, I see no reason why they should be put by. If you do not? (quoth Sir Iohn) I do, and I will prove them unit to have any dealings here; and first for the Butcher:
The Knavery of the Butcher. I pray you Goodman Kill-Calf, what ha∣vock play you with puffing up of meat, and blowing with your Pricker as you slay it? have you not your artificial Knaveries to set out your meat with pricks, and then swear he hath more for money than ever you bought: to sell a piece of an old Cow, for a chop of young Ox; to wash your old meat that hath hung waltring in the shop, with new blood, to truss away an old Ewe, instead of a young Weather: and although you know it is hurtful, and forbidden by the statues to slay your Hides, skins, backs,
with cuts and flashes, to the improverishing of the poor Shoemaker when he buyes it: yet I pray you how many slaughters do you make in a poor Calves skin? Oh Butcher, a Long Lent be your punishment: for you make no Conscience in deceiving the poor. The Knavery of the Brewer. And you Brewer, that grow to be worth forty thousand pounds by selling of sodden water, what subtilty have you in making your Beer, to spare the Malt, and put in more of the hop to make your drink (be Barly never so cheap) not a whit the stron∣ger, and yet sell never a whit the more mea∣sure for money; you can, when you have taken all the heart of the Malt away, then clap on store of water; 'tis cheap enough, and mash out a tunning of small Beer, that it scours a mans maw like Rhenish wine; in your Conscience how many Barrels draw you out of a quarter of Malt? sie, sie, I con∣ceal your falshood, lest I should be too broad in setting down your faults.
The Knavery of the Baker. And for you, Goodman Baker, you that love to be seen in the open Market-place upon the Pillory, the world cryes out of your wiliness, you crave but one dear year to make your Daughter a Gentlewoman: you buy your Corn at the best hand, and yet will not be content to make your bread weight by many ounces: you put in Yest, and Salt, to make it heavy, and yet all your policy cannot make it, but you sine for the Pillory. The poor cry out, the rich find fault, and the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, like Honourable and Worshipful Magistrates, every day walk abroad, and weigh your Bread, and all will not serve to make you honest men: but were extremity
used, and the Statute put in the highest de∣gree in practise, you would have as few ears of your heads, as the Collier. The Knavery of the Tapsters. Last to you, Tom Tapster, that tap your small cans of Beer to the poor, and yet fill them half full of froth, that card your Beer (if you see your Guests begin to be drunk) half small, and strong; you can∣not be content to pinch them with your small pots, and your Ostry Faggots; but have your Truggs, to draw men on to Vil∣lany, and to bring Customers to your house, where you sell a joint of meat for twelve pence, that cost you scarce fix: and if any chance to go on the score, you score him, when he is asleep, and set up a Groat a day more than he hath, to find you drinking pots with your Companions. To be short, thou art a Knave, and I like not of any of the rest, the way lies before you, and therefore you may be gone, for you shall be none of the Quest. The Judge hearing this smiled and said, I see Rogues among themselves can never agree, as the Judge was thus speaking, Sir Iohn saw five fat Fellows, all in Damas▪Coats, and Gowns welted with Velvet, ve∣ry
brave, and in great consultation, as if they were to determine of some weighty matter. Drawing near, he saw they were wealthy Citizens: so he went, and reverent∣ly saluted them, and told them how he needed their aid, about his Jury; they were contented; but the Judge excepted against four of them, and said, they were none of his friends; that was the Merchant, Goldsmith, Mercer, and Draper. His alle∣gations were these, that they were all fea∣thered of one wing, to fetch in young Gen∣tlemen by commodities, under the colour of lending of money.
The Knavery of the Merchant. For the Merchant, he delivered Iron, Tin, Lead, Hops, Sugars, Spices, Oyls, brown Paper, or whatsoever else, from six months to six months; which when the poor Gen∣tleman came to sell again, he could not make threescore and ten in the hundred be∣side the usury. The Knavery of the Mercer. The Mercer, he followeth the young up∣start Gentleman, that hath no Government of himself, and he fedeth his humour to
go brave; he shall not want Silks, Sattins, Velvets, to prank abroad in his pomp; but with this proviso, that he must bind over his Land in a Statute-Merchant, or Staple; and so at last forfeit all unto the merciless Mercer, and leave himself never a foot of ground in England; which is the reason, that for a few remnants of Velvets, and Silks, the Mercer creepeth into whole Lord∣ships. The Knavery of the Goldsmith. The Goldsmith is not behind; for most of them deal with Usury, and let young Gentlemen have Commodities of Plate, for ten in the hundred, but they must lose the fashion in selling it again (which cuts them sore) beside, they are most of them skill'd in Alcumie, and can temper mettals shroud∣ly, with no little profit to themselves, and disadvantage to the buyer; beside, puft rings and quaint conceits which I omit. The Knavery of the Draper. And for you Draper, he fetcheth them off for Liverie Cloth, and Cloth for six months and six, and yet hath he more knacks in his budget; for he hath so dark a shop, that no
man can well chuse a piece of Cloth, it so shadows the Dye and the Thred, a man shall be deceived in the wool and the nap, they cause the Cloth-worker so to press them; beside, he imposeth this charge to the Cloth-worker, that he draw his Cloth, and pull it passing hard when he sets it upon the Tenters, that he may have it full breadth and length, till thread and all tear and rent a pieces: what care they for that? have they not a Drawer to serve their turn; to draw and seam up the holes so cunningly, that it shall never be espyed? My self hath seen in one broad Cloth eighteen score holes torn, rackt and pull'd by the Cloth-worker only to please the Draper, and deceive the Commonwealth. To be short, the Cloth-worker, what with rowing and setting on a fine nap, with powdring it and pressing it, with sheering the wool to the proof of the thread, deal so cunningly, that they prove themselves the Drapers Ministers to execute his subtilties: therefore if he chance to come, let him be remembred. The Knavery of the Vintner. And as for the Vintner I hold him to be as deceitful as any of the rest; for he is a kind of Negromancer, for at midnight, when
all men are in bed, then he, forsooth, falls to his charms and spells, so that he tumbles one Hogshead into another, and can make a cup of Claret that hath lost his colour, look high with a dash of red wine at his pleasure. If he hath a strong Gascoin Wine for fear it should make his ghests too soon drunk, he can allay it with a small Rochel Wine, he can cherish up white wine, with Sack; and perhaps if you bid him wash the pot clean when he goes to draw you a quart of Wine, he will leave a little Water in the bottom, and then draw it full of wine. And what if he do? tis no harm, wine and water is good against the heat of the Liver. It were infinite to rehearse the juggling of Vintners, the disorder of their houses, es∣pecially of the persons that frequent them and therefore seeing the Merchant, Gold∣smith, Mercer and Draper be put by, the Vinter shall go with them for company. As these were going away in a snuff, for being thus plainly taunted, Sir Iohn saw a mad merry crew come leaping over the field as frolickly, as if they ought not all the world two pence; and drawing nearer he did perceive, that either Bottle Ale or Beer had made a fray with them; for the lifting of their feet shewed the lightness of their heads.
A Tantivee-Parson. The foremost was a plain Country Sir Iohn, or Vicar, that proclaimed by the red∣ness of his Nose, he did oftner go into the Alehouse, than the Pulpit; and him Sir Iohn asked what they were, and whether they were going? What are you, quoth the Priest, that stand by the high way to exa∣mine me and my friends? here's none in my Company, but are able to answer for themselves, he seeing they were all set on a merry pin, told the cause, and said, that he needed them to be of the Quest. Marry (quoth Sir Iohn) a good motion; know these all are my Parishioners, and we have been drinking with a poor man, and spen∣ding
our money with him; a neighbour of ours, that hath lost a Cow. Now for our names, and our Trades, this is a Smith, the second a Weaver, the third a Miller, the fourth a Cook; the fifth a Carpenter, the sixth a Glover, the seventh a Pedlar, the eight a Tinkar, the ninth a Waterbearer; the tenth a Husbandman; the eleventh a Dy∣er, and the twelfth a Saylor, and I the Vi∣car or Parson which you please to call me; How could you Sir, have a fitter Jury than me, and my Parishioners? You are a little too brief (quoth Sir Iohn) for you are a Fellow that raiseth up new Schisms, and Heresies and Divisions among your People, and the world was never in quiet, Devotion, Neighbourhood and Ho∣spitality never flourished in this Land since such upstart Boys, and shittle-witted Fools becam of the Ministry; you preach Faith, and say that doing of Alms is Papi∣stry; but you have taught so long, Fids solum juifict, that you have preached good Works quite out of your Parish; a poor man shall assoon break his Nck as his Fast at a rich mans dor. Alas Sir Iohn, you are mistaken, for, my friend, though indeed I am none of the best Scholars, yet I can red a Homily every Sunday and Holiday, and keep company
with my Neighbors, and go to the Alehouse with them, and if they be fallen out, spend my Money to make them friends; and on Sundays sometime, if good Fellowship call me away, I say both Morning and Evening Prayer at once, and so let them have a whole Afternoon to play in. This is my Life, I spend my Living with my Parishi∣oners; I seek to do all good, and I offer no man harm. Well (quoth Sir Iohn) then I warrant thou art an honest Vicar, and therefore stand by, thou shalt be one of the Quest. No Cheat in the Smith's Profession. And as for you, Smith, I see no great fault in you; you earn your Living with
the Sweat of your Brows, and there can be no great Knavery in you; only I would have you to mend your life for drinking, since you are never at quiet unless the Pot be still at your Nose. The Knavery of the Weaver. But you, Weaver, the Proverb puts you down for a crafty Knave, you can filch and steal almost as well as the Taylor; your Woof and Warp is so cunningly drawn out, that you plague the poor Countrey Hus∣wives for their Yarn, and dawb on so much Dregs, that you make it seem both well wrought, and to bear weight, when it is slenderly woven, and you have stollen a quarter of it from the poor Wife. Away, be packing, for you shall be cashier'd.
The Miller and Weavr shake hands What Miller, shake hands with your Brother the Weaver for Knavery; you can take Toll twice, and have false Hoppers to convey away the poor mans Meal: Be gone, I love not your dusty looks? The Cheats of the Cooks. And for Company, Goodman Cook, go with them; for you cozen the poor men and Countrey Termers with your silthy meat, you will buy of the worst and cheapest, when it is bad enough for Dogs, and yet so powder it, and parboil it, that you will sell it to some honest poor men, and that
unreasonably too. If you leave any Meat over-night, you make a shift to heat it a∣gain the next day. Nay, if on the Thurs∣day at night there be any left, you make Pies of it on Sunday Morning, and almost, with your slovenly Knavery poison the poor people. To be short, I brook you not, and therefore be walking. For the Carpenter, Glover, and Water-bearer, the Husbandman, Dier and Saylor, since your Trades have but petty lights stand you with Mr. Vicar, you are like to help to give in the Verdict. Tinkers and Pedlars Knavery. But for the Pedlar and the Tinker, they are two notable Knaves, both of a hair,
and both Cousin-germains to the Devil. For the Tinker, why he is a drowsie, bawdy, drunken Companion, that walks up and down with a Trugg after him, and in stop∣ping one hole, makes three; and is in con∣venient place, he meets with one alone, perhaps rifles him or her of all that ever they have; a base Knave, without fear of God, or love to any one but his Whore, and to himself. The Pedlar as bad, or ra∣ther worse, walketh the Countrey with his Doxy at the least, if he have not too his Morts Dels, and Autem Morts; he passeth commonly through every pair of Stocks, either for his Drunkenness, or his Leche∣ry. And beside, it is reported you can lift or nip a Bung like a guire Cove; if you want pence, and that you carry your Pack but for a colour to shadow your other Villa∣nies. Well, howsoever, you are both Knaves, and so be jogging. Well, at last, quoth the Judge, I suppose, Sir Iohn, your Jury is almost full; I believe you want not above three or four persons; look you yonder where they come to make up the Number; and they should be men of good Disposition, for they seem to be all Coun∣trimen of Vtopia. Assoon as they came close, Sir Iohn met them, and told them the Matter, and they were content to be of
the Jury. The one said he was a Grasier, the other a Farmer, the other a Shepherd to them both. What think you of these three, quoth Sir Iohn? Marry, saith the Judge, two of them are honest men, but the other is a base Knave; but 'tis no matter, shuffle him in amongst the rest. Nay, by your leave, quoth Mr. Attorney, I will shuffle out these two, for they are the very Cormo∣rants of the Countrey, and devour the poor people with their monstrous exaction. The Cheats used by the Grasier. And first I alledge against the Grasier, that he forestalleth Pastures and Medow grounds for the feeding of his Cattel, and wringeth Leases of them out of poor mens hands; and in his buying of Cattel, he committeth great Usury; for it it prove a wet year, then he maketh havock, and sel∣leth dear; if it be a dry year, then he buy∣eth cheap, and yet having Pasture, keeps them till he may come to his own price; he knoweth as well as the Butcher by the feed of a Bullock, how much Tallow he will yield, what his Quarters will amount unto what the Tanner will give for the Hide; Nay, what the Sowse-wives were able to make of the Inwards; so that he sells it so
dear to the Butcher, that he can scarce live of it; and therefore what subtilty the But∣cher useth, cometh from the Grasier, so that I exempt him from the Quest as a bad Member, and an ill Friend to Justice. The Cheats used by the Farmer. And for you Mr.Farmer, you know how through you covetous Landlords raise their Rents; for if a poor man have but a Plough-Land, if you see his Pastures bear good Grass, and his arable ground, good Corn, and that he prospereth and goeth forward on it, and provideth and maintaineth his Wife and Servants honestly, then, Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis, Vicinumque pecus grandius uber habet.
Then straight Envy pricks the Farmer forward, and he bids the Landlord far more than the poor man pays yearly for it; so that if it be a Tenant at will, he puts him out to beg in the Street; or when his Lease comes out, he overloads him in the Fine, and thus blood-sucketh he the poor of his own private profit. Besides, the base Chuff; if he sees a forward Year, and that corn is like to be plenty, then he murmureth against God, and sweareth and protesteth he shall be undone, respecting more the fil∣ling of his own Coers by a Dearth than the profit of his Countrey by a general Plenty. Beside, Sir, may it please you, when new Corn comes into the Market, who brings it in to relieve the State? Not your Mastership, but the poor Husband∣man, that wants Pence: For you keep it till the back end of the Year; nay, you have your Garners which have Corn of two or three Years old, upon hopes still of a dear Year, rather letting the Weasels eat it, than the poor should have it at any reason∣able price. So that I conclude, You are a Cormorant of the Commonwealth, and a Wretch that lives of the spoil of the nee∣die, and so I leave you to jet with the Grazier.
Shepherds honest men. As for the Shepherd, unless it be that he killeth a Lamb now and then, and saies the Fox stole him, I know little Craft in his Budget, therefore let him among the honest men of the Jurie.
Several Citizens come to hear the Trial of Sir John Fraud. Well said Sir Iohn to the Judge, here comes three or four Citizens, will any of these serve turn: I cannot tell (quoth the Judge) till I know their names and condi∣tions. With that Sir Iohn stept afore the company, and enquired what they were: the eldest of them being a grave Citizen, said he was a Grocer, the rest, his good and honest Neighbours, a Chandler, a Haber∣dasher, a Clothworker, and two strangers, one a Wallon, the other a Dutchman. How like you these? (quoth Sir Iohn to the Judge) 'le assure you, my Lord, these men are seen every Sunday in their Silks. I
marry (quoth the Judge) but they never get that Bravery with Honesty; For the Cloth-worker, his Faults were laid open be∣fore, when we had the Draper in question, and therefore let him be packing. The Knavery of Chandlers. For you Chandler, I like not your Tricks, you are too conversant with the Kitchen-stuff-wives; you, after your Wiek or Snaft is stiffened, you dip it in ilthy Dross, and after give him a Coat of good Tallow, which makes the Candles drop and waste away, to great hinderance of the poor Workmen that watch in the night. Beside, you pinch in your weights, and have false measures, and many other Knaveries that I omit; but this be sure, you shall not meddle in my Matter. Neither the Haberdasher, for he trims up old Felts, and makes them very fair to the eye, and faceth and edgeth them neatly, and then he turneth them away for good ones, and so abuseth us with his Cozenage. Beside, you buy gumm'd Taffata, where∣with you line Hats, that will straight asunder assoon as it comes to the heat of a mans Head. To be brief, I am not well skilld in your Knaveries; but indeed you are too subtil for a Jury-man, and there∣fore you shall be none of the Jury.
The Grocer seems an honest man, and I am content to admit of him, only take this as a Caveat by the way, all Gentlemen here present, that you buy of the Garvellers of Spices, the Refuse that they fift from the Merchant, and that mix again, and sell to your Customers. Besides, in your beaten Spices, as in Pepper, you put in Bay-ber∣ries, and such Dross, and so wrong the poor; but these are light Causes, and so overpass them, and vouchsafe you to be of the Quest. But I pray you, what be these two honest men The one (quoth the Grocer?) a Dutch∣man, and a Shoomaker; the other a French∣man, and a Millener in St. Martins, and sells Shirts, Bands, Bracelets, Jewels, and such pretty Toys for Gentlewomen. Oh, they be of Sir Iohn's Acquaintance, Upstarts as well as he! that have brought with them Pride and Abuses into England: But these we'l pass, knowing they abuse most Occupations, and they shall not be of the Quest Well (quoth Sir Iohn) now I suppose the Jury is full, and we see no more coming; let us call them, and see how many we have. The Iury being called over, two are wanting.
Immediately enters an Honest Bookseller. Assoon as Sir Iohn had spoke the Word, there comes into the Court a Book-seller, a reputed very honest man indeed, and of a Gentile Profession; assoon as ever the Judg perceived who he was, he commanded he should be one of the Jury: With all my heart, said the Prisoner at the Bar; for I know he is one that gives in his Verdict im∣partially; he is one that will act honestly (without fraud or deceit) and he is one that hath a good Report in Vtopia; and so he was admitted as a Jury-man. What is it not possible, quoth the Priso∣ner, to have one more to make up the four and twenty? as he was thus speaking, he spied afar off, a certain kind of an overworn
Gentleman, attired in Velvet and Sattin, but it was somewhat drop'd and greasie, and Boots on his Legs, whose Soles waxed thin, and seem'd to complain of their Ma∣ster, which treading Thrift under his feet, had brought them to that Consumption; he walked not as other men, in the common beaten way, but came compassing circum∣circa, as if we had been Devils, and he would draw a Circle about us, and at every third step he looked back, as if he were a∣fraid of a Bailiff or Sergeant. After him followed two pert Apple∣squires, the one had a Murrey Cloth Gown on, faced before with grey Coney, and laid thick on the sleeves with Lace, which quaint∣ly bare up, to shew his white Taffata Hose, and black Silk Stockings, a huge Ruff about his neck, wrapt on his great head like a wicket-cage, a little Hat, with brims like the wings of a Doublet, wherein he wore a Jewel of Glass, as broad as a great Seal. After him followed two Boys in Cloaks like Butterflies, carrying one of them his cut∣ting Sword of Choler, the other his dancing Rapier of delight. His Comerade that bare him Company, was a jollie light tim∣ber'd Jack-a-napes, in a Sate of watche Taffata, cut to the skin, with a Cloak all to bedawbed with coloured Lace; both he
and the gowned Brother seemed by their pace, as if they had some Suits to Mosieur Boots. At length coming near, Sir Iohn could discern the first to be a Poet, the se∣cond a Player, the third a Musitian, alias the Usher of a Dancing-School. Well met, Master Poet, quoth Sir Iohn, and welcom you Friends also, though not so particular∣ly known. So it is, though none of you three be Common-wealths men, yet upon urgent necessity, we must be forced to employ you. We have a Jury to be impannelled im∣mediately, which one of you three must help to make up, even he which approves himself the honestest man. They are all ho∣nest men, and good Fellows, quoth the At∣torney, therefore it is no great matter whether of them we chuse. The Doctors doubt of that, quoth the Jugde: and I am of a different opinion from you. The Poet admited a Iury-man. This first, whom by his careless slovenly gate, at first sight I imagined to be a Poet, is a wast-good, and an unthrift, that is born to make the Taverns rich, and himself a Beggar. If he have forty pounds in his purse together, he puts it not to Usury, neither
buyes Land nor Merchandise with it, but goes to Wenches feeds on Capons, and spends ten Pounds on a Supper. Why, 'tis nothing, if his Plough goes, and his Ink-horn be clear. Take one of them worth twenty thousand pound, and hang him. He is a King of his Pleasure, and counts all other Boors and Peasants; that though they have Money at command, yet know not like him how to domineer with it to any purpose as they should. But to speak plain, I think him an honest man, if he would but live within his compass, and generally no mans foe but his own, therefore I hold him quoth the Prisoner, sit to be of my Jury. Nay, quoth the Judge, I have more mind to these two; for this Poet is a proud fel∣low, that because he hath a little wit in his Budget, will contemn and mislike that which is Reason and Sence, and think we are be∣holden to him, if he do but bestow a fair Look upon us.
Players and Vshers of Dancing-Schools pret∣ty honest men The Player and the Usher of the Dan∣cing School are plain, honest, humble men that for a penny, or an old cast Suit of Ap∣parrel, will do any thing. Quoth, the Re∣corder, you say Truth, they are but too humble; for they be so lowly, that they be base-minded; I mean, not in their looks, nor apparrel, for so they be Peacocks, and pain∣ted Asses, but in their course of Life: for they care not how they get crowns, I mean, how basely, so they have them; and yet of the two, I hold the Player to be the better Christian, although he is in his own imagi∣nation, too full of self-liking, and self-love, and is unsit to be of the Jury though
conceal his faults & fopperies, in that I have been merry at his Sports, only this I must say, that plain Countrey Fellows they bring in as Clowns and Fools to laugh at in their Play, whereas they get by us, and of our Alms the proudest of them all doth live. Well, to be brief, let him trot to the Stage, for he shall be none of the Jury: And so you, Mr. Usher of the Dancing-School, you are a leader into all Misrule, you instruct Gen∣tlemen to order their feet, when you drive them to misorder their Manners; you are a bad fellow, that stand upon your Tricks and Capers, till you make young Gentle∣men caper without your Lands. Why Sir, to be flat with you, you live by your Legs, ass Jugler by his hand; you are given over to the Pomps and Vanities of the world. And to be short, you are a keeper of Mis∣rule, and a lewd fellow, and you shall be none of the Quest. Why then, quoth the Judg, the Poet is he that must make up the four and twentieth; He and none but he.
The Names of the Iury to be impannelled. 1 Knight. 2 Esquire. 3 Gentleman. 4 Priest. 5 Printer. 6 Bookseller. 7 Grocer. 8 Skinner. 9 Dyer. 10 Pewterer. 11 Sadler. 12 Joyner. 13 Cutler. 14 Plaisterer. 15 Saylor. 16 Ropemaker. 17 Smith. 18 Glover. 19 Husbandman. 20 Shepheard. 21 Waterman. 22 Waterbearer. 23 Bellowes-mender. 24 Poet. Then the Judge calling them all together, he bade them lay their hands on the Book. And first he call'd the Knight, and after the rest, as they followed in order; then he gave them the Charge, thus; Worshipful Sir, with the rest of the Ju∣ry, whom we have elected of choice honest men, whose consciences will deal upright∣ly in this Trial, you and the rest of your Company are here upon your Oath, and Oaths, to inquire whether Sir Iohn Fraud have deserved Death, yea or no? If you find him Not guilty of those crimes that are laid to his charge; then let him set in
his former Estate, and allow him reasona∣ble damages. Upon this they laid their hands upon the Book, and were sworn, and departed to the scrutiny of the offender, by inquiry amongst themselves, not stirring out from the bar, but straight returned, and the Knight for them as the foremost said thus: So it is, that we have with equity and conscience considered of the Prisoners Crimes, and have upon strict examination found that he deserves death; when the Forman had spake those words, the Judge stood up, and pronounc'd this Sentence. Sir Iohn Fraud, you have been here indi∣cted, arraigned and tryed for your Life, and the Jury (who have gone according to Evidence) have found you really Guilty of what hath been charg'd upon you; and therefore Your Sentence is, That you shall be expelled all Kingdoms and Nations and Societies and Countreys for an hun∣dred years, and when that time is expired, you shall be put to the severest Death, that can be thought on, or invented by poor, abused, wronged Citizens, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and Farmers.
The Prisoner left in the Executio∣ners hands. And so to conclude, the poor, condem∣ned Prisoner was left to the Mercy of the Executioner. FINIS.
