E3607 P1047 12595706 64049
An Exact and Perfect RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Army under the Command OF Sir Thomas Fairfax. From the sixth of this instant July, to the eleventh of the same. Wherein is expressed the particu∣lars of the VICTORY obtained by by the PARLIAMENTS Forces, over Goring, neer Langport in Sommersetshire. Dated at Sir Thomas Fairfax Quarters at Middlesey, 4 Miles from Bridge∣water, July 11. Published according to Order. London, Printed for Samuel Gllibrand, July 14. 1645.
JƲLY 7. AFter the relief of Taunton, and our marching to Crookhorn, where we rested the Lords-day, July 6. Although our long march, and the wants of our Souldiers challenged some refreshment, yet the Generall, and the rest of the Officers, could not with patience endure an Ene∣my so near us; and therefore the party from Taunton were sent for, who came to Podderton that night, Colonell Massey about Ilmister: The Generall seeing it very hazardous to free a passage at Longlode or Ilchester, march∣ed to Evil, thinking to passe the River there, or at Mud∣ford-Bridge. A little before our coming to Evil, Sher∣bone men had broken the Bridge, which was presently made up; but as it fell out, we had no use of it, for the Enemy quitted Ilchester, a Garrison of theirs, and left us free entrance on Tuesday, where we quartered on Tuesday night. Little of moment fell out these two dayes, Goring dancing from one side of the River, to the other; so that our Officers that came from Taunton, had the more free liberty to congratulate our happy succes∣ses; ours at Naseby, which was a complete victory, their's at Taunton, which was more then a deliverance; for they continually affronted the enemy, took from him 400 Horse at severall times, and ordinarily made bold with their Guards. The poor Souldiers were much afraid, in regard of our delay of relief, that they should have had another Cornish Hugg, as they call'd it, but it pleased God to prevent their fears, by this seasonable Mercy.
They lost a Gallant man, Colonell Floyd, a Religious ex∣perienced Souldier, and Lievtenant Colonell Richbell, a stout honest man, and some few Officers besides; some that were hurt, are recovered, as Major Marshall, Major Read. This day Colonell Butlers Regiment, commanded by Major Fincher, Quarter-master Generall of our Horse, came near us, and in its march from Barkley Castle to us, did very good service. First at Dursley, they entertained Sir Charls Lucas coming to beat up their Quarters, kill'd the Captain of the Forlorn-Hope, after that, charg'd the Party with two Troops, kill'd ten, whereof two Captains, took 39 prisoners, hurt Sir Charls Lucas. From thence they came to Highworth, where the Ene∣my from Farington had entered the Town, whom he beat out, and delivered to the Governour, the quiet possession of his Garrison. From thence to the Devises, where they took some Horse, and so to Dorchester, where they over took some of Sherborne Horse; and so came to us very seasonably, being through Gods providence, neerer an engagement then we expected. Wednesday, July 9. We divided our Force, and over∣look'd the danger through our earnestnesse to discover and dislodge Goring; but the danger of division was the lesse, in regard that Colonell Massey had many Dragoons, at least 2000, and an inclosed Countrey: Whereupon Col. Massey's party, with the addition of Col. Pyes, and Col. Sheffeilds Regiments, and all our Dragoons, but one Troop, were sent on the other side the Water, be∣twixt Taunton and Langport, to amuse the Enemy, and take advantages, if he might; which he very diligently did, and came upon a strong Quarter of the Enemies about North-Curry, took them before they were well ready: charged, took 9 or 10 Colours, 4 Captains, some
Lievtenants and Cornets, and about 200 men, and more Horses; with very little losse, onely Col. Cook shot in the face, and Col. Buller hurt in the arm. We were not idle on the other side, but skirmished at a Passe a mile from Langport, took one Colours, which led the way to many more the next day. On Wednesday night, we quartered at Long-Sutton, and on Thursday morning, the tenth, a Councell of Warre was called, whether to draw up before Langport, and do fur∣ther as opportunity might be, or withdraw toward Sher∣borne and Evil, to refresh our men, and receive our sup∣plies of Arms, Money, and Ammunition, coming to us by Sea; but it pleased God to end the businesse by an Alarm given us, that the Enemy had possessed the Passe we formerly skirmished at in Pessebury-Bottom, and some of their Foot appeared on the Hill: whereupon, the Forces we had on this side the River, were drawn forth: Of Foot, Weldens, Herbarts, Inglesbies, Fortescues, Maj. Gene∣rals, Russels, Hammands, and Rainsbroughes Regiments, with Sir Hardre Wallers, & the Pikes of the Generals, Mountagues and Pickerings Regiments. The Muskettiers of those three Regiments together, with Col. Iretons Regiment of Horse, being sent on Wednesday night to the as∣sistance of Massey. All our Horse, but the three Regi∣ments of Sir Robert Pye, Col. Sheffeild, and Col. Ireton, and Okeys Dragoons, who were all with Col. Massey, but one Troop. With these, we drew into the Field, about 10 of the Clock on Thursday, and about 12 or near one, we began to dispute the Passe with them; the Enemy had a Hill, and the Winde, we another Hill, they had the Passe and the Hedges lined before we came; we drew up our Canon, which did us very good service, and made the other side of the Hill so hot, that they could not come down to relieve their men; presently, the For∣lorn-Hope
were commanded down to cleer the Hedges, which they did, seconded with Weldens Regiment, which was next them. I need not say any thing of the General and Lieute∣nant-General, who carried themselves according to their wonted diligence and gallantry. The enemy had but two Pieces of Ordnance, small ones, having sent the rest, with most of their Carriages, to Bridgewater. The Passe being gained, the Horse went on. Major Bethel had the honour of the first Charge of Horse, who did it very gallantly, charging a Body of the enemy with a Troop, disordered them; and being over-born with a fresh Body, retreated slowly a little way, to Major Disbrough, who commands the Generals Regiment of Horse, where he rallyed, and charged a∣gain, and they with him, and put the enemy to a foul Retreat, which they never recovered. Part of their Foot, with some Horse, and their two Pieces of Ord∣nance, retreated into Langport, of which you shall have a further Account presently. The rest Horse and Foot, as fast as they could, ran toward Bridgewater, except some who scattered themselves into Corn and Woods for their shelter. Those that went toward Bridgewater, were earnestly pursued by our Horse, so that none of their Foot recovered Bridgewater; and very many of their Horse, and divers Colours. The General and Lieute∣nant General staying with the Foot neer Langport, per∣ceived the enemy drawing over at Langport, and going toward Bridgewater on the other side of the River. Whereupon, we found the enemy had quitted it, be∣cause, as they say, the Governour refused to hold it without 800 men, which they could not spare: and for a farewell, they fired the Town to run away by the light. Hereupon, we marched into the Town with Horse, and
some Foot, who thorow fire and water, pursued on that side the River. With those Horse went Lieutenant-General Cromwell and Colonel Greaves, who overtook their Foot-Colours, and Ordnance, and three loads of Ammunition, which they brought back to Langport. The Horse, some of them, got to Bridgewater, some to a little Garison call'ed Burrow-Church, in the way betwixt Lang∣port and Bridgewater. The General in the mean time marched on with the rest of the Foot toward Bridgewa∣ter, for the advantage of Quarters, not being willing to stay in that wasted place, and came that night to Middle∣sey, four miles from Bridgewater. In this Fight, the whole Foot of the enemy were di∣spersed, killed, and taken; but few killed, thanks to hedges and heels. What Ordnance they had, were lost, and many of their Colours taken. I cannot give a more perfect account of Prisoners: Two Colonels of Horse, Slingsby and Heveningh, are taken, with Bertridge Lieu∣tenant-General of their Ordnance, besides some Lieu∣tenant-colonels and Majors; and, as I hear, about 1200 Prisoners: and this a very cheap Victory, we having lost no Officer, and not 20 common Souldiers, for ought I can learn: Some of Major Bthls Troop are sore hurt, himself shot in the right hand. Thus hath the God of our Salvation protected and pro∣spered us, besotting the enemies old Souldiers, that they should suffer themselves to be engaged contrary to their intentions, and in the midst of their expectation of Sup∣plies to make up a formidable Army, directing us by his good providence, in the midst of our irresolutions: His Wisedom was our counsel, his Strength was our Victo∣ry; let the praise be his. Our Word was, God with us; and he made it good: Theirs was Bristoll, which they will make good, its like, and run from Bridgewater thi∣ther.
Many of their men came running over to us, be∣ing such as Gerard had taken prisoners in Wales, and en∣tertained; which should make us more carefull in ta∣king in the enemies prisoners: and if it be not carefully heeded, it may be justly believed, that, notwithstanding the Covenant (the frequency of oaths having brought them to a formality, and Perjury being now grown fa∣miliar; which it were to be wisht were better thought on) Many of the prisoners taken at Naseby we shall be constrained to fight with once again. A little before this Engagement, Master Hollis, the Ambassadour ordinary of the Clubs, came to us with a second Petition in the behalf of those whom Colonel Ceely had taken prisoners at Lyme; That reparation might be given for the lives of some who were killed, and the liberties of others who were taken; otherwise very fairly they must betake themselves to the adverse party for justice. The General being going to the Field, or∣dered him to stay at the Quarter, and he should have an∣swer at his return; which, God be thanked, we can give him, with Honour and Justice. The enemies remain∣ders are at and about Bridgewater; our Head-Quarter at Middlesey, where our Officers are consulting what is next to be done; for that is all the Question with us. I pray God resolve it, and direct us. FINIS.
