E3673 R21470 12121234 54431
AN EXACT RELATION OF A famous Battell fought on Munday last the tenth of October, 1642. BETWEEN The Dragooners sent out by the L. Generall under the Conduct of Colonell Browne, and Sir William Russell and his Cavaliers. ALSO A perfect description of the pitcht Camp of His Excellency the Earle of ESSEX now neer Shrewsbury. LONDON, Printed for Th. Tompson. October 15. 1642.
AN EXACT RELATION of a famous battell fought on Munday the tenth of October, 1642. between the Dra∣gooneers of Colonell Brown, and Sir Wil∣liam Russell and his Cavaliers. Also an exact description of the pitcht Camp of his Excellency the Earle of Essex neer Shrewsbury. ON Munday last being the ninth day of October, his Excellency the Earle of Essex having pitcht with his forces before Shrews∣bury, he commanded Colonell Brown, Captaine Bracham and Captaine Moore with about six hundred Dragooners to scout up and down for three or foure miles compasse, to see if they could de∣scry and of the adverse Forces to draw neer, and also to stop the recourse and ca∣riage of armes and ammunition (if any should be) which according to his Ex∣cellencies
command was in every re∣spect performed, and the said Colonell Browne with the other Officers and his 600. Dragooners marched forth, and in their march towards evening they recei∣ved information that Sir William Russel an arch enemy to the State, was march∣ing to his Majestie with six troupes of horse and some foot, and that they had pitcht in a meadow five miles off: the Dragooners tarried till towards morn∣ing before they set forward, and then by the guide of that messenger marched to∣wards them, and by break of day came within their centries, and soone espied the maine body of horse and foot, being no whit discouraged, as knowing the justnesse of their cause, sent a messenger to know what they were; and Sir Willi∣am Russell in a reviling way bid him tell his prick-card round-headed mule-bea∣ring citizens, that he would new baptize them, willing them to depart as unseen. Our men replied, they would dip them in a new font, never to have resurrecti∣on.
Whereupon a charge was beaten on both sides, and with much courage pro∣secuted on both sides, untill after two houres fight our men put the Cavaliers to flight, killing fifty of them, and taking some of them in the pursuit vvith little losse on our side, except some few hurt by their powder bags blowing up. Our souldiers pursued them as fast as they could, but because of their horses march∣ing most part of the night, and not well fed, they vvere constrained to forbeare the pursuit, giving God the glory, and singing Psalms of thanksgiving. So they marched vvith triumph and joy tovvard his Excellency, vvhere they found his souldiers in a faire battalia, having plan∣ted his Ordnance with much discretion, and raised bulvvarks, rampiers, and di∣vers other meet and necessary vvorks for the safeguard and defence of himself and his Forces, in the best and securest vvay he could devise, placing Centries and Courts of Guard most effectually, and like a noble and expert souldier.
From Bridgnorth there is informati∣on by divers letters, that the Lord Wil∣lough by of Parham hath joyned his Forces with his Excellency the Earle of Essex, and are in their march towards Shrewsbury, and by the way they found great opposition at Bridgnorth (which is a towne about twelve miles distant from Shrewsbury) by Prince Robert and divers others of the malignant Party; whereupon there soone increased many dangers, and the inveterate malice of the Cavaliers there burst out, and began to give out many scoffing speeches against our souldiers, but they not brooking of such scandalous words, desired leave of their Officers to discharge against them; but at the first they seemed somwhat un∣willing, and would not condescend thereunto untill they understood the pleasure of the Lord Generall; but after some consultation thereof, they fell to it pell mell, and in the space of five hours seventy of the Cavaliers were slaine, and divers taken prisoners, with very little
losse on our party: wherupon the ene∣my sounded a parley, and at the said par∣ley it was concluded on, that a set day should be appointed for the meeting of both Armies. Sir William Balfoure is gone to joyne his Forces with the L. Generall, and the Scots Commanders that profered their service to the Parliament, are gone to his Excellency and entred into their places. His Excellency having encamped his Forces neer Shrewsbury, caused a Parley to be sounded before the Towne, where the Malignant Party lies very strongly intrenched: whereunto answer was made (as is credibly reported) and divers Questions and Propositions propoun∣ded in Ais Majesties behalf, which were to this effect: 1. Wherefore his Excellency should so farre pursue his Royall Majesty, as to intrench him in his own Town? 2. Whether he would give his Maje∣sty leave to march with his Army, for
that (as they conceived) he had no Com∣mission to withstand him, with many other questions of main consequence. To which answer was made, that his Excellency would lay down his life at his Majesties feet for a re-uniting be∣twixt his Majesty and his high Court of Parliament, and that he came not with his Forces in an hostile way against his Majesty, but in all humility and loyalty, hoping that his Highnesse would not shelter any out-lawed and rebellious persons, but rather deliver them up to the justice of the law, and craving fur∣ther time to determine of his Majesties free passage. FINIS.
