E96 18972372 108524
AN Earnest Call To those Nonconformists, Who really Believe the Doctrine OF THE Holy, Blessed, and Glorious TRINITY, To come into the Communion OF THE Church of ENGLAND; THAT By their Constant Regular Confession of the Christian Faith, they may Con∣found the Devices of those GAIN-SAYERS, WHOM By their Separation they have so much Encouraged. Let us consider one another to provoke unto Love, and to Good Works: Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, &c. Heb. 10. 24, 25. London Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall, 1691.
AN Earnest Call To those Nonconformists, &c. My dear Brethren, So I call you all, who Believe the Doctrine of the Blessed TRI∣NITY Sincerely and Practical∣ly, who Worship the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose Name we are BAPTIZED. I beseech you by the Meekness and Gentleness of our Lord Jesus Christ, That you would lay aside all Prejudices against me▪ who have so often declar'd to so many of you, That it can hardly be imagin'd, that the Father of Lyes could ever find out a readier way to prepare the
Populace for the Reception of that most damnable Doctrine of the Anti-Tri∣nitarians, than by the contempt of the COMMON-PRAYER. We have often heard a senseless Clamour, that the Common-Prayer, is an Idolatrous Wor∣ship: Now we are told, why it is charg'd with Idolatry. In a Book En∣titled, Essays towards a Union between Divinity and Morality, Part 5. Chap. 4. are these Words: The first Com∣mandement settles Supreme Wor∣ship wholly on the Father, and makes the communicating of it, Idolatry; as for our Honor, we are to pay to the Son, the Scriptures call Mediation. As for Worship∣ping the Holy Ghost, there is no Mention made of it in the whole Scripture; and when there is no Ground for such Worship, one had as good make 100 Persons in the God-head, as Three: But yet, tho' such Worship be Idolatrous, and con∣sequently Odious; yet ought it not to deter us from our reasonable Li∣berty: thus I have formerly mani∣fested,
the Socinian may communi∣cate with the Church of England, &c. Thus you see this most Impudent TEACHER of the grossest Hypocri∣sie, charges the publick Worship of the Church of England, with Idolatry, because we Worship the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as we do the Father, as being with the Father the only True, and Eternal GOD. In a late Pam∣phlet, Entitled, A Vindication of the Unitarians, page 3. we find the like Expressions: If we err, says this Professed Arian, indeed, we Blaspheme the Son, and Holy Ghost, which, we hope we do not; but if you err, Do not you both Blaspheme and and Commit Idolatry in Worship∣ping them as Co-equal to the Fa∣ther? You see here, What Spirit it is that Instigates so many People to cry out against the Common-Prayer, as if it were Idolatry, &c. I beseech you to consider these Words of T. Cartwright, and the Answer given thereunto by the most Reverend Fa∣ther
in God, Arch-Bishop Whitgifte. The Defence of the Answer to the Admonition, page 496. T. C. The like may be said of the Gloria-Patri, and the Athanasius's Creed, it was first brought into the Church, to the end, that men thereby should make an open Profession in the Church, of the Divinity of the Son of GOD, against the detestable Opinion of Arius and his Disciples, wherewith at that time marvellously swarmed almost the whole Christen∣dom: Now that it hath pleased the Lord to quench that Fire, here is no such cause, why these things should be in the Church; at the least, why that Gloria-Patri should be so often repeated. Jo. Whitgifte. Even as convenient now, as it was then: For it is as necessary to main∣tain Truth, and make it known, as it is to suppress Errours; and yet it is not unknown, that even in our Days, and in this Church there have
been Arians, and I pray God, there be none still. I must suspect the matter, not well understanding where∣unto those glances of yours at Gloria-Patri, and Athanasius's Creed do tend. Gloria-Patri, besides that, it con∣taineth a brief Confession of the Tri∣nity, and of the Divinity of Jesus Christ; it is a Magnifying, and Glo∣rifying of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God; and Athanasius's-Creed, is not only an excellent Confutation of Arius's Heresy, but a plain decla∣ration of the Mystery of the Tri∣nity, such as is necessary for all Christian men to learn and know; and therefore he that is offended with the oft repetition, or saying of either of them, I cannot tell what I should judge of him. But undoubt∣edly, there is great Cause, why I should suspect him at the least of singularity and unquietness. You see this Prudent Man, did SUSPECT, that some Cunning Anti-Trinitarians had a hand in the
Inflaming of some Hot-headed Persons, with an unreasonable Indignation a∣gainst the Liturgy of the Church of England, particularly those most Ex∣cellent Parts of it, the Gloria-Patri, and the Athanasian-Creed. I do not charge T. C. with Arianism, but I charge him with a gross Defect of that Zeal, which Christianity requires, to that Principal Article of Sanctify∣ing Truth, which the Arians, and all other sorts of Anti-Trinitarians so ea∣gerly endeavour to Suppress. That Gloria-Patri is so often repeated, is so far from being a Vain Repetition, that 'tis impossible any man should ever conceive a good Thought, but when he has in his Heart the Power and Efficacy of those Words: Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. Therefore doth our Mother, the Church of England, Order, that the Gloria-Patri shall be repeated at the end of every Psalm, because the Conforming of our Hearts to those Divine Affections, which are exprest in every Psalm, proceeds only
from the Efficacy of the Sense contain∣ed in those Words, Glory be to the Father, &c. in which consists the Life and Reality of all Christian Virtue. No wonder that any man slights the LORD's PRAYER, who hates the Doctrine of the TRINITY, and consequently denies the Author of that Absolutely Perfect Form of Pray∣er to be the True and Eternal GOD. One of the late Blasphemers of the God-head of our Blessed Saviour, in his Book Entitled, Essays, &c. Part 6. Chap. 4. has these words: The Lord's Prayer was but as an Ex∣ample to shew the proper length, and matter for Prayer, and un∣doubtedly, that Service is weak and superstitious, that deals too much in repetition of it. He plainly re∣flects upon the Divine Service of the Church of England, which in ano∣ther place he charges with Idolatry, as he does here with Superstition. Another of these Anti-Christians, in a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Doctor Wallis's Letter, &c. Answered by a
Friend, Belches forth this horrid Blasphemy in derision of the Bles∣sed TRINITY: Suppose one Wo∣man, Mary, to be Married to Three Men at once; Peter, James, and John; I Mary, take thee Peter, James, and John to be my Wedded Husband, &c. Here are indeed Three Persons, but only One Hus∣band, the Husband-hood is but One, tho' the Persons are Three. Hear, O our GOD, for we are Despised. Hear, O our GOD, for Thou art Despised. Arise, O God, plead thine own Cause, remember how the Foolish Man reproacheth thee daily. Oh, My dear Brethren, consider, I beseech you, that every True and Living Member of En∣gland, seeing his Blessed LORD thus Crucified afresh, and put to an Open Shame, Cries out to you: Is it no∣thing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow! But that it may not be said by any of
my Adversaries, that I do nothing but make Exclamations, I shall here shew you in one Instance, how I deal with this sort of GAIN-SAYERS, in a way of the strictest kind of Argumentation. They Boast them∣selves in the Title of Unitarians, and pretend a mighty Zeal for the Ho∣nor of the UNITY of the Divine Essence; and yet one of them in a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Some Thoughts upon Dr. Sherlock's Vindication, &c. plainly Blasphemes that TRAN∣SCENDENT UNITY in these Words: By GOD we understand a Divine, and Supreme Person, one Numerical Being, and Spirit, having the same Notion of that Unity, which we have of an Angel, a Man, a King, &c. Answer, IT cannot be properly said, That the Divine Essence is Numerically One: Numerical Unity, implies a pos∣sibility
of Multiplication. That which is Numerically One, is One of Many, as an Angel, or a Man, &c. 'Tis true, the Son is Numerically One, but 'tis for this reason, because the Plurality of Suns, does not imply a Contradi∣ction, as it does that there should be more than One GOD, or Being ab∣solutely Infinite. That the One Infinite Being, is the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Holy Scriptures do abun∣dantly Testify. And it is most Rea∣sonable to Conceive that in the One Infinite Essence, there may be a Cer∣tain Trinity, or Triplicity, which can∣not in any wise Appertain to any Three Persons of a Finite Nature. Neither can the UNITY of the Divine Essence, be communicable to any Finite INDIVIDUAL: So that for any man to have the same Notion of that Unity, which we have of the Unity of an Angel, a Man, &c. is to Err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of GOD. That you may constantly retain the right No∣tion of the Infinity, and consequent∣ly
of the Absolute, and Incommunica∣ble UNITY of the Divine Essence, I shall Advise you frequently to Me∣ditate on the 40. Chap. of the Book of the Prophet ISAIAH. I shall not detain you any longer at present, but only to Entreat you to Joyn with me in that Devotion, which we are Directed unto, by the Right Reverend Father in GOD, ARTHUR LAKE Bishop of Bath and Wells, in the Prayer he sub-joyns to his Excellent Sermon on these Words of that Blessed Prophet:And His Name shall be called, the Wonderful Counsellour, the Mighty GOD. LORD, Guide us by thy Counsel, Support us by thy Power, that we be neither Cir∣cumvented, nor Quelled, but by thy Direction and Protecti∣on, we may escape both the
Craft, and the Force of all our Enemies. So shall we e∣ver Glorify thee, as our Ad∣mirable Counsellour, and our most Mighty GOD, Amen. FINIS.
