F1683 18186138 106954
Fourteen QUERIES Offered to the Consideration of all the Faithful Adherents to the PARLIAMENT, And Publick Interests: VVho are not corrupted into the present DESIGN FOR OLIGARCHY. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.
Fourteen QUERIES Offered to the Consideration of all the faithful Adherents to the Parliament, and Publick Interest, &c. Taking the great Cause so long contended for, to be the pulling down of Kingly Power, to make way for the securing of both Civil and Spiritual Liberty, the question follows. I. VVHether the Parliament, who never swerved from their principles of rooting our all foot∣steps of Monarchy (the irreconcileable enemy to liberty of conscience) with a full intent to settle an equal Commonwealth, under which kinde of Government the persecution of conscience is incompatible. Or whether those, who with the notorious breach of faith and engage∣ments have once already essayed to set up Monarchy, under which Government liberty of conscience is inconsistant,
and cannot be preserved, are the fittest persons, in reference to liberty of conscience, as least likely to berray it, to be intrusted with the settleing of the Government. II. Whether the late Interruption of Government, under pretence of securing liberty of conscience, when there had been the greatest tenderness of it that is imaginable, and not the least approach made to the infringement of it, be not hypocritical, fraudulent and deceitful, onpurpose to colour the design in some, for a Single Person, and of others for an an Oligarchy, or Triumvisate. III. Whether an Army, who makes themselves a distinct Corporation, or a Commonwealth within a Common∣wealth, are likley to settle an equall Government upon the single interest of publick and common good: Or whether in the framing of the Government, they are not rather likely to set up their own particular interest above and supe∣riour to the publick and common Interest; as that which will be as natural to them to do, as it alwayes hath been to Monarches; and as it is to all mankinde, to prefer them∣selves before all others. IV. Whether Souldiers, whose genious's are of a different nature to that of Government, and whose breedings have
not ben at all in Polliticks, nor out of their own Coun∣trey▪ and who, according to ancient Maximes, are good servants, but bad masters, good defenders of Laws in some cases, the worst makers and executioners of them in the world, (witness the late Reign of our Bashawes) are fitting persons to frame a new Government, especially those that joyn with them being no other to them then Jurnymen. V. Whether if any Government be settled upon the founda∣tions of a double interest, we do not thereby utterly lose all that we have fought for; our engagements having been all along against the interest of Monarchy, to the end, to re∣duce all to the single interest of publick and common good. VI. Whether it is to be believed, that those persons intends to set up a free State upon the single interest of the publick, who takes into their counsels the greatest enemies to it; as such, who out of love to Monarchy deserted the Parliament at the death of the King, and were as violent maintainers of the late Usurper in all his Tyrannies: Or whether they are not likely to set up another single person, or an Oligarchy, and whether grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles are to be expected. VII. Whether Cromwells crooked and by wayes are not exactly followed in designing the bringing these Nations into con∣fusion,
that thereby they may be necessitated, according to the healing question, to put the Sovereignty into one or a few hands. VIII. Whether these Nations can expect any happy, settled peace, or quiet, until all powers are kept to their distinct offices, without double capacities, and acting onely within their own shire, being all subject to the supream civill pow∣er; and whether, if the Souldiers aim at good and righteous things, they will not in their Model of Government lay down some such foundation, as the self-denying vote not to be violated, to keep every one in a single, equall, and unby∣assed capacity; and when they have done so, subject them∣selves to it, recommending all to the Parliament for their Sanction, who can onely derive it lawfully to future ages. IX. Whether the chief Authour of the present Interruption, did not, in Richards convention, argue strongly against the being of the other House of Parliament, from the Military Officers that was in it; saying, that so long as they were there, Parliaments might vote what they pleased, but the other would do nothing but what they pleased. And whe∣ther doth not the same argument lye against himself, and the rest of the Officers of the Armies, their being in any Civil power, so long as they will remain Souldiers.
X. Whether the interruption of the Parliament who onely can lawfully derive any new form of Government unto po∣sterity, doth not render all settlement by other powers un∣lawful, and usurped, and therein takes away all tyes of Con∣science, and the obedience of such powers, and exposeth them to be justly overturned, by the first Root, or Rabble that can get the Sword. XI. Whether the supposed Author to the healing question his former denying to own Cromwel, and his Adherents, because usurpers doth not teach all others, to do the same towards himself, and those he is joyned with. And whether his pre∣sent engagement doth not argue, that his former opposition proceeded from his being cousened of that share of Govern∣ment he should have had, and not from any sound, and right principles. And whether the little Secretary, who in Ri∣chards convention, told him of his sneaking Oligarchy, did not therein speak his knowledge, and is not able to prove the same. XII. Whether the whole party of honest men, who have throughout been constant to the great Good Cause, are not in number small, compared to their enemies, and whether this last interruption hath not by dividing them weakened their heads and strengthened the hands of their implacable enemies to the great hazard of them and their causes.
XIII. Whether the private Interest of three or four persons ought to be put in ballance with the publick and common Interest, and whether former services be a sufficient ground for the Army to maintain them now upon in their disservi∣ces, and unjust designs, by such a horrid Rebellion and breach of Faith, as if not repented of God will surely punish. XIV. Whether that since the Army of themselves cannot maintain the Government, and that by the late horrid Rape upon the Parliament they have lost most of their friends, there is any way left to preserve themselves, the good Old Cause, and the Adherents to it, but by once more calling together the Members of Parliament to the discharge of their duties. God having alwayes owned them in their actings, and sufficiently expressed his manifest displeasure against these Nations, when with the breath of Faith they have been interrupted. And whether the Army hath not cause to cast that person out from amongst them, and abomi∣nate him; who at their meeting, whilest the Parliament was sitting, and some time before the interruption, stirred them up to this detestable Rebellion, by telling them, that all power was devolved upon them, and therefore wished them to take the government upon themselves, especially he being one that is known to be no lover of Liberties, but a great fovourite of Harry Cromwell when he was in Ireland, and a Votary to his Tyranical Government. FINIS.
