f1815 11304012 47369
AN EXHORTATION TO All People, TO Pureness, Cleanness, and Holi∣ness, and Faithfulness to the Lord. By G. F. LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, 1685.
Here you may see who they are that dwell with everlasting Burning, & in Gods Taberna∣cle and Holy Mountain, & who not. DAvid saith, Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his holy place? David answers, and saith, He that hath clean Hands, and a pure Heart; who hath not lift up his Soul unto Vanity, nor sworn deceit∣fully; he shall receive the Blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his Salvation, and this is the Generation of them that seek the Lord, Psal. 24. So here is a Generation of clean Hands, and a pure Heart that ascends into the Hill of the Lord, and stands in his holy place. And Isaiah saith, Who amongst us shall dwell with devouring Fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? And Isaiah answers his Questions, and saith, He that walketh righteously, and speaketh Uprightly; he that despiseth the Gain of Oppression, that shake∣eth his Hands from holding of Bribes; that stoppeth his Ears from hearing of Blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil; he shall dwell on high, his place of Defence shall be the Munition of Rocks; Bread shall be given him, his Water shall be sure; thine Eyes shall see the King in his Beauty, &c. and thine Eyes shall see a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the Stakes thereof shall ever be removed, &c. Isai. 33. Here you may see who they are that can dwell with devour∣ing Fire and everlasting Burning, and yet shall not be Burned nor Devoured. David saith, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? And who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? David answers his Questions, and
saith, He that walketh Uprightly, and worketh Righteousness, and speaketh the Truth in his Heart: he that backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor doth evil to his Neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his Neighbour, in whose eyes a vile Person is condemned, but he Honour∣eth them that fear the Lord, &c. He that taketh not a reward against the Innocent; he that doth these things shall never be removed, but shall abide in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and dwell in his holy Hill, Psal. 15. But the Ungodly are not so, but are like the Chaff which the wind driveth away; therefore the Ungodly shall not stand in Judg∣ment, (namely, Righteous Judgment) and Sinners shall not stand in the Congregation of the Righteous. The Mountain of the house of the Lord, shall be establisht above all the Mountains, and exhalted above all the Hills; and doth not the Lord here teach his People his Righteous and Holy Ways & Paths to walk in? as in Isai. 2. Micah 4. And the Stone that smote the Great I∣mage of Gold, of Silver, of Brass, and Iron, and Clay, that they became like Chaff of the Summer Threshing Floors, and the Wind carryed them away, that no place was found for them, and the Stone that smote this Great Image, became a Great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth, Dan. 2.45. Is not this Stone, that becomes a Great Mountain, that filleth the whole Earth, Christ Jesus? and so through him the King∣domes of the World become the Kingdomes of Christ. Here you may see this Stone or Mountain that filleth the whole Earth, will dash to Pieces, and grind to Powder all that is not of it's Holy and Pure Nature, and with its Holy Divine Nature fill the whole Earth. The Lord saith, They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain, Isai. 11. and is not this Holy Mountain Christ, who destroyeth the Devil and his Works, the Destroyer? And them that take hold of my Covenant, saith the Lord, even them will I bring to my Holy Mountain, &c. Isai. 56.6, 7. and Chap. 2.2. And he that putteth his trust in me, saith the Lord, shall inherit my
Holy Mountain, Isa. 57.13. For thus saith the High and Lofty One that inhabits Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place, with him also that is of a Contrite and Humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart of the Con∣trite Ones, Isa. 57.15. Therefore is it not good to wait upon the Lord, and trust in him? Concerning such as eat up Gods people like Bread, and such as make Idols and Images, and worship them, are without the true Understanding, and are Fools that hate Knowledge; and such as goe into Adultry and Uncleanness, are void of the Wisdom of God and true Understanding; and Gods Fury is upon all such as do not call upon his Name. DAvid saith, Have all the workers of Iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my People as they eat Bread? Psal. 14.4. Here the workers of Iniquity as they eat Bread, they eat up Gods People, that is, they devour them; are not these Devourers, Men-eaters? And again in Psal. 53.4. the Lord saith, The workers of Ini∣quity eat up my People like Bread. But God did give his People Corn from Heaven, and Man did eat Angels Food, Psal. 78.24, 25. And David said, The Wicked even mine Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psal. 27.2. Here you may see these Wicked Men-eaters and Enemies of the Righteous stumbled and fell, when they came to eat up the Flesh of the Righteous, so they fell short of their devouring Prey, Psal. 27.2. Solomon saith, Whoso committeth Adultery with a Woman, lacketh Understanding; he that doth it, destroyeth his own Soul; a wound and a dishonour shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away,
Prov. 6.32, 33. And they that want Understanding the Wicked Woman draweth in; but he knoweth not that the Dead are there, and that her Guests are in the Chambers of Hell, Prov. 9.16. to the end. And therefore Job saith, The fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil is Understanding, Job 28.28. And So∣lomon saith, He that is slow to Wrath, is of a great Understanding; but he that is hasly of Spirit, exhalteth Folly, Prov. 14.29. And Under∣standing is a well spring of Life to him that hath it, Prov. 16.22. But the Man that wandereth out of the way of Understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead, Prov. 21.16. Evil Men understand not Judgment, Prov. 28.5. And the strange Woman deceiveth the simple Ones & Youth who are void of Understanding, her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death, Prov. 7. And there∣fore it is good to keep and walk in the Spirit of Understanding by which you may depart from Evil, and keep out of the Snare of the Whore, and the Congregation of the Dead. And the Lord said concerning the Jews that had rebelled a∣gainst his Spirit, My People are foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children, they have no Understanding, they are wise to do Evil, but to do good they have no Knowledge, Jer. 4.22. Is not this the condition of many Christians as well as the Jews? The Prophet saith, Pour out thy Wrath upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name; for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his Habitation desolate: Must not Gods Fury come upon these Men-eaters, that eat Jacob the beloved of God, and devoured him, and make his Habitation dolate, Jerem. 10.25. And David saith, Pour out thy Wrath upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdomes that have not called upon thy Name, for they have devoured Jacob, and laid wast his dwelling-place, Psal. 79.6, 7. Gods Fury will be poured upon such that devoureth the Righteous, and lay wast his dwelling-place. And you may see in Jer. 51. They that are founders of Graven I∣mages,
or Molten Images (are bruitish by their Knowledge) which are the works of errour, and shall perish. And the Lord saith, A draught is upon her Waters, namely Babylon, and they shall be dryed up, for it is a Land of Graven Images, and they are Mad upon their Idols, Jer. 50.38. Upon such God brings Draughts and Fa∣mine, who disobey and forsake the Living God, and dote upon their Idols and Images which they make, And the Lord frustrateth the tokens of Liars, and maketh the Diviners Mad, and turneth Wise∣men backward, and maketh their Knowledge Foolish, and hath not this been seen and fulfilled? Isai. 44.25. And the Lord saith, They eat up the Sins of my People, and they set their Hearts on their Ini∣quity, and there shall be like Priest like People, and I will punish them for their ways, and reward them for their Doings, Hosea 8.9. And the Lord saith to Daniel, The Wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the Wicked shall understand, but the Wise shall understand, Daniel 12.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, and the Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, and the Lord taketh care for them that fear him, as in Exod. 1.21. therefore it is good to live in the fear of the Lord, which ye must if ye know his Secrets. The cause of Draught and Barrenness, Famine and Plagues, for disobeying the Lord, and grieving his Spirit. THe cause of Draught, Barrenness and Famine, The Lord turneth Rivers into a Wilderness, and the Water Springs into Dry Ground, and turneth a Fruitful Land into Barrenness, for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein, (Mark) it is for the Wicked∣ness of them that dwell therein, Psal. 107.33, 34. And you may see them that disobeyed the Lord and forsook him, and because of the Wickedness of their doings, the Lord
will smite such with Consumptions, and Feavors, and Botches, and Blastings, and Mill-dews, until they perish, I will saith the Lord smite them with Madness and Blindness, and astonishment of Heart, and the Locust and the Wormes shall consume and devour their Fruits, and the Heavens that are over thy Head shall be as Brass, and the Earth that is under thee shall be Iron, and the Lord will make the Rain of thy Land Powder and Dust, and will smite thee with the Botches of Egypt, and with the Emrods, Scab and Itch, that thou canst not be healed; and this is the portion of them that disobey the Lord and forsake him, as in Deut. 28. you may see more at large, and how the Curse followeth the Wicked and Disobedient, in City and Field, and upon themselves and their Flocks, and the Fruits of their Land, yea, the Plagues and Judgments that he poured upon Egypt, he poureth upon them that disobey him, and grieve and rebel against his Spirit. And the Lord sent the Prophet Gad unto David, when he caused Joab to number the People, and said unto him, Shall Se∣ven Years of Famine come upon the Land, or wilt thou fly Three Months before thine Enemies, whilest they pursue thee, or that there be Three Dayes Pestilence in thy Land, 2 Sam. 24. And did not this action of David bring Death and Destruction of Seventy Thousand of the Jews, through Davids hearkning to the Temptation of Sa∣tan, as in the 1 Chro. 21. but David repented, and the Lord staid the hand of the destroying Angel; that Jerusalem was not destroyed. And did not the Lord call for a Famine, and it came upon the Land seven Years? as in 2 Kings 8.1. and was not this be∣cause of their Wickedness? And in Jer. 11.22. Doth not the Lord there punish Judah for his Idolatry, and said, That his Sons and Daughters should die by Famine. And in Jer. 14.12. There the Lord said to the Jews that disobeyed him, When they Fast I will not hear them, nor accept their Offerings, but said, I will consume them by Famine and
by Pestilence, &c. and likewise you may see in Jer. 15. how the Lord saith concerning the Rebellious and Disobedient jews, and the Wickedness of Manasses he threateneth Death, Captivi∣ty and Famine, &c. against them, and likewise you may see in Jer. 18.21. how the Lord threatens Famine and Judgments against the Jews for their revolting from the Lord, and in Jer. 44.13. See how the Lord threateneth the disobedient by Fa∣mine and Pestilence, and the Lord threateneth his Plagues and Judgments concerning Babylon, and saith, A draught is upon the Waters, and they shall be dryed up, for it is a Land of Graven Images, and they are mad upon their Idols: And therefore let all that dis∣obey the Lord, and make Graven Images and Idols, and wor∣ship them, beware of these Judgments, Jer. 50.38. And Ezekiel, he declareth the Judgments upon Jerusalem for their rebelling against God, how that they should die and be consum∣ed with Famine and Pestilence, in Ezek. 5.12. and likewise in Ezek. 6. you may see the Judgments upon Israel for their Idola∣try, the Lord saith, he would Pour his Fury upon them, and they shall die by Pestilence and Famine: And the Lord saith, he would Leave a few of the Jews that should escape from the Pestilence and Fa∣mine, and that these Jews that escaped might declare their own Abomi∣nations among the Heathen, Ezek. 12.16. and in Isa. 14. you may see how the Lord threatened the Assyrians with Famine and Pestilence, Thus saith the Lord, because of mine House that is wast, yea, every Man runneth to his own house, therefore the Heaven over you is stayed from Dew, and the Earth is stayed from her Fruit; and I called for a draught upon the Land, and upon the Mountaines, and up∣on the Corn, and upon the New Wine, and upon the Oyl, and upon this which the ground bringeth forth, and upon Men, and upon Cattel, and upon all the Labour of their Hands, Haggai 1.10, 11. Here you may see the reason of the Judgments of God, be∣cause People mind their own Houses and Business, and Wills more then the Lords.
And did not the Three Years Famine and Six Months come upon the Children of Israel, because of their turning from the Lord, and Rebelling against his Law and Spirit in the days of wicked Ahab and Jezabel, who set up their Idolatry, and Per∣secuted and Killed the Lords People? and did not the Lord sht up Heaven, that they had no Rain nor Dew for Three Years and Six Months in the Land of Israel? as in Luke 4.25. 1 Kings 17. And you may see in Rev. 18. what Plagues, and Famine, and Judgments the Lord poureth upon the False Church, Myste∣ry Babylon, the Great Whore, that hath Whored from the Spirit of Christ, and killed the Lords Prophets, and drunk the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs, who sat as a Queen; but Plagues, and Judgments, and Famine, and Destruction is their end, with the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophets, and their Followers. And therefore let all be warned that rebel against the Spirit of God, and so turn from the Lord into Sin and Wickedness, such cannot expect to escape these Plagues and Judgments that God and his Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, have pronounced against them in the Holy Scriptures of Truth. Concerning such as overcome the Beast, and Dragon, and Whore, and False Prophet. Rev. 11.7. THe Beast shall overcome the Two Witnesses of God, and kill them. Rev. 13.7. And the Beast shall make war with the Saints, and overcome them. Rev. 17.17. But the Lamb shall overcome the Beast and his Followers. Rev. 13.21. And Christ saith to him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.
Rev. 12.11. And the Saints overcame the Dragon by the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of their Testimony, and they loved not their Lives to the Death. Rev. 2.26, 27. And he that overcometh and keepeth my words unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, saith Christ, and he shall rule them with a Rod af Iron, as the Vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers, even as I received of my Father, and I will give him the Morning Star. Rev. 2.7. To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradice of God. Rev. 2.10, 11. And be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life; and he that overcometh shall not be hurt with the second Death. Rev. 3.5. And he that overcometh, the same shall be cloathed in White Rayment, and I will not blot his Name out of the Book of Life, but I will confess his Name before my Father and before his Angels. Rev. 3.21. And him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Fa∣ther in his Throne. Rev. 2.17. And him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hid∣den Manna, and will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a New Name written, which no Man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it. Rev. 3.10. And Christ saith, thou hast kept the word of my Pati∣ence, I will keep thee from the Hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth. Rev. 3.13. And him that overcometh will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God, and I will write upon him my New Name. Rev. 21.7. And he that overcometh shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. But the Dragon and the Beast, the False Prophet and their Followers, and the False Church that maketh war with the
Lamb and the Church of Christ the Saints; these say, that there is no overcoming of them while they live upon the Earth, but the Beast, False Prophets, and the Whore, and the Dragon, must have the Victory, and the Lamb and the Saints must not have the Victory; and the Kingdomes of the World must not become the Kingdomes of Christ; this is the Beast, and the Whore, and the False Prophets, and the Old Dragons, the Devils, and Satans False Doctrine; but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the Victory over them all. Isaac said that when Esau had broken Jacobs Yoke from off his Neck, then Esau should have the dominion, and this Isaac spoke by Prophecy in Gen. 27.40. and was fulfilled in Jehorams days, 2 Chron. 21.4, 5, 8. For then the Edomites made themselves a King, and this Jehoram compelled Judah to his False Worship, and to forsake Gods Worship, 2. Chron. 21.11. David saith, O Lord preserve my Life from the fear of the Enemy, and hide me from the secret Council of the Wicked, and from the In∣surrection of the workers of Iniquity, who whet their Tongue like a Sword, and bend their Bowes to shoot their Arrowes, even bitter words, Psal. 64.2, 3. THE END.
