F1930 R28011 10329532 44863
A TESTIMONY, Of what we believe of CHRIST, before he was manifest in the Flesh; and of his birth and preaching, and what he saith he is himselfe: as also of his suffer∣ings, death, resurrection, and ascension. Both as he was GOD and as he was Man. AND ALSO The Testimony of the Apostles concerning him; with those Names which GOD, the Angels, and holy Ghost, has given unto him, and the holy men as they were moved by the holy Ghost: which we faithfully own and believe. But all such by-names, which are not found in the Scriptures we testify against though contended for by such, as say, they have not the same holy Ghost, that gave forth the Scriptures: and it is the same Spirit that gives Christ those by-names, that in Scorn calls us QUAKERS. Also how the believers in the primitive times, and now; did and do possess, and enjoy CHRIST JESUS: and what is the Saints Food, and how they are to walke. And wherein they may see what a true Christians duty is. Hold fast the forme of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love, which is in Christ Iesus, 2 Tim. 1: 13. For the time will come they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turne away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables, 2 Tim. 4: 3, 4, 5. I am come in my Fathers Name and ye receive me not, if another should come in his own name him will ye receive. How can ye believe which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God onely. Joh. 5: 43, 44. By GEORGE FOX. Printed in the Year. 1677.
A DECLARATION Of the PEOPLE of GOD, In Scorn called QUAKERS: Because they heare the voyce of GOD: and Tremble at his Word: and are cast out for his Nam's sake: &c. But he hath appeared to our Joy. Isaiah. 66: 5. VVhat we do believe of the birth, sufferings, death, and resurrection of IESVS CHRIST. Now the birth of Jesus Christ Was thus: When as his mo∣ther Mary was betrothed to Ioseph, before they came to∣gether: she was found with child of the Holy Ghost, and the Angel of the LORD said unto Ioseph the son of David, Fear not to take Mary to thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost, and she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS, for he shall save his people from their sinns. And this was the fulfilling of the prophecy of Isaiah, Behold a virgin shall be with child, Isai. 7: 14. and shall bear a Son, and they shall call his name IMMANUEL, which is by interpretation GOD with us. And when JESUS was born in Bethlehem, it troubled Herod and all Jerusalem, which was the highest place of worship, though they could tell by the Scripture where he was to be born; as in Micah 5: 2. and Matth. 2: 1, 2, 3, 4. and in Luke 1. the Angel of the LORD appeared to Mary, and said unto her Fear not Mary, for thou hast found favour with GOD; for lo, thou shalt conceive
in thy womb and bear a Son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS, he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High, and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his Father David, he shall reigne over the house of Iacob forever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Then said Mary to the Angel, how shall this be, seing I know not man? And the Angel answered and said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall over shaddow thee, therefor also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. And in Luke 2: Vnto you is born this day in a city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the LORD: and she brought forth her first begotten, and wrapt him in a swadling cloath, and laid him in a manger, becaus there was no roome for them in the inn. And there the shepherds found him swaddled, lieing in a manger. A poor entertainment for the Saviour of the world, and King of kings, and Lord of lords, like the professors now in their highest place of worship, who slight him, as the Jewes did in theirs. And Simeon that just man, that feared God, a revelation was given him of the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death before had seen the Lord Christ, which came to passe. For he said Mine eyes have seen thy sal∣vation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people, a Light to be revealed to the Gentils, and the glory of thy people Israel: and this we are witnesses of, and beare witness to, which he saw before his death. Now here he knew the Lords Christ by revelation, (which every one must see him by, before their death) who was the Son of God. And Christ saith himself Luke 10: 21, 22. I confesse unto thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and learned, and hast revealed them to Babes, even so Father becaus it so pleased thee. Then he turned to his Disciples, and said, All things are given unto me of my Father, and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father, neither who the Father is save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And he turned to his Disciples, and said secretly to them, Blessed are the eyes, which see that which you see. And so it is clear here by Christs own words and doctrine, all the learn∣ed and wise, that deny Revelation now adays, you know not the Father nor the Son, for Christ saith no man knoweth the Son, nor the Father, but he to whom Christ the Son of God will reveal him: and as the Apostle Paul
saith in another place, that it pleased the Father to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him; so blessed be God the Father who hath revealed his Son in us, that we might know him and preach him. And in Ioh. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning with God, and all things were made by it, and without it was made nothing that was made, and in it (to wit the Word) was life, and the life was the light of men: and the Light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not, and that was the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world, he was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. They must know him by revelation, for the world by their wis∣dom knew him not, nor knoweth God, he came to his own, and his own received him not, but as many as received him, to them he gave power to be∣come the Sons of God. And this we witness, And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the onely begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace and truth, and of his fulness have we received, grace for grace. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by Iesus Christ. And this grace and truth we witness, which is our Teacher, and brings our Salvation, and establisheth our hearts. And this is the Prophet like unto Moses, that God hath raised up, whom we do heare and see, as Ste∣phen did, and have seen the heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, who was persecuted by the Priests and profess∣ing Jewes: Acts 7. and this is Christ the Rock that followed the Jewes in the wildeerness, 1 Cor. 10: 4. And this is the Christ Jesus that Wrought signes and miracles amongst the Iewes, the great Professors of the Letter; that the chief Priests bought of Iudas for thirty pieces of silver: whom they scourged and mocked and crucified, and said he had a devil, and by the prince of devils cast out devils: and when they had crucified him, the chief Priests gave large money to the souldiers, to say that his Disciples had stoln him away by night, whom they had crucified without the gates at Ierusalem, who appeared to Mary Magdalen, and to his Disciples; and came amongst them when the doores were shut Ioh. 20. And Ioseph of Arimathea a Disciple of Iesus, after they had crucified Christ, he begged his body, and he laid him in a garden in his own new tomb, Matth. 27. Now this Iesus is risen the same that they crucified, whom the high Priests and rulers delivered to be condemned to death, and they crucified him,
Luke 24: 20. who said behold my hands and feet, for it is I my self, handle me, for a Spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have, ver. 39. And this was after he was risen from the dead: and Christ Jesus saith after his resur∣rection Ioh. 20: 21. As my Father sent me I send you, his ministers and his Disciples, whom the great letter-professors persecuted, as may be seen in the Acts: and still they do the same unto them that Christ sends forth, where he is manifest. But ye men of Israel, and we may say ye men of all professions in Christendom without the possession of Christ, heare the words of Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you with great works and wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as you your selves also know, him I say ye have taken by the hands of the wicked, being delivered by the detereminat counsel and foreknowledg of God, and have crucified and slain, whom God hath raised up, and loosed the sorrowes of death, becaus it was impossible that he should be holden of it. And so Gods holy One did not see corruption, neither was his Soul left in the grave, whose heart did rejoyce and his tongue was glad, and his flesh did rest in hope. And David knew that God had sworn with an oath unto him, that of the fruit of his loins, he would raise up Christ concerning the flesh, he knowing this before, speaking of the resurrection of Christ, saith that his Soul should not be left in the grave, neither his flesh should see corruption; this Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we are witnesses, and we the people of God, in scorn called Quakers, are witnesses of this Jesus, and of his resurrection, to the men of Ifrael and all the men of the world, as Acts 7: 22, &c. Which Jesus appeared three times to the Disciples af∣ter he was risen, Ioh. 21: 14. Therefor let all the house of Israel know for a surety, that God hath made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus I say whom you crucified, he is risen and set down at the right hand of God. So we (the people of God called Quakers) do say let all the house of the professors of the Letter, without the possession, whether Iewes, Turks, Christians, or heathens know that there is no Salvation in any other Name under heaven, whereby they must be saved, but in the Name of Iesus Christ of Nazareth, which was crucified without the gates of Ieru∣salem, whom God hath raised up from the dead, as in Acts 4: 10, &c. So the God of Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, and the God of our Fathers, hath glorified his Son Jesus, whom the Jewes betrayed and denyed in the presence of Pilat, when he had judged him to be delivered, before whom Jesus made a good confession, 1 Tim. 6: 13. whom we are witnesses of,
and are not ashamed to confess him before our persecutors. But the pro∣fessing Jewes denyed the holy One and the just, and desired a murderer to be given them, as many will do now, that crucify him to themselves afresh, as the Jewes that killed the Lord of life, whom God hath raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses, I say we the people of God in scorn called Quakers, are witnesses, with the Apostles, of him against all such professors now, who desire a murderer rather then the Lord of life. But these things God shewed by the mouth of his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, and he hath thus fulfilled it: and so through him have we received remission of sinns, and refreshings from the presence of the Lord. And ye that do profess that Christ is come, as the Jewes professed he was to come, do not ye deny the holy One and the Just in your lives? who live unholy and unjust, and will not ye sooner receive a murderer, then the Saviour? and consent and persecut him where he is made mani∣fest now in his Saints? That which you doe unto them, ye doe unto him; but Christ is risen, whom the heavens must containe, untill the time that all things be restored, which God hath spoken by the mouths of all his holy Prophets, since the world began, Acts 3: 21. And Moses said un∣to the Fathers, The Lord your God will raise up unto you a Prophet of your Brethren, like unto me, ye shall hear him in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. For it shall be that every person that shall not hear that Pro∣phet, shall be destroyed from among the people. Now this Prophet Christ Jesus we do hear, who doth fulfill the Prophets that prophesyed of him: and now do not you say there is no hearing of his voyce now adays, and is not the contrary to the Apostles, who said while it is called to day hear his voyce? And was not this after he was risen, and God hath spoken to us by his Son, as in Hebr. 1? And did he not speak to his Disciples, and to Paul and to Mary Magdalen after he was risen? And doth he not now speak from heaven? See that ye despise not him that speaks from heaven, for if they escaped not, that refused him that spake on earth, much less shall ye escape, if ye turn away from him that speaks from heaven, even JESUS who suffered without the gates of Jerusalem, and sanctifies his people with his blood, Heb. 12: 25. And therefor you that say there is no hear∣ing of the prophet Christ's voyce now adays, do not you destroy your selves and people? And to Abraham God said, In thy seed sh ll all the kindreds of the earth be blessed, of whose seed Christ came, and so it was said unto the Jewes first, unto you hath God raised up his Son Jesus, and
him hath he sent to blesse you, in turning every one of you from your in∣iquity unto him. So [marke] you are blessed as you are turned every one from your iniquity, not in your iniquity, for he saith to the worker of in∣iquity depart from me, I know you not. For the true witnesses of Jesus Christ and of his refurrection, great grace was upon them all, and so it is now, as may be seen Acts 4: 33. where may be seen what work the Priests and the Elders the great Letter-professors made against them that were the true witnesses of Jesus, his birth, life, death and resurrection, as many of you, who have the form and not the power, have done against us, and therefore are we turned away from you. But we can say as the Apostle said to the Jewes, and to you that are in their Spirit, The God of our Fathers hath ruised up Iesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, him hath God lifted up with his right hand, to be a Prince and Saviour, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sinns: and we are witnesses concern∣ing these things, which we say, yea and the holy Ghost whom God hath given to them that obey him, testifies the same. But you that are disobe∣dient, say, the holy Ghost is not to be looked for now adayes, and forbid us to speake in the powr of Jesus, though you'l use the name of Jesus, but in the forme, and deny the power and Spirit, persecut them that are in it, Acts 5: 30, 31, 32. But remember Gamaliel's counsel And Stephen being full of the holy Ghost looked stedfastly into heaven, and said, Behold the heavens open, and the Son of man [marke the Son of man] standing at the right hand of God; so with the holy Ghost he could see into heaven, and see Christ Jesus, and so do we, Acts 7. and 1 Cor. 12: 3. where it is said, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Iesus accursed. Also no man can say that Iesus is Lord but by the holy Ghost, [marke] no man can say it, but by the holy Ghost. Now ye that say There is no holy Ghost to be looked for now adayes, as was amongst the Apostles, and teach so to the people, do not ye deny the promise of Christ, and the succession of the true ministers in the holy Ghost, which shall lead into all truth. And if no man can call Jesus the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, and ye deny having it your selves, and teaching it so to others, then ye can not be the faithfull witnesses of Jesus Christ the Lord, nor can ye truely call him Lord, neither are led into all truth by the holy Ghost, but by an un∣clean ghost into errour, and so are no true Christians. For this Comforter or holy Ghost which Christ hath sent, he shall re∣prove
the world of their sin, and righteousness, and judgment and unbelief: so you are not reproved of your sin, of your righteousness, of your judgment and unbelief, if the Comforter the Holy Ghost be not come to you, according to Christs promise, that he would send him after he was risen. And the Disciples of Christ then, and now, the Spirit of Truth, this Comforter doth lead them into all Truth, for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, he shall speak. So are not people to hear this Comforter, this holy Ghost, that pro∣ceeds from the Father and the Son? Ioh. chapters 15 and 16. And in Acts 9, Paul saith, Who art thou Lord, and the Lord said, I am Ies us whom thou persecutest, and it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Now you know that Jesus Christ was risen, but he was persecuting of him in his Saints: compared with Matth. 25 from ver. 40 to the end. So are not all they, that kick against that which pricks them, the per∣secuters of the life of Jesus, where he is made manifest? And in Acts 10: 34, &c. where Peter opened his mouth and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every na∣tion he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him. and how God hath anoynted Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost and with power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with him; and we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the land of the Iewes and in Ierusalem, whom they slew, and hanged on a tree, him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly, and we did eat and drink with him after he arose from the dead, and he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he, that is ordained of God, a Judg of quick and dead. And to this do we testify, which are the people of God, in scorn called Quakers. And to him (to wit, Christ) also gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, all that believe in him, shall receive re∣mission of sins. Now to believe in Christ, he teaches how to believe, Ioh. 12. who saith, I am come a Light into the world, that whosoever believeth in me, shall not abide in darkness. And wh ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may become the children of the Light, ver. 36: 46. And Ioh. 7: 37, 38. Iesus stood up, and cryed, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink: and he that believeth in me, as the Scri∣pture saith, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. And
Ioh. 3:16. God so loved the world, that he sent his onely begoteen Son into the world, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And, as many as receive him, he gives them power to be∣come the sons of God, yea even to them that believe in his Name, Joh. 1:12. And he that believeth in him, shall not be condemned, but he that believeth not, is condemned already, because he believeth not in the Name of the onely begotten Son of God: to wit, in the Light, as Christ commands. And this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the world, but men love darkness rather then Light, because their works are evil, For every man that doth evil hates the-Light, he hates that Light which Christ commands to believe in, neither cometh to the Light, least his deeds should be reproved. So he is afraid of his evil deeds being reproved, and therefore can not believe in the Light, if he will not come to it: but he that doth Truth, cometh to the Light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God; and he that be∣lieveth, is born of God, as John in his Epistle saith, and he that is born of God, overcometh the world. And he that believeth in the Son of God, hath the witness in himself. And this we witness, which are the true Believers in the Light: and he that hath the Son, hath life, and he that bath not the Son of God, hath not life. So all ye Letter-Professors of Christ, if ye have him not, you have no life, for Christ, whom God sent, speaks the word of God and he that believeth in his Son, hath eternal life in him, and he that believeth not in the Son of God, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him, Joh. 3:34, 35, 36. And the Son of God that spake the words of God, how people should believe, said, believe in the Light; for he was come a Light into the world, and in him was Life, and this life was the Light of men, and that was the true Light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world. And he was in the world, and the world know him not. So the world knows him not now, though the world was made by him, and he is in the world by his Light, though they will not believe in it, but love the darkness rather then the Light, and will not come to it, least it should reprove them of their evil deeds, as the Apostle saith Whatsoever doth reprove and make manifest, is light. So they can not see Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, without the Light, which is called the life in him, and Light in men.
And so the unbelievers now, though they may profess Christ is come, like the Pharisees to come who persecuted Christ in the days of his flesh, but he is risen out of their reach. And now the same spirit persecuts his Believers and Disciples that believe in the Light, which is Life in him, and Light in them, as Iohn teaches. So now they are persecuting the Light and Life of Christ, where it is manifest in his members, for every one that doth evil, hates the Light, and so hates Christ, his Light, his Life. But we who are the people of God, and in scorn called Quakers by them, are the believers in the Light, and children of the Light, with which we see our life hid in Christ; and are witnesses of Christs birth, suffering, death, and resurrection, and of his flesh, and of his Divinity, and can say he that hath the bride, is the bride∣groom, Joh. 3:29. And Acts 13:23. &c. Of the seed of David hath God according to his promise, raised up to Israel a Saviour: and whoso∣ever feareth God, to you is the word of Salvation sent, for the inhabitants of Ierusalem and the Rulers, because they knew him not, nor the words of the Prophets, which were read every Sabbath day amongst them, they have fulfilled them in condemning him, though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilat to kill him: and when they had fulfilled all things that were written of him, they took him down from the tree, and put him into a sepulchre, wherin no man was before laid, but God hath raised him from the dead, and he was seen many days of them, which came up with him from Galilee unto Ierusalem, and we can not but speak those things which we have seen and heard, Acts 4:20. And so now consider you Professors, was not this the highest place of worship at Jerusalem, where the Scripturs and Prophets were read every Sabbath day, and they knew not the voice of the Prophets, though they read their words, like the Professors now, and yet did not they crucify him (to wit, the Jewes) without the gates of Jerusalem? And the Priests and Rulers were against him, and knew him not in his birth, sufferings, death and resurrection. And now you that read the Scripturs with the same persecuting spirit, do not you crucify him afresh to your selves, and persecut him in his members, and put him to open shame, as it's said, Heb. 6:6? And Acts 13:47. I have set thee a Light of the Gentiles, that thou mayst be my Salvation to the ends of the world. And so Christ who is the Light, is the Salvation to the ends of the world, and the Gentiles are
glad of this, and glorify the Word of the Lord, which none can doe but in the Light, which is the Life in the Word. And we declare ac∣cording to Gods promise made to the Fathers, which God hath fulfill∣ed unto us his children, in that he raised up Jesus, as it is written in the 2 Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Now as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, no more to turn to the grave, wherefore he saith in another place Thou wilt not suffer thy holy One to see corruption; though David lay with his Fathers, and saw corruption, but he whom God raised up saw no corruption. Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, saith the Apostle, and say the people of God in scorn called Quakers to all the sons of Adam, that through this man, to wit Christ Jesus, whom God hath raised up, is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and from all things from which you could not be justifyed by the Law of Moses. By him, to wit Christ, every one that believeth is justifyed. And what is it to believe? To believe in the Light, as Christ saith: if not, he is condemned, and then not justifyed, as you may see, Ioh. 3:12. and Act. 13:32, &c. Now the time of ignorance, as the Apostle saith, (who preached Christs birth, death and resurrection) the times of ignorance God wink∣ed at, but now he admonishes all men every where to repent▪ So if God and Christ do admonish, he doth it by his power and Spirit, as Acts 17:30. Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judg the world in righteousness, by that man whom he hath appoynted, where∣of he hath given an assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. Therefore if he would have all men to repent, he would have all men to be saved, and their destruction is of themselves. And this we the people of God, in scorn called Quakers, do witness and have the assurance of. As the Apostle saith, But this I confess un∣to thee, that after that way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, and believe all things, which are written in the Law and the Prophets, and have hope towards God that the resurrection of the dead which they themselvs look for also, shall be both of just and unjust; and herein I endeavour my self to exercise a good Conscience towards God and towards men, Acts 23:14 to 16. This confession the Apostle made before Felix and Ananias, the high priests and the elders; and this is, and hath been our confession amongst all your high Priests and elders, above 20 years ago, and unto this day.
And the Apostle in his confession, Acts 26:18. saith, he was sent to turn the people from darkness to the Light, and from the power of Sa∣tan unto God, that they may receive the forgiveness of sins, and an inheri∣tance among them that are sanctified, by faith in Christ. And now have not many of you separated Professors and Priests, and others, scoffed at this Light, and called it an idol and darkness? But can any receive the remission and forgiveness of sins, and so have an in∣heritance among them that are sanctified, but who are turned from the darkness to the Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, ac∣cording to the true ministers doctrine, which we possess and are witness∣es of, against them that turn them from this Light to darkness, and keep them in Satans power from Gods? And was not this doctrin a wonder amongst the professing Jewes, and before Agrippa (whose eyes were not open, like yours) of turning people from darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified? [mark] are sanctified, that is already don, though the Apostle said, he had obtained help from God unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come; that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew Light unto the people and unto the Gentiles. And also was not this a strange doctrin think you then? and is it not so now which we do witness, by this Light which Christ hath shewed unto us, what Moses and the Prophets did say, that Christ should suf∣fer and rise from the dead, and shew light to the Gentiles? This through the help of God are we daily witnesses of, to small and great who are dead with Christ, and are risen with Christ: for, as the Apostle saith, if ye be dead with Christ, and risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, Coloss. 3:1. and this we are in the practise of, and can not seek after your things which are below, though you rage against us, and persecut us with tongue and hand. And Rom. 1. God which had promised before by his Prophets, in the holy Scripturs, con∣cerning his Son Iesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of Da∣vid according to the flesh, [mark] and declared to be the Son of God, touching the Spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection of the dead, by whom we have received Grace, through which we are witnesses, and are
called and made to declare and confess to the Name of Iesus. For the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, The just shall live by faith. For we are not ashamed of the Gospell of Christ, for it is the power of God unto Salvation to every one that believeth. And therefore we can not but warn all in the name of Jesus, knowing that God shall judg the secrets of all mens hearts, according to the Gospel, as the Apostle declares, Rom. 2:16. And Rom. 3:24, 25. We are justi∣fied freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Iesus, whom God hath set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of sins, that are past through the patience of God. And this we witness, blessed be the Lord God, through Jesus Christ for ever. And Rom 4:25. Christ who was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen for our justification, then being justified by faith we have peace with God, through our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom also we have access through faith unto his Grace, wherein we stand, [mark] and rejoyce un∣der the hope of the glory of God, and this hope makes not ashamed, becaus the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. For Christ when we were yet of no strength, at his time dyed for the ungodly, but seting out his love towards us, seing that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us, much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemys we were reconciled to God, through the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life, and not onely so, but we also rejoyce in God through our Lord Iesus Christ, through whom we have now received attonement, Rom. 5:1, 2. And this we witness who are in scorn called Quakers, but Christ did not dye for sinners, that they should live all their life time in sin, and dye in their sins; but that as sin had reigned unto death, so Grace might also reign through righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For know you not that all we that have been baptized into Iesus Christ, have been baptized into his death. We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so we also walk in newness of life (mark you Professors, in newness of life) for if we be grafted with him into the similitud of his death, even so shall we be of his re∣surrection, knowing this that our old man is crucified with him (mark,
is crucified, then it is done) that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, for when ye were servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness: and as the Apostle saith, his ser∣vants ye are whom ye do obey; wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe also we shall live with him, knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dyeth no more, death hath no more dominion over him, for in that he dyed, he dyed once to sin, but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God. So (mark) people must dye with Christ; if they will live with Christ, whom death hath no more dominion over. Like∣wise reckon ye also that ye are dead to sin, but alive to God in Iesus Christ our Lord. (mark, alive in Christ Iesus) so people must be alive in him, not in old Adam. And now being made free from sin, and made ser∣vants unto God, ye have your fruits unto holiness, and your end ever∣lasting life. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eter∣nall life through Iesus Christ our Lord. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness. So they that be free from righte∣ousness, and whose darkness can not comprehend the Light, and whose doctrin is, they can not be made free from sin while they be upon the earth, nor the old man, nor the body of sin: this is another doctrin then the Apostle preached, who said the old man is crucified: and this is to preach up the old mans life, and not the new man Christ Jesus, as you may see, Rom. 6 and 7 chap. &c. Now if we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorified with him, Rom. 8:17. So people must dye with Christ, if they will live with Christ, and suffer with him, if they will be glorified with Christ. Now it is an easie matter to make an outward profession of Christs death, but it's another matter to come to dye with Christ and suffer with him; which they must do, if they will come to live, and be glorified with him. Again, Rom. 7:9. I was once alive without the Law, (yet he had been a strict professor of the Law. So are not you strict professors alive without the Gospel?) but when the commandement came, sin revived and I dyed, saith the Apostle. Can ye professors say so, as many of us can, who were alive in a profession without the possession, where we see many of you yet remaining? And the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Iesus hath made me free from the Law of sin and death. Now ye Professors, ye are far off from being made free from the Law of sin and death, when you plead for it for terme of life, and are offended at us that plead for fredom by the
Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus. And Rom. 8. God send∣ing his onely Son in the likeness of sinfull flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, (so, can you witness the sending of the Son of God to condemn the sin in your flesh?) that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin. But the Spirit is Life for righteousness sake, but if Christ be not in you, your bo∣dy is alive because of the sin; and so you may call him Lord, and pro∣fess him without you, and say Ye have preached in his name, but such workers of iniquity he will bid depart, that live in sin, and plead for it to the grave. But if the Spirit of him, that raised Iesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raises up Christ from the dead shall quicken your mortal bodys, because that his Spirit dwelleth in you. and this we wit∣ness. And must not people be made like to the image of the Son of God, who is the first born among many brethren. For God who spared not his own Son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things? For Christ who is dead and risen again, who is at the right hand of God also making request for us, Rom. 8. through∣out. And Rom. 9:33. as it is written, Behold I lay in Zion a ston of stumbling and a Rock of offence, and every one that believeth in him shall not be a shamed. And this is that Christ, that the wise master-builders did reject in their own wisdom (as you may read in the Evangelists) that pretended to build people up unto heaven, as many do now without the life and Spirit of the Apostles. But Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness sake, to every one that believes, but the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise, Say not in thine heart Who shall ascend into heaven, that is to bring Christ from above, or who shall descend into the deep to bring Christ again from the dead. But what saith it? The Word is near thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. This is the Word of faith which we preach. Now we are come to this righteousness of faiths speaking, and to this Word in our hearts which the Apostle preached, and can confess with our mouths the Lord Iesus, and believe in our hearts that GOD raised him from the dead, who is the Saviour. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confesseth unto Salva∣tion. So this belief is beyond a Pharisees belief, for he that believeth
is born of God, and he that believeth in the Light is born of the Light, Rom. 10. and Ioh. 12. And it may be said unto you Professors, as David said, and CHRIST and the Apostle to the professing Jewes, Let their table be made a snare, and a net and a stumbling block, even for a recompence unto them, let their backs be bowed down always, Rom. 11:9, 10. Now the Church in the primitive times, which the Apostle writs to, I beseech you brethren (saith he) by the mercys of God, that ye give up your bodys a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reason∣able service of him. Rom. 12:1. For as it is said, 1 Cor. 6:20. Know ye not that your bodys are the temples of the Holy Ghost? For ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodys and in your spirits, for they are Gods. And what price was this they were bought withall? Is not this the blood of Christ Jesus? So it is not a puft-up profession, nor serving God with your lips, but the offering up the body a living sacrifice, and a glorifying God with body, soul and spirit, which are his. For none of us is to live to himself, nor to dye to himself, saith the Apostle, For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord; or, whether we live or dye, we are the Lords: For Christ Iesus therefore dyed and rose again and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the quick. So no true Christians must live to themselvs, but to him that dyed for them, Rom. 14:7, 8, 9. &c. And the Saints are to receive one another, as Christ also received us, saith the Apole, Rom. 15:6, 7, to the glory of God: and to be like-minded one to another according to Christ Iesus, and that with one mouth they may praise God, even the Fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ, ver 5. And vers. 18. the Apostle saith, I dare not speak of any thing which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient in word and deed. Mark this, ye Professors, if ye durst speak no more but that Christ works by you or in you, ye would have little to say, and ye would not find fault with the people of God called Quakers, who speak as Christ hath wrought in them. And Rom. 16:25. To him now that is of power to establish you, ac∣cording to my Gospel and preaching of Iesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery which was kept secret since the world began. Now ye Pro∣fessors can not know this mystery, nor this secret, but by revelation, which ye deny.
And 1 Cor. 1:2. there ye may see how we are sanctified in Christ Jesus, that ye may be blameless in the day of our. Lord Iesus Christ, ver. 6, 8. and the testimony of Iesus Christ hath been confirmed in you: marke in you, for God is faithfull by whom ye are called, unto the fel∣lowship of his Son Iesus Christ our Lord. Now I beseech you brethren by the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that ye all speak one thing. Then ye must come out of the many things, which make divisions. And the Iewes, saith the Apostle, require a signe, and the Grecians seek after wisdom. And are not you Professors of the same spirit, like the Jewes and Grecians? Do not you cry for signes and miracles, and seek after wisdom? But we preach Christ crucified, to the Iewes a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1:22. But ye are of him in Christ, saith the Apostle, ver. 30: who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption, which we witness, Blessed be God for ever. But the natural man, saith he, 1 Cor. 2:14. perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually dis∣cerned. And this we witness, which you Professors deny any one hav∣ing the Spirit as the Apostles had. So you are not like to know the things of God, but run into strife and contention about them, with your natural mens perceivings. And the Apostle saith, I esteem not to know any thing amongst you, save Iesus Christ and him crucified; for we speak the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God hath determined before the world unto our glory, which none of the princes of the world hath known, for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 1 Cor. 2. And the Apostle saith, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 4:16. & 9:1. So we cannot follow you, but as ye follow Christ. For the kingdom of God (saith he) is not in words, but in power, 1 Cor. 4:20. And God hath raised up the Lord Iesus (saith he) and shall raise us up by his power, and we do know that our bodys are members of Christ, and he that is joyned to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. And the Apostle saith, Neither theeves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners, nor adulterers, &c. shall inherit the kingdom of God. And such were some of you, but ye are wash∣ed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of our Lord Iesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 9, 10, 11. Marke, are washed
are sanctified, are justified.So for covetous ones, adulterers, drunk∣ards, theeves and railers to make a profession of Christs death and re∣surrection, and live in their sins; this is to profess him with the lips, but deny him in their works, not being washed. For Christ comes to call sinners to repentance, and he dyed for their sin, not that they should live in it, and plead for it for terme of life. And 1 Cor. 7:23. it's said, Ye are bought with a price, so come to be the Lords free men: and as Christ saith, if the Truth hath made you free, ye are free indeed. For Truth makes free from the devil, who is out of Truth. And the Apostle saith 1 Cor. 8:6. To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him. Marke, we in him, and one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. This we witness. And the Apostle saith 1 Cor. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted him, and were destroyed of the serpents. And therefore ye Professors take heed of tempting him in a profession with∣out possession of him, least ye be found mockers of him. Likewise the Apostle saith, what he received from the Lord, that he delivered unto them, 1 Cor. 11:23. Now do not you deliver any thing to the people, but what you receive from the Lord? Then ye must deny your own principle, who say, There is no hearing the voice of God now adays. And doth not the Apostle tell you, 1 Cor. 13. that you have nothing if ye have not love; if ye have faith and gifts, and prophecys and tongues, and give your bodys to be burned, and your goods to the poor, if ye have not love, ye are but like tinckling cymbals and sounding brass. Where is all your profession then of God and Christ, and what good doth it you, who make but a tinckl∣ing with your cymbals, and sounding with your brass, whilst you are out of love, and in a persecuting spirit? And 1 Cor. 15. the Apostle saith, First of all I delivered unto you that which I received, marke, how that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scripturs, and that he was seen of Caaphas, then of the twelve, and after he was seen of more then 500 brethren, &c. And after that he was seen of Iames, then of the Apostles, and last of all he was seen of me, as one born out of due time. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and is made the first fruits of them that slept. For as in Adam all dyed, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. The first man is of the earth earthly, the second man (marke, man) is the Lord from heaven: as it's also
written, The first Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam a quick∣ening Spirit. So here is the Heavenly man, here is the Earthly man, here is the Spiritual body, here is the Natural body, and as we have born the image of the Earthly, so shall we bear the image of the Heavenly. So it is the Second man the Lord from heaven that redeems the Earthly man, and the Just that suffered for the unjust. And thanks be unto God, saith the Apostle, which giveth us victory through Iesus Christ our Lord: and thus we declare and witness that which the Scripture doth declare, and can say, The Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with all that love him. And 2 Cor. 1:5. where the Apostle saith, The suf∣ferings of Christ abound in us. Have ye known this, ye Professors? And ye are our Epistles written in our hearts, 1 Cor. 3:3. written not with pen and ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God, in the fleshly tables of the heart, in that ye are manifest to be the Epistles of Christ. Marke, this Epistle was written with the Spirit of God in the table of the heart, these are manifest to be the the Epistles of Christ, which ye can not read without the Spirit of God, which ye have often denyed to have as the Apostles had. And the Apostle saith, Who hath made us able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter (marke) but of the Spi∣rit, for the letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life. For it's said, Mo∣ses put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel should not look unto the end of that, which was to be abolished, which vail in Christ is put away. But a worse vail you have put over your faces, that make a great bustle about the Scripturs, and are not in the Spirit that gave them forth. Now the Lord is this Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, and where it is not, there is imprisonment, persecution and bondage. But we all behold as in a mirrour the glory of God, with open face, and are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, and this we possess and witness, who preach not our selves, but the Lord Iesus Christ, and our selves your servants for Christs sake. For God that commanded Light to shine out of darkness, is he which hath shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the knowledg of the glory of God in the face of Iesus Christ. But we have this treasur in earth∣en vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.
And we are afflicted on every side that witness this, and persecuted, but not forsaken, Every where we bear about in our bodys (marke, in our bodys) the dying of our Lord Iesus, that the life of Iesus might also be made manifest in our bodys. (marke in our bodys.) For we which live are always delivered unto death, for Iesus sake, that the Life of Iesus might be manifest in our mortal flesh, because we have the same Spirit of faith, as it is written I believe and therefore have I spoken, we also be∣lieve and therefore speak, knowing that he who hath raised up the Lord Iesus, shall also raise us up by Iesus Christ, and with our hearts we be∣lieve this, and with our mouths make confession unto Salvation. And 2 Cor. 5. We must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things which he hath done in his body, ac∣cording to that he hath done, whether they be good or evil. Knowing therefore the terrours of the Lord we do perswad men to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and to turn from sin and evil, and obey him; For the love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus judg, that if Christ dy∣ed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him which dyed for them and rose again. So here is a living to Christ, it is not onely a mouth profession, and an outward belief; For the devils believe and tremble, for he that believes in the Light becomes a child of the Light. And the Apostle saith, Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him [so] no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creatur; old things are past away, behold all things are become new. And 2 Cor. 5. All things are of God which hath reconciled us to God by Iesus Christ: For God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them, for he hath made Christ sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him (marke in him) and who are in Christ are new creaturs. Now the old creaturs and such as are out of Christ, do make a profession without the possession, that's but like the Pharisees profession, 2 Cor. 7. So consider all ye Professors, are ye new creatures? Are ye made the righteousness of God in Christ? Do you begin to cleanse your selves from the filthiness of your flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of the Lord? Is your warfar spiritual, and not car∣nal, casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is exait∣ed
against the knowledg of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 cor. 10:4, 5. And Paul speaks of the Truth of Christ in him, and that he had espoused them to one husband, that he might present the Saints as a pure virgin to Christ. Then they must be free from sin, and must not plead for sin forterme of life, as you professors do, for there is no fellowship betwixt Light and darkness, as 2 Cor. 6:14. And 2 cor. 13:3. &c. Ye seek a proof of Christ that speaks in me, (marke, a proof of Christs speaking in the Apostle) which towards you (saith he) is not weak, but is mighty in you (marke, in you) And further he saith, though he was crucified concerning his infirmitys, yet he lived (to wit, Christ) through the power of God (marke, he that was crucified) and we no doubt are weak in him, but we shall live with him, through the power of God, &c. which we witness. Wherefore prove your selves whether you be in the faith, examin your selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobats? Marke, we have proved our selves, and examined our selves; and know Christ Jesus is in us. And if Christ be in you, as was said before, your body is dead because of sin, and you are alive to God, &c and not repro∣bats. And so it's the duty of all Christians to prove and examin themselves, whether they be in that faith that workes by love, that Christ is the Au∣thor of; whether Christ be in them yea or nay, that they be not found re∣probats, for reprobats may make a profession of Christ, in that birth that will persecut them that are born of the Spirit, as we have seen a a great deal of, among you Professors these 20 years. But the Apostle saith 2 Cor. 13. The Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. This we witness. And now ye that deny that there is any immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost to be looked for now adays, ye are out of the communion of the holy Ghost, and out of the praying in the holy Ghost, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, which was and is the true Church com∣munion and fellowship, that Christ is the Spiritual Head of. And Gal. 1:4. Christ that gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God, &c. Now marke, and see whether you are delivered from this present evil world,
ye that profess: and therefore it is not for people to profess Christ, and live in the evil of the world, that will serve their turn. And though we or an Angl from heaven preach unto you any other Gospel, let him be ac∣cursed, saith the Apostle. And Paul was an Apostle not of man, nor by man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, and God the Father which hath raised him from the dead. And the Gospel which he preached, was not after man; no more is it now, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. And when the Son of God was revealed in the Apostle, he preached him: but do not many of you Professors and others preach the Son of God, before he be revealed in you? I live, saith he, Gal. 2:20. yet not I, now, but Christ liveth i me Marke, in me, and the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who hath loved me, and given himself for me. Now this we testify should be every true Christians life. And Gal. 3:13. &c. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through Iesus Christ, that we might receive the pro∣mise of the Spirit through faith. So then they, that be of faith, are blessed with faithfull Abraham; which we witness, Blessed be the Lord for ever. But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. The Law was the School-master to bring us to Christ, that we might be made right∣eous by faith (marke, made righteous by faith) for after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. For ye are all the Sons of God by faith in Christ Iesus. For all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ (marke, put him on) and baptized into Christ: this is his ba∣ptism with fire and the holy Ghost, who throughly purgeth the floor, and gathereth the wheat into his garner. But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, and made under the Law, that he might redeem them which were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of his sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cryeth Abba Father, Gal. 4:4. And the Apostle tells the Galatians, he travelled in birth again, un∣till Christ be formed in them. And in Christ neither circumeision nor un∣circumcision availeth any thing, but faith that works by love, as Gal. 4.
And Gal. 6. In Christ neither circumcision nor uncircumcision availeth any thing but a new creatur. And cap. 5. If ye are led by the Spirit ye are not under the Law. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts: and this we do believe and witness. But see you Professors by what spirit you are led, you that talk so much of Christ, and see that your affections and lusts are crucisied. But is it not your principle that they shall not be crucified on this side the grave, who plead for sin and imperfection to the grave? And Eph. 1:4. and so on: God hath chosen us in him (to wit, Christ) before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy without blame before him in love, (marke, here is a new life, more then a bare profession) by whom we have redemption in his blood, and the for∣giveness of sins, according to his mercys, that in the dispensation of the fulness of time he might gather together in one, all things both which are in heaven and which are in earth, even in Christ. Wherein also after that you believed ye were sealed by the holy Spi∣rit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, unto the re∣demption of the possession purchased, unto the praise of his glory. Marke, this seal, belief and election we witness with the holy Spi∣rit, blessed be the Lord for ever. And the Apostle prayed that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory might give unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation through the kowledg of him, (now this revelation ye Professors deny) that the Saints might know what is the exceding greatness of his power towards us that believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenyl places, far above all principalitys and powers, might and dominion, and every name that is named, not in this world onely, but also in that which is to come: and he hath made all things subject under his feet, and hath appointed him over all things to be the Head of his Church which is his body; even the fulness of him that filleth all in all: which we witness, Glory be un∣to the Lord. And Eph. 2:5. Even when we were dead by sins hath he quick∣ened us together in Christ, by whose grace we are saved, and rais∣ed us up together, and made us to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that he might shew in the ages to come the exceed∣ing
riches of his Grace, through his kindness towards us in Christ Jesus. And this we do witness, that these ages are come, and that this loving kindness and riches are seen and felt, who are made to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus: praised be his Name for ever. For by Grace ye are saved, saith the Apostle, through faith, and not of our selves, marke, it is the Gift of God. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Iesus unto good works, which God hath ordained that we should walk in them, who were without God in the world, and had no hope, and without Christ, yet professing him like others. But now in Christ Iesus we, which were once afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, for he is our Peace, which hath made of both one, and hath broken down the partition wall, in abrogat∣ing through his flesh the hatred, the Law of commandments which stand∣eth in ordinances, for to make of twain one new man in himself. So making peace that he might reconcile both unto God in one body, by his cross; and slay the hatred thereby, for through him we have an entrance unto the Father by one Spirit; and are built upon the founda∣tion of the Prophets and the Apostles, Iesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone. And to make clear unto all men what the fellowship of the mystery is, (and this is our fellowship which we make clear to all men) which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God, who hath created all things by Iesus Christ, Eph. 3:9. that Christ might dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love might know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledg, &c. be praise in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all generations, that witness this in Christ. Amen. And Eph. 4. There is one body and one spirit, even as ye are called into one hope of your vocation. There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism: there is one God, one Father of all, who is above all and through all, and in you all. And Christ ascended on high, led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And he that ascended what is it, but that he had also de∣scended first into the lowest parts of the Earth; he that descended is even the same that ascended, far above all heavens, that he might fill all things (marke, fill all things) that is he that gives gifts unto men for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ, and this we be∣lieve and witness. Let us therefore follow the Truth in all things, growing up in him,
which is the head even Christ. For ye have not so learned Christ, to live wantonly, and in uncleanness and greedyness, if so be that ye have heard Christ, and have been taught by him, (marke, by him) as the Truth is in Iesus, that ye cast off, concerning the conversation in times past, the old man, which is corrupt through the deceitfull lusts. So then ye Professors must not plead for them, if they must be cast off: and be renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put on the new man which is after God created in righteousness and holyness. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God by whom ye are sealed (said the Apostle) unto the day of redemption. And now ye Professors and others may say how can we grieve it, when we do not look for such a spirit, as the Apostles had? But let no man de∣ceive you with vain words, for the wrath of God cometh upon the children of disobedience. And no unclean person hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. And the Apostle saith, Be ye followers of God as dear children, and walk in love as Christ hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour unto God. But fornication, uncleanness and covetousness, let it not be once named among you as becometh saints: neither filthyness nor foolish talking nor jesting, which are things not comely, but rather giving of thanks. Here ye see what a Christians life must be, it is not an outward talk, as ye may see, Eph. 5. And Eph. 4:32. Be ye courteous and tender-hearted one unto another, forgiving one another. But this hath been wanting amongst you, that have professed your selves Christians, and made a great boast and talk of Christ, but have persecuted the appearance and life of Christ in his people, for the fruits of the Spirit are in all goodness, righteousness and truth and love, &c. and these fruits are wanting amongst you Professors, and others called Christians. And the Apostle speaks of the great secret and mystery concerning Christ and the Church, comparing them to Husband and Wife; how he sanctifieth and cleanseth it by the washing of water through the word, that he might make it unto himself a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. Marke, all ye that call your selves gathered churches, see who is the Head of them, and what spots and wrinkles are in them. But we can not but give thanks for all things to God, even the Father, in the Name of Jesus Christ the holy Head, who makes his church holy.
And Eph. 6. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalitys and powers, and against the Rulers of darkness, the prince of the darkness of this world, and against spirituall wickednesses which are in high places. And therefore all true Christians are to put on the armour of God and the spiritual weapons, that they may stand against the assaults of the devil, to wit, the shield of faith, the helmet of sal∣vation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, &c. And these weapons we owne: and may not all people see that those weapons have been wanting amongst you that profess your selves Chri∣stians, and not in the possession of the true Christians life? For had ye been in it, ye would have stood as the Apostles and the rest of the saints and true Christians did: to make a profession of Christ when the sun shines, and when the storme comes, then to shut up your doores. So how often have you taken leave of your God and Christ? and he hath had no witness born by you, our desire is you may come to see your selves, and your fallen state. And he that hath begun the good work in his Saints, will perform it unto the day of Christ: this we know, and the fellowship is in the Gospel, that is in the power of God, not in the form without the power. And the Apostle saith, God is my record how I long after you all from my very heart root in Iesus Christ (marke, in Christ Iesus) that Christ may be magnified in my body, whether by life or death. Here was a stedfast minister. For, Phil. 1. Christ is to me both in life and death advantage. Let your conversation therefore be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, for unto you it is given not onely to believe in Christ, but to suffer for his sake. This we do witness, and it is sulfilled amongst us: but ye Professors see how your conversation is as becomes the Gospel of Christ, ye that profess so much of it. Also Let the same mind be in you (saith the Apostle, Phil. 1.) that was even in Christ Iesus. And 1 Cor. 2:16. But we have the mind of Christ, which every true Christian should witness. Now Christ who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in the shape as a man, [marke] he humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God hath highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every name, that at the Name of
Iesus every knee should bow, both of things in Heaven and things in Earth and under the Earth, and that every tongue should confess. And this we the people of God, called Quakers, do confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the Father. For it is God that worketh in you and in us, both the will and the deed of his good pleasur, that ye may be blameless and pure, and sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked generation; amongst whom to shine as Lights, holding fast the Word of Life, &c. and this should be every true Christians duty and practice. And the Apostle saith, For all seek their own things, and not the things of Christ Iesus. And are there not too many such in our age, that pro∣fess him; as was in the Apostl's day, seeking their own things, Phil. 2. and not the things of Christ Jesus. And Phil. 3. he saith, We are the circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoyce in Christ Iesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. But in things that are advan∣tage unto me, the same I account loss for Christs sake. Yea doubtless I think all things but loss, for the excellent knowledg, sake of Iesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have accounted all things loss, [marke] have counted, and do judg them to be dung, that I may winn Christ. And this we witness, which should be every true Christians mind and duty. That I may know Christ and the vertue of his resurrection, and the fel∣lowship of his sufferings, and be made conformable to his death, that by any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead. Now this should be every true Christians mind, but here is a fellowship in the sufferings or afflictions, and to be made conformable to his death. Who will come into this fellowship, think ye now, of the Letter-Professors, that put confidence in their flesh, and plead for the old man and the body of death and sin, as long as they live? Such will not follow hard towards the marke of the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, but raile at us and persecut us that do. But many walk in their evil wayes, that are enemys to the cross of Christ, whose end is damna∣tion, whose god is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. Such then might make a great profession of Christ, as such now do. But our conversation is in Heaven, saith the Apostle, (marke, is in heaven) from whence also we look for the Saviour the Lord Iesus Christ. And this we witness, where every true Christians conversation should be.
And Christ shall change, saith the Apostle, this vile body, that it may be fashioned like his glorious body, &c. Phil. 3. which we believe in Christ, who works this change, who is the Resurrection and the Life. And Phil. 4. the Apostle saith, The Peace of God which passeth all understanding shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Iesus (marke, in Christ Iesus) And I am able to doe all things through the help of Christ, which strengtheneth me. And in another place Christ saith, without me ye can doe nothing. Then they must be in the same power and spirit the Apostles were in. And the Apostle saith, Salut all the Saints in Christ Iesus: so all the salutations that are out of him are worth nothing. And as every one has received the Lord Iesus Christ, so walk in him, rooted and built in him, and established in the faith. Note, as they had received Christ Jesus, so they were to walk in him. So this is more then a profession of him without him, and a talking of him. And Col. 2:6, 8. beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy (marke, Philosophy) and vain deceit, and through the traditions of men, according to the ru∣diments of the world, and not after Christ. Marke, these are not after Christ: but how comes this Philosophy and vain deceit to be set up now? And the Apostle exhorts the Saints that their hearts might be com∣forted, and knit together in love and in all riches of the full assurance of understanding (observe, full assurance, while ye Professors, contra∣ry to the Apostles, say, that none can have any assurance here) and to know the mystery of God even of the Father and of Christ: in whom are hid all the treasurs of wisdom and knowledg. For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are compleat in him, marke, in him, (to wit, Christ) which is the Head of all principalitys and powers. In whom also ye are circumcised (to wit, in Christ) with the circumcision made without hands, by puting off the sinfull body of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ. Marke, puting off the sinfull body of the flesh. Now ye Professors are of another belief, who deny the puting off of the sinfull body of the flesh, as long as ye live; and deny the circumci∣sion of Christ which we witness. And in that ye are buried with him, saith the Apostle, through ba∣ptism (marke are buried with him) in whom ye are also raised up together (marke, are raised up) through the faith of the operation of God, which raised him from the dead, to wit, Christ. For ye which were dead in sins and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together
with him (to wit, Christ) forgiving you all your trespasses. And this we witness: but ye that plead for your body of sin, while ye live, and your uncircumcision, are yet dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, and not quickened, and so may make a profession of God and Christ, like the Pharisees. But Christ had blotted out the handwrit∣ing of ordinances, and took them out of the way, and so fastened them to the cross, and hath spoiled principalitys and powers, and triumphed over them in the same cross. This is Christ whom we do believe in and witness. And the Apostle saith, Let no man condemn you in meats nor drinks, nor holy days, nor Sabbath-days, nor new moons, &c. which are but shaddows of things to come, but the body is of Christ. And we are to hold the Head Christ, whereof the body is furnished and knit together by joints and bands, and encreased with the encrease of God. And if ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, Touch not, tast not, handle not, which all perish with the using, after the commandments and do∣ctrins of men. So they that are dead with Christ can not touch, but they that are not dead with Christ, touch perishing things, as ye may read, Col. 2. And Col. 1:13 to the 20 vers. Who hath delivered us (speaking of Christ) from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, (marke, into the kingdom of his dear Son) In whom we have redemption through his blood, and the forgive∣ness of sins. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first-born of every creature. For by him were all things created, which are in heaven, and which are in Earth, things visible and invisible, whether thrones or do∣minions, or principalitys or powers, all things were created by him and for him, to wit, Christ; [Marke] And he is before all things, and in him all things consist. He is the Head of the body, of the church, he is the beginning and the first born of the dead, that in all things he might have the preheminency. For it pleased the Father that in him all fulness should dwell, and by him to reconcile all things unto himself, to set at peace through the blood of his cross both the things in Heaven and the things in Earth. And this blessed confession and testimony we owne of Christ. And Rom. 9:5. &c. The Apostle speaking of the Fathers, of whom saith he, as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for ever. Amen. And this was the Apostles doctrin to the Church then, who saith, I say the Truth in Christ and lye not, my conscience
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost. [Marke, in Christ, and in the Holy Ghost: which should be every true confessor of Christ his testi∣mony, which we do witness, both as to his flesh and as he was God. And Col 1:21. to the end. And you which were in times past strangers and enemys, because your minds were set in evil works, [marke] hath he now also reconciled in the body of his flesh, through death, to make you holy and unblameable, without fault in his sight. For evil works make people strangers to him: so you may see it is not a profession of Christs death and body, but ye must be made holy and unblameable, and without fault in his sight. For Christ which is the mystery hid since the world began, from all ages, but now is made manifest to his Saints. (glory to God for ever) To whom God would make known, what is the riches of this glorious mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory. And this mystery we are witnesses of, blessed be the Lord for ever. Whom we preach, admonishing every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Marke, perfect in Christ Jesus: this is a contrary doctrin to you that present people with a body of death and sin to the grave, and say there is no perfection to be attained here. And the Apostle saith to the Church, Col. 3. Set your affections on things that are above [marke] and not on things which are on the earth. This we believe should be the practice of all true Christians. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, and when Christ which is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory, 1 Thess. 1. And this we are witnesses of, as the Apostle was, and it is Jesus Christ who delivers us from the wrath to come, & who is raised from the dead, and our peace is from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. For Christ Jesus saith, in me ye have peace, but in the world trouble. And this we do experience, and this all witness that are risen with Christ, who seek those things that are above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God. And 1 Thess. 2:13. the Apostle exhorts the Church: that ye walk worthy of God who hath called you to his Kingdom and Glory. Now this we declare should be every true Christians walk, and not talk only; and not like the professing Jewes, who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Pro∣phets, and persecuted the Apostles, as you Professors have, and do us.
And 1 Thess. 3:11. the Apostle saith, Now God himself and our Fa∣ther and our Lord Iesus Christ guide our journey unto you. So here it is seen who was and is the true Christians guide. And 1 Thess. 5:5, 9, 10. Ye are all children of the Light and of the day, we are not of the night, neither of darkness. Marke this Testimony, are children of the day, and of the Light, and are not of the darkness, nor of the night. For God hath not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain Salvation, by the means of our Lord Iesus Christ. Which dyed for us, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him, to wit, Christ, that dyed for us, So not onely to talk, but to live; which we are witnesses of. And the Apostle saith, Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout. And I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body may be kept blameless, (marke, blameless) unto the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ, who will come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto all them that do not know God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Iesus Christ. Therefore the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ is to be glorified in all his Saints, according to the Grace of our God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: as 2 Thess 1: may be seen. And 2 Thess. 2. Because that God hath from the beginning chosen you to Salvation through the san∣ctification of the Spirit, and the faith of Truth. Marke, from the beginn∣ing chosen you to Salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, not of the Letter, And therefore take heed, ye Professors, least that saying come upon you, that God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lyes: that all those might be damned that believe not the Truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness, lyes and false reports; which ye have been full of against us (Gods people, called Quakers) as by large experience we witness. And 1 Tim. 1:15. This is a true and faithfull saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, saith Paul, Notwithstanding for this cause I was re∣ceived to mercy, that Iesus Christ should first shew on me all long suffering, unto the example of them which shall in time to come believe in him unto eternall life. And this now we the believers do witness, and many can say this in truth, as he did; yea who have been persecutors of Jesus, as he was in his people and yet Professors. But now unto the King im∣mortal, invisible, unto God onely wise be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen. 1 Tim. 15:17.
And Christ would have all men (saith the Apostle) to be saved, and come to the knowledg of the Truth. (Marke, all men to be saved)  Tim. 4 &c. And therefore are prayers and intercessions and giving of thanks to be made for all men, for kings and all that are in authority, &c. For there is one God and one Mediator betwixt God and man, which is the man Christ Iesus: marke, the man Christ Jesus is the Mediator be∣twixt God and man, Christ who is the heavenly man. For the Apostle doth not call him Humane or humane body; he did not give him that by-name, as the Professors do, who call him humane body, and humane; as they give us the people of God, the nick-name of Quakers. And the Apostles say, he is the Second man, the Lord from heaven, the man Christ Iesus: and calls his body a glorious body, and not humane, as the Pro∣fessors do, who say the Scripture is their Rule, and yet give Christs body a by-name, which they have no Rule for. And Christ Iesus who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time, tasted death for all. Therefore all must be prayed for. So when we were enemys, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, as Rom. 5. and 1 Tim. 2. Who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time. So this due time is witnessed by many, for it was not testified to Paul, till after he was risen, and the Son of God revealed in him: and so it is known now by revelation; and by revelation Christ Jesus and his glorious body is discerned. For (saith Christ) flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, that is, concerning Christs being the Son of God, but my Father which is in heaven, who is known by revelation now, as then. And the church of the Living God, which Christ is the Head of, and the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Tim. 3. And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, which is God manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into glory. Now we are the Believers of this, who believe in his Light, in which he is seen and manifest; and are members of this Church, whereof Christ is the Head. And 1 Tim. 4:9, 10. This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received; we labour and are rebuked, because we trust in the Living God, which is the Saviour of all men, and especially of those that believe. And this we have received, and would have all others to do. These things, saith the Aapostle, command and teach.
And this the Apostle gave in charge to Timothty, before God and Christ, and the elect Angels, that he should observe those things, as 1 Tim. 5:21. And 2 Tim. 1. Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord Jesus, who hath saved us, and called us to an holy calling, not ac∣cording to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was given to us by Christ Jesus before the world began; but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death,and hath brought Life and immortality to light through the Gospel.  Marke, thus we witness, and are not ashamed of our testimony of this, and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; which was given unto us through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, before the world began. For, as the Apostle saith, I am not a chamed, for I know in whom I have believed, 2 Tim. 1:8, 9, 12. And 2 Tim. 2:8. Remember that Iesus Christ made of the seed of David was raised again from the dead, according to my Gospel▪ And Joh. 7:42 Saith not the Scripture that Christ shall come of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem? And this Christ did fulfill in his coming accordingly, of whom we are witnesses. And the Apostle saith, every one that calls on the Name of Christ, or nameth his Name, let them depart from iniquity, 2 Tim. 2:19. And 2 Tim. 3: he exhorts the Church thus: they that have the form of godliness, and not the power, from such turn away For they that have not the power, have not the Gospel, nor the cross of Christ the power of God; neither have they Christ which is the power of God, though they may have the form of godliness, and the form of the Prophets, and Apostles words; yet may be false accusers, fierce despisers of them that are good, &c. And all that will live godly in Christ Iesus shall suffer persecution (marke, all that in Christ Jesus will live godly, shall suffer persecution) as we have found it by the ungodly Professors and talkers of Christ Jesus, that live out of him, though they have the forme of godliness, yet deny the power thereof. And Tit. 1. the Apostle saith, to my natural son according to the common faith, Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour. [marke, according to the common faith and grace] And Tit. 2:11. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation unto all men hath appeared (marke, which brings Salvation, this common Grace brings Salvation) and teacheth us (marke, us the Church, the
Saints, and believers, true Christians) that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope, and the appearing of the glory of the Mighty God, and of our Saviour Iesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, (marke) and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works. And this is our Teacher, the Grace of God that hath brought us Salvation, which brings us to believe and witness these things: but there were such in the Apostles dayes, that professed they knew God, but by their works de∣nyed him, and were abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobat, Tit. 1:16. and have not we many such Professors now, that say they know God and Christ, but by their works deny him, and are abominable and disobedient? But when the bountifulness and love of God our Saviour towards man appeared, not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of re∣generation (marke, by the washing of regeneration) This should every profest Christian witness: they must know this new birth; so its not a talk of Christ without, and uncleanness within, but by the re∣newing of the Holy Ghost, which he hath shed on us aboundantly, through Iesus Christ our Saviour, (here is a confession with a witness) that we being justified by Grace (that Grace that teaches us, and brings us Salva∣tion) should be made heirs according to the hope of eternall life, Tit. 3:5, 6, 7. And Heb. 1:1. At sundry times and after divers man∣ners God spak unto the Fathers by the Prophets, but in these last days he hath spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath made heir of all things, by whom also he hath made the worlds. Marke, the worlds were made by the Son of God, and God was Adam's and Ev's teacher in Paradise: and now the same hath spoken unto us by his Son, by whom the worlds were made. So he is the Quakers first speaker, and is the last, the Son of God being the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his Substance; and upholding all things by his mighty Word and power, hath by himself purged our sins, and is set at the right hand of the majesty in the highest places, and is made more excellent then the Angels, having obtained a more excellent Name then they. For unto which of his angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? and again, I will be his
Father, and he shall be my Son. And again when he bringeth his first-begotten Son into the world, Let all the Angels worship him, but unto the Son he saith, O God, thy throne is for ever, the sce∣pter of thy Kingdom is a scepter of righteousness, for thou hast lov∣ed righteousness, and hated iniquity. Therefore to profess Christ, and live in iniquity, this is an abomination to the Lord, and he will bid such depart from him. Wherfore God, even thy God hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladness above thy fellows. For thou, O Lord, in the beginning hast established the Haevens, and the Earth is the work of thy hands, Heb. 2: to vers. 10. For if the word spoken by Angels was stedfast, (marke, stedfast) and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward, how should we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, (to wit, Christ) God bearing witness thereunto both by signes and wonders and divers miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost, ac∣cording to his own will, (not the wills of men) for he hath not put in subjection unto the Angels the world to come, whereof we speake: and thou hast made him a little lower then the angels, and thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, and hast set him above the works of thy hands, &c. But thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet, and in that he put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing that should not be subject to him, but we see not yet all things subdued unto him, but we see Jesus crown∣ed with glory and honour, which was made a little inferiour to the angels, through the suffering of death, that by Gods Grace he might tast death for all men  (marke, for all men: so here he makes no Sect) and this Jesus we see, who is our Saviour, and the Author and finisher of our faith. And it became him (to wit, Christ) for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, seing that he brought many children to glory, that he should consecrat the Prince of their Salvation through sufferings and afflictions, for he that sancti∣fieth and they that are sanctified are all of one. Wherefore he is not ashamed to call them Brethren: forasmuch then as the children were partake as of flesh and blood, he also himself (to wit, Christ) likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is the devil, that he might
deliver all them, which for fear of death were all their life time sub∣ject to bondage.  Here is a blessed deliverer, which thousands do wit∣ness: and how dare ye Professors or others give the Apostle and the Scripture the lye, and say Christ did not tast death for all men, but for the world of Believers onely? And he took not upon him the nature of angels, but of the seed of Abraham, wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto your Brethren (to wit, Christ) that he might be mercifull, and a faithfull high Priest, in things concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he suffer∣ed and was tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted. Now this is the high Priest of our possession, Jesus Christ, in whom we do faithfully believe, according as it's written, Heb. cap. 2 and 3. And we can not confess concerning Christs birth, his body, suffer∣ings, death and resurrection, in any better termes, then the holy men have done that gave forth the Scripturs, as they were moved of the ho∣ly Ghost: and therefore we can not but deny those termes and nick∣names, which ye Professors put upon Christ, that are not the Scriptur, and who also deny the receiving of the holy Ghost, or waiting for it's revelation in this age. For Christ the Son of God is over his own house, as the Apostle saith, whose house we are, &c. Wherefore, as the holy Ghost saith, to day if ye will hear hiis voice, harden not your hearts, (Note, They that do not hear the voice of Christ, do harden their hearts) Therefore his voice, who speaks from heaven now adays, is to be heard by all the true Believers in his Light: and to day they must hear it, not puting off till to morrow, if they will hear what the holy Ghost saith. And, as God saith, this is my beloved Son, hear ye him: and as Christ saith, Learn of me: which is every Believers duty, Heb. 4:14. Seing then we have a great high Priest, which is entered into Heaven, even Iesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession without waver∣ing, Heb. 10:23. This is our profession, which we have held fast, and declared to all professions without the possession; though for so doing we have been persecuted by them. For we have not an high Priest, which can not be touched, with the feeling of our infirmitys, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. Let us therefore goe bold∣ly unto the throne of Grace, that we may receive mercy, and find Grace
to help in time of need. And we can go boldly to the throne of Grace, through the Grace that hath appeared unto us, which teacheth us, and brings us Salvation. For the Word of God is lively and mighty in opera∣tion, and sharp as a two-edged sword, &c. And in another place it is said, the Letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth Life. So here is a clear dif∣ference betwixt the Word and the Letter, as may be seen, Heb. 4:12. and betwixt the Letter and the Spirit, the one killeth, and the other giveth Life. And Heb. 5. Christ took not to himself this honour to be made an high Priest, but he that said unto him, (marke) Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Thou art a Priest forever after the order of Melchizedek, which in the days of his flesh did offer prayers and supplica∣tions, with strong crys and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death; and was also heard in that which he feared, though he w the Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. And being consecrated was made the Author of eternall Salvation unto all them that obey him. (marke, obey him) And this we that obey, do faithfully be∣lieve of him, as Heb. 5. And, Heb. 6, 18, 19. there we are to hold fast the hope that is set before us, which we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and stedfast, and it entereth into that which is within the vail: (marke, this hope doth) where the fore-runner is for us entered, even Iesus, that is made an high Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedck. For the Law made men high Priests, which have infirmitys, but the Word of the oath (that is since the Law) maketh the Son of God, who is consecrated for ever more. And the Law made no∣thing perfect, but the bringing in a better hope, whereby we draw nigh unto God, and this hope is Christ, by which we come unto God. And Christ Jesus is made a surety of a better Testament, and he is able also perfectly to save them, that come unto God by him, seing he ever liveth to make intercession for them, [marke] and such an high Priest became us to have, which is holy, harmeless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher then the hea∣vens. (marke) This is the Priest Christ Jesus, which we owne and be∣lieve in, and bear witness to. which needs not daily, as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice, first for the people, and then for them∣selvs, for that he did once, when he offered up himself, Heb. 7, &c. Now concerning the things, which we have spoken, this is the
summe, that we have such an high Priest siting at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven, who is a minister of the San∣ctuary and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord hath pitched, and not man. And every true Christian must know this Tabernacle and this Sanctuary, which the Lord hath pitched, and not man; which Christ is the Minister of, who is at the right hand of God: this will keep their minds above every Sanctuary and Tabernacle that man hath pitched. For as the high Priests were ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, wherfore it was necessary that this man Christ should have also some∣thing to offer; who offered up himself, and ended their offerings, but our high Priest hath obtained a more excellent office, then the Priests under the Law; inasmuch as he is the Mediator of a better Testament, which is established upon better promises. For this is the new Covenant or Testament, I will writ my Laws in their hearts, and put them in their minds, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. So they are called Gods people and the children of the new Testament and new Covenant, in whose hearts God has written his Law, and put it into their minds. And they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least unto the greatest of them. For I will be mercifull unto their unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins and iniquitys no more, Heb. 8. And this new Covenant and Testa∣ment we do witness, blessed be the Lord for ever: and the Lord God writs this Law in our hearts, and puts it into our minds, that we may read it there, and doe it, which is every true Christians duty to believe and doe. For Christ being come an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, that is not of this building, which stood in meats and drinks, and divers washings and car∣nal ordinances, untill the time of reformation (that is untill the time of Christ) who neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood entered he in once into the holy place, and obtained eternall redemption for us: and this we do witness. For if the blood of bulls and goats and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkled them that were unclean, sanctify as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternall Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purify the
Conscience from dead works, to serve the Living God? Marke, to serve the Living God, and not onely to talk of the Living God. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that through death which was for the redemption of transgression, that were in the former Testament, they which were called might re∣ceive the promise of eternall inheritance. And we which are cal∣led can bless the Lord for this eternall inheritance, and redem∣ption and Mediator. And the first Testament was not ordained without blood, for Christ is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands, which are similituds of heavenly things; but he is entered into very heaven, to appear now in the sight of God for us: not that he offers up himself often, as the high Priests enter into the holy place with other blood, for then must he have often suf∣fered since the foundation of the world. But now in the end of the world hath he appeared, (marke, the end of the world) once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: so was Christ once offered to take away the sins of many. And unto them, that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin unto Salvation. And this we believe: Heb. 9. and blessed are they whose eyes see this, and receive Christ Jesus, according to his promise, who said, after he was risen, he would come and dwell in them, to wit, in his Believers. Again, Heb. 10. For it was impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins, wherefore when he cometh into the world (mean∣ing Christ) he saith, sacrifice and offerings thou wouldst not, but a body hast thou prepared me. Here is Christ by whom the world was made, and his body, which took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. For then I said, in the volumn of thy book, as it is written of me, that I should doe ty will O God; Lo I come to doe thy will O God, to take away the first that he may establish the second Cove∣nant, by the which will we are sanctified, (marke, are sanctified) by the offering of the body of Iesus Christ once for all. And this man Christ Jesus after he had offered up one sacrifice for sins, sitteth down for ever at the right hand of God (marke, at the right hand; which is not usuall for a father to set his son at his right hand) from henceforth tarryeth (to wit, at the right hand) till his enemys be made his footstool, and as it is said, shall remain in the heavens till all things be restored: who is restor∣ing by his faith, grace, power and Spirit, and his true believers and
disciples feed of his flesh, and drink of his blood, which is meat indeed, and which is their heavenly food. For by one offering hath he perfected for ever them that are san∣ctified  (marke, them that are sanctified.) So they must be sanctified, which is more then an outward profession, they are perfected. And, marke ye Professors, are ye sanctified and perfected for ever by the offering of Christ? Marke, are ye perfected? But can that be, seing ye deny perfection here on this side the grave? Seing therefore, Brethren, by the blood of Iesus we may be bold to enter into the holy place, by the new and living way, which he hath prepared for us true Christians, through the vail of his flesh. (marke, his flesh) And seing we have an High Priest, that is over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, washed in our bodys with pure water, keeping the profession of our hope without wavering. (marke) For he is faithfull that hath promised. Now this every true Christian is to hold and believe without wavering, and we are witnesses of it. Now ye Professors without possession, that make such a noyse with your mouths and a talk of Christ without you, are your hearts sprinkled? Look into your hearts, consciences and bodys, whether ye feel this sprinkling and this washing with pure water, for there was the blood of bulls and goats, which was the Old Testament: but Christs blood is the blood of the New Covenant. Therefore take heed of trampling the blood of the New Covenant under your feet, wherewith the true believers are sanctified, for vengeance is Gods, and he will repay it; and it is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the everliving God. And the Iust shall live by faith, and will not cast off their consi∣dence, but if any draw back, Gods soul hath no pleasur in them: and ye may see the faith of the Elders, and of Enoch, Abel and of Abraham, and these by faith sought a countrey that is heavenly, wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he hath prepared a city for them: and such went under mockings, stonings, scourgings and im∣prisonings; and wandered up and down in sheeps skins and goats skins, destitut, afflicted and tormented, of whom the world was not worthy, neither is it now indeed, of those that are in this mystery of faith held in a pure conscience: and they wandered in wildernesses, mountains and dens, and caves of the Earth. And all these through faith received a good report, and received not the promise, God providing a better
thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect; for we are all one body together, who are of this faith, as Heb. 11. And now see if ye Professors have not been the stoners, afflicters, mockers and imprisoners of the faithfull. Wherefore let us also, seing we ar compassed about with such a great cloud of witnesses, cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangeth so fast on, (marke, cast off the sin, not plead for sin and the body of death, during life) but let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Iesus the Author and finisher of our faith. (marke, he is the author and finisher: so it is no true faith, which he hath not been the author of) And this is the faith, which worketh by love. And Christ, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and de∣spised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Con∣sider therefore him that endured such speakings against him of sinners, least ye be weary and faint in your minds. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Therefore never expect ye Professors to see the Lord, whilst ye plead for your body of sin and death, which is unholy to the grave. And further the Apostle saith to the Saints, Ye are come to mount Zion, the city of the Living God, the heavenly Ierusalem, and to the innumerable company of Angels, and to the Church of the first born, which is written in heaven (marke, written in heaven: not a Church or list of members written in a book) ye are come to the Iudge of all, and the spirits of just men made perfect (but are not your ears stopt against perfection, ye Professors? and of hearing, and talking of the spirits of those just men made perfect, [marke, Iust men made perfect, and your eyes blinded that ye can see no such) and ye are come to Iesus the Media∣tor of the New Testament, (saith the Apostle) that speaketh better things then that of Abel. And therefore we are not to turn away from him, that speaks from heaven, whose voice shakes the heavens and the earth, that that may appear which can not be shaken, Heb. 12, &c. and 18:28. And Heb. 13. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have. For the Lord saith, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say (marke, boldly say) the Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me. And Christ Iesus is the same yesterday, and to day and for ever. (Marke, he is the same in his offices in his Church: he is the same head of his
Church, and Mediator and Prophet to teach, and shepherd to feed, and Bishop to oversee, yea even Jesus: that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, who suffered without the gate: (marke, what gate?) without the gates at Ierusalem. Let us therefore goe out of the camp, bearing his reproach, let us therefore by him, to wit, Christ, offer the sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruits of our lips, which confess his Name, and we can do no other who are the true Christians, who do believe and confess to his Name. And the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Iesus the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting cove∣nant. And this can we and all the true sheep witness: and it is he that makes us perfect in all good works to doe his will, working in us that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen. And Ia. 1. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which giveth to every man liberally, and upbraideth no man, &c. And God hath pro∣mised the crown of Life to all that love him. And every good and per∣fect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness nor shaddow of turning. And of his own good will begat he us with the word of Truth; not with the letter, that killeth, but the Spirit that giveth life: that we should be as the first fruits of of his creaturs. For every one is to receive with meekness the Word which is grafted in them, which is able to save the Soul. For if ye be hearers of the Word onely and not doers, ye deceive your own selves. Therefore all ye that hear this ingrafted Word, which is nigh in the heart and mouth, and doe it not, ye are the deceivers of your own selves. And take heed of the vain religion the unbridled tongue. For if any man among you seemes to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, he deceiveth his own heart. So he is a heart-deceiver that bridleth not his tongue, and his religion is vain, though he may make a profession of the Prophets and Apostles words. For pure Religion and undefiled be∣fore God the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their ad∣versity, and to keep thy self unspotted of the world. So this religion is practised. Now who will be of this pure religion, except the people of God, called Quakers, and the Church in the primitive times? Not ye that plead for a body of sin and death to the grave, which spots you, and keeps you defiled.
And we are not to hold the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ with respect of rings, cloaths and persons, for it is forbidden, as Ia. 2. And faith if it hath no works, is dead in it self; For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. So these are not the works of the Law which the Apostle speaks of, but the works of faith, which Christ is the author of, wh ch faith works by love. And take heed of that unruly member the tongue, for therewith bless we God even the Fa∣ther, and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitud of God. By this Gods works are curst. Is it not so, ye Professors? Mind it: Do not ye bless God, and curse men? But who is a wise man and endued with knowledg among you, let him shew by good conversation: (marke, good conversation) this is the wise man, his works are in meekness of wisdom. What wisdom? Not that which is below, which is earthly, sensual and devilish, envy, strife and all manner of wicked works, &c. The wisdom that is above is pure, peaceable, gentle and easie to be en∣treated, full of mercy and good works, &c. (Marke, ye Professors, here are fruits of possession) Ia. 3. Whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world, maketh himself the enemy of God. And the Spirit that dwelleth in man lusteth after envy: and he that hath not power over his own spirit is like a city whose walls are broken down. Therefore looke ye Professors, whether your walls are not broken down, that have no power over your own spirits; for the power is walls: and all ye that hold a profession in your own spirits, and have not the power over them, your city walls are broken down, Ia. 4. Prov. 25:28. Ye have lived in pleasurs on the earth and in wantonness, and have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter. Ye have condemned the Iust, and he hath not resisted you. Therefore consider this all ye wanton Professors, that live in pleasure, that have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter, and condemned and killed the Just, Pharisee-like. Is not this the birth that is not born of the Spirit, but of the flesh: Ia. 5.? And the Apostle Iames commands in his general Epistle to the Church, not to swear at all, but keep to yea and nay (but ye throw the commond both of Christ and the Apostle aside, and command people to swear) Matth. 5. Iam. 5. Peter also writes to the Elect, 1 Pet. 1. according to the foreknow∣ledg of God the Father unto the sanctification of the Spirit, through obedi∣ence
and sprinkling of the blood of of Iesus Christ. Marke, the sanctification and obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus. This is possession and is more then talk. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his aboundant mercy hath begotten us again (marke, hath begotten us again) unto a lively hope by the resurre∣ction of Iesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance immortal and unde∣filed, [marke] that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you all Gods true believers, which are kept by the power of God through faith unto Salvation, receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your Soules. Here is the Saints Keeper, the Power of God. And the Apostle saith, 1 Pet. 1:12. — the Gospel by the holy Ghost sent down from heaven. So this is according to the Apostle, and the Gospel is the power of God, which they had not received of man, nor by man, but of Jesus Christ, Gal 1:11. Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, and be sober: and trust perfectly on the Grace that is brought unto you by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Now ye Professors that deny Revelation, ye deny that which brings the Grace and the Gospel from heaven. For we are not redeemed (saith the Apostle) with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from our vain conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb unde∣filed or without spot, which was ordained before the foundation of the world (marke) but was declared in the last times for your saks. And now ye Professors that talke so much of redemption by the blood of Christ, are not ye in your vain conversation, and unredeemed? By the which means, to wit, Christ, we do believe in God that raised Christ from the dead and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might stand in God. And the Apostle saith, seing your Souls are purified in obeying the Truth, through the Spirit, &c. being born again anew not of a mortal Seed, but immortal, by the Word of God which liveth and abid∣eth for ever. And this we witness, as 1 Pet. 1, &c. And this Word by which we are born anew, is preached amongst you, which is not the Letter, for that is mortal. And Pet. 2. To whom ye come as to a Living Ston, disallowed of men, but chosen of God and precious, and ye as living stones be made a spiritual house hold, a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Iesus Christ. Behold I lay in Zion (saith he) a chief corner ston, elect and precious, and he that believeth herein shall not be ashamed. And we are not ashamed of him before men:
and to us that believe, he is precious, but unto them which are disobe∣dient, (marke, disobedient) a stone of stumbling and a Rock of of∣fence. Yea by such builders in the Letter without the Spirit, like Pharisees, is disallowed, but the same is made the Head of the Corner. And the believers in Christ are a chosen generation, a royall priesthood, (marke, the Church which is made up of men and women, the believ∣ers which are born again, a holy nation, a peculiar people) that ye should shew forth the vertues of him (to wit, Christ) that hath called you. And this we witness; Glory to God for ever: which in times past were not a people, but now are the people of God, &c. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously: who his own self bore our sins in his body (marke) on the tree, that we being delivered from sin should live in righteousness, not in unrighteousness and a body of sin, and plead for it for terme of life, by whose stripes we are healed, to wit, Christs, for ye were as sheep gone astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your Soules. And this we his sheep, that hear his voice, do witness; and that all are astray, untill they return to Christ, the Shepherd and Bishop of their Soules, as 1 Pet. 2. throughout. For Christ also hath suffered for sins (marke, his sufferings were for sins) the Iust for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, and was put to death concerning the flesh, (marke, concerning the flesh, not as he was God) but was quickened in the Spi∣rit, by the which (to wit, the Spirit) he preached to the spirits that are in prison. [Marke] See ye this, or do ye hear this preacher? The prison∣ers of hope have and do, and he hath said unto the prisoners, Shevv your selves forth, and they have shewed themselves forth, though ye have evilly entreated them, as the Pharisees and chief Priests did Christ. And it is a good conscience, that maketh request to God by the re∣surrection of Jesus Christ, which is at the right hand of God, to whom the Angels and powers are subject, as 1 Pet. 3. throughout. And it was, and is by the unjust, that Christ the Just suffers still, and chiefly by the unjust Professors, as he did by Saul and the professing Pharisees and as we do now by you Professors. And  1 Pet. 4.  For asmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the
flesh, (marke, for us in the flesh) arme your selves likewise with the same mind, that he which hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin, (marke, from sin) that he henceforward should live as much time as remaineth in the flesh, not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God, which shall give account to him, who is ready to judg the quick and the dead. And rejoice in as much as ys are par∣takers of Christs sufferings. Marke, as ye are partakers of Christ's suffer∣ings: this is not onely talk of his sufferings, as many Professors of the Letter, that killeth, do, and deny the having of the Spirit, that quickeneth now adays, which the Apostles and Saints had. But ye that are partakers of Christs sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoyce; but let none suffer as an evil doer, &c. but as a Christian, Let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on his behalf. And let them that suffer accord∣ing to the will of God, committ their soules unto him in wel doing, as unto a faithfull Creator, as 1 Pet. 4 throughout. And 1 Pet. 5. Peter saith, I beseech you, who am also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Jesus Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed.  Marke, here is a glory that was to be revealed; then Revelation was not past: for the witnesses of Jesus do witness it still, and are partakers of his glory: Blessed be God for ever. And further the Apostle saith, deck your selves invvaardly in lovvly∣ness of mind. Marke, an inward decking in lowlyness of mind. For God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble. And the God of all grace which hath called us (marke, us his people) unto his eternall glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have suffered a little, con∣firme, strengthen and establish you. And this we witness: blessed be the Lord, who hath called us to this eternall glory by Christ Jesus, as 1 Pet. 5. And Matth. 17:5. 2 Pet. 1:17. God said, this is my beloved Son, in vvhom I am vvel pleased, hear ye him. Marke, this voice came from heaven, which is to be obeyed. But we have a more sure word of Prophecy, to the which ye do wel that ye take heed, as unto a Light, that shineth in a dark place, untill the day dawn, and the Day-star arise in your hearts.  Marke, in your hearts: and all true Christians are to take heed to the Light, untill this Star do arise in their hearts. And the Apostle saith, Whereby most great and precious promises are given
unto us, that by them ye should be partakers of the Divine nature, &c. which have obtained the precious faith with us, by the righte∣ousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ. Marke, partakers of the divine nature and precious faith This is more then a profession of the Letter without. And further, it's said, Wherefore brethren give rather diligence to make your calling and election sure. For if ye doe these things, ye shall never fall, &c.  And this is every Christians duty to mind, to mind those things, as it is written, 2 Pet. 1. For if they, after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the knowledg of the Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, are yet entangled and overcome, the later end is worse then their beginning. So it's clear, to live in the silthiness of the world, and make a profession of God and Christ, will stand them in no more stead then the works of iniquity, that must depart, though they call him Lord, Lord. And such may put the day of the Lord afar off, and live in security; but it will come upon them as a thief in the night, and a thousand years with the Lord are as one day, as may be seen 2 Pet. 2:20 and 3:8, 9, 10. And Iohn writes in his 1 General Epistle, that which was from the be∣ginning, which we have heard, (marke) which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life. Marke, seen, heard and handled. The Life appeared, and we have seen it and bear witness: (marke, they bore witness to what they had seen, heard and handled) and shewed unto you eternall life, which was with the Father, and appeared unto us. So they shewed unto others what they had seen, heard and handled: these were and are the true witnesses. That, I say, which we have seen and heard, declar we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship is vvith the Father and the Son Iesus Christ. Marke, here is a fellowship with the Fa∣ther and Son, not made up with the Letter that killeth. And this then is the message, which we have heard of him (marke, heard of him) and declar unto you, that GOL is LIGHT, and in him is no darkness as all. This is the message they declared, and this is the message we de∣clare; what we have heard and seen. If we say we have fellowship with him (to wit, Christ) and vvalk in darkness, vve lye, and doe not the Truth, as some Professors may say, to doe the Truth, that sets up a Covenant of works: as though Truth and the Scripturs were given forth for no∣thing,
but to be talkt of, and not to be done, as 1 Ioh. 1:1. And 1 Ioh: 2. My babes, these things vvrite I unto you, that ye sin not. If any man sin, vve have an Advocat vvith the Father, Iesus Christ the just, and he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for our sins onely, but also for the sins of the whole world. And he that keepeth his Word, in him (marke, in him) is the love of God perfect indeed. Hereby know we, that we are in him (marke, in him, to wit, in Christ.) Again, Little children, I write unto you, (saith he) that your sins are forgiven you for his Nam's sake. And I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one, and the Word of God abideth in you. (Marke, overcome.) I write unto you Fathers, for ye have known him from the beginning  (to wit, Christ in his Di∣vinity, for in the beginning was the Word) or, known him as he was God. Let that therefore abide in you, that same, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the be∣ginning shall remain in you (observe, in you) ye also shall continue in the Son and in the Father. And this is the promise that he hath promised us eternall life. And these things have I written unto you concerning them that deceive you: but the Anoynting which ye have received of him, dwelleth in you, (marke, in you) and ye need not that any man teach you, marke] but as the same Anoynting teach∣eth you of all things, and is Truth, and is not lyeing; and as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him. Therefore it is good to keep to this Teacher: and take heed of the deceiver that will draw you out from this Teacher, and tell you, there is no overcoming of the body of sin on this side the grave, that the strong man may keep the house. For Gods minister saith, If ye ow that he is righteous, know ye that he which doth righteously is born of him, and whosoever doth not righteously is not of God. And whosoever is born of God, sinneth not, for the Seed of God abideth in him, neither can he sin, because he is born of God. In this the children of God are known from the children of the devil. For ye know that he appeared that he might take away our sins, and in him is no sin. whosoever abideth in him, sinneth not, 1 Joh. 3. And the blood of Iesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. And he that saith, he remaineth in Christ, ought even so to walk as he walked: and not onely to talk as he talked. And do not ye give the Apostle the lye, that say the blood of Christ will not cleanse you on this side the grave?
Again, Little children, let no man deceive you; he that doth righteous∣ness, is righteous. And he that committeth sin is of the devil, for the devil sinned from the beginning. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might destroy the works of the devil (that is sin) For his works are sin: and Christ through death destroyed death, and the devil the power of death. And every man, that hath this hope, (what hope?) Christ in you the hope of glory; purifieth himself, even as he is pure. Note, this is more then an outward Letter-profession. And this is his commandment, to wit, Christs, that we believe in the Name of his Son Iesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave commandment, 1 Ioh. 3. And 1 Joh. 4. In this the love of God appeared towards us, because God sent his one∣ly begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, and not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a reconciliation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought to love one another. And hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son, to be a Saviour of the world: and whosoever confesseth that Jesus is the Son of God, in him dwelleth God, and he in God. And we have known and believed that God is love, and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him, as 1 Ioh. 4. Whosoever there∣fore believeth that Iesus is the Christ, is born of God &c. And he that is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcom∣eth, even your faith. Marke, if all that are called Christians were the true believers, then were they all born of God, then they would over∣come the world: and if all they that are called Chaistians were in the true Faith that Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of, then would they plead for victory as the true Minister did, and not say there is no victory here over the body of sin and death. And who is it that over∣cometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God; and this is that Jesus Christ, that came by water and blood, and it is the Spirit that beareth witness: for the Spirit is Truth. Now ye that say, ye have not the same Spirit as the Apostles had, ye are not true witnesses; for ye say, there are but two spirits, a good, and bad; so ye must have the bad, if ye have not the good which the Apo∣stles had, according to your own judgment.
And there are three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word and the holy Ghost, and these three are one: and there are three that bear witness on earth, the Spirit, the Water and the blood, and these three agree in one: for this is the witness of God, which he testifieth of his Son: which Gods witness is a greater then the witness of men. And he that believeth in the Son of God [marke] hath the witness in himself. And this we believe and witness, and he that doth not, hath made him a lyar. And ye Professors, who have given new names to the Father, the Word and holy Ghost, as [Trinity, and three distinct Persons] and say the Scripture is your Rule for your doctrine, but there is no such rule in the Scripture, to call them by these new names, which the Apostle that gave forth the Scripture, doth not give them: and because we do not call the Father and the Word and Holy Ghost by your new names, therefore do ye falsly say that the Quakers deny the Father, Son and ho∣holy Ghost, which we owne in those names and sound words, in which the holy men of God spake them forth by the holy Ghost, which ye give other new names to, and yet say, ye have not the same spirit, which they had that gave forth the Scriptures. So, which is to be fol∣lowed, judg your selves. But this is the record that God hath given un∣to us eternall life, and this life is in his Son. And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us a mind to know him, which is true, and we are in him that is true, marke, that is, in his Son Iesus Christ, this same is very God and eternall life: and this we the people of God in scorn called Quakers do witness. And 2 Ioh. 1. For there are many deceivers come into the world, which confess not Iesus Christ come in the flesh, he is a deceiver and Antichrist. Now all the Christians (so called) in the world, and the Turke, will con∣fess Christ come in the flesh outwardly. So then by this outward confes∣sion these can not be deceivers nor Antichrist by your doctrin, but the Apostle saith, if Christ be not in you, ye are reprobats: and he that hath the Son, hath life; and he that hath not the Son, hath not life, and these were the deceivers that inwardly ravened, but had the sheeps cloathing the outward profession. And 1 Ioh. 2. The deceivers are there describ∣ed to be such as have not the Anoynting within them, and draw others from it, and such as have the forme of godliness, but deny the power, which are to be turned avvay from. And vvhosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrin of Christ, hath not God: but he that conti∣nueth
in the doctrin of Christ, hath both the Father and the Son; and if there come any among you, and bring not this doctrin, receive him not in∣to your house, neither bid him God speed, for who so doth, is partaker of his evil deeds. So as Christ vvas manifest in the flesh, above 1600 years since, if he come to dvvell in mans heart by faith, he is manifest in their flesh, and there is the Anoynting knovvn vvithin, condemn∣ing sin in their flesh, that they through him might become the righte∣ousness of God: and so he that believeth in the Son of God hath the Wit∣ness in himself. And Iud vvrits to them, vvhich are called and sancti∣fied of God the Father and reserved in Christ Iesus (marke, are sanctified) and such as are sanctified are holy, for is not to sanctify them, to make them holy? But do not ye affirme, that none are sanctified or made holy on this side grave, contrary to the Apostles doctrin? And so ye give the Apostles the lye, as ye do unto us. And further he vvrites unto them of the common Salvation, and that they vvere earnestly to contend for the faith that was once delivered unto the Saints. This common Salvation, which is Christ that tasted death for every man, and enlightened every man, and his Grace hath appeared unto every man, that brings Salvation, and contending for the faith, is it not to contend for that which Christ is the Author and Finisher of in their hearts? And when Michaël the Archangel strove against the devil, and disputed with the devil concerning the body of Moses, he durst not blame him with cursed speakings, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. And now are not the Professors like the devil here disputing about the body of Christ, which body they are ignorant of, whom the Lord re∣buke. If they knew his body, his flesh or his blood, then they would know the meat which comes down from heaven, which is our food, by which we live, whom ye nick-name, and in scorn call Quakers. But it is come to pass what the Lord Jesus Christ and the Apostle de∣clared, how that there should come mockers in the last times, which should walk after their ungodly lusts, and this we have daily experience of, and these are the makers of Sects, which have almost filled the world, with them who are fleshly, having not the Spirit, that the Apo∣stles were in, and so not in the unity of it. But ye beloved, (saith he) edify your selves in the most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. (marke, in the holy Ghost) But ye Professors say, ye have not the same holy Ghost as the Apostles had, so can not pray in it: and ye say, there is
no victory here. So ye have not the same holy faith, which they had, which gave them victory, as in Iude, ye Letter-Professors may read your conditions, who are like the raging waves of the sea, &c. And John, Rev. l. 1. saith, Iesus Christ which is a faithfull witness, and the first begotten from the dead, and Prince of the Kings of the earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his ovvn blood. So Iohn doth not plead for sin here for terme of life, (like the Letter-Pro∣fessors) but saith, they are washed from their sins. And has made us Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father, Behold, he cometh vvith clouds and every eye shall see him, even they vvhich pierced him through: and all the kindreds of the Earth shall vvall before him, to wit, Christ. And I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, Which is, and vvhich vvas, and vvhich is to come: the Almighty. And I Iohn (saith he) your Brother and companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of Iesus Christ, vvas in the Isle of Patmos for the Word of God and the vvitnessing of Iesus Christ, &c. (marke, your brother in tribulations and in the kingdom) Here is not onely an heir of the Kingdom, but in it. And this many witness that are the witnesses of Jesus Christ, and know the patience of Jesus. And in this. 1 cap. John sets forth Christ to the seven Churches, wherein he seven times saith, He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit saith un∣to the Churches. So here the Spirit is the speaker, as may be seen, Rev. cap. 2 and 3. And in his right hand, to wit, Christs, he held the seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword. (marke, out of his mouth, &c.) And he saith, I am alive that was dead: and behold I am alive for evermore: and I (to wit, Christ) have the keys of hell and death. And he saith, To him that overcometh, will I give to eat of the tree of Life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God: and be thou faithfull unto death, and I will give thee a crown of Life, Rev. 2: 8, 10, 17. To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the Man∣na that is hid: and will give him a white ston, and in this stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he who receiveth it. And thus saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like a flamme of sire, and his feet like fine brass, vers 18, 26. For he that over∣cometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of ron, and as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken. Even as I received of
my Father, so will I give him the morning-star. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the Churches. But your Churches now adays say, there is no hearing of this immediate Spirit: and ye say your selves, there are but two spirits; so then ye have gotten an∣other spirit to hear and speak to you, then that which spake to the Churches, and it seemes ye had no car to hear the Spirit that spake to the Churches. But we do witness this Spirits teaching, and do hear him; blessed be the Lord for ever. And Rev. 3. These things write unto the Church, which is at Sardis, saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God (to wit, Christ) and the seven stars, I know thy works, for thou hast a name that thou livest, but thou art dead.  Marke, is not this the condition of many of the Professors in Christendom, that have the name Christian, but are dead from the Life, and Power and Spirit, that was in the Apostles? And upon such Christ will come as a thief. And thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee, saith Christ. [marke] but thou hast a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their garments. O brave Saints! What will ye Letter-Professors say to these? Christ saith, they have not defiled their garments: these were perfect then: were they not? And they shall walk with me, to wit Christ, in white, for they are worthy. And he that overcometh shall be cloathed in white aray, and I will not put out his Name out of the book of Life. But I will confess his name before my Father and his Angels. Blessed be the Lord for ever. Let him that hath an ear hear what the Spirit saith to the Churches. But ye that deny this Spirits speaking now adays, are none of these Churches. And again he saith, Write unto the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, these things saith he that is holy and true, (to wit, Christ) which hath the key of David, which openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth, I have set before thee an open door, that no man can shut. And this we witness who have kept the Word, and have not denyed his Name. And they that keep his word of patience, he will deliver them from the houre of temptation, which will come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the Earth. And all are to hold fast that which they have received from Christ, that no man take their crown. And he that overcometh (saith Christ) vvill I make a pil∣lar in the temple of my God, and he shall no more goe out; (marke
no more out and I vvill write upon him the Name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, the New Jerusalem, which cometh out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new Name. O blessed writer and Saviour! Let him that hath an ear, hear what the Spirit saith unto the true Church now adays, which we hear, blessed be his Name for ever. And again: Write these things, saith the Amen, the faithfull and true witness, the beginning of the creaturs of God. And this was to the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, who were neither hot nor cold. Look, ye Letter-Professors, to this, that say, ye are rich and have need of nothing; see if ye be not poor, blind, miserable, wretched and naked, &c. And are not ye neither hot nor cold, and doth not Christ threaten to spue out such out of his mouth? Behold, saith Christ, I stand at the door and knock: (what door is this, think ye? Is it not the door of the heart?) if any man hear my voyce, and open the door, I vvill come in unto him (marke, come in) and will supp with him and he with me. And do not ye Letter-Professors, tell us, there is no hearing of the voyce of Christ now adays: and he is in heaven, and will not till the end of the world? So then there is no supping with Christ, till the end of the world, nor any opening of the door for him to come in among you. But they that have heard his voice, have opened the door, and he is come in to them, and he supps with them, and they with him. And this we witness: he that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches, Rev. 3. throughout And cap. 4. See the holy cry; Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, which was, which is, and which is to come. And thanks were given to him that sat upon the throne, which liveth for ever and ever: and they cast down their crowns before him. And so must all do, before they be crowned with Jesus, who is worthy to receive glory and honour and power for ever and ever. And John (Rev. 5.) saw that no man in Heaven, nor in Earth, nor under the Earth was able to open the book, neither to look thereon. Therefore Iohn wept, because he saw no man was found worthy to open and read the book, nor to look thereon. But one said unto him, Behold the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David hath pre∣vailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof. For it is he that opens, and he that shuts: and if he open, no man can shut,
and if he shut, no man can open. And it is he that opens to his people now the book of the Law and Prophets, and Gospel and Revelation, and the book of Life, which we witness. And I beheld a Lamb as though he had been killed, which had the seven hornes & seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, sent unto all the world, and they that sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof, because thou was killed, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, tongue, people and Nation, and thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests; and we shall reign on the Earth.  (marke, reign on the Earth) And also such that John heard, saying with a loud voyce, Worthy is the LAMB that was killed to receive power and riches, wisdom, strength, honour, glory and praise, &c. and we say the same. And all creaturs which are in Heaven and on the Earth, and under the Earth and in the Sea, and all that are in them heard I, saying, Praise and honour, glory and power be given to him that siteth upon the throne and un∣to the Lamb for evermore And so he is to be worshipped that liveth for evermore, Rev. 5. And Rev. 6 How the Lamb Christ Jesus opens the Seals: and all is sealed, till he open, for the naturalman perceiveth not the things of God, for they are spiritually discerned. And when the Lamb had opened the fifth Seal, John saw the Souls of them that were killed for the Word of God, and for the testimony which they mantained, and they cryed with a loud voyce, saying, How long Lord holy and true dost thou not judg and aveng our blood on them that dvvel upon the Earth? So it is God that doth avenge the blood of the persecuted, upon their perse∣cutors. And his people are commanded not to avenge themselves, for vengeance is his and he will repay it. And long white robs were given to every one of these Sufferers for Jesus; and it was said unto them that they should rest for a ltle season, untill their fellow-servants and bre∣thren should be killed as they were. And the Lamb opening the sixth Seal, the Great men and the rich men, &c. hid themselves amongst the Rocks and dens and mountains, and said unto the mountains and rocks, fall upon us and hid us from the presence of him that sitteth upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? Think on this, ye that have been our persecutors above these 26 years, for the wrath of our Lamb will find you out, Rev. 6. When the Sun is
turned as black as saccloath of hair, and ye know the great Earth-quak, then ye will not scoff at, nor persecut, the people of God in scorn, called Quakers. And Rev. 7. These are they which came out of great tribulations, and have washed their long robs, and have made their long robs white in the blood of the Lamb. (marke, have washed) Therefore are they in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple; and he that sitteth on the thron will dwell among them, and they shall hunger no more nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall govern them. Here is the Governour of Gods washed and suffering people, and he (to wit Christ) shall lead them [marke] into the living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And this we believe, and can cry with a loud voyce, Sal∣vation cometh of our God, that sitteth upon the Throne, and of the Lamb: and do know the palmes in token of victory. And Rev. 8. where the Lamb opened the seventh Seal, then did the trumpets begin to sound, and the prayers of the Saints were offered upon the golden altar, which was before the throne of God. And at the sounding of the fifth An∣gel, the bottomless pit was opened where the Locusts came out, which were to vex them that had not the Seal of God in their foreheads, and these Locusts had a king over them, whose name is called in Hebrew Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, Destroyer. And at the sound of the sixth Angels trumpet, there came destru∣ction upon such as worshipped devils and idols, gold and silver, and brass, wood and ston, which could neither see, hear nor go; and yet they repented not that remained undestroyed, neither of their sorcery, murder, fornication, nor theft, Rev. 9. And in the days of the voyce of the seventh Angels sounding with his trumpet, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared by his servants the Prophets, Rev. 10. And there were then great voyces in heaven at the seventh Angels sounding, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are our Lords and his Christs, and he shall reign for evermore. And the 24 Elders which sat before God on their seats, fell down on their faces and worshipped God, (not the beast) saying, We give thee thanks, Lord God Almighty, which art, (that is, present) and which was, and which art to come; for
thou hast received thy great might, and hast obtained thy Kingdom, and the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, the time of the dead that they should be judged: and thou shalt give reward unto thy servant, the Prophets thy Saints, and to them that fear thy Name, to small and great, and shalt destroy them that destroyed the Earth, Rev. 11. which after the Witnesses were slain and taken up into heaven, which tor∣mented their persecutors, that made merry over them when they had slain them; the dragon with his tail drew the third part of the Stars from Heaven, and cast them to the Earth. This dragon stood before the wo∣man to devour her child when she had brought it forth; but so soon as she had brought forth the Man-child which should rule all Nations with a rod of iron, her Son was taken up unto Gods thron, and she fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, where they should feed her 1260 days: and then the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went & made warr with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commands of God, and have the testimony of Iesus, when he was cast out of heaven into the Earth, the old Serpent that deceives all the world, and his Angels were cast out with him: then I heard a voyce, saying, Now is Salvation in heaven, and strength and the Kingdom of our God and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accus∣ed them before our God day and night, but they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony: and they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoyce ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them: (marke, dwell in heaven) but wo be to, the Inhabitants of the Earth and the Sea; for the devil is come down unto you with great vvrath, knowing that he hath but a short time to reign.  So here it may be seen here, who were the original of them, that persecuted the woman, and the remnant of her seed, to wit, the Dragon the devil the deceiver, Rev. cap. 11, 12. And then after the woman was gone into the wilderness, the beast rose out of the Sea, and the Dragon gave his power to him, and they worshipped the Dragon: and then the cry was, Who is able to make warr with the beast? And he opens his mouth with bla∣sphemy against God and to blaspheme his Name, his Tabernacle and them that dwell in Heaven.  Marke, this beastly spirit, who has not the Spirit and Power the Apostles had. And this beast was to continue 42 moneths: and it was given to this beast to make warr with the Saints
and to overcome them: and power was given unto him over all na∣tions, kindreds and tongues, and all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, to wit, the beast, and he and they may say, there is no perfection and overcoming, and may cry up the body of sin and death to the grave. So all worshipped him, whose names are not written in the book of Life. Marke, here is the writing-book of the Lamb, which was slain from the beginning of the World, slain not onely at Ierusalem, without the gates. If any man hath an ear let him hear. I beheld another beast come out of the Earth with two hornes, like the Lamb.  Marke, here the beast would be like the Lamb, but he speaks like the Dragon, not like the Lamb. And this beast did great wonders, he caused which dwelt upon the Earth to worship the first beast, and as many as would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed. So he made all great and small, rich and poor, fre and bond to receive his marke in their right hand and in their fore∣head: so he marked them and sealed them with his evil spirit, Rev. 13. And God seales his with his god Spirit: Ye are sealed with the Spirit, (saith the Apostle Eph. 4: 30.) unto the day of Redemption: and they that are sealed can set to their seals that God is true, that keep the testimony of Jesus the Spirit of Prophecy. And Iohn said, I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on mount Zion, and with him a hundred fourty four thousand, having his Fathers Name vvritten in their foreheads, and they sung a nevv song before the Throne, &c. and no man could learn that song but the 144000 which were redeemed from the Earth, and in their mouths was found no guile, for they were without spot before the Throne of God. These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are Virgins, these follow the Lamb whithersoëver he goeth, these are brought from men, being the first fruits to God and to the Lamb.  And this we do believe: but can any of the Letter-Professors believe that such a company should be without guile in their mouths, and without spot? And none know this new song, but they that are without spot and guile, and by the Spirit of God have their Fathers Name written in their foreheads. And I saw another Angel sleing through the midst of heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwelt upon the Earth, and to every kindred, tongue and nation, saying with a
loud voyce, Fear God and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come, worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea and fountains of waters. Now what will ye Letter-Professors say to Iohn? Have not your na∣tions, kindreds and tongues had the Gospel? Ye have had the Letter, but ye confess ye have not the same power, for the Gospel is the povver of God unto Salvation, &c. [Marke] but the Letter killeth, and it was the Power and Spirit the Apostles vvere in that gave Life. And have ye not persecuted every appearance of that, either by tongue or hand? Let your doings ansvver. And here follovved another Angel, and said, Babylon is fallen, the great City, vvhich made all na∣tions drunk vvith te vvhine of the wrath of her fornication. So as the Gospel the Povver of God is preached and received, Babylon falls. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voyce, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine, which is poured into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tor∣mented in fire and brimston before the holy Angels and before the Lamb. And this all must know who worship not God in Spirit and Truth; and they that do worship God, must come to Truth and the Spirit of God in them∣selves. And here is the patience of the Saints, here are they that keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, right blessed are the dead which hereafter dye in the Lord, even so saith the Spirit, for they rest from their labours, and their works follow them. And I looked and beheld a white cloud, and upon the cloud was one siting (marke, upon the cloud one sitting) like the Son of man, having on his head a crown of gold, and in his hand a sharp sickle. And another Angel cryed the harvest was ripe, thrust in the sickle. And blessed are their eyes that see Gods reapers reaping down the tares, and gathering the wheat, and a cutting down of the vines of the vineyard of the Earth, and casting them into the wine-press of the wrath of God, as Rev. 14. And Rev. 15. I saw as if it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the beast and his image and his marke, and the number of his name standing at the Sea of Glass, having the harps of God, not the harps of men: and they sung the song of Moses the ser∣vant of God, and the song of the Lamb, (marke, the Lamb Christ Je∣sus)
saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty. Iust and true are thy ways King of Saints! Who shall not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy Name? For thou art onely holy, and all Nations shall come and worship before thee (that is, in Spirit and Truth, and they must find it in their hearts) For thy judgments are manifest, Rev. 5. And when the seven Angels poured out the seven vials of the wrath of the Lord God Almighty upon the Earth, what sores fell upon them that had the mark of the Beast and worshipped his image? And how did the beast rage and blaspheme? and his kingdom became darkness and they gnawed their tongues for pain. And I saw the froggs come out of the mouth of the Dragon and of the false Prophets, for they are the spirits of devils working mira∣cles, to go unto the Kings of the Earth and of the whole world, to the battle of that great day of the Lord God Almighty: and here is the end of these gatherings. And I heard the Angels of the waters say, that by pouring out his vials upon the waters they became blood, Lord thou art just, which art, and which was, holy, because thou hast judged these things; for they shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, therefore hast thou given them blood to drink, and he for they are worthy; So it is God that gives them blood to drink; repayes it upon all the persecutors. And I heard another voyce out of the Sanctuary, saying, Even so O Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy Judgments, Rev. 16. Behold, I come, as a thief: blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, least he walk naked, and men see his filthiness. And the seventh Angel pouring out his vial into the air, there came a loud voyce out of the Temple and throne, saying, It's done, &c. And there were voyces, and thundrings, and lightenings, and great earth-quaks, such as were not since men were upon the Earth, even so mighty an earth-quak:and the great City was divided into three parts,  &c. And great Babylon came into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the fierceness of his wrath. Look Letter-Professors, Is not the city divided into three parts, Papists, Protestants and Turks? and see if ye have known this earth-quake, lightenings and thunders, Rev. 16. And after the true woman went into the wil∣derness, and the man-child was caught up into heaven; and the beast and his image the whoor got up, which the kings and the inhabitants of the Earth are drunk with the wine of her fornication, who hath a golden cup
in her hand full of the wine of her fornications, and in her forehead a name written, (marke, written) MYSTERY BABYLON the great, the mother of whoordoms and of the abominations of the Earth: and I saw this woman drunk with the blood of the Saints and with the blood of the martyrs of Iesus, saith John. So it's clear it is the whoorish and beastly spirit, that persecuts the Saints, who have their power from the Dragon; and alwayes worship∣ed him whose names are not written in the book of Life from the foun∣dation of the world, Rev. 18. And this beast which ascended out of the bottomless pit, shll go into perdition, though they shall make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords and King of Kings, and they that are on his side, are called Chosen and faithfull, &c. And he said unto me, the Waters thou sawest, where the whoore sitteth, are Nations, peoples, multituds and tongues. Therefore look ye nations, peoples, multituds and tongues, what sits upon you; for if she sit upon you, that have drunk the blood of the Martyrs and Saints, ye must have a sad weight upon you, with that whoorish spirit, that corrupts the Earth, she will make you plead for your body of sin and death, while she sits a top of you, for she can not abide perfection, and will not let you owne it. But he saith, that ten kings shall hate the whoor, and shall make her desolat and naked, and eat her flesh and burn her with fire, which hath reigned over the kings of the Earth, for God hath put it in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to doe with one consent, for to give their kingdom unto the beast, untill the words of God be fulfilled, Rev. 17. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, with great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory. (saith John) So as the Earth is lightened, Babylon falls, and at her fall what a cry is there among the merchants? And all that have drunk of her cup of for∣nications, who is become a cage of devils and the hold of all evil spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hatefull bird. And I heard a voyce from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive not of her plagues. So the Lords people are coming out, for her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath re∣membred her iniquitys: now must she have her reward double. So though she sat as a Queen, and said in her heart she should see no sor∣row, nor mourning, therefore shall her plagues come in one day,
death, sorrow and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God that condemneth her, and all shall bewail her that she hath reigned over. Oh! Heavens rejoyce over her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God hath given judgment on her, for she shall be cast down, and found no more, for in her was found the blood of the Prophets and of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth, in this whoorish power and spi∣rit Babylon, confusion, the beast and dragon, whom God hath judged. And after those things I heard a voyce of a great multitude in heaven, (marke in heaven) saying, Haleln-Iah, Salvation and Glory and Ho∣nour and Power be unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his Iudgments, he hath condemned the great Whoor, which did corrupt the earth with her fornications, and hath avenged the blood of his Servants shed by her hand. And again they said, Halolu-Iah, and the smoak rose up for evermore and a voyce came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his Servants, and all ye that fear him both small and great. And I heard like the voyce of a great multitud, and as the voyce of ma∣ny waters, and as the voyce of strong thunderings, saying Halelu-Iah, for the Lord God Almighty hath reigned: let us be glad and rejoyce, and give glory unto him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her self ready: and to her was granted that she should be arayed in pure white linnen and shining, for the fine linnen is the righte∣ousness of Saints. And so when Babylon was fallen, the Marriage of the Lamb came, (the true Church which Christ is the head of) as the false woman the false church fell, and blessed are they which are called unto the Lambs supper, and he said unto me these words of God are true, and we know it to be true, who are come to the Supper and to the Marriage of the Lamb. And John fell down to worship him that shewed him these things, but said he, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant and of thy Brethren, which have the testimony of Iesus, Worship GOD. For the Testimony of Iesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, & this we bear wit∣ness to. And all ye Letter-Professors that deny Prophecy, and say it is ceased, Ye have not the Testimony of Jesus, for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy. And John saw the Heaven opened, and beheld a white horse, and he that sat on him was called Faithfull and True, and he judgeth and maketh warr in righteousness, and his
eyes are as a flamme of fire, and on his Head many Crowns, and a Name written, that no man knew but himself, he was cloathed in a garment dipt in blood, whose Name is called The Word of GOD. This is Christ who is seen in heaven on the white horse, and the war∣riours which were in heaven follovved him upon vvhite horses, cloathed in white linnen, white and pure. And out of his mouth vvent a sharp tvvo-edged svvord, that vvith it he should smite the Heathen, for he shall rule them vvith a rod of iron: and he it is that treadeth the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God, and he hath upon his garment and upon his thigh a Name written, The King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and this is Christ, blessed be the Lord for ever. And the beast and the mighty men of the Earth made warr with him and his followers, but the beast was taken, and the false Pro∣phet that wrought miracles, whereby he deceived them rhat receiv∣ed the beasts marke, and them that worshipped his image: and these both were cast alive into the lake of fire that burneth with brim∣stone. And there is the end of the Beast and false prophet, that has been worshipped, and has deceived the world, that hath made warr against Christ that is on the white horse and his followers, who hath the victory. And the remnant of them that worshipped the Beast, were slain with the Word that went out of his mouth, as may be seen Rev. 19. And here is the faith and patience of the Saints. He that killeth with the sword, shall be slain with the sword, as Rev. 13.10. and he that leadeth into captivity, must go into captivity himself. And so after the beast is in the lake of fire, and the false Prophet, I saw Satan bound, and cast into the bottomless pit, and shut up and bound for a 1000 years: and I saw seats and they that sat up∣on them, and judgment was given unto them. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus the Word of God, which did not worship the beast nor his image, neither had taken his marke upon their forehead, nor in their hands, and they shall reign with Christ a 1000 years: and blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection, for on such the second death shall have no power, and they shall reign with Christ a 1000 years.  He doth not say, Christ shall come and reign with them, but they shall reign with Christ a 1000 years, and when the 1000 years are finished,
Satan shall be loosed out of prison for a little season, and he shall go & deceive the people which are in the four quarters of the Earth, even God and Magog, to gather them to battel: and they went up into the plain of the Earth, which compassed the Saints about and the beloved city, but fire came down from God out of heaven & devoured them; so there is an end of them also: and the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of sire and brimstone, where the beast and false pro∣phets were cast before, and shall be tormented even day and night for evermore. And so here is the end of the devil also. And then John saw also the dead both small and great stand be∣fore God, and the books were opened, and another book which is the book of Life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books (marke, in those books, where all mens words and actions are written in, according to their works) and all gave up their dead, and every man was judged according to his works, and death and hell delivered up there dead, and death & hell was cast into the lake of fire: and this is the second death. And whosoëver was not found written in the book of Life, was cast into the lake of fire. And this we know to be true, & are witnesses of, Rev. 20. that God will fulfill & perform in Christ Jesus. And then John saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, when the Dragon, beast, whoor and false Prophets and devil were cast into the lake of fire: and Babylon was fallen, &c. And the first Earth passed away, and was no more seen. And he saw the holy City the new Jerusalem come down from God out of hea∣ven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband, and I heard a great voyce out of heaven saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself will be their God with them.  And this we witness, blessed be the Lord God for ever, who dwelleth with his people. And he that sat up on the throne said, Behold I make all things new, and he said unto me, Write, for these words are faithfull and true, and he said unto me, It is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the be∣ginning and end, to wit, Christ. I will give unto him that is a thirst of the well of the water of ife freely. And this we witness, and need not go to buy our water of the sellers: and he that overcometh shall in∣herit all things, and I will be his God and he shall be my son. But the unbelieving, fearfull and abominable, and murderers, and
whoormongers and sorcerers, and idolaters and all lyars shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. But will not the sorcerers, whoormongers, idolaters, lyars and murderers say, that they are all believers in Christ? The devils believe, and tremble. But ye do not believe in the LIGHT, as Christ com∣mands, which should lead you from the second death, but ye hate the Light, because your deeds are evil; and will not come to it, because it will reprove you. And so this is the condemnation that Light is come into the world, but men love darknses rather then Light: which Light ye should believe in, and so become children of the Light, as Christ has commanded. So every true believer believeth as Christ hath commanded, and in so doing they obey his command. And John said, Ioh. 21. one of the seven Angels talked with him, saying, come, I will shew thee the bride the Lambs wife, and he shewed me the great City holy Ierusalem descending out of heaven from God. And he that shewed it John, carryed him away in the the spirit to a great high Mountain, &c. And so ye can not see this holy City, new Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God, except ye be in the Spirit that John was in, but this Spirit ye deny. And so as the false city Babylon was thrown down, seen by John then, and seen by the same Spirit now, the great City holy Jerusalem, that descends out from God, is set up, having the glory of God, and her shining was like unto a stone most precious. And the wall of the City had 12 foundations, and in them the Names of the Lamb & of the 12 Apostles, and it had 12 gates, and the gates 12 Angels, and the names written of the 12 tribes of the children of Israel, and he that talked with me had a golden reed to measur the wall and the gates of the city: and the city lay four-square, and the length is as large as the bredth of it: and he measured the city with the reed 12000 furlongs. The Greek coppy with Arias Montanus his interlineary translation hath it, Revelations cap. 21 & 16. , that is, furlongs twelve twelve thousands, that is, 144000, that is the length and the bredth: and the height being equal is 12000, being in all 1728000 furlongs, that is 216000 miles, that is 10 times the com∣pass of the Earth, as it is commonly accounted, or there abouts [12] in the Prophetical manner of speech is a full number, as 12 Tribes: and
the height, length and bredth being at 12, is the compleatness, and the wall 12 times 12, the compleatness of a wall in cubits that is 144 cubits, the wall bearing proportion to the city, as cubits to furlongs, as the in∣closing to the inclosed. The length and the bredth and the height were equal, and he measured the wall thereof 144 cubits, by the measure of a man, that is of the Angel: and the 12 gates were 12 Pearles, and every gate is of one pearle, and the streets of the city are of pure gold, as shining glass. And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Al∣mighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it, and the city had no need of the Sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light of it, and the people that are saved shall walk in the Light of it (marke, walk, not onely talk) and the Kings of the Earth shall bring their glory and honour unto it, and the gates of it shall not be shut by day, for there shall be no night there: and the glory and honour of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it, and there shall enter into it no unclean thing, neither whosoever worketh abomination or lyes. But they which are written in the Lambs book of Life. (marke, in the Lambs book of Life) Though the gates stand open, and are not shut, none can enter in, no unclean one, nor any lyar. The Angels that stand at the gates, & which are ministring Spirits in flammes of fire, will keep such out; Rev. 21. And all ye Letter-Professors that plead for imperfection, and your bo∣dy of sin and death to the grave, which are the Devils drudges, these gates are too strait and too narrow for you with that great luggage on your backs to enter. And Rev 22. John saw a pure River of Water of Life clear as Crystall, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. Happy are they, that drink of this River. And in the midst of the street of it, and on each side the river was the Tree of Life, which bears twelve manner of fruits, and giveth fruits every moneth. This is a fruitfull tree that beareth every moneth, and is not this Christ? This is beyond all the trees in the Earth. And the leaves of this tree served to heal the Nations with, and there shall be no more curse but the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his Servants shall serve him; and they shall see his face, (to wit, the Lambs) and his Name shall be in their foreheads, and there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, nor light of the Sun, for the Lord God giveth them Light, and they shall reign
for evermore. These words are faithfull and true: and the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel to shew unto his Servants, the things which must shortly be fulfilled. Seal not up the words of this book, for the time is at hand. He that is unjust and filthy, let him be unjust and fil∣thy still. So he will plead for his filthiness as long as he liveth. He that is just and righteous, let him be just and righteous still. And he will plead for his righteousness, which he hath from Christ, as long as he liveth. Behold I come shortly and my reward is with me, to give unto every man according as his works shall be, I am Alpha and Omega the beginning and ending, the first and last,  saith Christ: Blessed are they that do his commandments, (marke, do not onely talk) that their right may be in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gate into the city: for without are dogs, biters, worryers and inchanters, whoor∣mongers, murderers, idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh lyes. Here it is clear, all such are without the gates of this city new Je∣rusalem, though they may talk of it, and give their meanings to it. And I Iesus have sent my Angels to testify these things in the Churches. And the true Churches are to give regard and belief unto his words, though the false Churches do not. And this Iesus sent from heaven af∣ter he was risen: and this I tell you Professors that say there was no hear∣ing of his voyce from heaven after he was risen. I am the Root, saith Christ, and of the generation of David, the bright and morning-Star, and the Spirit and bride saith, Come, and let him that heareth, say, come, and let him that thirsteth come, and let whosoever will, take of the water of life freely. And what could Christ say more? Here all are invited to this water of life freely, but people had rather spend their money for that which is not bread. The Bride, that is married to Christ, bids others come to the marri∣age of the Lamb, and the Spirit bids them come to Christ: but if they will neither hear the Spirit nor the bride, they are left without excuse, and he that heareth Christ is commanded to bid others come, and take of the water of Life freely, and to come to Christ, and to hear him, as God saith, this is my beloved Son, hear ye him, in whom he is wel pleas∣ed, and not to hear them, that do displease him, but learn of me, saith Christ for I am the Way, the Truth and the Life: and no man cometh to the Father but by me. And this we witness, (blessed be the Lord for ever) in the same Spirit that gave forth the Scripturs, therefore as John
saith, He that hath an ear to hear let him hear what the Spirit saith to the Churches. And we know as Peter saith, that no prophecy in the Scripture is of any privat interpretation, 2 Pet 1:21. And now are not all ye Professors of the Letter, that say ye have not the same Spirit that gave forth the Scripturs, private interpreters of them? And yet follow your own spirit, as the Prophet saith, and see nothing: for the prophecy came not in the old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spak as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and ye deny the having of this holy Ghost now adays, and call it an extraordinary Spirit. Ye deny that which Christ sends to lead his Church, into all Truth by: and make a mock at the movings of it, and a scoff, as too often we have heard. And none can call Iesus Lord but by the holy Ghost: and the true Church fellowship is in the holy Ghost. So it is an extraordinary Spirit that people must pray and have fellowship in, and call Jesus Lord by, beyond mans spirit, by which the holy mens words are seen, which they spak as they were mov∣ed by the holy Ghost, but ye can not believe that there are any holy men now adays, nor hardly believe them that were so in the Apostles days, nor before: and those Scripturs which the holy men spak forth as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and came not by the will of men, ye men in your own wills, quarrel; jangl and disput about, and are so wilfull against others that witness the holy Ghost, and are run in∣to Sects, and one against another, and are not in fellowship, for how should ye that are out of the holy Ghost, be in the fellowship of the Spi∣rit? And Heb. 4. For we which have believed do enter into rest (marke, into rest) and he that hath entered into rest hath ceased from his own works, as God did from his: and so not to be saved by their own works, when they are ceased from them. Now if all they, that are called Christians, were the true believers in the Light, as Christ the LIGHT commands, they would enter into him their rest and be children of the LIGHT, and cease from their own works, as GOD did from his, but unbelief shuts out, for they enter∣ed not in, because of unbelief, as Heb. 3. And the Apostle saith, 1 Thess. 1:15. For our Gospell unto you was not in word onely, but in power and in the holy Ghost. Now if your Gospel be not in power and in the holy Ghost, but
onely in word; how should we receive it, or you? For the Gospel is the Power of God, and if ye have not the same Gospel which the Apostles had, which Gospel is the Power of God, then have ye not the Gospel of God: for ye say, ye have not the same power, then ye have not the same Gospel, then marke your portion as the Apostle tells you, Gal. 1:8. And the Apostle saith We approve our selves to every mans conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4:2. So it's the duty of every one that declares the Gospel, and that has received it, to approve them∣selves to every mans conscience, as the Apostles did. And the Apo∣stles doctrin was not yea and nay: but hath not yours been yea and nay? Is it not yea in the time of a sun-shine, and nay in the time of a storme? And if it was not yea and nay, how come ye to turn from one Religi∣on to another so often? But we know the Gospel is yea, and not nay; and all the Promises of God are yea in him, to wit, Christ; are yea and Amen to the glory of God, and it is God which stablisheth us in Christ, where all the Saints are established: and hath anoynted us and establi∣shed us, who hath also sealed us (marke, sealed us) with the Spirit of promise, and hath given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, (marke, the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts) 2 Cor. 2. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, (marke, in us) so our consolations abound through Christ: and this we are sensible of, and all our mercy, peace and com∣fort comes from him. For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, to the one we are the savour of death unto death, and to the other the savour of life unto life, 2 Cor. 15:16. And Ioh. 3:14. We know that we are translated from death to life, (marke, are translat∣ed) because we love the Brethren: and he that loveth not his Brother abid∣eth in death, and he that saith, he remaineth in him, to wit, Christ, he ought so to walk, as he hath walked, 1 Joh. 26. For as he is [to wit, Christ] (saith John) even so are we in this world. 1 Joh. 4:17. And now would not ye Professors of the Letter say, they blasphemed to say, that as Christ was, so were they in this present world? Ye that profess him, and do not possess him, are not ye such? For they that said, they were Jewes and were not, (but the Synagogue of Satan) did not they lye and blaspheme? And are not they such that profess themselves Christians but are not, but in name onely? For he is a Iew that is one inward: and the circumcision in the heart and in the spirit, not in the let∣ter,
whose praise is of God and not of man. And so is not he a Chri∣stian that is one inward in the heart, in the spirit, whose praise is not of men, but of God? Rom. 2:29. And the Apostle saith, Seing that ye have put off the old man with his works, and have put on the New man, which is renewed in knowledg after the image of him that created him. Mark, ye Professors and others, that plead for your old man to the grave, here the old man was put off, and the new man put on, before they went to the grave, as the Apostle saith, Coloss. 3:8. And Iohn the Ba∣ptist, who was a man sent from God, that came for a Witness to bear witness of the LIGHT, said, he was not that Light, but this Light was the Life in the WORD, and the Light in men, and this Light shin∣eth in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not; and that was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world, Joh 1. And Ioh. 1:26, 27. he saith, but there is standing one among you, whom ye know not, (speaking of Christ) he it is that cometh after me, which was preferred before me. And Ioh. 1:15. bearing witness of Christ, he cryed, saying, this is he of whom I said, he that cometh after me is preferred before me, for he was before me. Mark, before John, though as to his birth he came after him, but Christ was before John was, for all things that were made, were made by him. And Ioh. 3:12, 13. where ye may hear Christs own words, If when I tell you Earthly things ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of Heavenly things? For no man ascended up into heaven, but he that de∣scended down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven, mark, in heaven. And further Iohn saith, he that hath the bride, is the bride∣groom, but the friend of the bridegroom which standeth and heareth him, rejoyceth greatly, because of the bridegrooms voyce. He that is from on high is above all, to wit, Christ, he is not of the Earth; how can ye give him then that by-name humane, when John saith, he is not of the Earth? Mark, of the Earth, for John saith, he that is of the Earth, is of the Earth, and speaks of the Earth; he that is come from heaven is above all, and what he hath heard and seen that he testifys, but no man receiveth his Testimony, he that receiveth his Tistimony hath set to his seal that God is true, Joh. 3. And Ioh. 5:20. &c. For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committ∣ed all judgment to the Son, because that all men should honour the Son, as they honour the Father, for he that honoureth not the Son, the
same honoureth not the Father that sent the Son. Mark, all men should honour the Son, for he dyed for all men, and is the Saviour of all men, especially of them that believe, and inlightens all men, and his Grace hath appeared to all men, to believe in and to teach them, which we are witnesses of, and testify unto. And Ioh. 5:24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that heareth my Word, and believeth in him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but hath passed from death to life. Mark, hath, then he is passed from the bo∣dy of death and sin: and this we witness. And again, Verily, Verily, saith Christ, I say unto you, the hour shall come and now is, (mark, now is) when the dead shall hear the voyce of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. Marvell not at this, for the hour shall come, saith Christ, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voyce, and they shall come forth, that have done good, to the resurrection of Life; but they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. So mark your do∣ings, for it is not a serving of God with your lips, Ioh. 5. but ye must be rewarded according to your doings, And further Christ saith, Iohn bore witness of me, to wit, the Light. But have not your Professors born witness against this Light, and call it natural and an idol, as Robert Brown a Baptist Teacher in Worchester called it, to Samuel Morley? Which gives Iohn Baptist the lye, who said, it was the Life in Christ and Light in men, which we bear witness to. And Christ saith, the Father himself which hath sent me, beareth witness of me, and ye have not heard his voyce at any time, nor seen his shape: and these were great Letter-Professors. And Christ saith to Philipp, Joh. 14:2. He that hath seen me hath seen my Father: and be∣lieve that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me, and the words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwelleth in me doth the works. So they that see not the Son, see not the Father, and they that see the Son, see the Father. And if any man doth his will, to wit, Christs, he shall know his doctrin: so they that do not Christs will, do not know his doctrin, though they may talk of it, as Ioh. 7:17. And Christ saith, Ioh. 16. The bread of God is he which cometh down from Heaven, and giveth life unto the world. And Iesus said unto them, I am the Bread of Life, he that cometh to me, shall not hunger, and he that believeth in me shall not thirst For I came down from heaven, to wit, Christ, [mark, from heaven] not to doe my own
will, but the will of him that sent me, and this is the will of him that sent me, that every man that seeth the Son and believeth in him, should have everlasting Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And then the Jewes murmured at him, as do the Professors now, because he said, he was the bread of Life, and came down from heaven; and said, Is not this Iosephs son? So looked upon him carnally, as the Professors now do, and call him humane. And Christ said unto them, Murmur not, For no man can come unto me, except the Father draw him, that sent me, and I will raise him up at the last day: and it's written in the Prophets, They shall be all taught of God. Therefore every man that hath heard and learned of the Father cometh to me. Mark, that hath heard and learned of the Father, cometh to the Son, which we witness. And Christ saith, This is the true bread which cometh down from heaven, he that eateth of it shall not dye, and I am the living Bread which came down from heaven, saith Christ. And if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. So it's not onely talking of Christ, but eating and feeding of his flesh. For the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. And this we witness to be our bread, and have eaten of it, and therefore must needs owne this flesh of Christ to be our heavenly bread, which comes down from heaven, and can not deny our food, our daily bread. Then the Letter-professing Jewes murmured again, and said, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Then said Jesus unto them, Ex∣cept ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And this is our daily drink and daily food, the flesh and blood of him that comes from heaven. And what do ye Letter-professors call this humane flesh, which ye must eat, and humane blood of Christ which ye must drink, which came down from heaven; whose flesh whoso∣ever eateth, and drinketh his blood, hath eternall life, &c.? And do ye say that this bread and this flesh and blood of Christ will corrupt, through which they that eat, have eternall life: for my flesh is meat in∣deed, and my blood is drink indeed, saith Christ, and his flesh saw no cor∣ruption, and we are redeemed not with corruptible things but with the pre∣cious blood of Iesus Christ, which is not corruptible. And he that eat∣eth my flesh and drinketh my blood, saith Christ, dwelleth in me and I in him, and as the Living Father hath sen me, so live I by the Father: and
he that eateth me even he shall live by me. So its clear there is no living by Christ, and no dwelling in Christ and he in him, without eating his flesh and drinking his blood which came down from heaven: and he that eateth this bread liveth for ever. So ye must all come to eat and drink of this food, and praise God which will bring all into Life and Peace. Then some of the Disciples murmured as wel as the Jewes at this say∣ing, and he said unto them, What then if ye should see the Son of Man (mark, Son of Man) ascend up where he was before? (Mark, where he was before) And then Christ interprets his own words, and saith un∣to the twelve, Will ye go away also? And Peter said, Master, Whi∣ther shall we goe? For thou hast the words of eternall life, Joh. 6. And Ioh. 8:23. Jesus said unto the Jewes, Ye are from beneath, I am from above: ye are of this world, I am not of this world; and ye nei∣ther know me nor my Father, if ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also, ver. 19. And Except ye believe that I am he, to wit, the Christ, ye shall dye in your sins. And Jesus said unto them, when ye have lift up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and doe nothing of my self, but as my Father hath taught me. And Ioh. 8. the Jewes said unto Christ, Thou art not yet 40 years old, and how hast thou seen Abraham? Here they looked upon him carnally, and Jesus said unto them, Ʋerily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was I am, then the Iewes took up stones to cast at him, and said he had a devil. Here the devil got up in them that neither knew Christs birth, nor as he was before Abraham. This is like our Letter-Professing spirit, that stoneth him where he is manifest in his people, and calls his Light an idol, and saith it is of the devil. So the Professors now blaspheme his Life the Light, as the Iewes blasphemed him in the days of his flesh. And Ioh. 10. Jesus saith, I am the door of the sheep. And again, I am the door, by me if any man enter he shall be saved, and shall go in and out and shall find pastur. So there is no entering in nor out to this pa∣stur but by Christ the door, the thief cometh not but to steal, kill and destroy. Mark, ye that steal the word from your neighbour, and such are killers and destroyers. But I am come, saith Christ, that ye might have Life, and have it aboundantly. I am the good Shepherd, and lay down my Life for my sheep, and know mine, and am known of mine.
And as the Father knoweth me, so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for my sheep, and they shall hear my voyce, and there shall be one sheepfold and one shepherd. And this we witness, Glory to God for ever. And therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again; and no man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self, for I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again, this commandment have I received of my Father. And this set the Jewes a murmuring again: but this power we witness Christ hath. And he saith the hireling will flee, because he is an hireling: which your actions sufficiently manifest. And Iesus said unto Martha that he was the Resurrection and the Life. And she said un∣to him, Yea Lord I believe that thou art the Christ the Son of God, which should come into the world: and this good Testimony we witness unto, as Ioh. 11:25, 26, 27. And Ioh. 12:26. Jesus said, If any man serve me let him follow me, (mark, he must follow Christ) for where I am, there shall also my ser∣vant be, and if any man serve me, him will my Father honour. And if I were lifted up from the Earth, I will draw all men unto me,  vers. 32. And this we are witnesses of, that Christ Jesus is lifted up, who hath drawn us after himself, and is drawing others. And Ioh. 13:15. Christ saith, I have given you an example, that ye should doe as I have done unto you; and if ye know these things, blessed are ye, if ye doe them. So they that talk of Christ, and doe not, can not have the blessing. For saith Christ, Ye call me Lord and Master, and ye say wel, For so I am: and if your Lord and Master hath washed your feet, ye ought then to wash one anothers feet. So then not to foul them. And a new commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you; that ye also love one another, by this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love one an∣other.  And now how have the Christians, so called, in Christendom, keeped this commandment, that have taken one another by the throat, and imprisoned and persecuted to death other Christians? And by this may not all men know that they are not the Disciples of Christ? as Ioh. 13:34, 35. And cap. 14. Christ saith, Because I live ye shall live also, ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me,
and I in you. (Mark, these were and are the true Disciples and true Christians) And my peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world giveth. I go away and will come unto you. And this the Disciples witnessed, Christ in them and many others, & we also. And he that keepeth my commandments, is he that loveth me, & he that loveth me, shall be beloved of my Father, and I will love him & will shew my own self to him.  And this we witness, as Ioh. 14.  And here∣in is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, and be made my Disciples: and ye are my friends if ye doe what I command you. For it is the bearing of fruit that glorifys the Father of the Disciples and Learners of Christ, as Ioh. 15:8. And they are his friends that doe what he commands and spend not away their time in talk. And again, I have chosen you and ordained you that ye should bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain: and if the world hate you, ye know it hated me before you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own, but because ye are not of the world, (mark, are not of the world) but I have chosen you out of the world (blessed be his Name for ever) therefore the world hateth you: and if I had not done works among them, which no other man did, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloack for their sin: for they have now seen, (to wit my works) and hated me and my Father, that it might be fulfilled that is written in their Law, They hated me with∣out a cause  And cap. 16:28. I came out from the Father, and came into the world. Again: I leave the world, and goe to the Fa∣ther.  This is Christs own testimony which we believe. And in me ye have peace, (saith Christ) in the world ye shall have afflictions be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. And Ioh. 17. Christ saith, Thou hast given me power over all flesh, that he should give eternall live to all them that thou hast given him. (to wit, the Father) And this is Life eternall, that they know thee to be the onely very God,and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.  So it is not eternall life to talk of God and Christ, but to know God and Jesus Christ, that he hath sent; and to know God and Jesus Christ is with the Light that shines in the heart, that gives the know∣ledg of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and this is treasur in the earthen vessel,  2 Cor. 4. And saith Christ, Now glorify
the thou Father with thy own self, with the glory that I had with thee before the world began.  Mark, before the world began. Again, Holy Father (saith Christ) keep them in thy Name, even them whom thou hast given me, that they may be one as we are one. Here is the love of Christ to his people. I have given them thy Word, and the world hateth them, because they are not of the world [mark] as I am not of the world.  For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified through the Truth, As thou didst send me into the world, so have I sent them into the world: and the glory that thou gavest me I have given them, that they may be one as we are one, (and these are Christs own words) I (to wit, Christ) in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, 1 Ioh. 17. These are the Learners of Christ, which we witness unto: and here is an union and a fellowship with the Son and the Father, Christ in his people, and God in Christ. And Father I will that they which thou hast given me, be with me even where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. (mark, before the foundation of the world) O! Righteous Fa∣ther, the world also hath not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me, to wit, Christ. And we have known that God hath sent Christ, and God is in Christ, and Christ is in us, and we are in him: and this we witness, Blessed be his holy Name for ever. Ioh. 17. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, & of his bones, Eph. 5:30. And hath raised us up together, and hath made us sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Eph. 2:6. Who re∣maineth in the heavens till all things be restored, Acts 3:21. Who hath restored and is restoring: and this we witness, blessed be his Name for ever. And Simeon said, Behold this child is appoynted for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a signe (mark, for a signe) which shall be spoken against, yea a sword shall pierce through thy Soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. And Hannah a Prophetess she confessed likewise the Lord, and spake of him (to wit, Christ) to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
So here was a woman confessor and Preacher of Christ, to as many as looked for redemption by him, as there are many women confessors and preachers of Christ now, to as many as look for redemption by him; and to them that do not, that they may know there is no Salva∣tion given under heaven by any other name, but by the NAME of IESƲS, that they may all come to obey GOD's command, who said, This is my Beloved Son, hear ye him: and Christs command, who saith, Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly in heart. And here they may know their Priest, their Prophet, Shepherd, and Bishop of their Souls; and know his birth, his doctrine and sufferings, death and resurrection, and as he was with the Father before the world be∣gan, Christ Jesus, who hath redeemed them, and dyed for them, and bought them with a price, that they may glorify him in body, soul and spirit, which are the Lords, which he hath given them so to doe, Amen saith my Soul. G. F.
A brief APPENDIX, Or SUPPLEMENT Superadded. CHRIST is called the MESSIAH, Joh. 1:41. which Messiah by interpretation is Christ. And the Angels said unto them that sought Jesus, after he was risen, VVhy seek ye the living among the dead? when they came to look for him in the sepulchre. Moreover the Angel said, he is not here but is risen: remember how he spake unto you, when he was yet in Galilee saying, that the Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinfull men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again; and they remembred his words, Luk 24:6, 7. Matth. 17:23. Mark 9:31. And he was a Prophet Mighty in deed and in word, before God and all the people: but the high Priests and Rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and crucified him. Here ye may see, the chief Priests had a hand in it. And Matth. 26:24. Christ saith, Surely the Son of man goeth his way, as it is written of him, but wo be unto that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for that man if he had never been born. So it was the Son of man that was betrayed and cru∣cified, not as he was God: and he that was betrayed and cru∣cified, to wit, the Son of man, is he that is risen. And Ioh. 6:62. Christ said, VVhat then if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? Mark, the Son of man. And Ioh. 13:31, 32. When Judas, that betrayed him, was gone out from him, Iesus said, Now is the Son of man glo∣rified, and God is glorified in him, if God be glorified in him, God shall glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.
And Ioh. 3:13. Christ saith, but he that descended from heaven, the Son of man, which is in heaven. And this we believe, though ye have given him other names, as humane body, or humanity, which names are not found in Scripture; neither is he called by such names by God or Christ, or his Apostles; but he is called the MESSIAH, the IMMANVEL, the Son of man, and the Holy Thing, and the VVORD of God, and the Amen, &c. Rev. 3:14. But where in Scriptur can we find such names, as humane body and humanity given to Christ? And Christ, as ye say, is in heaven with a carnal body: and so we can not believe you further, then ye give forth Scriptur for your names and termes that ye give to Christ. Matth. 28. Christ, after he was risen, saith, All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. &c. [mark] And this we believe of him, for he hath manifested himself in us by his Light and Power, who was crucified without the gates at Ieru∣salem, and was buryed and rose the third day, and is at the right hand of God, and said unto his Disciples, he would come again unto them, and dwell in them: and this we witness, that he dwelt in his Saints, and in us his people; and hath made us sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, as before. And those ages are come that the Apostles declared of, (Glory to GOD!) and we can say, Glory to God through Jesus Christ for ever, who was set up from everlasting to everlasting, who is the Rock of ages, yea our Rock in our age, who is the Founda∣tion of many generations, yea our Foundation in our generation, who is our chief Corner-ston, by which we stand against all the foul weather and storms of tho Professors and profane; who is Elect and Precious, who is the First and Last, who bruiseth the Serpents head that led man into transgression from God, and Christ it is who leads man again unto God. So he is our Way,
our Life, Resurrection, Sanctification, Wis∣ Justification, and our Redeemer, Saviour and Me∣ator betwixt us and God: and through him we have peace with God, who was the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ the Same to day, yesterday and for ever, who re∣maineth in the Heavens, till all things be restored, who is our Restorer, & is restoring up into heavenly places, by his Grace, Light, Spirit and Power; yea many are restored and quicken∣ed, and made alive, and made to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, who is their heavenly Shepherd, and feeds them in the pasturs of Life, who has laid down his life for his sheep, and bought and purchased them with his blood, and his sheep know his voyce and follow him, and will not follow the hireling. And he is our Prophet, that God hath raised up like unto Moses, whom we do hear, who opens the book to us, and the book of Life, (and opens the book of the Law and the Prophets, and lets us see him the Substance of them, that we can sing and rejoyce and praise God through him) by which we can see our names written therein, and no man can shut them, nor can any man open them, but he; Glory to God for ever, &c. And Christ is our Priest made higher then the Heavens, he is Anoynted by the Holy Ghost, Acts 10:38. He is holy, harmeless and separat from sinners: and he is made higher then the Heavens; and such an high Priest becometh us, who offer∣ed up himself for us, and sanctifys his Church and offers it up to God, and he is the Holy Head of his Church. And Christ is our heavenly Bishop that doth oversee us, by his Spirit and Power. And God has given Christ for a Lead∣er and a Counsellour: so he is both our Leader, Coun∣sellour
and Commander; a Counsellour to counsen  ing the things of God and of his Kingdom and the wo  hath no end. So glory to God and the Lamb, who was slain &c. alive again, Glory be unto God and the Lamb for evermore. And the LAMB shall have the victory: and this we believe, let the beast and whoor make never so much warr against him and us, I say, the Lamb shall have the victory, and this we believe, though all the wild beasts and the wolves and the dogs, the goats and bulls of Bashan, the spoted Leopards and all the wild heifers of Ephrajm, the horses of Pharaoh, and the wild Ishmaels, profane Esaus, envious Cajus, which may gather in a brotherhood, and Gog and Magog, Professor and pro∣fane, if all these rise against the LAMB and his follow∣ers, yet, I say and believe the LAMB shall have the vi∣ctory over the beast, whoor and dragon, devil and Satan and all his followers: Christ is a top of the head of them all, for he was before they were, and will be when they are gone, Glory to GOD for ever. Come therefore, let us sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb, which none can learn but they that are redeemed from the Earth: for we know our Beloved and we have found him when we pass∣ed the watchmen of the night, who smot us, and wound∣ed us: So we can say My beloved is mine and I am his. He hath knockt at the door of our hearts, and we have let him in, and he is come to supp with us, and we with him, Rev. 3:20. of the spiritual and heavenly Supper at the Table of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is above the table of Devils out of the Truth; Glory to God for ever. Amen. Halelu-IAH. And further concerning what the Angels said of Christ to Mary. The Angel answered and said unto Mary, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Most High shall overshaddow thee, therefore also that Holy Thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called The SON of GOD, Luk 1:35. And Ioseph of Arimathea went to Pilat and asked of him the body of IESVS. Now Joseph did not ask for the Humane body of Jesus, or give it such a name, as may be seen in the Evangelists, and no where did they give him such names, as Humane body nor Humanity, which names ye have added to him more then the Scripturs do. And 1 Cor. 11. the Apostle saith, He that eateth and drink∣eth unworthily, eateth and drinketh his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body. Now what say ye to this, ye that call his body Humane? May not every unworthy eat∣er see and discern that which is Humane? And 1 Cor. 10. They did all eat of the same spirituall meat, and drink of the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that Spi∣ritual ROCK, that followed them, and that ROCK was CHRIST. So is not Christ called a SPIRITVAL ROCK, and was not this before he was born of a Virgin? And further he saith, God was not wel pleased with many of them, for they were overthrown in the wilderness. And Christ saith, I am the Resurrection and the Life: He that believeth in me though he were dead yet shall he live. And VVhosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never dye. Be∣lieve ye this ye Professors, as Mary did? And ye make a great deal ado concerning what bodys people shall be raised, and about the body of Christ; therefore be satisfied with the Apostles doctrin: for the Apostle saith, Some men will say How are the dead raised, and with what bodys shall they come forth? And therefore he saith, Awake to live righteously, and sin not: for some have not the
knowledg of God, I speak this to your shame. Therefore see, Is not this your condition, that make such a work about the body of Christ, and with what bodys people shall be raised up: and the Apostle saith to such, Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye, and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be. So he tells here plainly it is not the same, and calls thee a fool that sayest it is the same; if thou sowest wheat or other corn, let the husbandman answer thee in this. Further the Apostle tells thee, God giveth it a body as pleaseth him, and to every seed its own body. And therefore people are to wait upon God to give it a body as pleaseth him: and the Apostle tells thee, there are also Heavenly bodys and there are Earthly bodys, but the glory of the Heaven∣ly is one, and the glory of the Earthly is another, so also is the resurrection of the body. (Mark, can ye read people here?) He further tells you, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. And of the Heavenly bodys and Earthly bo∣dys, this Heavenly is not Earthly: Is it? It's sown a na∣tural body and raised a spiritual body, and there is a natural bo∣dy, and there is a spiritual body. So is Natural Spiritual? As it is also written, The first man was made a Living Soul, and the Last a QVICKENING SPIRIT, to wit, Christ. (mark, made a quickening Spirit) Howbeit that was not first made, which is spiritual; but that which is natural, and afterward that which is Spiritual. Can not ye read this? Are not ye awake? Doth not the Apostle bid you awake, that ye may read and see? The first man is of the Earth, Earthly; (mark, the first man) the Second Man is the LORD from Heaven. Mark, the Second Man, to wit, CHRIST.
And is the first man humane, and the Second Man the Lord from Heaven humane also? Will ye give them both the name Humane? Where had ye such words to call the Second Man withall? Not from the Scriptures, for they give him no such by-names. And the Apostle further tells you, As is the Earthly, such are the Earthly (like it self, and will call other things like it self) and as is the Heavenly, such are they also that are Heavenly, like its self again: And as we have born the image of the Earthly [mark] so shall we bear the image of the Heaven∣ly. And can the Apostle express himself in more plaine words? So here is an image of the Earthly, and an image of the Heavenly; these are two bodys, and two images, Earth∣ly and Heavenly: So wel might the Apostle say, Thou Fool: for an Heavenly image is not an Earthly, a Spiri∣tual body is not a Natural, nor an Heavenly body an Earthly. So thou fool, that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be. Mark, that shall be. And the Apostle saith, At the last Trumpet the Dead shall be raised up incorruptible, [mark, incorruptible] and we shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. And that is a quick change: and do not the fools say, they shall not be changed, but must be raised with the corruptible, the same? And further 1 Cor. 2:15. the Apostle saith, this corru∣ptible must put on incorruption, neither doth corruption inherit in∣corruption, (so it is not the same) and this mortal must put on immortality. So it is not the same. And when this Cor∣ruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortality hath put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass this saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory. O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the LAVV. So the Grave hath not victory over immortality, and that is over the sting of death. But thanks be unto God, which hath given us the victory through our LORD Iesus Christ. And this we witness, and believe what the Apostle saith. And the Apostle further saith, Behold I will shew you a mystery, VVe shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed. (mark, be changed) So then not the same: which the Husband∣man will teach thee. Moreover, Phil. 3:20. the Apostle saith, But our con∣versation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Saviour, even our Lord Iesus Christ, who shall change (mark, then it is not the same) our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body. So if the vile body be changed and fashioned like unto his glorious body, it is not the same, and consequently do not ye undervalue the Lord JESUS CHRIST and his body, ye that are giving such by-names to his body, as Humane and Humanity? Yea some have been so bold as to say he is in Heaven with a natural and carnal body, but these have been some of the grossest sort of Professors. And the greatest sort of Professors say, he is in heaven with a humane body. But these are not Scriptur terms or names, for if your vile natural and hu∣mane bodys must be changed, and made like unto his glorious body, then how can ye say that Christ is in Heaven with a carnal, natural, or humane body? For [Natural] knowes not the things of God, and [Carnal] is sold under sin, as the Apostle tells you. And is not Humane from the ground? But doth not Christ say, he is from above?
The second man is the Lord from Heaven, and his body is a GLORIOUS BODY, and he is the HEAVENLY, SPIRITUAL MAN. Therefore all that profess Scriptures and Christianity, let them keep to Scripture terms, and to those names, which God and Christ and the Holy men of God in Scriptur have given to it and him, which are sound words not to be condemned. G. F. VVorcester Prison, the 25 of the 11 Moneth, 1674/5.
