F2306 R11317 13791238 101844
A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Landing and Reception OF THE Late King JAMES AT KINSALE, WITH The Particulars of the Ships, Arms, Ammu∣nition, Men and Money, that He brought with Him. In a Letter from Bristol, April 1st. 1689. Licensed, April 4. 1689. James Fraser. SIR, THis Day Landed several of my Acquaintance who left the County of Cork on the 24th of March, and give the following Particulars of the Late King James's Landing and Reception there. On the 12th of March entered the Harbor of Kinsale 12 great Men of War with French Colours, 3 Fireships, 8 Merchantmen, and cast Anchor before the Fort. Soon after the Earl of Clancartie, who commanded in that place, having Notice of His Late Majesties being in the Fleet, gave Order to his Regiment to draw up ready to receive him, whil'st he went on Board the St. Michael to Congratulate His Happy Arrival to that King∣dom. In the Afternoon His Majesty Landed, and went up to the Fort, being accompanied by the Duke of Berwick, Mr. Fitz-James, the Mar∣quis of Powis, the Earl Melfort, and the Bishop of Chester, who lay tha Night in the Fort.
Those who came with His Majesty debarqued also at the same time, and went up to the Town, being to the Number of 150 Officers, which were all the Persons that embarqued at Brest. There His Majesty stay'd till the 15th, in which time the Arms, Ammu∣nition and Money were brought ashore, and laid up in the Fort. The List of the Arms delivered at Brest amounted to 15000, together with 30000 Swords and Ammunition proportionable to the Service. There was also a 100000 l. in Money. During His Majesties stay here, Lieutenant General Maccartie, and seve∣ral Irish Officers came to Congratulate His Arrival, and on the 15th, he went to Cork, and lay at St. Dominicks, being received by the Irish, after their rude and barbarous manner, by Bagpipes, Dancing, throwing their Mantles under his Horses Feet, making a Garland of a Cabbage Stump, and such like Expressions of Joy. During His stay at Cork, Mr. Brady, the Minister of the place, and Ten Men of Bandon petition'd Him for Pardon for that Town, which he granted, saying, You may now see you have a Gracious King. And when the Earl of Clancartie, and Duke of Berwick urg'd the Destruction of that Nest of Rebels: To the first he said, He was a Young Man. And to the latter, That he was a Fool. After that, came many of the distressed English, complaining of their barbarous Usage, and how all they had was taken. Whereupon He issued out a Proclamation to quiet all, and that Restitution might be made to them; which the Rabble (or Rapperies, as they call them) little regard∣ing, continued plundering publickly every day, not sparing even their own Party: Insomuch that of Ten Oxen which were sent the King as a Pre∣sent, Two of them were by those Villains taken away. Two Days after, notwithstanding the King's Promise of Pardon to those of Bandon, several were Indicted at the Assizes, insomuch that 30 or 40 of them fled by this Opportunity, and came to Bristol, being frightned at the bloody Proceeding against one Mr. Brown, who was Hang'd, Drawn and Quartered at the same Assizes. Several Petitions were also preferr'd for the Pardon of Sir Thomas South∣well, Capt. Mills, and many others, who being taken in their way to the North, were carried to Galloway, and there Try'd, and Condemn'd to dye: But the King rejected their Petition; however, reprieved them for three weeks, deferring it till His Arrival at Dublin, to which place He set for∣ward on the 21st in the morning. This, Sir, is what's confirmed by all Persons come over, who were Eye-Witnesses of all that is here related; and who farther add, that most of the French Ships set Sail back again on the 17th for Brest. I am, Sir, Yours. LONDON, Printed by D. M. 1689.
