G1655 R28394 10585804 45278
Great and Good News From His Grace the Duke of Schombergs CAMP at DƲNDALK: Containing, I. A full Account of the Discovery of the Villianous Design of the French Papists. II. The Address of the Presbyterian Ministers in the North of Ireland, to his Grace the Duke of Schomberg. III. The Address of the Quakers, in the Province of Ulster, to his Grace the Duke of Schomberg. IV. A true List of the Irish Prisoners taken by the Renowned Men of En∣niskillen, at the Battel of Newtown. Licensed and Entred according to Order. I. A full Account of the Discovery of the Villanous Design of the French Papists. THE 150 French Papists which were pickt out of the Army, are now at Carling∣ford, and among them 'tis said there is one Jesuit, all ready to be shipt for Eng∣land: There is but four of the French, and two Irish that were going to Charle∣mount to suffer, and of them one of the French is to be executed; his Crime, and the whole Discovery was thus: He that is to be executed, was formerly a Count in France, had Moneys from the French King to raise a Regiment, spent it, and not daring to shew his face, got to Holland, and from thence for England, where he insinuated himself into the Army, pretending to be a Protestant, though he never was one, and came with the Army hither, where he writ a Letter to King James, that in case he would assure him of a Pardon from the French King, he would bring over to him 400 Men; that he should send his Answer in a Letter, which was to be brought into the French Camp, by some Fellow, who, as a Countryman, was to come with a Cross of white and red under the cover or folding of his Sleeve, and a Bottle of Brandy, crying, Brandy-wine, Brandy-wine, and so up and down only in the French Quarter, till one came to him, and said, God bless you Friend, how do you sell your Brandy? and turn up his Sleeve to look for the Cross; which when the Huckster perceived, he was to deliver the Letter from King James to him. The Messenger going with this Letter to the Irish Camp, being taken, discovered the Author, and it's said, had his Pardon for it. This coming to the General, he forth∣with gave orders to make publick Proclamation, at the head of each Regiment, That if any Papist was in the Army, did deny himself to be so, and afterward discovered, he should im∣mediately be put to Death, without more ado. And thereupon most, if not all the aforesaid 150 were singled out. Since this Discovery, there is not one French man permitted to pass any Guard, without a Pass, any where out of the Camp: and orders are given to all Officers, to proclaim, at the head of every Regiment, That if there be any Roman Catholick, that shal not forthwith declare himself publickly to be so, if afterward discovered, shall be punished with im∣mediate Death. And it's said, that upon that Proclamation, most, if not all those at Carling-ford are found out to be such. II. To His Grace the Duke of Schomberg, Captain General to Their Majesties Forces. The Humble Address of the remaining Presbyterian Ministers now in the North of Ireland. AS it hath pleased the Glorious Lord God to move Their Majesties to take the Di∣stressed Estate of their Protestant Subjects in this Country into their Royal Care, and to make way for your Graces coming into this Kingdom with an Army for Relief there∣of,
so we judge our selves obliged to signifie unto your Grace the sense of Duty upon us to bless God, and to Congratulate your Graces happy Arrival, and begun-success, and do esteem it our Dispensible Duty to continue Orators at the Throne of Grace, for carrying on his work in your Graces hands, and to endeavour to keep our People in all Loyalty to Their Majesties, and Dutiful Obedience to your Graces Commands. So humbly ex∣pecting your Graces Favour and Protection, We remain, Your Graces most Humble and Dutiful Servants, T. Hall, J. Fieland, J. Fisher, F. Fredell, W. Adair, T. Futt. Malcome. III. To His Grace the Duke of Schomberg, General of Their Majesties Forces in Ireland. The Hum∣ble Address of the People called Quakers, in the behalf of the whole, for the Province of Ulster. WHereas we the People called Quakers since the Landing of the English Army are threatened, and some abuses already committed upon them by those that call themselves Protestants, and for their pretence to abuse us and make us odious in the sight of the General and the whole Camp, do asperse and put forth, that we the said People called Quakers, was aiding and assisting to the late King James in his War, with Money to maintain a Regiment against the Protestants; which said Aspersion and envious In∣formation, we in the behalf of the rest of our Friends do utterly and solemnly deny, and in the sight of God, can declare we never were aiding nor assisting the said King with Money or any thing else, save the Quartering men on free Quarter, which no Prote∣stant could avoid no more than we; but on the contrary are great sufferers, insomuch that many have not left them to sustain their Families, but stript their Clothes off their Backs, taken their Goods and Victuals out of their Houses, their Horses and Cows taken from them, and left in a state of starving, and not spared more than any other Protestant where suffering hath been. Therefore we humbly desire and intreat thee, in our plain way, as we are an Inno∣cent People, and desire to live peaceably, and do unto all men as we would have them do unto us; that thou would be pleased to give forth thy Order to the Army, and other Protestants in the Country, that are wrong informed against us, that they may not Rob us of our Goods, nor molest our Bodies or Families, for we are a People that desires Peace, and is always willing to live honestly and soberly, and pay our tribute to whom it is due. Therefore we make bold to present thee with this our Address as unto a Chri∣stian Governour, hoping thou wilt be pleased to take us into thy Care and Favour, that we may not be further exposed to spoil and ruin: As in Duty bound we shall humbly pray the Lord to be thy Reward. Signed in the behalf of our Friends at Lisbourn the Second of September 1689. G. Gregson, R. Hoope, T. Wainwright, J. Greer. IV. A True List of the Prisoners now at Enniskillen, that were taken at the Battle at Newton and Belturbet. Lord Montcastle, Lieutenat Ge∣neral. Mac Carty's Officers belonging to his Lordship's Regiment. Major John Rooth. Capt. Barry Oge. Dead Lieut. Patrick Rivers. Lieut. Thomas Hogan. Lieut. Walter Obryan. Lieut. Daniel Mac Carty. Lieut. Cusck. Ensign Mac Carty. Ensign Patrick Lavallin. Ensign Michael Mulluany. Ensign Jo. Lawless. Ensign Gravalick. Lord Clares Officers. Major Marany. Capt. Lawleigh. Capt. Jo. Carroll. Capt. Conner. Capt. Edward Laey. Capt. Stephen Harrold. Lieut. Darby Callaghan. Lieut. Piercy Lacy. Lieut. Jo. Sampson. Lieut. Thomas Kennedy Dead. Ensign James Stretch. Ensign Mauris Rawleigh. Ensign Macnamarra. Lord Buffins Officers. Capt. Francis Bourke. Capt. Patrick French. Capt. John Blake. Capt. Brown. Lieut. Jo. Kelly. Lieut. James Badkin. Lieut. John Blake. Lieut. John Bourke Dead. Lieut. Christopher Finch. Ensign Mac Donnell. Ensign Stephen Linch. Ensign Nicholas French. Ensign Peter Merrick. Adjutant Dennis Madden. Collonel Obryans's Reigment. Capt. Macnamarrah. Capt. Murtugh Obryan. Adjutant Nicholas Archdeacon. Quarter-Master Hahire. Sir James Cotters Reigment. Lieut. John Lacy. Prisoners taken at Bellturbet. Lord Galmoys Officers. Cap. Ʋlick Bourk. Run away since. Capt. John Mac Grath. Lieut. Richard Bourke. Ensign James Eggan. Collonel Oxbroughs Officers. Capt. Coghlan. Capt. Miles Carroll. Lieut. Francis Scott. Lieut. Roger Mac Manus. Ensign Conner. Ensign Dulchantry. Collonel Pursels Reigment. Cornet James Keating. Quarter-Master Fits Gerrald. In all 2 Majors. 17 Captains. 18 Lieutenants. 15 Ensigns. 2 Ajutant. 1 Cornet. 2 Quarter-Masters. In all 56 Officers besides Common Soldiers, whose Numbers I have not, but may be easily Judged by the Number of Officers to be Extream great. LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the Old-Baily. 1689.
