G1789 12143661 54889
portrait of Valentine Greatrakes The true and liuely Pourtraicture of Valentine Greatrakes Esq. of Affane in ye County of Waterford, in ye Kingdome of Ireland famous for curina several Deseases and distempers
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF Mr Valentine Greatrak's, AND DIVERS OF THE Strange Cures By him lately Performed. Written by himself in a LETTER Addressed to the Honourable Robert Boyle Esq. Whereunto are annexed the Testimonials of seve∣ral Eminent and Worthy Persons of the chief Matters of Fact therein Related. LONDON, Printed for J. Starkey, at the Mitre in Fleet-street, between the Middle Temple-Gate and Temple-Bar. 1666.
LICENSED, May 10. 1666.
A LETTER to the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq. Most Honourable and most Worthy Sir, THough I had not the happiness for∣merly to have an acquaintance with you; yet I was no stranger to your Worth and Virtue, which have made you as much admired and reveren∣ced abroad as honoured and beloved at home: And therefore I have assumed the confidence to make this Address to your Honour, whose Re∣pute and Testimony to the World will be so pow∣erful (knowing your Wisdom, Devotion, and Learning to be so great) that Truth may find be∣lief, God have Glory, and his poor Instrument be justified before Men, who hath no farther de∣sign in the distribution of that Talent which the All-healing God has entrusted him withal, then the honour of his Maker, and the good of his poor Fellow-creatures, whose Distempers (ma∣ny of them) neither Art nor Physick probably could reach; which caused him cheerfully (that he might not be found an unfaithful Steward) to cast all his worldly pleasures and delights behind his back, to run himself into the midst of all Di∣seases, to make his house an Hospital, and forsake his own interest and advantages; to labour day
and night, and oftentimes run the hazard of his liberty and life by the crowds, pressings, steams and stinks of the multitudes and ulcerous per∣sons (which you can well witness few men can brook or undergo) and what is worse then all this, the scandalous and false Reports of lying Tongues; which have caused him who never had the Ambition to publish himself to the World farther then by his deeds, to write this Vindica∣tion in answer to a Pamphlet called by the Title of [Wonders no Miracles] wherein the Author a certain obscure Person, one that never saw me nor knew any thing of me, very confidently takes upon him to be my Herald and Confessor, and to represent me in such black Characters, as if I were so horrid a Monster that my very Name should affright the Reader. Sir, I never injured this Gentleman in Word or Deed in all my life, and yet he who pretends himself to be a Minister of the Gospel is so ex∣tremely (beyond the Rules of Charity) invective against me. But (you know, Sir) if to be accu∣sed only be sufficient, who can be found inno∣cent? I have enough of provocations given me to reflect, but God be praised I have learn'd a better Lesson, and shall return him good for evil, if it lies in my power. I beseech God I may never suffer as a Murthe∣rer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil-doer, or as a Bu∣sie-man in other mens matters; but if I suffer for doing good to persons in misery freely, I hope I
have no cause to be ashamed, but to glorifie God on this behalf, who gave both the gift and mind to use it. This Gentleman was the man (as I am certain∣ly informed) that writ that Pamphlet Entituled The Countess of Bridgwaters Ghost, for which he lay six months in Prison; one would have thought this might have proved a sufficient warning to him to be more sober for the future, who you may see was ashamed to fix his Name to his Book, lest the Contents thereof (though it might carry some∣what of Truth in it) might totally be discredited for the Authors sake. I do not instance in this Gentleman to shame him (for that is no ways my design) but so far to invalidate his Testimony, that I may not be the worse thought of for his evil speaking, who makes it his Trade to put forth Libels on any one, so he may get but a little mo∣ney from the Printer, or those that employ him. I pray God he may better make use of his Time and Parts hereafter, and that he would take all rancour and malice out of his heart, and give him the Spirit of Meekness, Charity, and Love: for if we bite and devour one another, we may chance to be consumed one of another. For me to answer each particular Allegation of his, would require too much time to be so ill spent, and therefore I will over-look his calum∣nies, desiring God to forgive him; nor shall I render evil for evil, or railing for railing, only I shall instance in some few particulars for the satis∣faction
of the Reader, who by those as by a Touch-stone may try what mettal the rest are made of. And, First. In folio 14. he charges me to have writ to that Right Reverend and Pious Person the Lord Bishop of Chester, with several other Instan∣ces which I shall make use of, which are most, if not every one of them, feigned and false. The words are as follow. That he had a voice from Heaven assuring him first, That he had a Power to cure the Kings-Evil, and afterwards that he might cure all Diseases: That he could not be quiet till he had undertaken it; and that a Woman unknown to him had a Vision to come to him; and that hereupon (notwithstanding he was diswaded by his Friends from the Practice, and jeered out of the Imagination) he had a con∣stant Impulse to force him upon the several Experi∣ments he had made, till the whole Country thronged to him. And this the Pamphleteer saith is what the Man saith for himself. Now by this Testimonial of my Lord Bishop of Chester written with his own hand at his House in Tuthill-street (which I herewith send you) you may please to judge how misbecoming his pre∣tence of a Clergy-man he has acquitted himself in fathering such forgeries upon one of the Fathers of the Church, whose Testimony he would have made use of to create a belief in the Reader, and scandalize an innocent person. The words are as follow.
Whereas in a late Book Entituled [Wonders no Miracles,] the nameless Author hath thought fit to take notice of a Letter of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's directed to me; wherein he is charged to avouch a Voice from Heaven twice heard by him, by which he was employed to cure the Kings-evil, and afterwards to cure all Diseases; mention being made also of a Vision which a Woman had to come unto him, &c. I cannot but so far do right to the said Mr. Greatrak's, and disabuse all Readers of that Book, as to Testifie, That the Letter which I received from him had no such Passages savouring of Phanaticism, as a preten∣ded Voice from Heaven and a Vision do import; and that this is but one of many other falsities in that Book. Apr. 27. 1666. Geo. Cestriens. Next, as to my Education, in the ensuing part of my Letter you shall receive a Refutation sufficient to convince you of the untruth which this stran∣ger to my Breeding charges me with. Then pas∣sing by many other of his Assertions, not worth the taking notice of, nor having the least colour of truth in them, I come to page 17. wherein he char∣ges me with swearing by my Maker, at Mr. Cres∣sets house in Charter-house-yard; an Oath which never was heard to come out of my mouth: But if you observe, the Author of that Report is as nameless as his Book; and Mr. Cresset (who with several others was present all the while I was in his
House) hearing of that falshood fastened on me, hath herewith also sent you his Testimonial to the contrary, writ with his own hand, in the following words; Whereas in a Pamphlet lately Printed, Entituled [Wonders no Miracles,] the Author thereof charges Mr. Valentine Greatrak's to have sworn at my House in Charter-house-yard, by his Maker, I do hereby Testifie, That I was continually by him whilst he was in my House, vnless when he was in his Bed, and went with him from my House to the Old-baily that day that the Author alledgeth he did swear the said Oath, and I did never hear him swear the same Oath, nor any other whatsoever, either on that said day, or in my House, nor at any other time, or in any other place whatsoever: Witness my Hand this 5th of May, 1666. John Cressett. Then he charges me in pag. ibid. with being a Good Fellow (according to his sense), and having converse with Women notoriously scandalous; and also with many fallacies put upon poor people as to the place of my abode; and several other Things as true as these. To which my Answer is, That there is no Per∣son that knows me but will acquit me of being ex∣cessive either in Eating or Drinking; neither was I ever charged or suspected (till by this Gentleman, who puts his Name to nothing, nor seems to care
what he says of Man, Woman, or Child) to be in∣continent with Women, or to have to do with any [but my Wife] in all my Life-time. Then, as to the fallacies put upon poor people as to the place of my abode, you your Self can acquit me of that calumny, who have been pleas'd oftentimes to do me the Honour (with se∣veral other Honourable, Reverend, and Worthy Persons) to come to Lincolns-Inn-Fields, whither for several Weeks I repaired five days in the Week, where I laid my Hands on all that came, without regard of Persons, that People might not be disap∣pointed in hunting me up and down. And farther to shew you the dis-ingenuity of this Person, I went to him who was reported the Author of that Pamphlet, with Dr. Whitchcot, and Dr. Cudworth (my honoured Friends, who were pleas'd to afford me the favour of their Company) and reason'd with the Gentleman about several Things he char∣ged me with being guilty of in his Book, and de∣sired before them to know whether he knew me, that he gave such a Character of me; or whether this practise of his, in slandering of a Stranger, and an innocent person for ought he knew, were ac∣cording to the rule of the Gospel, or that of Mo∣ral Honesty? And also I told him that his carriage in this Affair could not but subject him to the cen∣sure of wise men, who would lie inveying in his Closet, by judging and condemning what he knew not, and denying the verity of what was obvious to all persons that had the curiosity of coming;
when as he might purchase the knowledge of truth by an occular Testimony, in repairing to the house which I frequented in Lincolns-Inn-fields, where I promised to make way for him, and to accom∣modate him with a convenient place, and after∣wards (when he had informed himself) he might be able to relate the truth of things to others, since he had such an itching desire to Write: At length the honest Gent. promised that he would come, but never did; fearing that by the glass of truth there, he might discover the deformity of his carriage and be forced to a recantation. But to proceed further, In Page 20. he useth these words: He takes no∣thing in publick himself, but it hath cost some good round sums of money to his Followers, who are ob∣served to be noted Projectors; Jo. Terrill Gent. ex∣pending 100 l. to come at him, James Birion 40 l. and William Fettyplace 60 l. &c. To this I An∣swer, That he speaks Truth in saying that I take no∣thing in Publick, but in saying, That it hath cost some good round sums of money to his Follow∣ers who are observed to be noted Projectors, he says an unhandsome untruth known to many thou∣sands; for I never suffered, nor would keep any Servant that I knew would take a farthing of any one that comes to me: Nor have I any Fol∣lower but a simple Youth whom I never suffered to be a Door-keeper to avoid scandal. And as for Jo Terrill, Ja. Birion, and William Fettyplace
(I say) I know them not by their Names, nor did I ever hear of them but in his Book, who is their Godfather I believe. Then in the same page he saith, I borrow mo∣ney of my Patients though I take none; in an∣swer to which, I call God of Heaven to witness, I never borrowed so much as one farthing (to the best of my remembrance) in my life, nor does he instance in one, nor can any man living. Then in the same page you may further ob∣serve how like a Deceiver he speaks: What if it be proved that such as he have those that maintain them and hire them Patients: and in the 21 page he chargeth me in these Terms; And the dullest nose may smell the matter when he heareth this tra∣dition of him: That being a Member of an Inde∣pendent Church, He was excommunicated thence for pretending to the gift of Heaven, and thereupon his Gift left him, untill being absolved he was re∣admitted at once to his Church-priviledge and his gift. To which I answer, That I never was a Member of an Independent Church in my life, and so could not be excommu∣nicated by them, neither do I acknowledge any such Power in such a Church. But passing by many of his Invectives, which his own conscience (if he has any) cannot but smite him for, being guilty of so many ground∣less and simple untruths, I come to that of the 22. page, where he says: That its evident that this whole Affair is but a Cheat, and that there is not a
Man, Woman, or Child that may be trusted and are well known that is the better for him. Which Re∣proach your Honour I am sure, as well as thou∣sands else, knows to be otherwise; and therefore I think it needless to say any thing more to this particular, than to refer the Reader to the unde∣niable Testimonials following. Then in Page 23. (on which single Instance this Architect builds so large a Structure) he says; I Launced a poor man troubled with a sore Knee in the Charter-House, and that I pinched the poor man, and the sore Gangrened, and that if it had not been for the worthy Doctor Bevior Physitian to that House, and Mr. Harrison the Chirurgeon, there had been Life and Limb lost; and that when I heard of this, I came to the man and would have been tamper∣ing with him, but the man would not endure me, charging me with his Blood if he had dyed, and wishing me no more to delude the People. To which I make this answer: That true it is, on the request of a poor man that came to me in the Charter-house, I made a small incision a little above the pan of his Knee (as I take it) which was full of small concreted Juices like Measles; and it may be, as it is usual (where there is any humour) that the Place where the Orifice was, did swell, grow red, and fiery, as it must con∣sequently before the Tumour comes to a suppura∣tion (which in laying my hands of it, and spit∣ing thereon would, as it is usual, immediately have ceased) but that it came to a Gangreen, or that
the Doctor or Chirurgeon without dissecting the Limb so affected cured him afterwards, carries so so great an improbability in it, that any ingeni∣ous person cannot but abhor his Malice and Fol∣ly herein: and whether the latter part of his charge be true I refer you to the testimony of Cap∣tain Cresset herein, who was the only person pre∣sent when I went to the poor man: which I here∣with send your Honour writ with his own hand, as follows. Whereas in a Pamphlet lately printed, Entituled, Wonders no Miracles, the Author thereof amongst other his charges against Mr. Valentine Greatrak's layeth to his charge the spoiling of one of the Officers or Servants of the Charter-House, and the endanger∣ing of his Life by making some incision in his Knee or Thigh, that afterwards did gangrene and had like have cost him his life; and further saith, that when the said Valentine Greatrak's did come a second time to see him, the said hurt person would not let him meddle with him, but bid him go away and leave off fooling, and charged his life or blood upon him if he should dye: I do hereby certifie that I was with Mr. Greatrak's when he went to visit the said person hearing he was very ill, and he used no such words or expressions; but when Mr. Greatrak's told him that he doubted not but to allay the inflam∣mation with his hand, the said person desired Mr. Greatrak's to excuse him, for the Doctor and Sur∣geon had been with him, and applyed Medicaments
unto him, and he durst not take them off for fear he should so far incur the displeasure of the said Do∣ctor and Chirurgion, as that they should not come to him any more, but thanked him for his kindness: In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand this 5. of May 1666. John Cresset. Then in page 25. he uses these words; But his Jack-puddings (I mean) his Vouchers and Familiars who have been caught in fearful untruths about him, & his acquaintance with Fryers, he speaking one thing and they another, he saying he had not heard from such a man in eight years, and one of his Followers shew∣ing a Letter he had in eight days from him: He shewing how he had cured one with a stroke, and one of his Comrades asking the man unawares how his Pill, Glister, and Plaister wrought last night. My answer to this is, That he is the Jack-pudding that has told so many Fables, which are so senceless, that I will say no more of them, nor hinder you or the Reader with making further Objections, more than by giving an account of my life from my birth to this Instant; which I will do (God willing) in sinceri∣ty and faithfulness, knowing that God would be offended with me should I be guilty of speaking or publishing a falshood, and the world would quickly discover me. The Reports of the world as well as the Author of the Pamphlet touching me and that Talent
which God has entrusted me (a worthless Instru∣ment) withal, are so various and fabulous, that I conceive my self in conscience bound to leave a Testimony of Truth behind me before I turn my face homewards; and therefore I shall give your Honour and the World a brief and true Narrative of my self from my Birth to this instant, and those wonderfull things which God has been plea∣sed in mercy to effect upon several persons by my hand. I was born the 14th day of February 1628. I was the Son of William Greatrak's of Affane in the County of Waterford, Esq one that had liberal Education, and a competent Estate left him by his Father (who was known to be a worthy Person and well esteemed in his Country) a man lookt upon to be of a generous spirit, but one that had a mind above his fortune. My Mother was the Daughter of Sir Edward Harris Knight, one of his late Majesties Justices of the Kings Bench in the Kingdom of Ireland, who had the reputati∣on of a learned and a just Judge; and this I dare say of her, (who dyed some few years past) for I do but justice to her memory) she was a virtuous and discreet Woman, an excellent Neighbour, and a most indulgent and provident Parent; she took a care of my Education (my Father dying when I was tender in years) which was briefly as follows. First, After I had learn'd to read, I was sent to the Free-School of Lismore (once famous) which
was erected by the Charity of your Father the late Earl of Cork, where I spent my time till I was 13 years of age, and had made such a profi∣ciency in Learning, that I was designed for the Colledge the ensuing year, but prevented there∣in by the late Rebellion in Ireland, from whence I was forced with my Mother and several other small Children to flye for refuge hither into Eng∣land, and by the Charity of my Uncle Mr. Edm. Harris were relieved and provided for, and had the Principles of Religion confirmed in me by him, who was a Protestant, and one of so severe a pious life, that he devoted his whole time to the Service of God and the works of Charity: He was one that in many years before his death was not known to speak an idle word, or spend a vain hour: In brief, he was a Saint in his life and conversation, and one whose memory I shall ever reverence and love; but God in mercy to him (who though in the world, was not of the world) was pleased after some few years to take him to himself out of this troublesome life, who before his Departure left my Mother the third part of his Estate, and me in a most solemn manner his Prayers and Blessing. After his decease my Mother, who had a spe∣cial care of my Education, for my further pro∣gress in Literature sent me to a learned and reve∣rend man, John Daniel Getseus an High-German Minister of Stock Gabriel in the County of Devon: where I spent some years in studying Humanity
and Divinity, and found from his hands much favour and love; for which kindness I pray God to recompence him and his. Afterwards (sumptâ virili Togâ) I considered with my self, that the fortune which my Mother enjoyed in England was very small to maintain her self and so many Chil∣dren as she had (who grew daily more expensive as we grew in years); and thereupon I addressed my self to her, resolving to lose my life with my fortune in Ireland, or re-gain it, who gave me her blessing and consent; and so after some 5 or 6 years absence I returned to my native Country, which at that time was in a most miserable and deplorable state, as you may well remember; for then it was not as formerly a National Quar∣rel, Irish against English, and Protestants against Papists; but there were high and strange divisi∣ons throughout the Kingdom, English against En∣glish, and Irish against Irish, and Protestants and Papists joyning hands in one Province against the Protestants of another: which differences to me seemed so unnatural, that I resolved not to inter∣meddle therein, till the mist of confusion was o∣ver, and so for refuge retired my self to the Ca∣stle of Caperquin, where I spent a years time in contemplation, and saw so much of the madness and wickedness of the world, that my life be∣came a burthen to me, and my Soul was as weary of this habitation of clay, as ever the Gally-slave was of the Oar, which brought my life even to the threshold of death; so that my Legs had
hardly strength to carry my enfeebled body a∣bout: All company seemed irksome and distaste∣ful to me; so epidemically lewd, blasphemous and sottish were many become, that I saw the ma∣ny and great Judgments of the Lord that the Kingdom groaned under, had not reclaimed, but Pharaoh-like hardned our Egyptian hearts; which caused me seldom during that time to go from my Cell. In the Year 49. (as I take it) some small time after the Rout at Dublin, Oliver Cromwell then General of the Army, after the taking of Tredagh, sent part of his Army into Munster under the con∣duct of Colonel Robert Phaire; but before his landing at Youghall, Cork and Youghall had revolted from their obedience to their General the Earl of Inchequin, then Lord President of Munster under the Command of his Majesty, who is ever to be honoured by all English for the eminent and faith∣ful services done to the Protestants in the begin∣ning of the late Rebellion there: So that all, or most of the English and Protestants joyned with the said Colonel Phaire against the Irish and Pa∣pists, their Interests as well as Judgments being opposite; so that in a small time most of the Towns in Munster were reduced to Obedience, and the Command of the Horse in the said Pro∣vince was given to (that Renowned and Worthy Person) your Brother the Earl of Orrery, in whose Regiment I was made a Lieutenant: during all which time, which was 6 years, I will boldly say I
never suffered Quarter to be broken, nor violence offered to any that were in protection; nor did I suffer any one under my Command to oppress or injure any that were in Quarter, without bringing them to condigne punishment: nor did I permit any Women or Children to be killed though out of Protection, where I had a power to restrain the fury of the Souldier. In the Year 56. great part of the Army was disbanded, and I among the rest, and then I betook my self to a Country life, and lived at Affane the habitation of my Ancestors, where I have continued ever since, and got by my Industry a livelihood out of the bowels of the Earth, and daily employed many poor people to work, and improved that little Estate which I had so, that I bless God I lived as comfortably as he that had Thousands, and daily relieved those that were in want, and gave my Friends and Strangers a hearty welcome to what God in mercy had be∣stowed upon me, who never coveted much, nor denyed my self and others the enjoyment of what I had. But by the way. Assoon as I was retired into the Country, I was by the kindness and respect of the then Governour made Clerk of the Peace of the County of Cork, and Register for Transplantation, and Justice of the Peace: In which Employment I studied so to acquit my self before God and Man in singleness and integrity of heart, that to the comfort of my Soul, and praise of God that directed me, I can with confidence say, I never took Bribe nor Re∣ward
from any man, though I have had many and great ones offered me (when I was Register for Transplantation:) nor did I ever connive at or suf∣fer a Malefactor to go unpunished, if the person were guilty of any notorious crime (where I had a Power:) nor did I ever take the Fee belonging to my Office, if I found the Person were injured or in want: Nor did I ever commit any one for his Judgment or Conscience barely; so it led him not to do any thing to the disturbance of the civil Peace of the Nation: Nor did I take any thing for my Fee when he was discharged; for I bless God he has taken away a persecuting Spirit from me, who would perswade all men to be Prote∣stants, those Principles being most consonant to Truth and the Word of God in my Judgment, and that Profession which I ever have been of and still am: But Truth it is, That when I was Justice of the Peace, I endeavoured to convert as many Papists to Protestantism as I could, and prevailed with many hundreds to go to Church, for these two Reasons, 1. For the good of their souls who lived in ignorance, having no Priests in those days, and being little the better for them now (I conceive) the Common People understanding little La∣tine. 2. For the preservation of our own Bodies and Estates, which I found by sad Experience as well as the rest of the poor Protestants of Ireland, could never be secure whilest such dangerous
Principles were instilled into them as these; That there was no Faith to be had with Hereticks, and so it is lawful to make a prey of our lives and for∣tunes. The Papists may deny that this is one of their Tenents, but I am sure it was the practice of my Country-men, for whom I have this Cha∣rity, That if they were not strangers to the word of God they would not run into such violent courses as they did: Yet (though there was Or∣ders from the Power that then was (to all Justices of the Peace) for Transplanting all Papists that would not go to Church) I never molested any one that was known, or esteemed to be innocent, but suffered them to continue in the English Quar∣ters, and that without prejudice: So that I can truly say I never injured any man for his Consci∣ence, conceiving that ought to be informed and not enforced. Besides (Sir) I have so far observed the immoderate courses of several that were in Power and Authority in those days, amongst those different Judgments who have had their seve∣ral turns at the Helm, That they have driven Jehu-like, when they have had the Reins of Au∣thority in their hands, and by their own fury de∣stroyed themselves and interests, God abhorring the violent and cruel-minded man, Who would have all Knees bow to his Dagon, or take occasion either to cashier or put them by their Employments, (as was the usual practice of the Army there in those dayes) so that Charity had left Religion, which too too many made a
meer design to promote their Interests and Facti∣on: Thus one Faction destroyed another, till at length they all lay down in sorrow, and he that was most violent still came to the worst. Thus far I have given you a brief account how I spent my time before I laid my hands on any, and now I shall proceed to let you know how I have demeaned my self since, with the circum∣stances and causes that moved me to attempt pra∣ctises of this nature, for which I have been judg∣ed and condemned by many, and that as ignorant∣ly as maliciously: But blessed be God I have dis∣charged a good Conscience, in not burying that Talent which God so entrusted me withall, and his mercy has shielded me from their Darts. About four years since I had an Impulse, or a strange perswasion in my own mind (of which I am not able to give any rational account to ano∣ther) which did very frequently suggest to me that there was bestowed on me the gift of curing the Kings-Evil: which, for the extraordinariness of it, I thought fit to conceal for some time, but at length I communicated this to my Wife, and told her, That I did verily believe, that God had given me the blessing of curing the Kings-Evil; for whether I were in private or publick, sleeping or waking, still I had the same Impulse; but her re∣ply was to me, That she conceived this was a strange imagination: but to prove the contrary, a few daies after there was one William Maher of Salterbridge in the Parish of Lissmore (a Tenant
of your Brothers the Right Honourable the Earl of Burlington and Cork) that brought his Son Wil∣liam Maher to my house, desiring my Wife to cure him, who was a person ready to afford her Charity to her Neighbours, according to her small skill in Chirurgery; on which my Wife told me there was one that had the Kings-Evil very grie∣vously in the Eyes, Cheek, and Throat; where∣upon I told her that she should now see whether this were a bare fancy or imagination as she thought it, or the Dictates of Gods Spirit on my heart; and thereupon I laid my hands on the pla∣ces affected, and prayed to God for Jesus sake to heal him, and then I bid the Parent two or three days afterwards to bring the Child to me again, which accordingly he did, and then I saw the Eye was almost quite whole, and the Node, which was almost as a big as a Pullets Egg, was suppurated, and the throat strangely amended, and to be brief (to Gods glory I speak it) within a month dischar∣ged it self quite and was perfectly healed, and so continues God be praised. Then there came one Margaret Mac-shane of Ballinecly of the Parish of Lismore, and a Tenant of your Brothers the Earl of Cork, who had the Evil 7 years and upwards, which had spred it self from the bottom of her stomack upwards, all over to her throat, neck, and nose, and so all over her back, shoulders and arm-pits, so that I could not see one place free from the Evil, where you might put a sixpence, and to speak the truth she look∣ed
so dreadfully, and stunk so exceedingly, that she would have affrighted and poysoned any one almost that saw or came neer her; whereupon I spoke to one Doctor Anthony (a famous Physitian, then at my House) desiring him to take commise∣ration on her for Gods sake: His reply was, That she was eaten out with the Evil, and that all the men in Ireland could do her no good; whereupon I said, I did believe that there was one that could do her good, and cure her; the Doctor demand∣ed who that man was; my answer was, That through Gods blessing I could: but he slighted the matter saying, if he saw that Person cured, he would not question but I might heal all Diseases; but I replyed I was not of his opinion as to the latter part, but said, he should be convinced of the former; which accordingly fell out, (God be praised) for my hand suppurated the Nodes, and drew and healed the Sores, which formerly I could not have endured the sight of, nor smell, nor touch∣ed them without vomitting; so great an aversion had I naturally to all wounds and sores: so that the poor woman about six weeks afterwards came perfectly well to my house, (and so continues) where Doctor Anthony was then also, to see my Wife, and gave God praise and me thanks; who carryed her to Doctor Anthony, and told him, That hence he might see, that God could and did great things by poor and worthless Instruments, and therefore he should not limit him for the fu∣ture.
After this several people infected with the Evil, came to me from several Counties, and I stroked them, and desired God out of his abundant mer∣cy to heal them, who (blessed be his Name) heard my Prayer, and delivered them: So that few or none, unless those whose Bones were infected and eaten, returned without their cure: This course I kept for 3 years, not medling with any other Di∣stempers, about which time the Ague was very Epi∣demical, whole Families being struck down with it; when I found as formerly the same kind of Im∣pulse within me, suggesting that there was bestow∣ed upon me the gift of curing the Ague: This al∣so I told to my Wife, who could not be perswa∣ded to it: and the next day there came to my House a Neighbours Wife, who lived nigh Tallow-bridge (a place well known to you) by name Bateman, the Naylors Wife that is there, who had a most violent Ague, on whom I laid my hands, and desired God Almighty to cure her, who in mercy heard my Prayer, and so the Ague run through her, and she went away immediately, per∣fectly cured of her Ague: upon which her Hus∣band and Children, who were afflicted with the same disease, applyed themselves to me, on whom I laid my hands in like manner with the same suc∣cess, and so many more came to me afterwards, and were cured by Gods great and wonderful power in the like nature. Within some small time after this God was plea∣sed by the same or the like Impulse to discover un∣to
to me, That he had given me the gift of healing; which the morning following I told my Brother and Wife, but neither of them could be prevail∣ed with to believe it, though for my own part I had a full assurance thereof within me: This im∣pulse I had the Sunday after Easter-day, the 2d of April, 65. early in the morning, and the Wednes∣day ensuing I went to Cornet Deans (about some occasions I had with him) to Lismore, where there came into his House to me a poor man, that with a violent pain in his loins and flank went almost double, and had also a most grievous Ulcerous Leg very black, wherein were five Ulcers; who desired me for Gods sake that I would lay my hands on him, and do him what good I could. [But by the way take notice, That as God gave me the several gifts from time to time, he alwayes sent Pa∣tients that applyed themselves to me, for I never sought after any from the first moment to this ve∣ry instant.] Whereupon I put my hand on his loins and flank, and immediately run the pains out of him, so that he was released, and could stand up∣right without the least trouble: Then I put my hand on his Ulcerous Leg (which the Chirurgeons, after they had shewed all their skill on him, told him it was perished at the bone, and so must be cut off, but that he wanted 3l. to give one of them for his pains, as he informed me) which forth∣with changed colour and became red, and 3 of the 5 Ulcers closed up, and the rest within a few hours afterwards; so that he went out well, that
could hardly by the help of his staff craul in, and within two dayes afterwards he fell to his Labour (being a Mason by Trade) and so continued seve∣ral Months afterwards to my knowledge, and to this instant (for ought I know.) The man was a York-shire man, one that the Right Honourable the Earl of Cork brought from thence, and employed about the making of his Park-Wall nigh Lismore. This and the former instances I relate unto you, That you may not seek far for the confirmation of the Truth, if you or others should distrust my Report. The Thursday following I went to see Colonel Phaire at Cahirmony in the County of Cork, who when I came, told me he was vexed with an Ague; my Reply was, that through Gods blessing I could cure him: He told me that I was welcome, and within an hour it would seize him, who thought it impossible for him to live two fits more, for af∣ter the cold fit his hot one continued for four∣teen hours in that extremity, that no Fever could be more violent: accordingly as he had said his cold fit arrested him, and then I bid him to give me his hand, which he did, and it pleased God that from that time his Fit left him so that he had it no more: Then there came several People to his House troubled with several Diseases, desiring me for Gods sake to cure them (at which passage I was much amazed, not having told him nor any one, but my Wife and Brother, of the Impulse I had, which was but the Sunday before) some had
the Ague, several others the Falling-sickness, others the Kings-Evil, one the Fever, some pains, some Aches and lameness, on whom I put my hands, little thinking that the Pains would skip and fly from place to place till they did run out, but that the persons might be cured without any such mo∣tion by the laying on of my hands; and several, nay most of all Diseases were immediately cured, and those that came exceeding lame, and so had continued for many years (by their own Re∣ports and others) went well home rejoicing and praising God: At which extraordinary appea∣rance of God, the Lord knows my soul was wrapt up with wonder and amazement, and my heart filled with praises and thanksgivings to the Al∣mighty and most merciful Lord God, to whom be the Glory, Power, and Praise for evermore ascribed: and certainly my heart melted into tears, and has often since with this conside∣ration, That the Holy One of Israel among so many millions of men more pious, more wise, and more learned, should make choice and use of so poor, so vile, and so contemptible a wretch as I am, to be so peculiar an Instrument in his hand of shewing mercy and deliverance to afflicted poor creatures: Thus much I can say, it was for no worth or sanctity of mine, for I acknowledge mine iniquities, and my sins are not hid from me, and confess it is thy mercy in Jesus my blessed Sa∣viour, that I have not been consumed long since, but preserved to this moment, to the praises and
glory of thy Name, to whom my soul doth of∣fer up daily (as is most just and due) new songs of Mercy and Deliverance on my own account, and others to whom thou extendest thy boun∣tiful favours. These considerations, Sir, transport me, carrying me from the Relation of what has been done by the Instrument, to the commemoration and admi∣ration of the first and principal Agent, Jehovah: But I know this Digression will not seem harsh in your ears, whose heart like a well tun'd Instru∣ment is strung with Prayer and Praises; and there∣fore I will take yet a further latitude before I re∣turn to the Narrative part of my discourse as to matter of fact, by answering some few Queries or Objections, which I have often heard from many, which may not seem impertinent to be placed here, That it may prove a Bridle to their tongues for the future. The first Quaery is, What need had God to cure Diseases in this Age of the world by any extraordinary means, when as there is no new Doctrine to be expected, or promulgated? and many the like fond and con∣fident assertions tending to this purpose. To which I answer, First, They are not of God Almighties Privy Council, neither have they so much reason or Religion as confidence; for if they had, they would be more sober and less presumptuous then to interrogate what his mind or will is in doing what they see (de facto) done, and so rather with
humble thoughts admire and praise him, whose mercy endureth for ever, then expostulate the cause of things, why and wherefore he has done it, or made use of such Instruments; as one quae∣ried of me at a Great Mans Table, and would have reason wherefore God did make choice of me sooner then another to do things in an extra∣ordinary manner, or what it was he saw in me more then another man, and many such Questi∣ons; my Reply was a smile, which was the best I could use in answering such fond Enquirers. But by the way, Sir. Give me leave to presuppose 2 or 3 Reasons why or wherefore God should now cure diseases in an extraordinary manner. The first is to con∣vince this Age of Atheism, which (I am sorry to say it) many of our pretended Wits I fear are fall∣ing into, who make it their pastime to deride at Jesus and Christianity, who cannot yet but be∣lieve Jesus to be God, when they see pains and diseases to vanish, and evil Spirits flye his Power; as I have good cause to believe the Falling-sick∣ness and other Distempers I have met withal some∣times to be, which I intend upon another occasi∣on to prove by such Reasons drawn from my own experience, as may convince any man that is but a curious Observer, and trusts not the Writings of men that speak but their thoughts in cases of this nature, more then his own eyes or the eyes of faithful witnesses. Next, the goodness of God, out of compassion to poor distressed man, may
make use of never so worthless an Instrument to magnifie his own mercy and power, as he did of a brazen Serpent in the wilderness, that the glory and praise of all may be solely ascribed unto him, who by a little dust and clay can cure, and cause diseases to run through men, which no Physick could move. Next, God may, to abate the pride of the Papists (that make Miracles the undenia∣ble Manifesto of the truth of their Church) make use of a Protestant to do such strange things in the face of the Sun, which they pretend to do in Cells. There may also other Reasons be given, and such as may tend to Gods glory, but I shall decline mentioning of them, lest I fall under the lash of unmerciful Pens, and the censure of Cri∣ticks, knowing that Truth it self is sometimes better concealed than published. In the next place many demand of me, Why some are cured and not all, and if this work were of God all would be cured? To which Que∣stion I make this Answer; That God may please to make use of such means by me as shall operate according to the disposition of the Patient; and therefore cannot be expected to be like effectual in all. They also demand further, Why some are cured at once coming and not all; and why the pains should flye immediately out of some, and take such ambages in others; and why it should go out of some at their eyes, some at their fingers, some at their toes, some at their noses, others at their ears or mouths? To which I say; If all
these things could have a plain and rational ac∣count given of them, then would there be no rea∣son to account them strange. Let them but tell me what substance that is which removes and goes out with so great expedi∣tion, and it will be more easie to resolve their Questions; but till then let them be silent and ad∣mire the works of God, whose ways are past finding out, and whose Majesty is not confined to time, manner, or measure. Some will know of me why or how I do pursue some pains from place to place, till I have chased them out of the Body by laying my hands on the outside of the cloaths only (as is usual) and not all pains. To which I answer; That I and others have by frequent experience been abundantly sa∣tisfied that it is so, though I am not able to give a reason why it should be so; although I am apt to believe, there are some pains which afflict men after the manner of Evil-Spirits, which kind of pains cannot endure my hand, nay not my glove, but flye immediately, though 6 or 8 Coats and Cloaks be put betwixt the parties body and my hand; as at York-house the Lady Ranaloughs, and divers other places since I came to London (where many wise and learned men have been present, as well as frequently in Ireland) has been mani∣fested. Sir, I hope you will pardon me when I relate to you my own Observations, and what my Ex∣perience inclines me to believe, in saying that I
have met with several Instances which seemed to me to be Possessions by dumb Devils, deaf Devils, and talking Devils; and that to my apprehension, and others present, several evil Spirits one after the other have been pursu'd out of a Woman, and every one of them have been like to choak her (when it came up to her Throat) before it went forth; and when the last was gone, she was per∣fectly well, and so continued. There have been others that have faln down immediately as soon as they have seen me, which the Mayor of Worcester, Colonel Birch, Major Wilde, and many hundreds both at Worcester, and here, and other places, were eye-witnesses of; many, when they have but heard my voice, and have been tormented in so strange a manner that no one that has been present could conceive it less then a Possession; as I will instance in one at York-house (where Sir John Hinton, Colo∣nel Talbot, aed many others were present) who had somewhat within her which would swell her Body to that excessive degree on a sudden as if it would burst her; and then as soon as I put my hand on that part of her Body where it did rise up, it would fly up to her Throat (or some other place), and then it would cause her neck to swell half so big again, and then almost choak her, then blind her, and make her dumb and foam, and sometimes fly into her hand, and so contract and fasten it, that nei∣ther Sir J. Hinton, or any else that did try (as there were many) could with all their strength open one finger of her hand; nor would it fly his hand
in the least, nor any other persons there, till I put my hand on it, or my glove; nay, I oftentimes brought it up into her Tongue (by running my hand on her Body, on the out-side of her Cloathes, up to her Throat) which it has swoln in an instant nigh as big again, and has been seen plainly to play from place to place, and at length with great violence of belching (which did almost choak her, and force her eyes to start out of her head) it went forth, and so the Woman went away well. Whether this were a natural Distemper, let any one judg that is either a Divine, a Philoso∣pher, or Physitian. I could instance you in fourty as strange or stranger; but I will go no further then London, and places adjoyning, for instances of this nature. Now, Sir, another Question hereon will arise (which I have often times heard from others) be∣fore I proceed; and that is, Whether this opera∣tion of my Hand proceeds from the Temperature of my Body, or from a Divine Gift, or from both? To which I say, That I have reason to believe that there is something in it of an extraordinary Gift of God: The Reasons and Arguments which incline me to this belief are, That I am very sensible of the particular time when this Gift was first bestow∣ed on me, before which time I had it not; be∣cause, having my self for several years together been most violently troubled with the head-ach, though I have put my hand a thousand times to my head and held it, it would neither remove
nor run out the pains; but since God gave my hand this Gift, I have no sooner put it on my head where it was troubled, but I have removed and run it out. I have also oftentimes held my Friends heads formerly, when they have been in violent pains with the head-ach; but I never could hear them say their pain removed or ceased, which now immediately it do's in very many. What the natural efficacy of effluvias may be I leave others to judge; and I suppose no man will question but that an ex∣traordinary Gift may be exercised by natural means, or that God may confer in an extraordi∣nary manner such a temper of Body upon a person as may by a natural efficacy produce these effects: Only by the way I shall suggest to you an Experi∣ment made at the House of that excellent Person your Sister, the Lady Ranalaghs, where I tried (to satisfie the curiosity of some there) with a Napkin which I rubbed my breast withal, and with my Shirt which I had pulled off, being very hot, whe∣ther that would remove the pains of a Woman which was in strange fits there (as my glove, be∣ing tried, did oftentimes) and it would not. I could use many more Instances, and answer se∣veral other Objections; but I think that will be more proper hereafter; and therefore I shall now return again to matter of fact, by letting you know that great Multitudes from divers places re∣sorted to me, so that I could have no time to fol∣low my own occasions, nor enjoy the company of my Family and Friends: whereupon I set 3
days in the week apart (from 6. in the morning till 6. at night) to lay my hands on all that came, and so continued for some months at home: But the multitudes which came daily were so great, that the neighbouring Towns were not able to ac∣commodate them; whereon for the good of o∣thers I left my home and went to Youghall, where great multitudes resorted to me, not only of the Inhabitants, but also out of England; so that the Magistrates of the Town told me, that they were afraid that some of the sick people that came to me out of England might bring the Infection into the place: whereon I retired again to my house at Affane, where (as at Youghall) I observed three days by laying my hands on all that came, what∣soever the diseases were (and many were cured and many were not); so that my Stable, Barn, and Malt-house were filled with sick people of all di∣seases almost: yet so great was the Providence of God, that I do not remember that in all that time any one of my Family (though I touched them in my house) was ever infected by them; neither did any of them, though they herded all together, infect one the other. But this by the way. The Dean of Lismore (my reverend and wor∣thy Friend) by orders from the Bishop and Cler∣gy, hearing of Cures done in an extraordinary manner, cited me to appear at the Court of Lis∣more, to which Citation I gave Obedience, and accordingly appeared, desiring to know what
they had to lay to my charge; the answer of the Court was, that they heard I had effected Cures in an extraordinary manner, and therefore desi∣red to know whether the report were true or no: to which I answered, That that doubt might ea∣sily be satisfied, by coming one day to my House, where they might have an occular Testimony of Truth in that particular, or that they might sa∣tisfie themselves by several that were without the Court, that through Gods blessing were restored, by laying my hands on them, from several infir∣mities and diseases which they formerly laboured under: on which the Judge of the Court caused the Recorder to enter what I had said, and took for granted that people were cured in an extraor∣dinary way: Then the Judge asked me, where is your Licence for practising, as all Physitians and Chirurgeons ought to have from the Ordinary of the Diocess? my answer was, that I knew no rea∣son I had to take a Licence, since I took no Re∣ward from any one, and that I knew no Law of the Nation, which prohibited any person from doing what good he could to his Neighbours; yet notwithstanding because I had no Licence (nei∣ther would I take any, not expecting any advan∣tage by what I did) I was prohibited from laying my hands on any for the future: which Order I observed for two dayes, but going to the Town of Copoqueen, where there were many poor people, that came out of England to me for several di∣stempers which they laboured under, and amongst
the rest, two that had the Falling-sickness, who no sooner saw me but they fell into their fits immedi∣ately, which caused so great compassion in me, that I could not, nor durst not deny them my help; whereupon I put my hands on them, and by the power of God restored them to their senses forth∣with, and pursued their Pains from place to place, till they went out of them; after that I fell to my former practice, and observed the three dayes which I formerly set apart, whereupon the Lord Bishop of the Diocess sent for me, and tole me that he required me to lay my hands on no more within his Diocess: but I answered his Lordship, that I conceived that I transgressed no Law of God or man in doing the works of Charity, and therefore I thought my self obliged thereby not to deny any man my help (whilest God enabled me to do good) that came to me: And so I part∣ed with his Lordship, and returned to my own house, where I persevered in my former practice both at home, Dublin, and elsewhere, wheresoe∣ver my occasions called me, till at length about January last, at the request of the Right Honou∣rable the Earl of Orrery, I was perswaded to come over into England, to the Right Honourable the Viscontess Conway, who for many years had la∣boured under a most violent Head-ach (which many of the ablest Physitians in England and France had unsuccessfully attempted the cure of.) And so did accordingly, resolving to land by King-Road nigh Bristol, and so go to the habitation of
my Lord Conway in Warwick-shire, concealed; but the wind falling short we were forced into Mine∣head, where I was so well known by several Pati∣ents that had been with me in Ireland, that I could not conceal my self; and so was by the Country (as I went) resorted to from place to place till I came to Ragley, the residence of the Right Honou∣rable and most worthy person my Lord Viscont Conway, to whom I am for ever endeared and ob∣liged; for his Lordships extraordinary favour and respect (notwithstanding I could not remove or abate his Ladies pain in the least;) which kindness of his I beseech God to return to him a thousand fold: but finding her Ladiships pain incurable by me, I resolved speedily to return home, but at the entreaty of my Lord Conway I remained with his Honour at Ragley three weeks or a month, where many hundreds daily came to me from divers Counties, and many were cured of their Diseases and Distempers, and many were not: from thence at the entreaty of the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Worcester, I went thither (where I met with several high Distempers and Diseases, many whereof I bless God were cured) resolving to stay four or five dayes with them, but in the interim I received an Order from the Lord Arlington, by command of his Majesty, to come to White-Hall, which I forthwith observed (being glad to be freed from so great crouds as were at Worcester, where I was like to be bruised to death) resolving within three or four dayes to return to my Lord
Conways again, but by the entreaties of Justice Godfrey and others, my honoured and worthy riend, I was perswaded to stay in these parts, daily doing what good the Lord enabled me, till I met with your Honour, whose Judgment and Wisdom was so great that you would not credit or distrust matters of fact on bare report, and were therefore pleased several times at the place where I used to be in Lincolns-Inn-fields (and else∣where) to be an eye witness of what was done, and to bring several other learned and worthy Persons with you, that they might also bear testi∣mony to the truth of what appeared, and to en∣courage me to give this account to the world, and to take Testimonials of such remarkable Cures as I could remember were done since I came to Lon∣don, and in the presence of men of Note: which Circumstance I therefore mention to you, that it may not be imagined that this is an account of all the Distempers I have been instrumental in cu∣ring, since I have omitted all those at which it did not happen that eminent persons were present, and willing to attest them; and all those other Cures which had been already performed in seve∣ral other places, divers of which were so extraor∣dinary that if it be desir'd, I may hereafter give you an account of them apart: Which Testimonials I herewith present unto you (but what was done before your coming to London, I can give little ac∣count of, it not being my custom to ask any mans name, or the place from whence he came, or whi∣ther
he goes, till within this Month or five weeks) by which the matter of Fact (I hope) will be so clear in it self, that I need not use any further arguments to gain belief in the Reader; I shall not here make use of any Cure done else-where, or of any common, or trivial one, or of more than what I conceive will be sufficient to evi∣dence Truth, to Gods glory, and the satisfaction of all good men: and when this is done (God-willing) I will retire to my own home and Fami∣ly. Now whether I have done my duty as a Chri∣stian in imploying that Talent which God had in∣trusted me withall, to the good of People distres∣sed and afflicted, or no, judge you, and every good man. Thus far I appeal to the world, whe∣ther I have taken rewards, deluded, or deceived any man; and whether I have not made it my constant practise, when any came that I judged was incurable, to desire them to repair to their own home, and not put themselves to further ex∣pence and trouble: God (to whom I appeal, de∣siring him still to shield me with his mercy, and to keep me humble and faithful) knows what in∣juries and reproaches I have suffered, what la∣bours and dangers I have undergone, and what losses and crosses I have sustained for his names sake, and the good of others. All that I will say, is, I pray God forgive my Enemies, and make me never weary of well-doing, let the world judge and say what they please, that I may be found a faithful Steward when I come to give up my last
account. This is a brief and faithful account of his life and carriage, who though he have not now leisure and privacy to enlarge, nor answer all the Quaeries you made me in the Paper you put a while since into my hands, may yet hereaf∣ter find opportunity to give you satisfaction about those of them that are not already in this Paper taken notice of by, SIR, London, May 8. 1666. Your faithful Honourer, and humble Servant, Val. Greatrak's.
TESTIMONIALS. April 26. 1666. Mr Boyle's, Sir W. Smith's, Dr. Denton's, and Dr. Faireclough's Testimony. ANne Kelly of Shalin gate in the Parish of Old Windsor, 21 years old, hath had the Dead Palsey 14 years on the right side, not able to go, nor to lift her hand to her head: She was first touched by Mr. Greatrak's the beginning of April 1666. who found ease the first day she was touch∣ed, and so got strength more and more every day; and now, being the 26th of April 66. she goes well without help of any stick, and hath very good use of her right Arm, heretofore useless; only she goes as if her right Leg were somewhat shorter then the left. Examined 26 Apr. 66. by Robert Boyle. W. Smith. Gul. Denton. M. D. Ja. Faireclough, M. D. Mr. Boyle's, Dr. Denton's, and Dr. Faireclough's Testimony. LEwis Bonivent aged 27 years, upon a cold ta∣ken after Child-birth, about a month before Michaelmas last fell into a lameness in her should∣ers, arms, knees, and hands, with a violent pain in her stomach, head, and ears: Upon the first strok∣ing
by Mr. Greatrak's (which was about 3 weeks since) she could lift her hands to her head, which she could not do before; upon the second strok∣ing she recovered her knees, of which she had no use as to going before, but went upon all four; and upon the third stroking (which was in our presence) she could go without rocking or wav∣ing, and feels her self well at this present. Examined 26 Apr. 66. By Robert Boyle. Gul. Denton, M. D. Ja. Faireclough, M. D. Mr. Boyle's, Sir William Smith's, Dr. Denton's, and Dr. Faireclough's Testimony. ELenor Dickinson, aged 45 years, had a Dropsie 12 years in her belly only, without any tu∣mour in her Legs, but with a drought, was strok∣ed by Mr. Greatrak's about 16 days since, at 7. a clock at night, and drank at the same time about 6 spoonfuls of his water, and rubbed some of it on her body, which she did of her own accord: the same night she felt a queasiness in her stomach, and about midnight she felt a rumbling in her bel∣ly and stomach, and brake great store of wind per annum & per partem domesticam; and then she made water in very great quantity, as 4, 5, or 6 gallons in 24 hours, and continued making wa∣ter, though in lesser quantity; so that at this pre∣sent day the skin of her belly is as empty as a
glove or purse, and wraps over, and hath no drought, and her belly quite down. Examined 26 Apr. 66. By Robert Boyle. W. Smith Baronet. W. Denton, M. D. Ja. Faireclough, M. D. Elenor Dickinson's Certificate. ELenor Dickinson of Clarkenwell Widow, aged 45 years or thereabouts, having been trou∣bled with an exceeding Timpany in her Belly for the space of 12 years past, and used all means possible for her health, insomuch that the prosecu∣tion thereof cost her above 60 l. but altogether ineffectual. The 16th of this instant April she came into Lincolns-Inne-Fields, the place where Mr. Valentine Greatrak's used to lay his hands on the diseased; but not being able to come near him by reason of the throng, she snatch'd some of his urine and drank it, some of which she also put into her ears, which were so stopp'd she could not hear, and immediately she heard the noise of the people all round about her: Then going home, some hours after the same urine be∣gan to work in her belly, and she voided near upon 4 gallons of water, with a great quantity of wind at her privy parts; and her belly which was before 2 yards in compass, doth not now ex∣ceed 3 quarters of a yard. She likewise saith, that at the same time she vomited out of her mouth several pieces of thick skin drawn over
with blew veins like to a fresh bladder: so that now she confesses her self to be perfectly cured, and hath ascertain'd this as a Truth under her own hand, April 21. 1666. Elenor Dickinson. In the presence of us who saw her Tim∣panied belly, and af∣terwards saw her perfectly well. Albertus Otto Faber, M. D. M. R. Ja. Faireclough Med. Tho. Pooley M. A. Note, The 19th day she came again to Mr. Gra∣trak's, and was by him stroked on the belly, which he then found lank and loose like an empty purse; and being in the like manner stroked this 21. in∣stant, she continues perfectly well. Note also, That she was twice stroked by Mr. Greatrak's before the 16. day, viz. on the 12. and 14. dayes of the said month of April. Mr. Boyle's, Dr. Faireclough's, Mr. Williams's, and Mr. Coxe's Certificate. ANne the Wife of Thomas Field a Pastry Cook in Woodstreet, aged 28. afflicted with a vio∣lent Head-ach for five years, a blindness in both her eyes, insomuch that she was not able to di∣stinguish one person from another, at four yards distance; after three or four times stroking was perfectly freed of her pain in her head, and her eyes so amended, that she can now read a small
Print: After the first stroking of her head by Mr. Greatrak's, the pain immediately descended into her neck and shoulders, together with an hard swelling, both which continued for 14 dayes; then being stroked, the pain and swelling both de∣scended into her Legs, where it continued for 6 dayes, after which being stroked in those parts, the pains and swelling ceased. Attested by her self, 12. April 1666. Anne Field. In presence of Ro. Boyle. Ja. Faireclough M. D. Tho. Williams. Daniel Coxe. Walter Dolle's Certificate, attested by Mr. Boyle, 25. April 1666. WAlter Dolle, the Son of Walter Dolle Gold∣beater, at the Hand and Hammer in Pye-Corner, now servant to William Faithorn En∣graver, aged 19 years, was totally deprived of the use of his right hand, leg, and side, for the space of ten Months, insomuch that he had no more motion on that side than a dead Carkass, and had always two persons to help him to bed and from bed, and alwayes some to help him when he eat, and had natural evacuations; for whom his Father had been at much cost in Medicines, and upon divers eminent Physitians, but without the least help or hope of amendment: Until at length he applyed himself to Mr. Valentine Great∣rak's,
when he was brought to him in a Coach, and betwixt two persons into Justice Godfrey's house, where he was first stroked, and was thereby ena∣bled to walk alone immediately, which is about six weeks agoe; and since that time has grown daily in strength and vigour, and is now able to walk 2 or 3 miles without resting, or any manner of help, and begins to draw again in the way of his Masters Trade, having been 5 or 6 times stro∣ked by the said Mr. Greatrak's. Attested by him∣self and his Father, this day and year above written. Walter Dolle senior. Walter Dolle junior. In presence of Ro. Boyle. Ja. Faireclough M. D. William Yates. Mr. Boyle's, and Dr. Faireclough's Testimony. RObert Furnace a Mettleman in Clarkenwell Pa∣rish lame for 8 years, had been thrice in St. Bartholomews Hospital, for eleven weeks at one time, and nine or ten weeks a second time, and for a month the last time, without benefit, being in great pain in his hips and thighs, legs and feet, was stroked by Mr. Greatrak's, April 3. 1666. and found present ease in his hip upon the first touch of Mr. Greatrak's hand, wherewith the said Fur∣nace's pain was driven downward from place to place without much grievance, until it came to his foot, but when the pain was only in his foot, it was then most intollerable in it, which being gently stroked, he was quite freed from all
pain, and walked without his Crutches, which he could not have done for seven years before. At∣tested by himself this sixth day of April 1666. Robert Furnace. In presence of Ro. Boyle. Ja. Faireclough M. D. Mr. Hawtrey's Certificate attested by Mr. Boyle. JOhn Hawtrey of the Town of Burnham in the County of Bucks, being troubled with the Kings-Evil in his lips and nose for the space of two years, was (being thrice touched by Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, after the humour had broken out some∣thing in the affected place) perfectly cured. Which is affirmed to be true in his own writing. John Hawtrey. Written and attested before us, Ro. Boyle. Ja. Faireclough M. D. John Hawtrey. Sir William Smiths Letter to Dr. Faireclough April 6. 1666. SIR, ACcording to your desire I thought fit to give you an account of Cures, which up∣on my own knowledge I know to have been done by Mr. Valentine Greatrak's: One Thomas Burt a day Labourer, who lives in the same Pa∣rish
with me at Radcliff in the County of Bucks, was the beginning of Feb. last sent by me into Kent, to do some work for me there, and got an Ague, which held him very violently for many hours every fit, and likewise fell into his thigh and knee, and did very much swell in his knee, and put him to very great pain, so that he was forced to leave his work, and came to my house in Lincoln-Inn-fields, where he had his Ague as before, and the swelling of his knee I saw, which was very great, and made him so lame that he could scarce goe: I got Mr. Godfrey to procure him to be stroked by the said Mr. Greatrak's on Thursday the sixth of March in the morning, and he came to my house at noon and shewed me his knee, and the swelling was gone, and so was all his pain and lameness, and he had no more fits of his Ague; he is gone to his work again, and hath continued well ever since. A servant of mine own, William But, who likewise got an Ague at the same place in Kent, was cured by him without taking any thing for it, and continues well. A servant of mine, one Ma∣ry Dimmack, who nursed my eldest Son, hath had a sore leg almost these 8 years, which the Chirur∣geons said was a Cancer, but she could have no help for it, either from Chirurgeons or Phisitians, but it grew worse and worse; by stroking it four or five times it is in a manner healed, and I am con∣fident in a short time will be perfectly healed. I have likewise been present when I have seen him do very many great Cures, and namely pains in
the head I have seen him drive out of the body, and cure divers of the Sciatica, who as they said themselves had many years been lame with it; and one who came with crutches, and went a∣way without them. Sir, Your humble Servant, W. Smith. Sir William Smith's and Sir Nathaniel Hobart's Certificate. April 24. 1666. JOseph Warden, an able Seaman belonging to the Royal Charles, aged 45 years, labouring with violent pains in his hip, ham, and ancle, contracted with carrying out and wading in water, was sent the day abovesaid by Doctor Micklethwait to Mr. Greatrak's, out of S. Bartholomew's Hospital, where he had been for some time without success; and had his pains removed by the said Mr. Great∣rak's stroking, first out of his hip, then down his thigh and leg, until he had driven it quite out of his toes: Insomuch as he who came on his crutch∣es, walked up and down very lustily without them, and so departed, resolving speedily to re∣turn to his Ship. Also William Levell a Cook at the Cock in Lead∣en-hall-street, aged 24 years, troubled with a grie∣vous pain in his hip, especially when he walk'd, and a very great pain in his knee, when hee sate down, sent from the said Doctor out of the said Hospital, where he had been a Patient for ten months, had his pains likewise driven downwards
from his hip out of his toes; so that he confessed himself to be in perfect ease. Lastly, Francis Steele aged 63 years, sent from the said Doctor and Hospital, where he had con∣tinued about three weeks, had been disabled for 6 months to put on his cloaths, or to put his hands to his head, and sore pained and weakned in his knees, so that he could not walk, nor rise up when he was sate down, without help, had the perfect use of his arms restored, and could and did rise and walk without pain, help, or diffi∣culty, before us, W. Smith Baronet. Na. Hobart Knight, Master of the Chancery. Ja. Faireclough, M. D. Sir John Godolphin's Testimony. ANne Robinson, Servant to Major Wilmott next door to the Hand and Pen in Aldersgate-street, troubled with a Pthysick for the space of six years, was stroked 21 April 1666. and the pain removed out of her stomach into her left side; thence at a second stroking it removed into her thighs and legs; and lastly into her right foot and toes, whereinto (her eyes being covered) a pin was thrust divers times, without her feeling or being sensible of it, until her foot and toes were strok∣ed; but then she immediately started at the first touch of the pin, and she declared her pains
were gone, as well out of her foot and toes, as out of all other parts. In presence of J. Godolphin Knight. Alb. O. Faber Med. George Weldon. J. Faireclough M. D. Ed. Sleigh. John de Bruy. Note, That no blood issued upon the pricking of this womans toes, nor of divers others who have been pricked in the like case, before me, J. Faireclough, M. D. Colonel Weldon's Certificate. THese are to certifie, That I have several times had someinspection into several Cures that have been done by the hands of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, which I cannot attri∣bute to proceed but from some extraordinary Power. My self having observed very much his life and conversation, and by my Enquiry of several others who were formerly ac∣quainted with him, I could never hear him justly impeached of any unhandsome carriage in his deportment. I having examined several persons before they came under his hands what their Infirmities were, and how long they had been troubled with their griefs, who have answered me, some a year, some more, some less; and after he had done with them, I examined what benefit they had received, who an∣swered very much; for before some could not go, nor move their hands to their heads, but after he had done with them, they could do both, my self having been a Spectator of se∣veral of those passages. Besides, I cannot but testifie some experience of my own self, by whom I am satisfied I did re∣ceive a very great benefit, I having a very great Fit of the Stone. I having not risen out of my bed two hours, but a violent Fit of the Stone seized on me; insomuch that I could
not stand on my feet, nor make water, and was going into my bed again; and in less then half a quarter of an hour after he had touched me, I did void a very great lump of gravel, besides several smaller parcels; after which I did make water very freely▪ and was very well, and have so con∣tinued ever since. In witness whereof I have set my hand. George Weldon. Alderman Knight's Certificate. GRace the Daughter of Alderman William Knight of London, aged nine years or neer thereunto, after she had had the Small Pox and Measles, continued troubled with a Flux of Rheum in her left eye for the space of five years or upwards, insomuch that it grew less then the other in the ap∣prehension of her Parents, who thereby much afflicted, used all lawful means for her help and relief; but all in vain, un∣til she was brought to Mr. Greatrak's, who divers times ap∣plyed his hand and spittle to her eye; by which means the flux of Rheum has been perfectly stayed for the space of three weeks last past, and her Eye at present is very well, and 'tis hoped will so continue. This is believed to be truth By William Knight. Attested by Alderman Knight▪ Father of the said Child. In presence of Ja. Faireclough M. D. John Cresset. Sir Charles Doe's Sons Letter to Dr. Faireclough. SIR, WHereas you desire to know what effect Mr. Greatrak's hand had on me; this may satisfie you, that the Head-ach which I laboured under 3 or 4 years (and used what means the Physitians prescribed, though unsuccessful∣ly) which oftentimes was very violent, was cured by the laying on of Mr. Greatrak's hand, in the manner following; viz. about the beginning of March last, hearing that Mr. Greatrak's was at my Lord Mayors house, I repaired thither
unto him, and desired him (having the Head-ach violently then on me) that he would be pleased to use his endeavours to cure me; whereupon he demanded of me in what part of my head the pain lay, which I shewed him; and thereup∣on he laid his hand upon the place affected, and immediate∣ly I found the pain remove to another place of my head, which I also directed him to, who pursued it till it went out of my head; and so following it from place to place (laying his hands on that place of my body whither my pain did remove) till he drove it into my foot, where it was very painful to me, till at length he chased it out at my toe, I not putting off my stocking: Which he did at two several times, the pain (as I conceive) being divided; whereupon I forth∣with found my self freed from all manner of pain both in head and body, and have so continued ever since (blessed be God) in perfect health: And not only was I freed from the aforesaid pain of the head, but also from a constant bleeding which continually attended it, whereas I did use to bleed every day, (or every other day at least) which bleeding I am very little troubled with: This is that, Sir, which I affirm to be true, who am Your humble Servant, John Doe. May 9. 1666. Sir Abraham Cullen's, Mr. Rushout's, and Captain Owen's Testimonies. WE do certifie in behal of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's that we saw a great Cure wrought by him upon the body of one William Jones (inhabiting in the Parish of Mort∣lack, where we also reside) he having been very much brui∣sed, by reason whereof he was in great danger of his life: but by the prevalency of Mr. Greatrak's stroking, and the blessing of God thereon, was perfectly removed and drove out at his toes, after many removals from place to place: the said Jones continues in perfect health, it being three weeks
since the said person was cured, and this we affirm under our hands, this 9. day of April, 1666. Abraham Cullen Bar. William Rushout. John Owen. Sir Abraham Cullen's, Mr. Rushout's, and Captain Owen's Testimony. WE doe further certifie, that we heard Dorothy Wardant affirm that she was for twelve years last past very much troubled with a great pain in her side, as also a vio∣lent pain in her head, she likewise had at the same time an Ague that held her about three weeks, all which Mr. Valen∣tine Greatrak's his stroking of her cured, and from that time has not felt any of her former infirmities, it being 3 weeks since she was stroked; which caused such violent motions when the pains flew from place to place, that the raged Doro∣thy swounded away. Given under our hands, April 9. 1666 Abraham Cullen Bar. William Rushout. John Owen. Edwin Brewns. Dr. Wilkin's, and Mr. Sankey's Certificate. I Do hereby certifie whom it may concern, that I have been present at the stroking of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, on the 17. 19. and 24. dayes of this present April 1666. At each of which times I found several persons about him, who pro∣fessed to have received great benefit by his hand, both as to the cure of swelling, Ulcers, Epilepsies, driving away of pains, &c. And I my self did at each of these times see several cures wrought by him, which to me did seem very strange and extraordinary: As particularly that which was perform∣ed on the 17. day, on a woman about 30 years of age, who (according to her own relation) had some weeks before been cured by Mr. Greatrak's of the falling-sickness, and did
now come to him to be stroked for a pain in her head; upon his putting of his hand on her forehead, she said that her pain did forthwith remove to her shoulders; upon the laying of his hand on the Cloths of her shoulder, she said it slipped into her arm, and so at another move, into her hand; from whence being by his touch driven into her fingers, which thereupon grew cold and stiff, I took her fingers between my hands, endeavouring by friction to recover them to some warmth, and limberness, and having continued this friction for some while, I let her hand goe, and would have perswa∣ded her that she was cured: but she replyed that the pain still continued upon her: to which Mr. Greatrak's added, that the upper joints of her fingers, into which he had driven the cause of her pain, were dead, and that if she were wound∣ed in them, she would neither feel it, nor would any blood come: for the tryal of which, having first several times pinch∣ed the pulp of her fingers betwixt my nails with great vio∣lence, I did several times thrust in a pin neer the bone, but the woman was not sensible of either, neither did any blood come: but upon two or three slight strokes of his hand, she professed to be eased of her pain, and her fingers to be re∣stored to their wonted temper; and then being but gently pricked with a pin, she was sensible of it, and the blood followed upon it. This I can truly, and do willingly te∣stifie. John Wilkins D. D. What is here certified by that worthy Doctor Wilkins, I was present at it, and as carefully as I could observed the same things: and do therefore subscribe the same Testi∣mony. C. Sankey.
Dr. Whichcot's Certificate. SIR, WHereas you desire some account of Mr. Greatrak's, I make this return: I have seen and been present at Aulcestr and Ragly in Warwick-shire, and since in London, when and where Mr. Valentine Greatrak's hath relieved and restored very many persons miserably afflicted with several distempers, particularly the Evil, the Falling-sickness, Con∣vulsions, Palsey, Sores, and Ulcers, Aches, and Pains, Deaf∣ness, Dimness of sight, Lameness, and Feebleness of limbs, and other great Evils, so as that the parties afflicted have freely and abundantly expressed and declared that they found themselves much better than they were before, eased of their aches and pains, and restored to the use of their limbs and senses, whereas they had been disabled or depri∣ved for many years before: I have been present when sun∣dry persons thus helped and relieved, have with an abun∣dance of joy and chearfulness given God thanks for the great benefit they had received by means of Mr. Greatrak's: I have been in company of persons of good understanding and cre∣dit, who have of their own accord declared and testified that they themselves have been eye-witnesses of the like good effects: 'Tis true, he doth not cure such in whom Na∣ture is spent, or where the parts or principles of nature al∣together are defective, to whom at first coming to him he doth commonly declare that he cannot help them: Some others at the first or second application to him he doth not help, who afterwards are restored at their oftner coming to him. And as concerning the way of his curing maladies, I have very diligently observed him, but did never perceive him to use any form of words, nor saw him do any thing (in my judgment) liable to any suspicion of any ill art or device. And for his conversation I have been much in his company, for the time of his being in England, and I never saw any ill behaviour or unseemly carriage in him, nor any
intemperance, disorder, or excess: I have great cause from mine own observation to esteem him a sober and well-go∣verned person, affable, civil, and courteous in his converse, and for his temper in Religion, he is not (so far as I could discern) of any fond perswasion or vain conceit in matter of Religion, but a devout acknowledger of God and of Je∣sus Christ, in whose name alone, and by whose power he professeth upon all occasions to act: He declares himself a Protestant, and an hearty lover of the Reformed Religion, and professeth to worship God according of the Rules and Principles therof, and to live in the obedience of, and communion with the Church of England: I believe him to be of an unexceptionable and unblamable conversation, through the experience I have had of him: And for my own particular, he hath been to me an happy instrument of God; to relieve and ease me of a very dangerous and painful ma∣lady, which for many years had greatly disabled and sorely afflicted me, for which before my coming to him I could have no remedy; but notwithstanding the use of all means I could hear of, which all proved unsuccessful, I was wholly left in despair of ever obtaining a Cure, yet I neglected not the advice of persons of art and skill: But now by his means, and his often application of his hand and spittle, I am rid of all the pain and inflammation of the part disaffe∣cted and the tumour, fungous, and superfluous flesh, for∣merly very grievous to me, is greatly abated, and decreaseth more and more daily; so that I am in very great hope that in a little more time by his means it will wholly wast away and consume, as the greater part since his touching already is, through Gods mercy, for which I give hearty thanks to the Divine goodness. This I account my self bound, in acknow∣ledgment of God as principal, and of doing right to Mr. Greatrak's as his instrument, to testifie and declare, and in witness whereof I subscribe my name, April 3. 1666. Benjamin Whichcot D. D.
Dr. Cudworth's Certificate. SIR, I Can certifie you that the tumours in my little Son Charles his breast are very happily cured by Mr. Greatrak's, who opened the same, and let out the corrupt matter, and since the sores are healed, and the wounds dryed up. April 18. 1666. . Cudworth, D. D. Dean Rust's Certificate. BEing desired to give my testimony of Mr. Greatrak's and his Cures, I do hereby certifie, That I have with some curiosity been an observer of him and his operations; and I take him to be a person of an honest and upright mind, a free and open spirit, a cheerful and agreeable humour, an inof∣fensive conversation, of large and generous principles, and that carries on no design of faction or interest. I have been an eye-witness of many hundreds that have come under his hands, especially during his being at my Lord Conway's for three weeks or a month together, and I must profess my self convinc'd (however it be, whether from an immediate gift, or a peculiarity of complexion) that he has a vertue more then ordinary; for though I have seen him touch many with little or no success, yet it must not be denyed but that I have seen too in very many instances by his spittle and the touch or stroking of his hand, humours put into odde and violent fer∣mentations, pains strangely flye before him, till he has cha∣sed them out at some of the extreme parts of the body; the Kings-evil in a few days wonderfully dryed up, knobs or ker∣nels brought to a suppuration; tumours ripened; ulcerous sores skinn'd and amended; hard swellings in womens breasts abated; cold and senseless limbs restored to heat and life; scabs all over the body, which have been for many years, and counted incurable, deadned and dryed up; many people relieved in cases of deafness, lameness, dimness of sight; twenty several persons in Fits of the Falling-sickness,
or Convulsions, or Hysterical Passions, (for I am not wise e∣nough to distinguish them) upon the laying his hand upon their breasts (often upon the top of their cloaths) within a few minutes brought to their senses, so as to be able to tell where their pain lay, which he has followed till he has pur∣sued it out of the body. I can say little to the permanency of his Cures, many (I believe) do continue firm, but seve∣ral of those of the Falling-sickness I heard had relaps'd afore I left the Country, but after much longer intervals then they were wont to enjoy. There was a poor woman at Aulcester that I sent to speak with at my coming away, who had been troubled with these Fits ever since she was 13 years old, and I take her to be now betwixt fifty and threescore; and for some years past there was scarce a day that she had been free from them, and she was inclin'd to them to that degree, that coming neer any hot meat would bring her Fit upon her. Mr. Greatrak's brought her out of her Fit, and she had then continued well by the space of 3 weeks, and could eat or dress hot meat without any disturbance: what has since be∣come of her I can give no account. The Forms of wordshe uses are, God Almighty heal thee for his mercy sake (or) for Je∣sus sake; and if they profess to receive any benefit, he bids them give God the praise; and that (so far as I can judge) with a sincere devotion. This is in short the matter of fact, which is testified to be true by me, March 28. 1666. Geo. Rust, D. D. & Dean of Connor. Mr. Patrick's Certificate. HAving been present sundry times when great numbers of people resorted to Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, and beheld many wonderful Cures done by his hand, I could not refuse his desire, that I would in writing declare something of what I have seen; and therefore do certifie as followeth: I was by, when he stroked a Servant of Mr. Faithornes (an excellent Engraver near Temple-Bar) who had been lame a
twelve-month by a dead Palsey on the right side. After the second stroking he was able to go about the room with the help of a stick, and in a little time grew to such strength, that he now can work at his Trade again. The Wife of Samuel Smith of Newbury has been afflicted with a violent pain in her back and hip seven years; which made her so lame, that she could not stir without some tor∣ment, and by the continuance of it, her life was become (as she said) a burden to her. By gentle stroking he brought it down to her foot, and in a few minutes (renewing his strok∣ing in those places where she said any pain was remaining) drove it quite away, so that she could go without her staff as fast as any of us there present. I have seen her several times since, and she continued in the same strength; only coming to him sometimes to confirm it to her (and to remove some small grudgings which she had of it) before she went into the Country. There was also a little after, a well known Artist in this Town who desired his help, having lain in intolerable pains (as himself told me) for the space of eleven months. I saw him stroke his arm, and thigh, and leg, whither he pursued the pain till he chased it out at his foot, and the Patient said he was perfectly free. I hear indeed since that his pain is re∣turned; but I have good reason to conclude, that if he had applyed himself again to the same hand which eased him be∣fore, he might have received a greater benefit: For I know one whom he gave relief unto that had been long tormented in that fashion; but within a day or two was in such pain that she could not stir in her bed, and judged her self worse then ever. Upon my desire that he would go again to her, (for she could not come to him) he went, and after a few gentle strokings freed her so perfectly from her pains, that for a considerable time after she felt none at all; and I hope still remains at ease. These are but a few of those Instances which I could give of this nature: To which if I should adde what I have seen
him do in the case of Deafness, of the Evil, Fits of the Mo∣ther, Wind, and such like, it would be enough to fill a Vo∣lume: And yet I have not seen half so many Cures as other Persons of unspotted credit have done, who had the leasure and opportunity to be more frequently with him. I never yet met with any, who would have the patience diligently to attend him for a few hours, who came away unsatisfied about the reality of such things as are reported. Nay some persons (not too forward of belief) have been convinced in a few minutes: a small acquaintance and short converse with him, would also soon satisfie those who doubt, that he is a man of no designs: for he appears to me of too free an hu∣mour, and open disposition, to be able to conceal and dis∣guise himself: There is nothing of reservedness to be seen in his temper: I could never discover any thing that looks like craft and subtilty in him: He seems to be of a singular good nature, and to be void of all covetousness, pride, or hatred of others: His charity and good will to mankind seems to be great; and to be the only thing that moves him to engage himself in such perpetual labours: I never heard him speak any words unbecoming a Christian: He professes all loyalty to his Prince, due reverence to his spiritual Governors, and to be of the Reformed Religion, as it is here by Law esta∣blished. All which considered, me thinks he merits much respect: and if this Testimony of mine may do him any ser∣vice I shall be very glad of it; because of the obligation I have to him for a Cure done upon my self. April 14. 1666. Simon Patrick Rector of St. Pauls Church Covent-Garden▪ Sir William Smith's, Mr. Windham's, and Dr. Evan's Testimony, April 3. 1666. RObert Furnace of Clerkenwel had a Sciatica in both hips, for the space of 8 years, as upon examination he affirmed: upon Mr. Greatrak's stroking the parts affected, the
distemper went out at his toes, so that he walked away with∣out a stick, who came into the room with Crutches. The same day Elizabeth Sharp of Dowgate in Thames-street, who had a pain in one of her legs for neer 12 years (so that she could not lift her leg from the ground,) upon the same persons stroking of it, she could not only lift it from the ground, but also walk upon it. W. Smith. Tho. Windham. Geo. Evans D. D. Dr. Whichcot's, and Dr. Cudworth's Testimony. April the 3▪ 1666. ELizabeth (Bis) Thomas of Petty-France in Westminster, having been troubled two years with a violent pain from her head down her back; by stroking had it removed downwards, till at last it was driven out at her Toes. Done the 3d of April, in the sight of us being present. Benjamin Whichcot D. D. R. Cudworth D. D. Dr. Whichcot, and Dr. Evans Testimony. RObert Toples of Ellison in Stafford-shire, having had the Kings-Evil in his face in 2 places as big as two egs, in 3 dayes space was suppurated, and by Mr. Valentine Greatrak's had all the corruption and the roots taken out, and was made perfectly well. In presence of R. Cudworth. Benjamin Whichcot D. D. Geo. Evans D. D. Mry Jackson of Woodstreet was cured of an Imposthume above her eye, the corrupt matter being pressed out. B. Whichcot D. D.
Two Certificates from the Countess of Devonshire's. April 30. 1666. I Having been an Eye-witness of several very wonderful Cures performed by Mr. Greatrak's, and being desired to give under my hand what I know of them, I do affirm, That the Right Honourable the Countess of Devonshire's chief Cook, a man of about 55 years of Age, having been of a long time troubled with the Sciatica, was gently stroked by Mr. Greatraks's hand, and hath ever since continued very well, it being now almost 2 months since. I likewise saw a woman living in Roehampton, who had a great Wen over her Eye, which by a mischance she had gotten above four∣teen years since; only by having it launced, and the corrup∣tion twice pressed forth by Mr. Greatrak's, was perfectly cu∣red by him, without the use of any Plaister or other Chi∣rurgical remedy. I likewise saw a Man in the same Town, who had an ordinary Tertian Ague about three Quarters of a year, which afterwards turned into a Quartane, and had hung upon him almost half a year: This person I saw strok∣ed, who went immediately home very well, and hath ever since so continued. I likewise saw a Gentlewoman in the Countesses Family, immediately cured of a violent Fit of the Tooth-ach; and one of her Ladiships Gardeners (who had for some years a Cancer in his Nose, and for the curing of which he had without success consulted several Physitians) so much amended since the application of Mr. Greatraks's hand, that himself does not doubt of a perfect recovery. To those who find benefit from him he only bids them, Be thankful to God, to whom alone belongs the Glory. This I have been an Eye-witness of, and therefore do attest it un∣der my hand. Walter Stonehouse, Gentleman of the Horse to the Countess of Devon.
I Do also hereby attest the truth of this Testimonial of Mr. Stonehouse, having been an Eye-witness of the said par∣ticulars therein specified. And also I do further aver, That I was present at Mortlack, where I saw at Capt. Owen's house Mr. Greatrak's lay his hand upon several persons for divers Diseases, who were strangely cured of several Distempers which they laboured under several years; particularly Wal∣ter Jones his Son of Mortlack aforesaid, who was sorely bruised, brought in between two men; and upon his laying on of his hands, the said Walters pains run from place to place till they were forc'd out at his Toes; and immediately he acknowledged himself well, and went away without any help, and voided many clots of blood by stool, and out of his mouth, and also blood by urine; whereby he continues perfectly well to this instant, being about 5 weeks since. Also I saw a young man of Lambeth, who was for four years exceeding ill by a violent pain in his head; which pain Mr. Greatrak's drove out of his head into his body, where he drove it on the outside of his cloaths from place to place till he drove it into his feet, and so out at his toes. The truth hereof, and of several other things which I might in∣stance, I do hereby testifie under my hand, this thirtieth day of April, 1666. Richard Mulys, Auditor to the Right Honourable the Countess Dowager of Devon. Mr. Barcock's Certificate. BEnjamin Barcock Son of Mr. Edmund Barcock of the Pa∣rish of S. Bennet Fynck, London, was ever since Micha∣elmas 1664. affected, daily by several Fits, with tormenting gripings in the bottom of his Belly, and in the small of his Back, and a continual pain in his Stomach; for which he had taken much Physick, and changed Air, but without any benefit at all: Being five several times stroked by Mr. Great∣rak's,
mended sensibly upon the first stroking, and every time better and better; and since the last stroking hath not been sensible of any pain. And Mr. Edmund Barcock the Father of the said Young∣man, having had a great deafness in his left Ear for twenty years; being touch'd and rubb'd but one time, had the hear∣ing of that Ear restored to him, to the great comfort of his Life. April 1. 1666. This is testified by me, Edmund Barcock. We whose Names are subscribed, were present when this was dictated by Mr. Edm. Barcock and subscribed. Ben. Whichcot, D. D. R. Cudworth, D. D. Jane Deanes Certificate. JAne Deane of Swallowfield in the County of Berks, aged 18 years or thereabouts, saith; That for the space of four years last past she hath been exceeding lame in her right foot, and for recovery thereof applyed her self to several Bone-set∣ters and Chirurgeons, but never received the least benefit by any of them, rather growing worse then better under their hands; insomuch that for this last year her lameness so much increased upon her, that she being altogether unable to go, was forc'd to creep on her knees and hands from place to place; until Saturday last, being the 21. of this instant April, at which time she came to Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, and was by him stroked on the part grieved, and found some ease im∣mediately thereby: But coming again to him this day, the 24th. she was by him in like manner stroked as before, and (blessed be God) doth find her self able, and accordingly did walk up and down the room in the presence of a great company at Sir William Smith's in Lincolns-Inne-Fields. The
truth whereof she attesteth under her own hand, the day and year abovesaid. In the presence of Jane Deane. John Wilkins, D. D. and others. Dr. Fairecloughs Letter to Sir William Smith Baronet. Honoured Sir, SInce I had the favour of your Letter, I have been called up∣on & imortuned by divers friends, and persons of quality, inhabiting several parts of the Nation, to inform my self and give them some accounts concerning Mr. Greatrak's and his attempts of curing Diseases: I shall now take the liberty (ac∣cording to promise) to give you in gross what others have received from me by piece-meal; and (by the way) I beg leave to acquaint you, that whilest I was making superficial en∣quiries after him, and before I had ever seen the Gentlemans face, a vertuous Lady, somtime my Patient, came to Town, on purpose to implore his help, and calling of me would not be satisfied until I had suffered my self to be prevailed with to accompany her to Colonel Weldons, where Mr. Greatrak's then was, who at first sight very frankly declared himself to be cheerfully willing to gratifie all Doctors in their Re∣quests; and thereupon, though he had been at hard labour most part of the day, and had sufficient cause (as the By∣standers said) to be throughly wearied, he bestowed a full half hour on this infirm Lady, gently rubbing her head, neck, arms and back, her benummed leg and foot, as I had before directed him, the Ladies woman and another assisting to put off her Cloaths and to put them on; which when he had done, he ingenuously told me and the Gentleman that at∣tended the Lady, that he conceived himself unable to do her any considerable good, Dead Palsies on the left side sel∣dome giving place to, or being helped by the application of his hands; but if she pleased to come to him he would free∣ly afford her his pains, which he did once or twice after∣wards,
to the great and only satisfaction of her mind, the success, as to her body, hitherto complying with his predicti∣on: Notwithstanding I must needs confess I then observed strange things performed by him, enough to puzle a stronger head-piece than mine, though not to satisfie my Curiosity, which being pushed on by the Contents of your Letter, and eagerly hurried with an earnest desire of seeing (as you had done) Agues cured with easie frictions, hath ever since induced me to improve all my leisure in observing Mr. Greatrak's his Cures or Operations, the like whereof ('tis presumed) will hardly be found in any Author. I have lately spoken with Mr. Buts, one of those servants you mention, who had the good fortune to loose their Kentish Agues by the contact and stroking of this wondrous mans hand; he tells me his fellow-servant continues at work in your Saltern in Kent: that both of them have stood sound these two months, their Agues never attempting to recoil upon them: I have also had con∣ference with divers eminent and worthy Divines, inferior to few for parts, piety, and learning, who acknowledge and affirm themselves to have received help and cure from his hand and spittle, of such distempers in their own bodies as had eluded the most exquisite methods of Physick, and the best remedies that could be prescribed or administred to them, in their particular cases, by the most skilful and expe∣rienced Artists. I minded very heedfully his comportment towards the Lady that first brought me to him, and likewise towards many others since that time, and have alwayes observed it to be very comly, grave, and dispassionate: I could not per∣ceive nor learn from others that he used any form of words, either immediately before, or during the time he layes his hands on any person; but when he hath done 'tis familiar with him (his hands and eyes lift upwards) to repeat the Ejaculation mentioned by Dean Rust, varied now and then a little, viz. God Almighty heal, or help, or strengthen you or thee, for Jesus sake, or his mercyes sake; and to those
who thankfully tell him they find ease or benefit, he alwayes replies, The Lords name be praised, or give God the praise. It is agreed by all who have had opportunities of frequent converse with him, that he appears to be a man of a free, ge∣nerous and open temper, courteous and debonaire, without any thing of affectation or reservedness, of singular patience and tender-heartedness towards all persons in pain or trou∣ble, and one who declares himself in word and deed to be a truly loyal Subject to his Prince, and an hearty lover of those in present service at Sea or Land, as hath been often manifested by his preferring Seamen and Soldiers, who ap∣plyed themselves to him for help and ease of their aches, pains, and lameness, to others of much higher rank and quality: and indeed I saw not one of these poor persons who had been ren∣dred useless for present service, through their pains contract∣ed by heats and colds, but went away, after stroking, very well pleased, with a professed enjoyment of present ease, and resolution of repairing speedily to the respective Ship or Colours whereunto he did belong. I shall only instance in Joseph Warden a stout Seaman be∣longing to the Royal Charles, who was sent on Crutches (as you may remember) from St. Bartholomews Hospital to Mr. Greatrak's then in Chancery-lane, and complained not so much of his pains, though those he affirmed to be very grievous in his hip, thigh, ham and ankle, as that he (who had been in all former engagements against the Dutch) should now be disa∣bled (if I may use his own words) to have the other warm Bout with them: upon which I need not tell you (being there present) with what alacrity and heartiness Mr. Great∣rak's stroked him, I think, thrice over from his hip down∣wards, until all his pains were driven out at his toes ends, and the man walkt lustily to and fro in the Garden, professing his apprehensions of being able to do so for 10 miles, and car∣ried those Crutches one while in his hand, another while tri∣umphingly upon his shoulders, which had been his suppor∣ters thither. I might add hereunto some Soldiers names,
who came from the Tower, and out of the Guards, as well as the Gunner Benjamin Huskins, and Ship-Carpenters and others, who for lameness, deafness, and other infirmities, have received benefit by his hand. Robert Furnace the noted Tinker of Clerkenwel, his Cure is talked of all over the Town: the Crutches on which he came to Mr. Greatrak's (and he had not been able to walk without Crutches for 8 years last past') he brought in his hand and presented to me, after he had been strok'd three or four times, and found himself thereby enabled to walk without them. I may not here omit to ac∣quaint you, that the Honourable Mr. Boyle being sometime present when this poor man was under Mr. Greatrak's hands, by the application whereof his pains being dislodged out of his hip and driven downwards to his knee, that noble per∣son descended to stroke the Tinkers knee, leg and foot with the inside of Mr. Greatrak's glove, and so proceeded to pur∣sue his pains from place to place until they fled quite out at the ends of his Toes. Margery, the Wife of the above named Tinker, by the ap∣plication of Mr. Greatrak's hand to her breast, sides, and bowels, was freed from an Ague, which flew (as she said) first to her throat, next out at her mouth, making her tongue and lips extraordinary cold in its passage, which were ob∣served to be so by some other persons as well as my self. I have felt the tongues of divers others wonderfully cold, when their Ptysicks, or other pains, have given place to his hand, and passed away out at their mouths. John Hayes Servant to Doctor Worley, troubled for many years with stoppage of stomack, and shortness of breathing, being stro∣ked upon his breast and stomack, voided wind upwards in abundance, insomuch as he feared to be choked with the vio∣lence of it; but when that belching ceased, and his tongue (which was then as cold as ice) had been touched by one of Mr. Greatrak's fingers, he professed himself to be very well, and freed (as he conceived) of his former distempers. Anne Rose a Widow in the Minories, troubled with a head∣ach
for twenty years so grievous, for the most part, by her relation, as no tongue was able to express it, whereby her life was become a burthen to her; upon Mr. Greatrak's his laying his hand on her head, and gently rubbing it, the pains removed thence into her breast and stomack, and made her wondrous faint and sick; but those parts being stroked, she was immediately put into a tedious fit of belching, which continued the space of an hour or upwards, and that being over, she expressed her self to find more ease than she had done of 20 years before, and that she was then void of all pain, to her unspeakable joy and comfort. It would be end∣less to reckon up what I have seen in this kind, and hold it more adviseable to break off here, than to proceed in giv∣ing you a further trouble. Colonel Henry Sibthorp, aged seventy and eight years or thereabouts, so deaf that his Servants and others were for∣ced to shout to him, had the hearing of one ear so perfectly restored, that he could hear any low word or sound, by the only application of Mr. Greatrak's hand to his head, and put∣ing his fingers into the old Gentlemans ears, wherein I in∣stance, the like happening daily to younger persons. I had the honour to be present at the experiment made by the Right Honourable the Lord Viscount Falconbridge, upon John Jacomb of George-Alley in Southwark, whose ex∣quisite and continual pains, by the gentle touch and easie fri∣ction of Mr. Greatrak's hand, were allured out of his arm and shoulder to the extreme joints and ends of his fingers, which became thereby (as the man affirmed) devoid of sense, benummed and deaded: Whereupon his Lordship thrust a pin of about an inch long almost to the head, into one of his fingers, his eyes first close covered, without the least sign of the mans perception, or any blood appearing when the pin was pulled out: he then thrust it into another finger, as deep as the first, and askt the man if he felt nothing, who made answer, that he could not tell; but after a little pause, said he thought he did; whereat my Lord admiring,
pulled it out again, and Mr Greatrak's slightly stroked the mans fingers twice or thrice, who continued hoodwinkt; afterwards the pins point only touching one of his fingers ends, he smartly cryed out, Oh you prick me, & blood imme∣diately issued out of those places into which the pin had been thrust: The man professed himself freed of all pain, and may be presumed to have continued so, for as much as he was bidden by Mr. Greatrak's to come again if he felt the least grudging, with promise of easie access to him, and as∣surance of help and ease; but hath never appeared since. A like Experiment was tryed by the reverend Doctor Wilkins, upon a Woman in my house, with some conside∣rable improvements; for when her pains, by Mr. Greatrak's stroking, were brought into her fingers, and those benum∣med as the former, the Doctor indeavouring by rubbing and pinching to reduce them to sense and life; which when he had continued a good while, he would have perswaded the poor woman that her fingers were freed and well, which when she complainingly denyed, he proceeded to prick her fingers, but without her feeling, or blood following, until her fingers were gently stroked, which restored them to sense and motion. I might add hereunto very many instances of the same nature, but am unwilling to be tedious, and shall therefore reserve them to a fresh opportunity, together with a List of neer One hundred persons names, who in my hearing have professed themselves helped of various Distempers, by the hands, urine, and spittle of the said Mr. Greatrak's. I shall for the present conclude with observing to you, that though his hand had little or none effect upon the Lady that first brought me to him, yet have I often seen in meaner per∣sons wonderful success to ensue in the like case: as in Anne Shelley, Jane Farrington, and Grace White: the last whereof by reason of a Palsey on her left side, had been disabled for five years from walking without the support of another, yet after 4 or 5 times stroking, she confessed she had walkt two
miles at one time, without any assistance or intermission. I beseech you pardon the length of this Letter, and conti∣nue to oblige, SIR, Your most faithful and humble Servant, James Faireclough. May 5. 1666. Captain Owen's Letter to Mr. Boyle. Mortlack, May 4. 1666. SIR, UPon the 2d of this instant (being Wednesday) I had ta∣ken a Purge, which by reason of a small addition more then I did formerly use to take, did work very violent∣ly the whole day, at least 24 times. I could eat nothing that day nor night, only drank a little Mace-ale. I rested pretty well that night; but when I rose the next morning, I was mightily griped in my stomach and bowels, with much pain I went up and down an hour or two, and when nothing would ease me, I resolved to lye down and rest my self; and going to take some rest, a Friend meets me and perswades me to let Mr. Greatrak's touch my stomach and bowels; which I did consent unto, (he being in my house the same time, for he came the night before) and I observed when he first strok∣ed me I was immediately without pain, and went down from my Chamber very well (as I thought) with intent to shew some friends that came to see me what a sudden change his hand had wrought: But I had not been with my friends 6 minutes but I felt a sudden change; for I had many qualms in my stomach, which forc'd me to vomit very much, and I was in a sweat all over, and very sick, and so continued half an hour, when he came and stroked me again, which caused me to vomit the second time, and then I took a little rest up∣on my bed: but the pain in my stomach was so great that it did awake me, and presently I vomited the third time: which Mr. Greatrak's hearing (being in the next Room) came
to me (I being exceeding ill) and said, by the blessing of God this will do you much good, I will stroke your head, bow∣els, and stomach once more, and I believe you will do very well: which when he had done, I laid me down and rested well for an hour, and then came from my Chamber very well, and went abroad with him all that afternoon. I have one thing more only to adde, That I was in a great sweat all the time, and do believe and found most apparently, that by the stroke of his hand all the sharp matter which the Purge had stirr'd, and could not carry away downwards, was that which caused so much pain, and was brought away by vomiting. Your Honours humble Servant, John Owen. Mr. Sibley's Letter to Captain Owen. SIR, THis is to satisfie you concerning the strange effects the stroking of Mr. Greatrak's hand did work upon me the third of March last, at Sir George Watermans: But first I will let you know how I was. For 8 years past I had been troubled with the Tissick, a Cough of the Lungs, and a great stoppage at the stomack, insomuch that I could not walk the length of our Shop, or go up a pair of stairs without much trouble, and many times have been fain to be helped to my bed, and in foggy misty weather I have been forced to be set upright in my bed with pillows, and so to sleep: my want of breath was so much, that when I went abroad I did reel like a man in drink, that I was ashamed of my self▪ and when it was so that I had been stroked by him, which was on the Saturday night about eleven of the Clock, upon his im∣mediate stroking I was ready to swound, and was in a very great sweat all over my body, and in much burning all over, excepting my tongue, and that was exceeding cold; insomuch that I continued in that sweat from eleven of the Clock on Saturday night, being the third of March, till Sunday morn∣ing
the next day at ten of the Clock: And this I testifie un∣der my own hand (blessed be God) this very day being in perfect health, May 5. 1666. Nathaniel Sibley. This Relation I had from himself several times before he now sent it me in writing: He lives in Coleman-street; his Age is 24 years. John Owen. Dr. Faireclough's and Dr. Faber's Testimony. April 19. 1666. SArah Tuffly, Servant to Mr. John Pryde at the Red Cross nigh Essex-gate in the Strand, troubled with a violent Head-ach every day more or less for 7 years; upon Mr. Great∣rak's stroking her head she fell a belching, which continued for two hours and upwards, he now and then applying his hand to her breast, &c. whereupon she was freed from all pains, though her tongue was at times as cold as lead, during this process; and now declares her self more free from any manner of pain then she has been these 9 years. Sarah Tuffly. Before Us, Tho. Kenian Gent. Alb. Otto Faber Med. J. Faireclough M. D. W. Smith Chir. Dr. Faireclough's and Dr. Faber's Testimony. THese are to certifie, That the Son of Mr. George Claire Grocer in Grace-Church-street, London, being about 6 years old, having been troubled with an Impostume in his bowels, and with continual pain, was much wasted for above two years; and all means proving ineffectual, he was brought to Mr. Greatrak's, who in three times stroking brought the humour to such ripeness in the thigh near the groin, that up∣on a little incision there came forth above a pint of corrupted
matter, to the great ease and benefit of the child. April 19. 1666. In the presence of J. Faireclough M. D. Albertus Otto Faber M. D. & Medicus Regius Exer∣citus Suecici. Mr. Squibb's Letter to Mr. Boreman. SIR, WHereas you are pleased to enquire after the Cure by Gods means done upon me, by the stroking of my head by Mr. Greatrak's; These are throughly to inform you, That being violently troubled with an excessive pain of the head, that I had hardly slept six hours in six days and nights, and taken but very little of sustenance in that time; and that being but touch'd by him, I immediately found ease, and (thanks be to God) do continue very well; and do further satisfie you, that the rigour of the pain had put me into a high Fever, which immediately ceas'd with my head-ach: and do likewise further inform you, that a Servant being touch'd for the same pain, that had continu'd upon him for twelve years last past, he touch'd him in the forehead, and the pain went backward; and that but by his stroking upon the outside of his cloaths the pain came down to and out of his foot: the party continues still well. These Cures were wrought about 3 weeks before Easter. And thus much I as∣sure you to be true from him that is Your Friend and Servant, Edm. Squibb. Covent-Garden, Apr. 20. 1666. at my Lady Ver∣ney's, the place of my re∣sidence. And further for your satisfaction I must tell you, that the very day of the Date hereof, by accident I met with Mr. Greatrak's at Mr. Starkey's a Stationer near the Middle-Tem∣ple-gate, where to my very great admiration he cur'd two
persons of the Pthysick: the manner of it makes me give it that term (though I must confess as a Gentleman and Chri∣stian, all that he does are to be miraculously admired, in my weak opinion.) These persons unstripping both their bosoms, he applies himself to his way of Curing, and told me in the presence of Sir Anthony Morgan, Mr. Starkey, and many other standers by, that he would bring the Pthysick out of their Stomachs into their Tongues, and that their Tongues should be as cold as Ice: which I and the rest of the company found to be true; for laying my finger upon their Tongues, I found it to be true what he had said; and away they went (after his touching of their Tongues) well, and praising God. Their Infirmities were so great, that in a manner they went double in the breast. April. 20. 1666. Edm. Squibb. This Attestation was owned and confirmed 26 Apr. 1666. in presence of J. Faireclough M. D. Arthur Squibb Oxonien. M. A. Mr. Wolrich a Chirurgeon his Letter to Mr. Greatrak's. Ratcliff, April 16. 1666. Mr. Greatrak's, ANd by me respected for your trouble with my Wife; for which I return you many thanks, and heartily wish I might any way be capable whilest I have life, to manifest my acknowledgment, which to endeavour, I now having had my eyes and ears my witnesses, if my genius fail me not, shall both by Tongue and Pen, which haply you may see, be in confutation of the parties your abusers. Sir, I give God praise, my Wife, now in a very fine condition, presents her respects to you; and as I would not willingly be worse than my word to the Doctor, whose name I think is Faire∣clough, I desire you to let him know this underwritten: That my Wife having had a great pain in her stomack and head some years, in which time she hath not wanted the endea∣vours of able Doctors and Chirurgeons, for all which her
pain increased so high, that this last six months she was not able to go about her chamber, but all people expected her de∣parting this life daily. I being gone to her Doctor, who is of note (it was about three weeks ago) you by good Fortune came to a Neighbours house of mine (Captain Wildy:) she being informed, having a great desire was rather carried than to say went that little way; but by the blessing of God through your endeavours, that night she came to meet me as far as Bell-Wharf very cheerfully. This last week she was twice with you at Lincolns-Inn fields, and to the glory of God and her comfort, I hope is freed from her pains. Sir, no Doctor could or ever did tell any thing, but that her di∣stemper was vapours that ascended from her stomack; but now I hope she will need no more such answers; which is the prayers of me who subscribe my self, SIR, Yours obliged, Richard Wolrich Chirurgeon. Mr. Comb's Letter to Sir Nathaniel Hobart. Honoured Sir, WHereas you desire to be informed by me of a Cure be∣gun and perfected by Valentine Greatrak's Esq in obedience to your command, you have the verity of it as followeth, viz. About 4 years since, I received a mishap on my right leg, in the small thereof, by the striking off the skin, which by neer two years being under several Chirurgeons hands, was made a very desperate sore, I enduring all that time the very extremity of misery and pain, and so remain∣ed utterly disponding of any hope of Cure, until such time as the aforesaid Mr. Greatrak's, on Thursday the 16. instant, touched and stroked the same, it being then very fiery and Ulcerous; the pain removed it self and fell part thereof into the great toe of my left foot, and other part into the little toe of my right foot, and now, praised be the Almighty, the
Cure thereof is perfected, to the admiration of all my Neigh∣bours, and the unexpressible comfort of, most worthy Sir, April 24. 1666. From my Lodging in Jerusalem-Alley in the Parish of St. Ben∣nets Grace-Church. Your Worships most humble Servant, Anthony Combs. Present when the Cure was done on Anthony Comb. Nathaniel Hobart Knight, Master of the Chancery. Rich. Hals. W. Smith Baronet. J. Faireclough M. D. Mr. Hawkin's Letter. SIR, I Understand you have a desire to be satisfied by some that have had experience of the great benefit and help they have received by the touch of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, which to satisfie you of, I take boldness to give you this ac∣count. I was taken with a great pain in my hip, about seven years of age, which so continued till this present April, the 14. day, 1666. which is above 18 years: in which time there have been many wayes sought for help; I was once a patient to Doctor Barker of Newbury in the County of Berks, very eminent: I was also a patient to Doctor Pavie of the Devises in the County of Wilts, an eminent Physitian also, and by the advice of both these Doctors I went to the Bath, and re∣ceived some ease, but the Spring following, the pain came a∣gain, upon which they judged it the Sciatica, and therefore made Issues in my leg, but all to little effect, for my pain still continued; but when I was toucht by Mr. Greatrak's, my pain went immediately out of my hip into my knee, which put me to great pain, thence his touch removed it into my anckle, and thence into my great toe, which caused it to look very black, and with one more touch he caused it to pass under my nail, and so it went quite away; since which
I have been well, and have walked five miles in the City in one day without pain, and have also slept upon that hip where the Sciatica was, without any trouble, which in many years before I had not done. In Witness whereof I make bold to subscribe my name, John Hawkins of Tharham in the County of Berks. This Cure was per∣formed in the pre∣sence of John Patrick Minister of Battersea. Tho. Bromley Gentleman. Mr. Floyd's Certificate. WIlliam the Son of Gabriel Floyd the elder, inhabit∣ing in the Parish of Long-stoke in the County of Southampton, having a disease in his nose called the Kings-Evil, which he hath had about two years; since which time it began, continually issued forth bloody Corruption, his face and lips often swelling and falling, by which distemper he lost one of his eyes, and the other very neer lost: The said William Floyd coming to London to Mr. Valentine Great∣rak's, was touched by him March 31. 1666. the next morning the said boy coming again to Mr. Greatrak's, the eye that was so neer decayed, was much restored, and his nose like∣wise; and having since been touched thrice more by the said Mr. Greatrak's, is now so wel recoverd in his sight, that he can see the smallest pin upon the ground, the swelling in his face and lip very much abated, & the issuing in his nose absolute∣ly stopt; his father before having fruitlessly made use of all means to be had for this his Son, who by the blessing of God and the touch of the said Mr. Greatrak's, is restored, to his own ease, and his friends great satisfaction, as appeared to
many more, particularly to me who am his Father, who here∣to subscribe, Gabriel Floyd. We the undernamed have subscribed our names to the truth of the abovesaid relation, being present when the said W. Floyd was cured. John Pinckney. George Weldon. John Dugdale. Mrs. Frances Read's Certificate. SIR, WHereas you desire an account of some of those great Cures performed by Mr. Greatrak's, in order there∣unto, I do here certifie, that I have been present when he performed divers very good Cures; and particularly, I my self having laboured under a sad and violent pain of the Head-ach for three years together, and never could have any ease during all that time, any longer than whilest I was hold∣ing it with my hand, and during that time used all proba∣ble means, without any benefit, came to this Gentleman Mr. Greatrak's, who (God be praised) in twice stroking cu∣red me perfectly, three weeks since, so fully as I have not felt the least pain since: he stroked my head, and the pain flew through my body into my knees, so violently that it made me cry out with the extremity of the pain, and so removed from place to place until I felt it no more: now if any per∣sons desire further satisfaction concerning this Cure perform∣ed on me by Gods blessing, let them repair to Mrs. Reads house the next door to the Dukes-Head, at the hither end of the Pell-Mell, and I shall be very ready to give all satis∣faction herein. Witness my hand▪ April 6. 1666. Frances Read.
The foregoing Certificate of Mrs. Read, was Signed in the presence of us who were most of us Spectators when those foresaid pains flew so violently about the abovenamed Fran∣ces Read, and when she was cured. Witness▪ George Weldon. W. Smith Baronet. Mr. Stepping's Certificate. NAthaniel Stepping a Gardiner in Hogsden, had a great and painful swelling in his knee of two years continu∣ance; after the application of Mr. Greatrak's hand (in an hours time) he found that the pain was dispersed into seve∣ral parts of his body, particularly his arms and hips, and most of his joints: He was wont to be bound in his body, but the same night wherein he was touched, and the next day, and for a whole week afterwards he became loose, and went to stool 2 or 3 times in a day; which was very ex∣traordinary in him, who heretofore was constantly costive. The next morning the swelling asswaged very considerably, and the pain vanished, having first immediately been remov∣ed out of his knee into the calf of his leg: at 4 dayes end the pain in his head abated, and in a weeks time was per∣fectly gone. Witness his hand▪ Attested by himself, Nathaniel Stepping. May 10. 1666. In presence of J. Faireclough M. D. Henry Pierce Rect. de Shaw in Comitatu Berks. Ezechiel Foxcroft A. M. Mr. Nicholson's Certificate. I Anthony Nicholson of Cambridge, Book-seller, have been affected sore with pains all over my body, for three and twenty years last past, have had advice and best directions of all the Doctors there; have been at the Bath in Somersetshire; and been at above one hundred pound expence to procure
ease, or a Cure of these pains; and have found all the means I could be advised or directed to, ineffectual for either, till by the advice of Dr. Benjamin Whichcot and Dean Rust, I ap∣plyed my self to Mr. Greatrak's for help, upon Saturday was sevenight, being the latter end of March, who then stroked me; upon which I was very much worse, and enforced to keep my bed for 5 or 6 days: but then being stroked twice since, by the blessing of God upon Mr. Greatrak's endea∣vours I am perfectly eas'd of al pains, and very healthy and strong, insomuch as I intend (God willing) to return home towards Cambridge to morrow morning, though I was so weak as I was necessitated to be brought up in mens arms, on Saturday last about 11 of the Clock, to Mr. Greatrak's. At∣tested by me this tenth day of April, 1666. I had also an hard swelling in my left Arm, whereby I was disabled from using it; which being taken out by the said Mr. Greatrak's, I am perfectly freed of all pain, and the use thereof wholly restored. Anthony Nicholson. In the presence of Andr. Marvell. Ja. Faireclough. Tho. Alured. Tho. Pooley. W. Popple. Dorothy Pocock's Certificate. DOrothy the Wife of John Pocock of Chiveley in the County of Berks, aged 45. had a Tumour began in her breast about August 1665. which in the beginning of April 1666. was grown so big as a large Pullets Egge, and conceived by sundry Physitians and Chirurgeons to be a Can∣cer, and no other way of curing it then by cutting out; was stroked twice by Mr. Greatrak's, and after the second time, the Tumour was grown softer, so that he opened it, and out thereof flowed a great quantity of concocted matter; and after that by gentle stroking Mr. Greatrak's brought forth the
bag wherein the matter had lyen out of the small orifice; and she professes her self to be very well of her breast, and also to be freed of a great pain which she had had in her arm and shoulder for the space of 8 months last past. April 10. 1666. Dorothy Pocock. In presence of Andr. Marvel. J. Faireclough. Tho. Alured. Tho. Pooley. Mr. Langham's Certificate. THese are to certifie, That whereas I had been daily trou∣bled with the Head-ach, more or less, for full three years together, hardly a day omitted, especially when after Riding I was most insufferably tormented; I have by Gods great blessing (ever since Mr. Valentine Greatrak's touched me in his Highness Prince Rupert's Chamber) been very well and free from any thing of the Head-ach; and since my be∣ing stroked I have rid from Dover to London in ten hours. Given under my Hand and Seal, this 27th day of March, 1666. I suppose from the time I received this benefit to this day above-written, is full three weeks. Thomas Langhame. Mrs. Smiths Certificate. MAry Wife of Arthur Smith, a Mercer at the Lyon with∣in Ludgate, aged 23. troubled with a great and con∣tinued pain in her Forehead for the space of ten years, not∣withstanding the use of the best Physitians and most excellent Remedies, to her Parents great Cost; about the latter end of March 166 5/6 applyed her self to Mr. Greatrak's, who laid his hand upon her Forehead, whereby the pain removed in∣to the hinder part of her head and neck, thence to the Crown of her head, and from thence into her cheek, where it con∣tinued swelled, until she was again stroked in that part the
day following; whereupon the swelling and pain vanished, and never troubled her any more. Attested this first of May 1666. Mary Smith. In presence of J. Faireclough M. D. Anne Meyern, Mother of the party. Mrs. Meyern of Ludgate-hill her Certificate. THese may certifie, That my Daughter, Mrs. Anne Wa∣ring, having had a sore Breast which had several holes in it for the space of 14 weeks; by Mr. Greatrak's assistance she was perfectly recovered in a months space. In witness hereof I have set to my hand. Anne Meyern. London, the 4th of May, 1666. Captain Owen, SIR, I understand that you are acquainted with Mr. Va∣lentine Greatrak's, with whom it was my fortune to be with at Worcester, where I received very great benefit from him for my distemper of the Gout, having lain about three months before very lame and in great misery in Hereford∣shire; but since I came to London have been much troubled with it again: my humble request is, that you will afford me your assistance to get once more to him, which I shall be ex∣ceeding thankful to you, if you will be pleased to give your self the trouble to send a messenger to me whom I shall thankfully pay; I being verily perswaded that I shall re∣ceive further benefit from him, having beheld such miracu∣lous Cures that he did at Worcester; as the Gout, and the Falling-sickness, Wens, and restoring the Blind and the Lame, with many other Cures, which if I had not seen I should not have credited; and likewise many more in those parts can testifie the same benefit I have received. Sir, I have not else to trouble you with, not doubting but you
will endeavour to grant my Request, in the performance of which you will infinitely oblige▪ Your loving Friend and Servant, to command. Richard Whittall of Tower-Wharf. Mr. Whittall came to my house the last week full of pain, his hand and wrist much swell'd, and bound up with Cloths; Mr. Greatrak's did there stroke him, and he came this day to my house again to have his foot and leg touched; where I with several others did see his hand that was so swelled, to be free from swelling or pain. May 17. 1666. J. Owen. Mr. Noye's Certificate, London, May 10. 1666. WHereas Peter Noyes of Trunkwell in the Parish of Shing-field in the County of Berks Gent. having a distemper risen in his neck, about twelve months since, in a white hard knob; being fearful what the effects of it might be, went to Oxford to advise with Dr. Willis, who laid di∣spersing Plaisters, thinking to dissolve it, and by Physick to carry it off; continuing some time in this course I found my self grow weaker and stomackless, and a Feaver seized up∣on me: I sent to Dr. Willis, who desired me to come to Ox∣ford, to advise there with the Kings Chirurgions, who said it was not the Kings-Evil, but a Fistula, and must be dila∣ted, which was done in four places at several times, but all proved ineffectual; their scarifying, eating medicines, Plai∣sters, and Physick never could make it run any thing but a black humour; afterwards a new swelling rising under the ear made them apprehend it to be the Kings-Evil: Where∣upon I still growing weaker and weaker, and almost with∣out hope of life, by the advice of Dr. Willis, with much difficulty, came to London to Mr. Greatrak's, but in so low a condition, that I was in my own apprehension neer death: Now Mr. Greatrak's (being my last remedy) I made my ap∣plications
to him; my Wife with tears and perswasive ar∣guments procured him to come to me; and upon his first stroking I found strength, and that black humour which my sores did run, stopped, and they ran thick corruption: Upon the continuance of his stroking, I (through the goodness of God) found the humour abated, and my strength encrease; and now the Evil killed, only a Scrophulous humour follow∣eth, which I hope will be soon dryed up. Peter Noyes. Win. Noyes. Witness Richard Birch. Jasper Walker. Tho. White. Stephen Parkes. Edward Phipps. Mr. Harrisons Certificate. THere being a Report of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, who did cure all diseases by his Hand, although I could scarce believe that an innate and in-born disease could be cured, yet I was perswaded to go to him upon the Certificate of one man, who did inform me that he did cure him; and by his touch make an essay to mine own Cure. Being born with the Kings-Evil (as they call it) upon me, now being 31 years old, it being demonstrable from divers parts of my body, my Parents did alway endeavour a Cure from the Chyrurgions, they by their skill did prove its ob∣stinacy by their repeated endeavours, and did break the Node which was contracted in my right arm-pit, and likewise ano∣ther in my little finger of my right hand, but as I grew in strength, the disease grew more daring, and approched my throat, my face, and Eye-lids (as was apparent from their promanances and swellings) and now was under my right ear, no means softning its obduracy: I made my address to him, who did freely stroke that part, as likewise my face; which touch did humble the swelling under mine ear, and
brake it after it had troubled me by its soreness for 2 or 3 hours, and my face on that side did change its hue formerly being ebullient in many places; from his stroke the disease was beaten downwards into my small-Guts, and did pain me so extremely for 14 dayes; I endeavouring to cure it by other means, was perswaded it was the disease flew thither for refuge, which I found true; for going to him, and e rubing of it with his cold hand (an improbable means, as most do think) he by this motion of his hand did produce such a heat, as did burn up all the pain: but at this and the other times he stroked me, I had such a sickness upon me as men have when they are about to vomit, and one time I vomited an acid frothy matter with some indigested Flegme. After this, viz. on Easter Monday, I found some of this humour steal into my Right leg, and was stroked there, and it vanished, having some remembrance of my former sickness in my stomack. When my self or any one else did tell him of the ease they received, I heard no vaunt in his language, but joyfully he said, either Praised be God, or The glory be to God; and when he stroked me, he said, God give a blessing to it. For his being an Impostor, as some have censoriously averred, who thought their Dagon of Profit must fall hereby, his Liberality will dis∣prove. What I could give of credit or applause to any that have formerly done me good, I must double upon him, as an Instrument to give all to God as the Author of all the Comforts of▪ John Harrison. Present when Mr. John Harrison in Southwark writ and sub∣scribed his name hereunto. Albert. Otto Faber, M. D. Memorand. That I was an eye-witness of Mr. John Harrison subscribing and owning of this Certificate. George Weldon.
Mary Glover's Certificate. I Mary Glover of Alisbury in the County of Buckingham, do certifie whom it may concern, that I was neer quite blind, and was deaf about 5 years, and I have been with one Mrs. Wells in Hartford-shire, and Mr. Restrick in Gunpowder-Alley in Fetter-Lane, and several others for Cure, but could get none: but under God, I have received perfect Cure by the stroke of Mr. Greatrak's hand, both in my eyes and hear∣ing: All which I testifie to be true, and have hereto subscri∣bed my name the 17th of May, Anno Dom. 1666. Mary Glover. Witnesses hereunto, having it from her own mouth. John Owen, of Breadstreet, London. Matthew Porter of London. John Grone. William Faithorn. Margaret Westleys Certificate. I Margaret Westley of the Parish of Christ-Church, London, do certifie whom it may concern, That I have been al∣most blind of one of my Eyes near twelve months, and have been with divers persons to get Cure, but could get none: But now under God I have received perfect Cure by the stroke of Mr. Greatrak's hand. Which I testifie to be true, and have hereto subscribed my name, May 17. Anno Dom. 1666. Margaret Westley. Witnesses hereunto, John Owen of Bread-street, London. Math. Porter. John Grone. William Faithorne.
May 20. 1666. Mrs. Surmans Certificate. THis Person, Mary Surman the Wife of William Surman, living in S. Johns Court in Cow-lane by Smithfield, a Physitian, was troubled with a very violent pain for 7 years last past, which so contracted her limbs that she was quite double, and could not stand upright or scarce sit; and having used all manner of means possible for Cure, but found none, at length through the goodness of God was directed to Mr. Valentine Greatrak's on Monday last, being the 14th day of this instant May, he then being at Mortlack, at Mr. Owen's: at which time she had little or no pain at all upon her; but by the stroking of the hand of Mr. Greatrak's, a very little while after was in a most violent and miserable pain and tor∣ture, by reason of the stirrings of that humour which had so contracted her limbs as aforesaid: which pain continued till a second time she came under his hands, which was on Fry∣day last, being the 18th day of this Instant; at which time being stroked by him, she fell into a sweating; which sweat continued upon her till this present day, and so her Distem∣per by Transpiration ceased, that she is perfectly well, and feels no pain or any contraction upon her at the least. Mary Surman. Witnesses to the truth of what is related as above. Richard Bland of Hoxton in Shoreditch Parish, Merchant. Tho. Massam of S. Bartholomew's Parish, London, Sr. John Massam of Bread-street, Stationer. Both the Massams Brothers to the said Mary Surman. Alex. Merreal of Bread-street, Stationer. Dr. Astell's Letter to a Fellow of a Colledge in Oxford. SIR, IN my last I promised to give you an Account of what I had seen that Man of wonders do, viz. Mr. Valentine Great∣rak's.
I did likewise promise to give the same Account to my Honourable Friends, the Honourable Robert Boyle, and Dr. Dickinson; but being straited in time I desire you to show them this, and in my behalf to beg their excuse. In acute pains wheresoever seated, the persons upon his stroking have for the most part confessed a momentary re∣lief; and that which often caused my admiration, I have seen a pain move from the left shoulder to the right foot, and then stroked out of the toes: when fix'd there, they have cried out with extremity of pain, till relieved by his hand. I saw a young woman well habited, who complained of a pain in her head that was Chronical; Mr▪ Greatrak's gently stroked her head, and it came into her eyes, afterwards into her nose and mouth, then into her stomach: The woman grew very sick, so that she swounded away; the people a∣bout her imagin'd she would have dyed: Upon stroking her stomach it flew into her throat, ready to strangle her, then into her eyes, so that both sight and speech were taken from her. He continued stroking from place to place till she reco∣vered her senses, and declared before those present she was freed from pain. I have seen several of the same nature, though not so extreme, freed by him during the time they were with him. I have heard those who have been deaf for many years, declare, after he had rubb'd their heads, and put his fingers in their ears, that they have heard distinctly; nay some I have gone to, and have spoke to them with no high voice, and they have made ready Answers to Questions not vulgar. I saw a Child aged about 12. that had not stirr'd hand nor foot for 14 weeks together; she had neer 20 scrophulous tumours in her arms, thighs, legs, and throat. Out of one large one in her leg, near the shin-bone he made a small orifice, and took out divers kernels; those that were hard, by his handling tended to suppuration: After twice stroking this Child walked up hill 60 yards or more: Those sores that ran, dried up after his spitting upon them. I can the more boldly attest this, by reason the Mother of the
Child through the intercession of a friend of mine to me, by my interest gain'd access to have her Child touched by him. Those who have had Ischiaticas or Hip-gouts, I have seen go away freed from all pain. I saw a man aged above 30, who had the Kings-Evil, by reason whereof he had not stood upright for 3 years, his back-bone through weakness distended 2 or 3 inches, when without his Crutch he could not walk about a room without resting his hands upon his knees: he had two Fistulas upon the left musculus sacrolumbi, great inflammation being upon the parts adjoyning, with grievous pain. After Mr. Greatrak's had stroked him a while, the pain was quite taken away, and he walked upright seve∣ral times about the room. A little above the Carpus of the right wrist was 2 tumours as big as tennis-balls, no way tending to any suppuration; yet saith Mr. Greatrak's to a Person of Quality then present, if I do not open it, his arm will rot off: with that taking his Lance, he makes a small orifice, and with a little compressing the part there flies out hundreds of small bodies, some as big as French-beans; I could liken them to nothing so fitly as to Cocks-stones; for they much resembled them in all points: they flew out like to a shower of hail, with a windy stink. He had likewise a tumour of the same nature in the muscle or brawn of the thumb; he opened that, there came out some of the same kernels, and I could perfectly discern that the part of the brawn of the thumb was converted into those Anomalcus bodies; but whence or by what juice this strange transmuta∣tion should be made, I leave to others more learned to en∣quire into. I likewise saw a man who could not move his hand, it be∣ing to hi thinking dead, Mr. Greatrak's gently stroked him, and he moved his hand as well as I could mine, and with great acclamations gave thanks to God. I forbear to ac∣quaint you with any more, for if I should relate all I have seen, several sheets would not contain it: I have declared what I was an Eye-witness too, but whether the persons that
have received that immediate relief continue well, I cannot inform you at present; but perhaps hereafter I may tell you my thoughts, why many (as it is reported) relapse. Having oft had the opportunity of being in his company, with some persons of no ordinary quality, I am the better able to give a Character of him. I find him to be a person of a brave, gentile humour, of a free carriage and disposition; one as being not over-precise to be termed a Zelot, so not of so large a latitude as to deserve that of a debauched person, which some in the world have undeservedly given him: for I have dined several times where he hath been, and I never obser∣ved other but great moderation, both as to eating and drinking; nor did I ever hear him swear, or see him passio∣nate, although cause sufficient hath been given in my hearing, to move a person not indued with a more than or∣dinary patience. I hope, Dear Friend, you are so assured of my reality, that nothing could induce me to this, were I not so great an Assertor and Vindicator of Truth, let it tend ne∣ver so much to my disadvantage: I take leave and sub∣scribe, SIR, Your affectionate real Friend, &c. Jer. Astel. March 10. 1666.
A Postscript to Mr. Boyle's Letter. SIR, NOt knowing whether I may have the happiness to see you again before I return for Ireland, I thought fit to let you know, That I have left the Original Testimonials in the hands of Mr. Starkey the Stationer, to be delivered unto you, that you may see (& others that are any wise scrupulous, may be satisfied) that the Printed Certificates are verbatim the same with them. For your many and great Civilities, I heartily thank you, and do desire you to give my humble service to those Honourable Gentlemen of Gresham Colledge, who were pleased to afford me the Honour of their Compa∣ny at Lincolns-Inn-fields, and elsewhere: I know both your self and they have so much Candour, Nobleness, and Inge∣nuity, as not to Condemne, or Censure me, as others have done, for that Liberty and Freedom in my Carriage (void of Offence, I hope) which I use, having not been acquaint∣ed with that severe and morose manner of Converse, unto which some tye up themselves: I thank God I carry about me an open, clear, and harmless Breast, free from base De∣signs Hypocrisie, or Fraud, so that I need not a cover, pre∣tence, or colour; and I hope the Divine Goodness will in great mercy over-look my Failings and Imperfections; and of his own Grace regard the simplicity and integrity of my heart, which rejoyceth in nothing more than in doing of good, and imploying my self, as God shall enable me, in helping persons in misery; towards whom I find in my self tenderness of mind, a hearty compassion, and a ready dispo∣sition to try the utmost of my Endeavours for their ease and relief; in which service, as I have my recompence, so in the
good effects of it my satisfaction: judging it better than my being in the world, to be instrumental for good, and to be serviceable to mankind. I shall add no more but my hearty Prayers for your eternal happiness, who am faithfully devo∣ted, Most Honoured and Worthy Sir, Your most affectionate and humble servant, Valentine Greatrak's. May 5. 1666. FINIS.
