G376 R29920 11223777 46899
A COLLECTION Out of the best Approved Authors, CONTAINING HISTORIES OF Visions, Apparitions, Prophesies, Spirits, Divinations, and other wonderful Illusions of the Devil wrought by Magick or otherwise. Also of divers Astrological Predictions, SHEWING As the wickedness of the former, so the va∣nity of the latter, and folly of trusting to them. LONDON: Printed for Joshua Kirton, at his shop in S. Pauls Church-yard, at the sign of the Kings-Arms. 1657.
Courteous Reader, HOw great an influence that bewitching Art of Magical-Astrology hath had on multitudes of both men and women in these our times, too sad experience doth truly make evi∣dent; yea so far, that it may well be feared, that some are more ready to harken to, and place more confidence in, these their pretend∣ed Divinations or Prognostications, then ought well to stand with a true Christians prosession. Somewhat to undeceive those that either hitherto have been, or hereafter may be deluded by these deceivers and their deceits, is the end of this Collection. In which you shall find, that the Author hath faithfully, and from well approved Writers, set forth, as the original of that Diabolical Art, and the strong delusions of Satan; so likewise by several examples, shew∣ed the wickedness of the Professors, and how exceedingly they have been deluded, that over credulously have given credit to the same; if pleasure or profit prevail with thee, I hope this may prove accepta∣ble to thee, wherein thou hast not onely variety of story, but the same improved for thy good; which that it may so prove, as the hearty desire of, Yours, I. K.
1. Of the fabulous erections and appellations of Starres, and Celestial Signes; such as the Mag-astro-mancers do make use of, in their erecting of Theames, or Scheames; for their divining prognostications and predictions. PHrixus had a Golden sheep, or a Ramme with a Golden Fleece, given him by his father, or else by his mother; this Ramme nourished him; and speaking with mans voyce, advi∣sed him of sundry perils; and to help him in his flight, flew with him in the ayre, carrying him over Hellespout, to Colchos: then was this Ramme sacrificed to Jupiter, to Mars, or to Mer∣cury; and the skin or fleece hang'd upon an Oake or an Elme; in the Wood, Grove, or Temple of Jupiter, or of Mer∣cury: And in memoriall of all this, it was by prayer obtai∣ned of Jupiter, that the Sign Aries, or the Ramme, should be placed among the Stars. All that can here be credible, is; that this Phrixus was an Astrologer; now the Astrologer gave an occasion to the Fable; and the Fable to the setting up of the first sign of the Zodiack. Jupiter infinitely taken with the excellent beauty of Europa, turn'd himself into a dainty white Bull, and was seeding by the Sea side, where Europa, with her fellow Virgins, used to walk, she observing and admiring the unusual comeliness of this beast, went aside to behold it, fell more freely to stroke it, gat upon the back of it; and by this wile was carried over Sea into Grete, and there ravished. Then for an everlasting memo∣riall of this fact, Jupiter placed the image of Taurus among the Stars: and Europa obtained that one part of the world might be called after her name. Orion arrogantly boasting of his cunning and power to kill any beast, Tellus, Latona, Diana, indigning this insolency, raised up a Scorpion that slew him. Scorpius for this memorable fact, was taken up, and set among the Starres: and (in pitty) Orion was thither referred also, and placed next to Taurus. Ganymedes a beautiful Boy, inordinately loved by Jupiter, he
caused an Eagle to snatch him up into heaven; and so transla∣ted him among the Starres; to make that Signe which they call Aquarius. Such stories of Star-making there are in the Poeticall Fables of the Pleiades, the Hyades, the Dolphin, the Eagle, the Swan, the Goat, of Castor and Pollux, of Cassiope and Andromeda, of Ari∣adnes crown, of Orpheus his Harp, of the Argonants ship, of Sile∣nus his Asse, and the Asses Cribbe, &c. 2. Of the Mythologicall significations of Planets; which are not onely made to signifie mens morals, or their manners; but their fatals also, or their lives and fortunes. SAturne was the sonne of Coelus and Rhea; which signifies, that Time began with the agitation and motion of beames and the Starres. Saturne cut off his fathers genitals: This sig∣nifies time consuming her selfe, or forgetting her own begin∣ning rather. Iupiter cuts off Saturnes genitals; because he tem∣pers his malice, or maligne influence. Saturne covenants with his brother Titan to slay all his sonnes; to note, that it is con∣spired betweed the Sunne and Time, that all that are born shall haste to an end. Saturne devoures his own sonnes; to note, that few live, who when they are born, have Saturne dominant in their horoscope. But Saturne did onely eate up his male-chil∣dren, not his females: is he therefore not so malignant in the birth of women, as of men? And Saturne was couzened by his wives shifts, who kept some of his male children from his greedy tooth; yea and was made to devoure a stone instead of a man: does not this signifie, that a Planet may be prevented by that which is no Planet? Saturne vomited up again all that he did eate: shewing that nature repaires that by generation, which she impaires by corruption. Saturne turn'd himselfe into a horse, to obtaine his love, or indeed his lust: which shews what furious lust they are prone to, that are borne under this cold and dull Planet. Saturne is old; because of his slow mo∣tion, and want of heat. He hath a Sythe in his hand, and a Ser∣pent
by him; because he is a retrograde Planet. Jupiter binds him, deposes him casts him into hell: and all this is but a fi∣gure of a conjunction depressing, infringing, or tempering his malignant influence. But Iupiter does no such thing, but rather frees, and restores him: and does that signifie nothing? was not this benigne Planet now a meanes to help and forward his malignity? But Saturne was foretold by an Oracle that his own sonne should depose him from his Kingdom. What? were divining Oracles before the Planets? Or indeed, are there not over the Starres that can foretell their fates; as well as they can the fates of others? In short, the Golden age was under Saturnes raigne: why then is he made so maleficall a Planet wheresoever he is predominant? It would be long to note the like of Iupiter, Mars, Sol, &c. and after all such observation, the question at last would return to this: whether Mythology or Astrology (the poeticall, or the speculatory Fable) serves most, to make one another good, or more significant? 3. Of the strange, uncouth, improbable, impossible, ridicu∣lous, and superstitious causes, grounds, forms, prescripts, waies, means, and instruments, whereby to acquire the Art, procure the power, and prepare unto the practice of Divinatory, Magick and Astrologie. MElampus, Tiresias, Thales, and Apollonius Tyanaeus could understand the voyce or language of Birds. The latter of them sitting among his friends, seeing many Sparrowes upon a tree, and another comming in chirping to the rest, told them, that it told its fellows, that there was a sack of Wheat spilt in such a place, neere the City; and they going to see, found it so. But how learnt Appollonius this rare divining art? why peradventure by Democritus his prescript, who named the Birds, whose blood being mingled together would produce a serpent: of which whosoever would eate should understand the voyces of Birds. Or else, by that of Hermes, who saith, If any one shall goe forth to catch Birds on a certaine day of the
Kalends of November; and shall boyle the first bird that he cat∣cheth, with the heart of a Fox: that all that shall eate of this bird, shall understand the voyces of Birds, and of all other ani∣mals. Or else that of the Arabians, who say, that they shall understand the meaning of bruits; who shall eate the heart and liver of Dragons. The Sybils, the Bacchides, and Niceratus the Syracusan, and Amon, were by their naturall melancholy complexion, Pro∣phets, and Poets. —Hesiod, Ion, Tynnichus, Calcinensis, Homer, and Lucretius, were on a sudden taken with a madnesse, and became poets, and prophecied wonderfull and divine things, which they themselves scarce understood.—Cornelius Pata∣rus his Priest, did at that time, when Cesar and Pompey were to fight in Thessalia, being taken with madnesse, foretell the time, order, and issue of the battle. How great heats love stirres up in the liver and pulse, Phy∣sitians know, discerning by that kind of judgement, the name of her that is beloved. So Naustratus knew that Antiochus was taken with the love of Stratonica. When a mayd at Rome died the same day that she was mar∣ried, and was presented to Apollonius, he accurately enquired into her name; which being known, he pronounced some oc∣cult thing, by which she revived. It was an observation among the Romans, in their holy rites, that when they did besiege any City, they did diligently enquire into the proper and true name of it, and the name of that God under whose protection it was: which being known, they did then with some verse, call forth the Gods, that were the protectors of that City, and did curse the inhabitants thereof, and so at length, their Gods being ab∣sent, did overcome them. Ʋsyche in Apuleius, prayes thus to Ceres; I beseech thee by thy fruitfull right hand, I embrace thee by the joyfull ceremo∣nies of harvests, by the quiet silence of thy chests, by the winged Chariot of Dragons thy servants, by the furrows of the Sici∣lian earth, the devouring wagon, the clammy earth, by the place of going down into cellars at the light nuptials of Pro∣serpina, and returnes of the last inventions of her daughter, and other things which are concealed in her Temple in the City Eleusis in Attica.
The Aegyptians, and Arabians confirme, that the figure of the Crosse, hath very great power, and that it is the most sure recep∣tacle of all the celestiall powers, and intelligences, because it is the rightest figure of all, containing four right angles, and it is the first description of the superficies, having longitude and latitude; and they said it is inspired with the fortitude of the Celestials. Rabbi Israel made certaine cakes, writ upon with certaine divine and angelicall names, and so consecrated; which they that did eate with faith, hope, and charity, did presently breake forth with a spirit of Prophecy. Rabbi Iohena the sonne of Iochabod did after that manner enlighten a certain rude Countreyman, called Eleazar, being altogether illiterate, that being compassed about with sudden brightnesse, did unexpectedly preach such high mysteries of the law, to an assembly of wise men, that he did even astonish all that were neere him. A certain man called Heruiscus an Aegyptian was endued with such a divine nature, that at the very sight of Images that had any deity in them, he was forthwith stirred up with a kind of divine phrenzy. The Sybil in Delphi was wont to receive God after two waies: either by subtill spirit, and fire, which did break forth somewhat out of the mouth of the cave, where she sitting in the entrance, upon a brazen three footed stoole, dedicated to a Diety; was divinely inspired, and did utter prophecyings; or a great fire, flying out of the cave, did surround this prophe∣tesse, stirring her up, being filled with a Deity, to prophecy; which inspiration also she received, as she sat upon a consecra∣ted seat, breaking forth presently into predictions. There was a Prophetesse in Branchi which sate upon an Ex∣tree, and either held a wand in her hand given to her by some Deity: or washed her feet, and sometimes the hem of her gar∣ment in the waters: by all these she was filled with divine splendor, and did unfold many Oracles. In the Countrey of Thracia there was a certaine passage con∣secrated to Bacchus, from whence Predictions and Oracles were wont to be given: the Priors of whose Temples having dranke wine abundantly, did doe strange things. Amongst the Charians
also, where the Temple of Clavius Apollo was, to whom it was given to utter divine things, they having dranke much Wine, did strange things. There was also a propheticall fountaine of Father Achaia, constituted before the Temple of Ceres; where they that did enquire of the event of the sick, did let down a Glasse by degrees tied to a small cord, to the top of the water; and certaine sup∣plications, and fumes being made, the event of the thing did appeare in the glasse. There was also not farre from Epidaurus, a City of Licaonia, a deep Fume, which was called the water of Iuno, into which cakes of Corn being cast, answers were given fortunate, if the waters did quietly retaine what was cast in: but unhappy, if they did as it were scorning of them, cast them back. We read that Hermes, Socrates, Xenocrates, Plato, Plotine, Hera∣clitus, Pythagoras and Zoroastes, were wont to abstract them∣selves by rapture, and so to learne the knowledge of many things. Also there was in Proconnesus, a Philosopher of wonder∣full knowledge, called Atheus; whose soule sometimes went out of the body, and after the visitation of places farre remote, returned again into the body, more learned. Also the soule of Harman Clezomenius was wont to wander abroad, his body being left, and to bring true tidings of things very farre off. And there are even to this day, in Norway and Lapland very many who can abstract themselves three whole daies from their body, and being returned, declare many things which are afar off. Amphiarus the Prophet commanded those who would re∣ceive Oracles to abstaine one whole day from meat, and three daies from wine; that the soule could not rightly prophecy unlesse it were free from wine. It was a custom amongst the Antients, that they who should receive Answers, certaine sacred expiations, and sacrifices being first celebrated, and divine worship ended; did religiously lie down even in a consecrated chamber, or at least in the skinnes of the sacrifices. The Rulers of the Lacedaemonians were wont to lie down in the Temple at Pasiphae that they might dreame. The same was done in the Temple of Aesculapius, from whom true dreames were thought to be sent forth. And the Cala∣brians
consulting Podalyrius, the sonne of Aesculapius, did sleep neere his Sepulchre in Lamb-skinnes: for so doing they were told in their dreames whatsoeuer they desired to know. There was formerly at Bura a town in Achaia, an Oracle of Hercules, constituted by a Chest board, where he that went to consult of any thing, after he had prayed, cast foure Dice; the cast of which the Prophet observing, did finde written in the Chest-board what should come to passe. There was once at Pharis, a City of Achaia, in the middle of the Market, a statue of Mercury; where he that went to receive omen, did, Frankincense being fumed, and candles being ligh∣ted, which was set before it, and that Countrey Coyne being offered on the right hand of the statue, whisper into the right care of the statue, whatsoever he would demand; and pre∣sently, his eares being stopped with both his hands, did make baste away from the Market-place; which when he was past, did presently, his eares being opened, observe the first voyce he did heare from any man, for a certaine Oracle given unto him. The Pythagorean Philosophers, being taken with desire of Oracles, divine praises being celebrated, did wash themselves in a river, as in a bathe; and did put on white rayment, and linnen, &c. — In like manner, the Brachmanni, the wise men of the Indians, were wont to wash themselves naked in a foun∣tain, which is called Dirce in Boeotia, their heads being first an∣nointed with amber drops, and odors fit for that purpose: then after they were according to custome sufficiently cleane, they were to goe forth about noon, cloathed in white linnen, with a white attire, having rings on their fingers, and staves in their hands. In like manner among the Gymnosophists it was a custom to wash themselves thrice a day, and twice in the night, in cold water; before they entred into the holy place, &c. The Brachmani did admit none to their Colledge, but those that were abstinent from wine, from flesh, and vices: saying that none could understand God, but they that emulate him by a divine conversation, which also Phraortes (in Philostratus) taught the lower Indians. The Priests of the Athenians, who are called in Greek Hiero∣phantae (as Hierome reports) that they might live the more chastly in their sacred employments, and might follow their
divine affaires without lust, were wont to castrate themselves, by drinking of Hemlock. Zoroastes the father and Prince of the Magicians, is said to attain to the knowledge of all naturall and divine things, by the solitude of twenty yeeres; when he wrote, and did very strange things, concerning all the art of divining and sooth∣saying. The like things doe the writings of Orpheus to Musae∣us, declare him to have done in the desart of Thracia. So we read that Epimenides of Crete, because learned by a very long sleep; for they say, that he slept fifty yeeres, id est, to have laine hid so long. Pythagoras also in like manner to have laine hid ten yeeres: and Heraclitus and Democritus for the same cause were delighted with solitarinesse. The Brachmanni of the Indians, the Magicians of the Persi∣ans, the Gymnosophists of the Aegyptians, the Divines of the Greekes, and Chaldeans which did excell in divine secrets; did apply themselves to divine vowes and prayers, and thereby did effect many wonderfull things. Abbot Ioachim proceeded no other way in his prophecies, but by formall numbers. 4. Of the diabolicall, originall, and obscure, and spurious Inventers, Authors, and Tutors, to praestigious Magick, and divining Astrologie. THe Delphian Oracle was first invented by a Goat; and thats the reason why a Goat is there immolated by the consulters. For a goat looking into a great chink or cleft of the earth, began to insult with strange voyce, and gesture; which made the admiring shepheards peepe in too, and so were corrupted with fury to prediction. The fame of this made it to be adjudged an earthly oracle, and so a Tripode was built over it for divination. It was first ascribed to Tellus, Tellus gave it to Thenus, and Thenus to Apollo. Tages the nephew of Iupiter, the sonne of a Genius, or a Divel, yea an evill Genius, or a Divel himselfe, taught the Hetrurians the aruspicinall discipline, or the art of divining. For, as a
certaine Plowman was plowing in the Tarquinian field, there suddenly starts up from under a clod, this Tages, in the forme of a little child, and spake to the Plowman: at which he asto∣nished, cried out; whereupon in came all the Hetrurians; and then he taught them this art or discipline for the space of six houres together, and they wrote it from his mouth; and so he died, or disappeared. Some say that this Tages was onely a base obscure fellow, and that he grew famous on a sudden, from the art of divining. Sosipatra a prophetesse, the wife of Aedesius the Sophister, had two Daemons in the form of old men, that taught her the secrets of Magick, for the space of five yeeres together. A strange old woman came to Tarquin the proud, and offe∣red him nine books to sale (which she said were divine Ora∣cles) and asking him a huge price for them, the King laught at her, for making so monstrous a demand: whereupon she burnt three of them before his face, and still asked the same price for the rest; at which the King laughed so much the more; then burning other three, and yet bating nothing of her former price, the King conceived there might be some rare thing contained in them, and bought the last three at the same rate: and so the woman went out, and was never seen after by any. Now these books they kept as divinatory Oracles, to be consulted as occasion served. One hath a pretty Apologue to this effect: A light giddy huswife, Dame vanity, stole into the bed of a wilde youth cal∣led Sir Curiosity; and betwixt them both was begotten a many∣faced Elfe, called Magick: and fearing lest the Lady Truth should cause it to be strangled as soon as it was born, for a monster; the two sureties of it, or guardians, Grandsire Impu∣dence, and Grandame Superstition, having wrapt it up in the mantle of an old crone, called Difficulty, and her waiting puzzle named Jill Hard-trifle attending upon it; they committed it to nurse to a prodigious Hagge, that hight Praestigie: she carried it up and down to the blind houses of Gaffer Ignorance and Gammer Folly; in whose families it has lurkt ever since, enter∣tained onely by a fond Gossip, called Credulity; where it still keeps in (like an Owle) all the day time of Truth and Peace; and never dares to peep abroad, but in the twilight of Error and Distraction.
From the sect of the Grecians have proceeded all these books of Darknesse, which Ʋlpianus the Lawyer calls books disallow∣ed to be read, and forthwith appointed them to be destroy∣ed. Of which sort the first is Zabulus reported to invent, who was given to unlawfull Arts: then Barnabas a certain Cyprian. And now in these daies, there are carried about books with feined titles; under the names of Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Solomon; also Paul, Honorius, Cyprianus, Albertus, Thomas, Hie∣rome, and of a certain man of Yorke; whose toyes Alphonsus King of Castile, Rohert an Englishman, Bacon, and Apponus, and many other men of deplored wit, have foolishly followed. Moreover they have not made Men onely, and Saints and Pa∣triarks, and the Angels of God, the Authours of such execrable opinions, but they boast also that these books were delivered by Raziel and Raphael the angels of Adam and Tobias, which books openly betray themselves, to him that looks narrowly into them, &c. Peter (in Glement) deduces this art from the prevaricating Angels; proving, how they taught men, that the Divels doe obey mortall men, according to certaine arts, and may be compelled thereunto, that is, by magicall invocations. Cham the sonne of Noah, delivered the ill found out disci∣pline of Magick art, to a certaine sonne of his, called Misraim (from whom is derived the race of the Aegyptians, Babylonians, and Persians) him the Nations that then were, called Zoroaster, the first author of the admired magicall art. His master in this vanity, was Ayovax or Azovax &c. Methodius writeth, that in the 340 yeere of Jared there arose the inventors of the evil art, men full of all wickedness, of the sonnes of Cain: as Iabeth, and Tholuscoll, the sonnes of Lamech, who was blind; in the time of whose dominion the divel perverted them to all kind of Magicall arts. Zabulus and Zamolxis addicted to unlawfull arts, first inven∣ted, or rather propagated it, so as that without doubt it might be determined for issuing from their father the Divel. There followed their steps Almadal, Alchiudus, and Hipochus, from the root of the Arabians; Apuschierus, Zaratus, and Cobares, among the Medes; Marmaridius, among the Babylonians; Zar∣mocemdas among the Assyrians; Abbaris among the Hyperbo∣reant;
Thespetion among the Aethiopians; Arunphis among the Aegyptians; Julian among the Chaldaeans, called the Thaur∣gists, &c. Besides the spurious, fictitious, and ascriptitious books of Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Aaron, Daniel, Solomon, Zacharias, Paul, &c. St. Augustine (oh horrour of blasphemy!) reports certaine foolish, wretched Pagans, (affected themselves to magicall art) to have boasted that they had seen and read books of Magicall art written by Christ himselfe; and by an epistolary title directed to Peter and Paul: affirming that by the arts therein contained, he did all those miracles for which he was so famous. But the Father bids shew those books they spake of; and askes if they by them can learn to doe as he did? and withall proves against them, That Christ himselfe wrote no booke at all; that he need not write to Peter, because he was alwaies with him; that he could not write to Paul, be∣cause he was not called till after his passion; and that he would not write of Magick, because it was contrary to his doctrine; and that even his enemies were thus convinc't how venerable and vertuous the name of Christ was; in that they thought and sought to winne the waight of authority to such their execrable arts, by commentitiously prefixing his most glo∣rious name. Cassandra desperately loved by Apollo, and importunately solicited by him, would not consent, unlesse he would first bestow upon her the gift of Divination. Which the credulous lover soon granted; but she having already obtained her de∣sire, refused to stand to her promise, for the satisfaction of his. This the divining God could not foresee; yet indigning to finde himselfe so deluded, because he could not recall such his fatall gift, he laid this curse upon it, That whatsoever she vati∣cinated, she should not be believed. Let it be a curse to the predictors not to be believed: surely it is a blessing to Christians not to believe them. And believe them who list, whose originall endowment was from a lust. The first man that themselves confesse to have attained to the skill of a Prophet in Tharsus, was a silly Shepheard; having only so much wit, as taught him to take advantage of the follies of his Countreymen. Others say, the first Prophet of this kind was
found by chance in an old vault, in Hetruria: without know∣ledge either of his name, his dwelling, or the mean that con∣veyed him thither. When began the motions of the Starres, and accordingly the genethliacall way to be known? was it not after Theatis the Aegyptian? or else, as some say, after Atlas, the prop and supporter of the heavens? The Originall and foundation of Magicall and Astrologi∣call arts, is yet more dubious and fabulous, from the false opi∣nions and impossible, about the time of the worlds beginning, and computation of the yeeres thereof. Apuleius was of opi∣nion, that the world, and men, and arts therein, were from eternity. And being destroyed by flouds and conflagrations, (in some parts, but not all) were repaired, but not created. The Indians boasted of men living long before Adam; and that they could name who was Adams father and master. The Aegyptians fained, that they had a story in letters comprehen∣ding thirteen thousand yeeres. The Chaldaeans dotingly glo∣ried, that they had monuments of Astrology, containing foure hundred and seventy thousand yeeres. Plato accounts many thousands of ages to have been past, since the existence of the world; and induces an Aegyptian Priest talking with Solon, and affirming, that Athens of the Greekes, and Sais of the Ae∣gyptians, were built, one nine, the other eight thousand yeeres before their time. The Aegyptians fained that the Starres, from their first originall, had four times runne their courses, (and the Stars doe not once absolve their course but in 36000 yeeres) and that the Sunne had twice set where it now rises: and that their Kings, to Ptolomy, had raigned there above seventy thousand yeeres: and that for more then an hundred thousand yeeres, Aegypt had been skilfull in comprehending the way of the Starres. The Indians bragd of their historicall monuments, that from the time of Liber Pater to Alexander the great, there were an hundred fifty and three Indian Kings; through the space of six thousand foure hundred and two yeeres, and three moneths. The Chaldaeans, from their first ob∣servation of the Starres, to Alexanders time, number foure hundred thousand yeeres. Pliny reports from Eudoxus, that Zoroaster lived six thousand yeeres before Platoes death. Her∣nippus saith the same man was five thousand yeeres before the
Trojane warre. Betwixt Ʋulcan the sonne of Nilus the Aegyp∣tian and Alexander of Macedon, were (they say) forty eight thousand, eight hundred sixty three yeeres: in which time there hapned three hundred seventy three Defects or Ecclipses of the Sunne, and eight hundred thirty two of the Moon. The Aegyptians record in their annals above thirteen thousand ages of yeeres, and three hundred and thirty Kings before Amesis. Betwixt Osiris, and Isis, and Alexander of Macedon, some reckon ten thousand, others twenty three thousand yeers. Other fable the Gods, and Heroes to have raigned there no lesse then eighteen thousand, and men little lesse then fifteen thousand yeeres, unto the hundred and eighty olimpiad. A∣lexander in an Epistle to his mother Olympias, wrote the narra∣tion of a certaine Aegyptian Priest insinuating the Kingdom of the Assyrians to exceed five thousand yeeres: the Empire of the Persions and Macedonians unto Alexander, more then eight thousand yeeres. The Assyrians, through the vastnesse and plainnesse of their Region, whence they might on all parts behold the trajections and motions of the Starres; these being noted they first committed to memory what was thereby sig∣nified to every one; in which Nation the Chaldaeans (so called not from their art, but their countrey) by continuall observa∣tion of the Stars, are thought to have made the science, whereby it might be predicted what should befall every one, and with what fate every one was born. 5. Of Paganish Oracles, founded upon the starres, foun∣ding divinatory Magicke, and Astrologie, confounded by Divinity, and Christianity. A Certaine big bellied woman enquiring of Apollo, whe∣ther it was a male child, or a female, that she went withall, and should bring forth? he answered a female; declaring that he had perceived so much from the time of her conception, saying, thou mayst not hope for a male-child, seeing the Moone is darkned by the rayes of Ʋenus. To another, enquiring as concerning his health, it was answered (by the course of the Starres predicting sicknesses) that his lungs were vexed with ill humours; because Saturne was pressed with un∣evennesse
or roughnesse, either in leaping, or speaking. In answer to another, Thy fatall day (quoth he) is at hand: be∣cause Saturne and Mars have both agreed together to deter∣mine it. Apollo himselfe being interrogated by a certain Souldier, why he laboured so hazzardous a thing as the fatation of a mans free will? answered, because genethliacall Mars so stirred him up: or else thus, why he laboured under such hazzard or perill himselfe? because fatiduall Mars had stirred up such a thing against his fatiduall Oracle. For thus tamely they took their own fatations; and confessed they were not able to defend their own Temples from firing. Pythius Apollo contended, that fates might be dissolved by malesicall arts. For when one enquired, why he was judged of Apollo as unapt for any thing? and what was to be done, where∣by he might be received as fit for something? It was answered by the Oracle, that the force of the Fates did hinder him, and yet he might avoyd that by Magicall arts. Porphyrius confesseth, that the gods will lye, saying, that an exquisite knowledge of things future, is not onely incompre∣hensible to men, but to many of the gods. Neverthelesse did they not alwaies lie of their own accord; but were wont to predict, that they themselves could not answer truly; and yet men out of their madnesse, would obstinately compell them to answer. Therefore Delphick Apollo, when the affection, or disposition of the Heavens, and the continent was so, that he could not foresee the truth: forbeare (said he by his diviner) this forcible urging, and utter not those powerfull words; for I shall tell false, if thou thus compellest. And in another answer, the way of the Starres (saith he) afford me to say no∣thing to day. Where is the Delphian Oracle, that men did so religiously adore? where is Apollo Pythius, or Clarius? where is Iupiter Dodonaeus? The Delphicke Oracle truly is related to have been thrice burnt by the Thracians; yet was not that calamity once foreseen or foretold by Apollo himselfe. We have heard the same of Jupiter Capitoline, in the time of Ptolomy, when the Temple of Ʋesta was also burnt. That great Image of Jupiter, which they say was the glory as it were of all Greece, in the
time of Julius Caesar burned, being from above stricken with thunder and lightning in the Olympick bickerings. And in more ancient times, they say the Capitoline Temple was burnt: and Pantheus is said to be cast down and destroyed with thun∣der and lightning: and we are not ignorant, how the Sacrary of Serapis in Alexandria was burnt in like manner. Augustus Caesar consulting the Oracle of Apollo Pythius, about the succession in the Empire, it gave no answer thereunto: and being importuned to give a reason of its silence, answered to this effect: That an Hebrew child, a Ruler of the Gods them∣selves, had commanded him to depart that place, and get him down to Hell. Aemilianus the Rethorician was heard to report, that his Father sailing towards Italy, about the Isles which they call the Echinades, the wind lying still, towards night they came neere to Paxas; and they that sailed being more attently vigi∣lant, on a sudden was heard a great voyce from the Isle Paxas, calling on one Thraemnus (now this Thraemnus was an Aegyp∣tian, and Governour of that ship) they all wondred, but he answered not till the third call, and then it cryed louder thus: When thou commest neer the Fenne, proclaime, that great Pan is dead. Which being heard, all of them were stricken with great feare, and doubted whether they should obey that voyce or not; at length they approved this counsell of Thraemnus the Governour, that if the winds blew faire and prosperous, they would say nothing; but if the Sea were calme, and the winds ceased when they came in that very place, then there was no concealing of what they had heard. Now when they were neer the fenne, & no wind stirring, Thraemnus looking into the Sea, pronounced with a loud voyce, as he had heard, Great Pan is dead. Which being proclaimed, there was presently heard many and great and strange groanes. As soon as they came to Rome, the rumour hereof filled the whole City, so that Tiberius sent for Thraemnus to confirme the truth thereof. — Then Demetrius told his story, Beyond Britaine there are many deso∣late Islands, some of which are dedicated to Daemons and Heroes: and I sailed (said he) towards an Isle neere to Britaine; where there are few inhabitants, but all accounted hallowed by the Brittaines: As I was there, a great tempest arose in the ayre,
with stormes and lightnings that made us all afraid: which thing the Islanders said, fell out, because some of the Daemons, and Heroes were dead. The grave Author gives this note upon them, that these things were said, and done in the time of Tibe∣rius; in which time our Saviour was conversant upon earth, and then both silenced and expelled Devils. 6. Of the Magicall Oracles, and or aculous Magicians, the causes of all Idolatry; especially that inhumane abho∣mination of humane Sacrifices, or immolations. THe Rhodians did sacrifice a man to Saturne; which they afterwards willing to mitigate, did reserve unto those Saturnials, one condemned to death; whom, being loa∣den with Wine, they immolated at that feast. In the Ile Sala∣mis, which of old time they called Coronea, untill the time of Diomedes, a man was slaughtered to Agravala the daughter of Cecrops: afterwards in the Temple of Pallas, Agravala and Diomedes (one of the three) a man was immolated; whom led by youths about the altar, at length was smitten by the Priest with a speare, and so laid upon the fire and burnt; which thing Dyphilus the King of Cyprus (in the time of Seleucus) abhominating, appointed that not a man, but an Ox should be sacrificed to Diomedes. Amongst the Aegyptians in Heliopo∣lis they sacrificed men. To Juno they sacrificed three in a day. To Dionysius called Omadius, by those of Chios, a man was sacrificed, being cruelly torn in pieces. The Lacedaemonians were wont to sacrifice a man to Mars. The Phaenicians, in the calamities of warre, and pestilence, were wont to immolate their dearest friends to Saturne. The Curetes sacrificed of old their children to Saturne. In Laodicea of Syria a Virgin was offered to Pallas. The Arabians every yeere sacrificed a child, and buryed it under the Altar. All the Graecians commonly immolated a man before they went out to warre. In the great City of Latinus, a man was sacrificed upon the solemnity of Jupiter. Not onely in Arcadia, to Pan Lyceus; nor in Carthage, to Saturne; but all men in common, upon the appointed day
of sacrificing a man did sprinkle the Altar with mans blood. It was the manner of the Ancients in great calamities, & dangers, that the Prince of the Nation, or City should give up the best beloved of his children to a vengefull divell, as a reward of redemption, and mystically to slaughter him so delivered up. Saturnus the King of that Region which the Phaenicians call Israel, who after he had put off man, being brought to the starre of Saturne, having a deare and onely sonne of Anobret his new married Spouse, called Jeud (for so the Phaenicians call an onely sonne) because the City was pressed with a most great and dangerous warre; Him, clad in regall ornaments, he offe∣red upon the Altar built and prepared to that purpose. Ari∣stomenes Messenius sacrificed three hundred at once to Jupiter, whom they call Ichometes; among whom Theopompus the King of the Lacedaemonians was a Noble and Regall Hoste. The Tauroscythians whatsoever stranger they took (and they took many, driven thither by tempest) they were wont forthwith to sacrifice them to Diana. In Pella a City of Thessalia a man of Achaia was sacrificed every yeere to Peleus, and Chiron. The Cretians did immolate a man to Iupiter. The Lesbians to Dio∣nysius. The Phocensians to Diana. Herechteus the Atticke, and Macharius the Roman, one sacrificed his daughter to Proserpina, the other to a Daemon his defensor. Jupiter and Apollo is said to have brought great calamity upon Italy, because the tenth part of men was not sacrificed to them. The Pelasgi, and the Aborigenes, the earth being fruitlesse, vowed to sacrifice to Iu∣piter, and Apollo, the tenth part of all that should be born. The Celti, and almost all the more Easterly people did sacrifice by homicide. Saturne was angry with the Carthaginians, because whereas formerly they had sacrificed to him, the more excel∣lent of their sonnes; afterwards they immolated to him in∣fants privily bought, and obscurely educated, instead of their children: whereupon to appease him, they publiquely sacri∣ficed to him two hundred of their most Noble young men. The Athenians being afflicted with famine, because of the slaughter of Androgeus, and flying to the Gods for helpe, Apollo did not answer, that the Gods were to be pacified with righ∣teousnesse, humanity, repentance, or contrition: but he adding death to death, and plague to plague, and cruelty to cruelty,
commanded that seven males, and as many females, (not in∣fants, but men grown) should every yeere be sent into Creet, and there sacrificed. Cepheus King of the Aethiopians, and Cassiope his wife, had one onely daughter, named Andromeda; in his time a huge sea monster infested the Countrey; whereupon they consul∣ting the Oracle for remedy; answer was returned, that could not be, till Andromeda was exposed to that monster to be de∣voured. Thus cruel were the Stars to those, that afterwards were made Stars themselves. Tiresias promised victory to the Thebanes; but upon this condition, that the sonne of Creon should be sacrificed as a victime for his Countrey. Chalcas did vaticinate or progno∣sticate the destruction of Troy; but upon the successe, enjoyned that Iphigenia the daughter of Agamemnon should be immo∣lated. The Delphian Oracle being consulted about a great plague grassating among the Ionians, it was answered, that it could not be remedied, unlesse Menelippus and Cometho; and not one∣ly so, but unlesse a young man, and a mayd, were yeerely offered up at Diana's altar. The Messenians consulting about some issue of their long warre with the Lacedaemonians, it was pre∣dicted that theirs should be the victory, but upon this condi∣tion, that they should sacrifice an incorrupted virgin of the Aepytidaean family unto their God: whereupon Aristodemus, to gratifie his Countrey, destinated his onely daughter to the immolation. After the death of Julian the apostate, there was found in Antioch sundry heads, and carcases of men, women, and chil∣dren, hidden in chests, wells, pits, and other secret holes; all which he had idolatrously, and barbarously caused to be slaine for Necromancy and divinations sake. Especially in Carras, in the Temple, where he had performed his execrable abomina∣tion, immediately before his going into Persia, and had straitly commanded, that the doores should be kept lockt, and none to enter in till his return. There was found a woman han∣ged up by the haire of the head, her hands cut off, and her belly ript up; and all to vaticinate and ariolate his Persian Victory.
Such like anthropomanticke Sacrifices were used by Mithri∣dates, Heliogabalus, &c. by the Druides among the French; by the Gothes to their God Odhen; and by the Sclavonians to their great God Swantmith, and more efficacious in answers; to whom they were accustomed to sacrifice a Christian every yeere. In the Taurican Region, where Thoas was King, it was a law of their sacrifices, that whatsoever stranger came thither, especially they that were cast upon their shore, should be slain as a victime to Diana Taurica. Idomeneus King of the Cretians, returning to his own Coun∣trey, from the Trojane warre, Neptune sent such a tempest, that he was constrained to vow a Sacrifice unto him, the first crea∣ture that met him, as he came out of his ship: now his owne sonne first meeting him, to welcome his safe arrivall, was so served. In Albania, a Region not farre distant from the Caspian sea, they used to immolate a man to the Moon: where many of the servants did divine; and he that was most transported therein, wandring alone in the wood, was taken and bound by the Priest with a sacred chaine, and nourished delicately for the space of a yeere, and then led to be Sacrificed with the rest of the hosts. That there were such heathenish and inhumane immolati∣ons, and they pertaining to all kinds of divination (either as preparations thereto, or as consequents thereof) is most evident and undeniable. Deut. 18. v. 11, 12. 7. Of the fatuity of fatations, or fatidicall divinations. HOw often is Jupiter, Apollo, and the rest of the starry Gods, complaining of their own fate? how they themselves are subject thereunto? and that what any one of them doth (espe∣cially upon poore mortals) another of them can neither pre∣vent, nor remedy, but it must of necessity be? So Iupiter wept showers of blood, because he could not deliver his sonne Sarpe∣don from death.
Contrarily, Apollo Pythius contends, that the fates may be dissolved by maleficall arts, for when one enquired, why Apollo had judged him fit for nothing, and what was to be done, that he might be thought fit for something? he answered, the force of the Fates did hinder him; yet he might avoyd them by magicall arts. Almost infinite numbers, both of Graecians and Barbarians, yea women, and tender children, have fainelesly and willingly left their bodies, and imbraced their deaths: now this cannot be applied to the necessity of Fate. Oenomaus, in his book of maleficall artifices, uses these words against Apollo: Goe thou to Delphos, and thou canst not hold thy peace, though thou wouldest; for so Apollo the sonne of Jupiter now wils; not because he will, but because necessity compels him to will.—Heare a fatidicall Oracle! Leaving thy Country, goe into Euhoea, for there it is fatally destinated for thee to build a City. What sayest thou Apollo? Is it not in a mans power to leave his own Countrey when he pleases? and if it be fated for a man to build a City, he must doe it whether thou consellest or no; nay, whether he himselfe will or no.—Heare another fatidicall Oracle, Goe tell the Pari∣ans, O Thesides, that they must build for themselves a City in Aeria. Why he must needs have told it, because it was so fated, although thou hadst not commanded it. Thou didst answer to Laius, it was fated that he should be slain by his owne sonne. Wert thou ignorant, that his sonne was to be born Lord of his own will? Was it not in Laius his own will whe∣ther he would doe his endeavour to get children, or no? and was it not in his sonnes own will whether he would kill his father, or no?—Thou answeredst to Loerus, Jupiter hath done, and will doe thee much ill: it is not right, O Apollo, for the Gods to handle an innocent man so hardly; if he was for∣ced to doe any thing ill, why did not Jupiter punish himselfe also, as the author of that necessity?—Why didst thou praise Licurgus, O Apollo? for if he were good, this was not to be at∣tributed to him, but to the Fates. Chiron the centaure, the sonne of Saturne, who taught Phy∣sick, and Astrologie; was grievously wounded in his foot by a dart of Hercules, dipt in Lernaean poyson, that casually fell
upon it: wherewith being sore vexed, he wisht to die, that he might fulfill the vaticination which his daughter Ocyrrhoe had predicted: but he could not naturally thus yield to Fate, be∣ing born immortall from his parents: at length praying the Gods above that he might be suffered to die, they granted his request, but withall translated him into Heaven, and placed him among the Starres in the Zodiack, and there he is called Sagit∣tarius. Theophilus Emperour of Greece was advised by the Patriarke Iohn a Magician to breake down the fatall Statue with three heads, and so to presage of his successe. Likewise Euphrosine wife to Alexius, was counselled to cause the snout of the Caly∣donian bore to be cut off, and battered many other fatall statues and fabrications, for presagitians sake. Among the Elaeans was a brazen Oxe, which the Corcyreans had there dedicated; a little child playing under it, hastily dasht his head against it so hard, that it dasht out his braines. The Elaeans condemned the Oxe for the murder, and being about to draw it away to some execution, they were admoni∣shed by the Delphick Oracle, to expiate the Oxe, as they used to doe facts of imprudent homicide; because it was done by Fate, and by chance, and by no ill deceit. The fatidicall Image of Apollo Cumanus wept four daies to∣gether, at the warring against Aristonicus, as not being able to prevent or redresse what was fatally destined. So Juno Sospita (neverthelesse unable to save) wept at Lavinium, because of a great pestilence that was fatally to follow. And so Diana con∣doled Camilla: and Hercules, dying Pallas. A notable fellow minding to try Apollos Oracle at Delphos, askt him, what it was he held in his hand (holding a Sparrow under his cloake) and whether it was alive, or dead? (inten∣ding to kill, or preserve it, contrary to what the Oracle should answer. But the answer was that it was in his own choice whe∣ther it should live or die. The old Fable confesses that there is more in the liberty of a mans wil, then in the Fates, which they divine either of, or by.
8. Of the sundry natures, customes, and manners of men, either quite contrary, or nothing according to the posi∣tions, conjunctions, dominations, and dispositions of the Starres. AMong the Seranes there is a law not to kill, nor to for∣nicate, not to worship Images; whence in that region, there's no temple to be seen, no harlot, no adultresse, none is a thiefe, none a man-slayer; neither doth the siery starre of Mars, constituted in the midst of heaven, compell the wil of anyone of them to the murder of men: neither doth Venus, con∣joyned to Mars, cause any one of them to solicite another mans wife: and yet every day Mars must needs come there into the midst of heaven; and that in so great a Region that men are born there every houre, is not to be denied. Among the Indians and Bactrians, there are many thousands of men, which they call Brachmans; they both by traditions, and laws of their Fathers, neither worship Images, nor eate any thing that is animate, they neither drink wine or beere, but farre from all malignity, are onely attending upon God: but yet all the other Indians in the same Region, are involved in adulteries, murder, drunkennesse, idolatry; yea, there are found some of them, dwelling in the same climate, which hunting men, and sacrificing, devoure them. And yet not any of the Planets, which they call good and happy, could prohibite these from slaughter, and mischiefe; neither could the malefick starres impell the Brachmans to malefice, or malefacture. Among the Persians there was a law, of marrying daughters, sisters, and mothers themselves: neither did they celebrate these nefarious marriages in Persia onely, but also in all other cli∣mates of the world wheresoever they came: whose wickednesse other Nations abominating, called them Magufiaeans; and there are in Aegypt, Phrygia, and Galatia, very many of the Magufiaeans, that by succession from their fathers, are still pol∣luted with the same wickednesse. And yet we cannot say, that
in the Nativities of them all, there was Venus in termes, and in the house of Saturne, and with Saturne, Mars aspecting. Among the Getulians, this is the law or custom: the women till the fields build houses, and doe all such like works; and moreover they may meet with whom they please: neither are they accused for it by their husbands, nor called therefore adulteresses though they mingle indifferently with all, and especially with strangers. Also their women contemne all persumes, neither weare they dyed garments; but goe bare footed. On the contrary, their men delight in vestures, and odours, and various colours; yet doe they it not out of effemi∣nacy; for they are valiant and warlike above other Nations. Neverthelesse all the women that are born among them, had not Ʋenus ill affected in Capricorne or Aquarius: nor were all the men born under Venus, constituted with Mars in Aries; which the fopperies of the Caldaeans can claim makes men both valiant and delicate at once. Among the Bactrians, the women use gallant ornaments, and precious oyntments, and are more reverenced by their handmayds and servants, then their husbands are, and ride abroad in a singular pompe, their horses adorned with trap∣pings of gold and precious stones: neither doe they live chastly, but mingle with servants as well as strangers: nor are they accused by their husbands, because they Lord it over them. Notwithstanding the nativity of every Bactrian woman had not Ʋenus, with Iupiter and Mars in the midst of heaven, and termes of Ʋenus. Amongst the Arabians all adulteresses are put to death, and those punished, that are onely but suspected. In Parthia and Armenia, homicides are executed, sometimes by the Judges, sometimes by the kindred of him that was murdered: but he that shall kil a wife, a sonne, or a daughter, or a brother, or sister unmarried, is not so much as accused for it; for so is the law. Contrarily we see among the Grecians and Romans parricide is not expiated, but by the greater penalty. Among the Atrians or Adroams, he that stole the least thing was stoned: but among the Bactrians, he that stole but petty things was onely spit upon: yet among the Romans, such an one was beaten and wounded. From the river Euphrates, to the orientall Ocean,
he to whom murder or theft was objected, was not much ag∣grieved, or tormented: but if he had abused himselfe with a masculine, and that come to light, he was forced, through paine to kill himselfe. And yet the wise men of Greece were not asha∣med to pursue specious boyes. In the same orientall coast, the parents and kindred, if they had known their sonnes and kinsfolks subjecting themselves to turpitude, they both killed them, and would not vouchsafe so much as to bury them. A∣mongst the Gaules, the children marry publikly, and by the law are noted with no reproach for it; and yet truly it is not pos∣sible that all they among the Gaules, who betray the flower of their youth; should have Venus and Mercury, in the house of Saturne, and of Mars tearmes occident. Among the Britaines, many men have but one wife. Among the Parthians, many women (on the contrary) have but one husband; and yet they all live chastely, and obedient to lawes. The Amazons have no men; but, at spring time they goe into other Countries, and couple with their bordering neighbours: and thus, by a naturall law, they all bring forth about one time, and the males they slay, the females they cherish, and are all warlike women. Mercury in his house, with Venus, is said by the Chaldaeans, to make man covetous, and money mongers, and devisers, and paynters; but in the house of Venus, to make them unguentaries, or perfumers, and such as exercise their voyces, as Stage players and actors of fables. And yet among the Saracens and Moores, and in upper Lybia, and in nether Germany, and among the Sarmatians, and the Scythians, and other Nations that inhabit the Northern parts of the Sea Pontus; in Alania also, and Al∣bania, and Othene, and Saunia, and Aurea; there is found no money hoorder, no paynter, no Architect, no Geometrician, no exerciser of his voyce, no actor of fables: but such a conjun∣ction of Mercury and Venus, is found to be altogether ineffectu∣all and vaine, in so many and great parts of the world. All the Medes nourish Dogges with no little cost and care; to which they cast men dying, and yet gasping: notwithstan∣ding all of them had not, in a diurnall nativity, the Moon with Mars under the earth, in Cancer. The Indians burn their dead, with whom their wives are
willingly burned together: yet all those women that thus willingly endured the sire of their husbands, had not in a nocturnall nativity, the Sunne, with Mars, in the tearm of Mars in Leo. Many of the Germans use strangling: yet is it not possible that all they who so hang themselves, should have the Moone intercepted of Saturne and Mars. Among all Nations men are born at all houres, and we see laws and manners prevaile every where from the power of a mans free will. Neither doth any mans nativity enforce him to doe any thing against it. Neither doth it compell the Serans to homicide; nor the Brachmans to the eating of flesh; nor are the Persians thereby restrained from unlawfull marriages; nor the Indians kept from the fire; nor the Medes from the dogges; nor the Parthians from marrying many wives; nor are the Mesopotamian women debarred from chastity; nor the Graecians from their exercises; nor the Romans from their rule; nor the French from their muliebriousnesse; nor can all the Nations, which we call Barbarians, be thus brought to approve the lear∣ning of the Muses. All the Iewes, by the Mosaicall law, doe circumcise their children on the eight day; yet are they not compelled to it by the force of any Starre; nor are they impelled thereunto by the time of the region; nor are they induced to doe otherwise by the custome or manners of any other Nation: for where∣soever they are, whether in Syria, Galatia, Italy, Greece, Parthia, they still keep their Law; which could not at all be done by any necessity of their Nativity. For it is not possible that all the Iewes should have the same Nativity. Futhermore, one of the seven daies, where ever they are, they cease from all manner of work, nor goe a journey, nor use any fire, yet doth not any genethliacall reason restraine a Iew from building, or pulling down a house, from buying, or selling, on that day: but many of them are born, many are sicke, and healed, and many die on that day. The sect of the Christians, which are found in every part of the world, and in every City; if the Parthians after they once become such, they marry not many wives; neither doe the Medes (after that) cast their dead unto the dogs, nor the Persians
marry their daughters, nor the Pactrians and Gaules corrupt matrimony; nor the Aegyptians worship Apis, or a dogge, or a Goat, or a Cat: but wheresoever they are, they live after others laws and customes: nor can they be compelled, either by any genethliacall reason, or by their own, or by the principles of any, to think any thing fit to be done, which their master hath not counted fit to be spoken. 9. Of Magicians and Astrologers, the most perverse and pestilent Hereticks: and their Magick and Astrologie, the greatest causes or confirmations of their blasphe∣mous and nefarious Heresies. SImon Magus was the Prince of Hereticks, and the father of the first Heresies after Christ: who, besides those so execra∣ble in doctrine, and detestable in manners, hatched these so abo∣minable, as concerning his own person, giving out that himselfe was some great one. Acts 8.9. and taught that himselfe was he who should appeare to the Iewes, as the Sonne, and in Samaria, should descend, as the Father; and to the other Nations should come as the Holy Ghost. He set himselfe forth for a God, at least for the sonne of a Virgin. He bewitched the people, with his sorceries, or magicke, to say, This man is the great power of God, Acts 8.10. And in admiration of his magicall operations, they set up a statue, with this Inscription, To Simon the holy God: His Image was made after the figure of Iupiter; and the Image of Salena, or Helena, his harlot (whom he affirmed to be the first conception of his mind, the mother of all, by whom, in the beginning, he conceived in his mind, to make the An∣gels, and the Archangels) was made after the figure of Minerva: and these they worshipped with Incense, victimes, offerings and sacrifices. Howbeit this magicall sorcerer simulated the Chri∣stian faith, and was baptized; supposing that the Apostles healed by Magick, and not by the power of God; and suspecting the Holy Ghost to be given, by a greater Magicall science, he offered money for the gift: which being denied him, he studied all
manner of Magick so much the more; so to make himself seem the more glorious in the emulation; and to make him∣self famous in his contestation against the Apostles, vented his heresies, and vaunted his sorceries so much the more. And, in stead of the Holy Ghost, he got him a devil for his familiar; which he said, was the Soul of a slain childe, (although indeed it was a Devil) that he had adjured for his assistance, in doing whatsoever he commanded. His Priests and proselytes likewise were taught to use exorcisms, and incantations, and Amatories and allurements; and had also their Paredrials, and Oniropom∣pists; Sc. their familiars; and studiously exercised all manner of curious superstitions, and unlawful Arts. And all was to this intent, that his, and their praestigious acts, might seem to confirm their blasphemous heresies. Elymas the Sorcerer, or the Magician, sought to turn away the Deputy from the faith; and would not cease to pervert the right wayes of the Lord, Act. 13.8, 10. And not onely his actions, but his appellations also, serve to note his Heresie, as well as his Sorcery. Jannes and Iambres the Magicians that withstood Moses; wherefore are those Hereticks, men of corrupt minds, re∣probate, or of no judgement, concerning the faith, that resist the truth, compared to them 2 Tim. 3.8. Doubtlesse, there was not onely some resemblance, or similitude, but some identity or reality in their actions. Menander the disciple, and successour of Simon Magus; a Samaritane also, and a Magician, was possessed with a devil; and being instructed with daemoniacal power, was not inferi∣our to the former in diabolical operation. And having attained to the height of magical Science, which (he said) he had from his Euvoja; and by her taught, and gave it unto others: so that many were deluded & deceived by this his prodigious art. To which he added, as upon which he founded these his por∣tentous, Heresies, or opinions, viz. Affirming himself to be the Saviour sent from Olympus to Heaven; or from the invisible world, for the salvation of men. Teaching, that the Angels, the operators of this world, cannot be otherwise bound, or compel∣led, or conquered by any; unlesse it be by learning the decep∣tive, and proving the experience, of the Magical art, which he taught, and by receiving the Baptism which he himself delive∣red,
which whosoever had ever been partakers of, they should thereby acquire perpetual immortality; and die no more; but remain everlastingly with themselves, or with him, and be∣come thenceforth expert of old age, and be made immortal. Saturninus or Saturnilus, and Basilides, were notorious im∣postors in all Magical arts, using Images, incantations, and in∣vocations and all other superfluous curiosities. And among their other Heresies, this was one, inconsistent altogether, not onely with nature, and Theologie; but with Magick also, and Astrology. viz. In that they invented 365. Heavens, ma∣king one another by succession, and similitude; and the lowest of them begetting the creatures here below. And the chiefest or highest of them, which they call Abrafax, or Abraxas, they make to have in it self, not onely the number of the 365; but the vertue of them all. And yet the Mathematicians then agreed with them in the distribution of the 365 local positions of the Heavens; though peradventure not in their mutual, and so infinite generation: Howbeit, in this they, and the Magi∣cians were wholly agreed in contending their mysteries to be ineffable, and ought to be hidden in silence. Carpocrates and his ear-mark'd Disciples, practised all manner of Magical arts; used Incantations, Philters, Paredrials, or De∣moniacal assessours, oniropompists, or Dream-artists, and all other machinations, malignations, inductions, illectations, &c. Yea, they set up Schools of Magick, and taught praestigi∣ous operation in publique; saying heretically, that by vertue of these they had gotten the Dominion over the Princes, and Fabricators of this world; and not onely over them, but o∣ver all that are made therein. Teaching yet more heretically, that they who will attain to the perfection of their Mystago∣gie, must dare to do any thing; yea, must do any filthy thing: otherwise they cannot escape the Prince of this world, unlesse by such secret operation they pay their debt to all. And what was this operation of absolving the debt in the body? but a nefarious coition of men and of women; and therewithal, an abhominable operating of incantations, venefices, and I∣dolatries upon every member of the body. Marcus (with his podalitial Marcosites) was most skilful & ex∣pert in almagical impostures; by which he seduced many men,
and not a few women; to turn to, and attend him, as one most sciential, and perfect; and one that had gotten great vertue from invisible and unnameable powers & places. Wheras he onely mixed the ludicrous fopperies of Anaxilaus, together with the wicked subtilties of Magicians, and so deluded into admiration or astonishment, such simple and senseless people, as could not discern his ludibrious incantations. For faigning himself to give thanks over a cup of white wine, by his long invocations, and incantations, he turned it to red, or made it so appeare, that it might be thought, by that grace, from them that are above all, he distilled his own blood into the cup; through the invention thereof, and that they which were pre∣sent might desire to tast of that cup, that so there might distil upon them that grace which the Magician invoked; or which the Magician called Grace. Understand withal, that he had a Devil his Paredrial, or assessor; by which he himself did seem to prophesie: and so many women, as he thought worthy to be partakers of his grace, he made to prophesie, especially he bu∣sied himself about women that were noble, and rich, and gayly clad; and thus blasphemously he would flatter, and allure them: I will that thou shouldest partake of my grace; because the Father seeth every Angel of thine alwayes before his face; now the place of thy greatnesse is in us, and it behoveth us to convene in one; receive first from me, and by me, grace; and be thou prepared as a Spouse, to entertain her well-beloved; that thou maist be as I, and I as thou: place thou in thy cham∣ber the seed of light; take from me thy well beloved; and receive thou him, and be received of him; behold grace de∣scendeth upon thee; open thy mouth and prophesie. Thus she being enticed, seduced, and puffed up, and her heart beating and burning within her, out of a hope, or presumption to pro∣phesie; she dares to speak any doting follies; and that (from the heat of the spirit) boldly, impudently, confidently vainly, empti∣ly. And from thenceforth reputes her self a prophetesse; & gives thanks to Marcus, who hath communicated his own Grace to her: and now labours to recompense and reward him, not on∣ly with all her wealth and substance, but with her corporal co∣pulation, that in all things they may be one. A certain Dea∣con in Asia, who had received Marcus into his house, fell into
this very kind of calamity; he having a very beautiful wise' this Magician corrupted her both in body, and minde, or opi∣nion; so that she followed after him a long time: at length, after the brethren had converted her with great pains; she spent her whole time in confession, bewayling and lamenting the corruption that she had suffered by this heretical Magician, or magical Heretick. Priscillianus was very studious of Zoroaster the Magician, and of a Magician made a Bishop. He himself subjected Christ his actions, and passions, to the stars. And the Priscillianists determined all men to be bound to fatal stars; and that our body is composed according to the twelve signes; as those they vulgarly call Mathem iticians use to do, constituting Aries in the head, Taurus in the neck, Gemini in the shoulder, Cancer in the breast, and so running over the rest by name, till they came to the soles of the feet, which they attribute to Pisces, cal∣led the last signe by the Astrologers. These and the like fabu∣lous, vain, and sacrilegious things, hath this heresie woven together, which is too long to prosecute. And so is it, to speak particularly of the Ebonites, Valentinians, Gnosticks, Co∣larbasians, Heracleonites, Heraclites, Ophites, Cerdonians, Mar∣cionists, Montanists, Euchetanes, Euphratians, Senophians, &c. which were as infamous for praestigious Magick, as portentous heresies. I passe by the heresies of the Magical, and Astrologi∣cal Philosophers, about the principles, tearms, matters, efficacies and ends, of all things, celestial, and terrestrial; and their Magical opinions mixt with Idolatry, Superstition, Atheism, and prophanenesse. Of all the rest, Ptolomie, and the Ptolomaites would not be left out, and it were but for names sake: but Ptolomie was a bud or branch of the Gnosticks, and the Valentinians, and then he must needs be a piece of a Magician. But I onely put the Ptolomaites, heathenish or heretical, to the construction and application of these words; ? For hereupon I con∣clude, that if Ptolomie the Genethliack, was not an heretick, yet Ptolomie the heretick, was a Genethliack. And that he, and his followers are as easie to be posed, puzzled, and confu∣ted in the one, as the other.
10. Of the inveterate malice, and envy of Magicall ope∣rators, and Astrologicall diviners, in maligning, defa∣ming, opposing and persecuting the Church; and more especially the Ministers of Christ. BEsides the canonicall history of Jannes and Iambres resist∣ing Moses; and of Simon Magus, and Elymas withstanding St. Peter and St. Paul: Ecclesiasticall story makes this relation betwixt St. Peter and Simon Magus. Nero being captivated with the effascinating allurements of Simon Magus, who had gotten his heart, by promising him (through his wicked arts) victory, dominion, health, long life, safety, &c. all which he believed, that knew not how to prove the truth of things: so that he held the chiefe place in his friendship; for he took him to be the overseer, and guardian of his life, and health. But after that Peter had detected his flagitious vanities; and had demon∣strated how that he onely belyed the species and appearances of things; and that he effected no true solid thing at all: then was he had in scorn, and therefore consumed himselfe with griefe and envy. And although he had experience of Peters power in other parts (for under Claudius Caesar he was stricken with madnesse, after that he was found to have dealt so mali∣ciously against the Apostle Peter in Iudaea, he wandred from East to West) and comming to Rome first, he boasted that he could raise the dead. It so fell out, that a Noble young man, a kinsman of Caesars, died about that time, to the griefe of all. Most of them advised that an experiment should be made, whe∣ther he could be raised again from the dead. Now Peter was accounted very famous for such mighty works: but as yet the Gentiles had no faith, as touching any such fact of his. Yet their griefe requiring remedy, to Peter they went: and some of them thought it meet that Simon Magus should be called also. Both of them being present, Peter bad Simon begin first to raise the dead if he could: and if he could not, then he himselfe would not be wanting to the raising of the dead by the help of Christ. Simon supposing that his art would avayle much in a
City of the Gentiles, proposed this condition: that if he rai∣sed the dead, then Peter should be slaine, who injuricusly pro∣voked so great a power (for so he was called) but if Peter pre∣vailed in the fact, he should in like manner be avenged of Simon. Peter is content and Simon begins: and drawing to the dead mans bed, so soon as he began to inchant, and murmurre his charms, the dead corps seemed to move the head, thereupon great was the cry of the Gentiles, that he was alive already, and spake with Simon: and a greater indignation against Peter, that he durst offer to compare himselfe to such a power. The holy Apostle desiring silence, said, if the dead be raised indeed, and live, let him rise, walke, speake: all this is but a phan∣tasme, and no reality: call but Simon away from the bed side, and then shall ye see not so much as the least shew of it. Well, Simon was brought from the bed, and there remained not so much as a signe of any motion in the dead man. Then Peter intent on prayer a while within himselfe, and standing aloofe off from the corps, cryed with a loud voyce, Young man arise, the Lord Jesus healeth thee: and straight way he arose, and spake, and walked, and received meat, and he delivered him to his mother, who desired him, that he would not depart from him: to whom he said, he shall not be forsaken of him who hath made him to rise again, whose servants we are: and thou mother, be secure of thy sonne, and feare not, for he hath his keeper. Then the people arising up to stone Simon, Peter said, let this suffice for his punishment now, that he understand his arts are nothing available; let him live yet, and see the Kingdome of Christ increase even against his will. The Magician was much tormented in himselfe at this glory of the Apostle; and collecting himselfe, and summoning up all the force of his charmes, he gathers the people together, and complaines, that he had been greatly offended by the Galilaeans, and therefore would now leave the City, which he was wont so to defend. And appoints a day, on which he would goe flie, and so would ascend into those supernall seats; for the heavens was open to him when he pleased: upon the said day he gets up the Capitoline Mount, and so casting himself from the top of a Rock, began to flye. Thereat began the people to wonder and worship; many of them saying, it was the
power of God, and not of men, to flye with a body; and that Christ himself did no such thing. Whereupon, Peter praying Christ to magnifie his own power, by detecting the vanity of such tempting arts, and so to undeceive the people: Simons wings were forthwith clipt, and he fell down head∣long, and died either in the place, or soon after. Now Nero indigne in the fall and losse of so necessary a friend and fa∣miliar, took occasion against Peter, and persecuted him to his martyrdome. Cynops a great Magician, and adversary to St. Iohn, inveighed against his doctrine, detracted from the miracles which he wrought in the name of Christ, and defamed his person, through the false criminations of Apollos Priests. And pro∣voking him to behold and admire his power, in raising the dead out of the sea (which was no other then divels appearing in forms of men) where he himselfe diving (to fetch up more dead men) with a great noyse of the Sea, and acclamation of the superstitious bewitched people: at the prayers of St. Iohn the sea roared indeed, and swallowed up Cynops among the dead, so that he never appeared above water any more. Then commanded he those divels to depart that place, and get them againe to their cave. Yea, he made the divels to confesse the mutuall compact or covenant that was betwixt them and Cy∣nops. And likewise expelled devils out of divers places: for which Domitian commanded that he should be banished into the Isle of Pathmos. Wardacheus King of Babylon, being foretold by his Diviners, of the great danger and losse, which he should suffer in his warre against the Indians; at which he being dejected, the Apostles Simon and Jude (then present) smiling said, they had brought peace with them into his kingdome, and therefore bad him not feare, for the Indians should be glad to make peace with him on the morrow. But the Magicians derided both this and them, and bad him not believe those vaine men, for it should so be as they had said. But they proved the vain men; for the event fell out contrary to theirs, and according to the Apostles prediction. Those two Apostles also were mocked and derided by Zaroes and Arphaxat, two Magicians: but at the very houre of the martyrdome of the two Apostles, the two
Magicians were stricken dead with Thunder and Lightning. Maruthas Bishop of Mesopotamia, being sent in embassage to Isdigerdes King of Persia; he much honoured the man for his singular piety, and began to attend unto his doctrine. Now the Persian Magicians, fearing lest he might perswade the King to receive the Christian faith; and envying the man, be∣cause he had (by his prayers) cured the King of that paine in his head; whereunto all their spels and charms were nothing available: they began (whereby to despite this Religious man) to play this imposture, namely, they caused one to be hidden under the ground, and to presage, or proclaime in this wise, as the King was at his devotions; that the King should be cast out of his Kingdome for giving heed to a Christian Priest. Hearing this voyce, though he much reverenced Maruthas, yet was he minded to remove him, rather then runne so great a hazzard. But Maruthas (by his wisdome and diligence) de∣tecting the circulatory and praestigious fallacy: the King caused every tenth Magician to be beheaded. Maruthas after this de∣parted Persia: and yet returning thither again after a while, then began the Magicians to play their imposturous prankes afresh. For they caused a noysome and poysonous stinke in the place still when the King and Maruthas met together: and this they foysted upon the Christians; and presaged how peri∣lous it was to the Kings health. But they being formerly sus∣pected; were the more easily discovered, and punished accor∣dingly. After the death of Isdigerdes, his sonne Baratanes was stirred up by the Magicians to bitter persecution against the Christians; Sapores also bitterly persecuted the Christians, and especially Simeon the Bishop and the Ministers; because they re∣fused to worship (the Planetarian god) the Sun, in which per∣secution, the Magicians were the onely instigators and actors. The persecution under Decius, was not begun by any impe∣riall edict; but first set on foot by an imposterous Diviner: who stirred up the multitude of the Heathens, to promote their own superstition, and oppresse the Christian profession. Olerian was very clement and favourable to the Christians, till the Magicians put him upon the persecution; as the grea∣test enemies to and impediments of their acts and opera∣tions.
All the Philosophers, Sophisters, Magicians, Aruspices, Au∣gurs, Negromancers, gathered themselves together against Athanasius, alledging nothing could succeed in their art, or to them by their Art, till Athanasius was first taken out of the way. Therefore they greatly excited Iulian against him. Ano∣ther time they most calumniously accused him of the same devillish art, that they themselves were guilty of. Iulian, Maxentius, and Maximinus, were great divining Ma∣gicians, and great favourers and promoters of divining Magi∣cians; and as such, and by such, great tyrants, and persecutors; and such as especially laboured to destroy not onely the Priests, but the Priesthood. Henry the third purposing to ayde his brother against Lewis the French King, was disswaded therefrom by the dis∣astrous predictions of William de Perepond, a great Astrologer, and his counsellour. But the main intent of the divination was from the Popes Oracle; lest Lewis might so be interrupted in his persecuting enterprize against the Albigenses. The Magicians (as the Ecclefiasticall historians relate it) pursued Daniel with envy, calumny, and treachery, before Cam∣byses, or Cyaxares, till they brought him to the Lyons denne; till the Prince repented that he was led so farre by the Magi∣cians, and delivered Daniel from the denne, and cast them into it. The Magicians of Persia by false calumny, and barbarous cruelty, raised and maintained thirty yeeres persecution against the Christians: devising and inflicting horried tortures upon Abdas or Audas, a Bishop; upon Benjamin a Deacon; and also upon Hormisda, a Nobleman. Theoteclinus a Magician of Antioch, under Maximinus, by magicall force caused an Image of Iupiter to poure forth Ora∣cles; and such they were as served to whet on the Emperours persecution, and to exasperate the hatred of the Citizens against the Christians.
11. Of the divining envy, dissimulation, calumny, blas∣phemy, and enmity, not onely against Christian Reli∣gion, but even against Christ himselfe. MIlesian Apollo being consulted about Christ, whether he was God, or man, gave this answer: That he was mor∣tall according to flesh, or body; wise in portentous, or monstrous workes; but being apprehended by armes under Chaldean Judges, with nailes and clubs, he made a bitter end. Upon which Lactantius his comment is, That although the Oracle (as it was forced) began to speak truth; yet it did it so subtilly, and perversely, as with intent to deceive the consulter, being altogether ignorant of the mystery of God and man: and so seems to deny him to be God, by confessing him to be man. But in that it acknowledgeth him to be mortall, accor∣ding to the flesh, it is not inconsequent (although against the mind of the Oracle) but that he was immortall, and God never∣thelesse, according to the Spirit. And why must he needs make mention of the flesh; when as it was enough to say him mor∣tall? but being pressed with truth, he could not deny the thing to be, as it was: as he also was forced to confesse him to be wise. And what saies Apollo to himselfe? If he be wise, then is his doctrine wisdome, and no other: and they are therefore wise that follow it, and no other. Why then doe their vulgar account us vain and foolish: since we follow a master, and Teacher wise, by their Oraculous gods own confession? In that he saith, that he did portentous works (by which he me∣rited the faith of a Godhead) he seems to assent unto us: be∣cause he saith him to doe those very things, which (rightly understood and believed) we glory in. Neverthelesse he recollects himselfe, and returnes to his daemonicall frauds of calumny and blasphemy. For albeit he spake some truth, as necessitated, yet he seems to be a betrayer of himselfe and the gods: in as much as he would have enviously concealed (through an inimicall and deceiving lie) that which the truth
partly wrung from him. And therefore he saith him to have done wonderfull workes; but he meant it should be under∣stood not by a divine, but by a magicall or divining power. But whereas he saith further, that he was apprehended under Chaldaean Judges, &c. I demand hereupon whether they were Chaldeans by nature, or by profession? The first is not to be conceded as concerning Herod and Pilat; nor yet properly as touching Annas and Caiaphas: and therefore (since he will needs call them Chaldeans) the latter is rather to be supposed: it is not strange to be believed, that any one of them might be of the Chaldean profession, or addicted to it. And why might not the Chaldaeanizing Oracle be drawn to confesse so much against it selfe? And might it not be one end of the Ecclipse at his passion, to make even all the Chaldaeanizing Astrologers to confesse, with some of their fellows, that it was no other but the God of nature, that now suffered? One asking Apollo, what God he might appease, whereby to recall his wife from Christianity? The Oracle gave this answer (as St. Augustine cites it from Porphyrius, a great enemy of Christ and Christians) Sooner mayst thou write in water, or fly in the ayre like a bird, then remove the opinion of thy impious wife; let her goe on as she will, and sing a dead God in vaine fallacies, and false lamentations: whom (the Judge rightly determining) an ill death hath ended. This Porphyrius cites, and expounds blasphemously; as if Christ died deserved∣ly, from the just sentence of his Judges. But St. Augustine conceives Apollo spake not thus; but his vaticinating Diviner: and yet not he, but this magicall calumniator; that durst blaspheme above the devill himselfe. For Apollo himselfe durst not but speak well of him, saying, he was such a God, and King, as made the heavens, the earth, and Sea, and the deep things of Hell to tremble; of whom both he, and his fellow Daemons were afraid. Such also was the answer of Hecate concerning Christ; and so were all the rest of them. Among some forced and dissembled truths, abundance of blasphemy, and calumny against Christ, and Christian religion. The Pythian Oracle being consulted again and again by the Athenians, what religion was best to be set up? would stil an∣swer, their Fathers or Countries customes, rites, or ceremonies.
Not but that he would false religion in all variety: but that he feared a change of religion might make way to reformation of Christianity. 12. Magicians, Astrologers, Diviners, Diabolically prae∣dicting, maliciously envying, malefically imprecating, and venefically murdering, such as inhibited, opposed, confuted, contradicted them, or their arts. That is, either by violence, treachery, or sorcery, seeking, and venturing their adversaries destruction: whether they were Kings or Priests, Christians or Persians. VItellius having commanded by his Edicts, that the Chal∣deans, Mathematicians, Magicians, judiciall Astrologers, and Diviners should depart the City of Rome, and be banished all Italy, within the Kalends of October. Thereupon the Chal∣daeans set up an imprecatory and devotory libell, threatning that Ʋitellius Germanicus, by the day of the same Kalends should be no where, or not in being. And yet not that by Fate so much as vaticinall malesice. Domitian having decreed the banishment of the Astologers, (although he much presumed to be an Astrologer or Diviner himselfe) they likewise casting his constellation, told him what time he should die. Ascletarion the Mathematician espe∣cially threatned his death to his own face. At which Domitian angerly demanded, what death found he by his art that he should die himselfe? He answered that he himselfe should be eaten up of dogs, which (saith the story) fell out as prodigi∣ously, as inevitably. Now those dogs being divels, without doubt it was easie for the Divell to suggest unto the Astrologer what he meant to effect himselfe: so easie is it for Astrologers to predict those things, whereof they intend to be the instru∣ments, or by their effascinating predictions to instigate others to commit. And if they understood not these very things by diabolicall instinct, to satisfie their tempting invocations; how should Apellonius Tyanaeus, disputing in the Schooles at
Ephesus, stop on a sudden with defixed eyes, and distracted conntenance, cry out (at the very instant that Domitian was slaine at Rome) well done Stephanus, kill the Tyrant; that Tyrant Domitian is even now wounded, slayne dead? Well might a Magician be advised of the act, when it was a sooth∣saying divination, that provoked to doe the deed. Iustine Martyr was slain by the treachery of one Creseens, a dissolute, vain-glorious, circulatory, sophisticall Philosopher: because he disputed against, and confuted him in that kind of sophistry. Picus Mirandula, for writing largely, soundly, and sharply against Astrology was envyously and imprecatingly told by Lucius Bellantius, that (according to his Astrologicall judge∣ment upon his Nativity) he should die in the thirty fourth yeare of his age: yet while he formerly disputed for the Ma∣thematicall sciences at large, the Astrologers made the Starres to signifie his stupendous living above his yeares. It is recorded of Simon Magus, that many even of the Hea∣thens observing his praestigiousnesse, and branding him for it, he soothed them up, and pretended a sacrifice, and bade all those that had reproached him or his art to a banquet; of which they had no sooner eaten, but they were all infested and inflicted with divels and diseases. A Magician not far from Ihena, being upbraided by a neigh∣bour of his, a Carpenter, with his unlawfull arts and practises: pretended to predict some infortunity of his at hand, for railing against the profession; but wrought it venefically, so that the poore man fell suddenly into a strange disease. Where∣upon begging pardon for offending him or his Art, he implo∣red the help of his skill for his release. The Magician promi∣sed it, and to that purpose gave him a certaine root to take in a potion, which he had no sooner done, but he was taken with most exquisite torments in all parts, of which at length he died.
13. Of oraculous arts, and divinatory artifices, silenced, and confounded, at the presence, and by the vertue of wise and holy men and things. I Ʋlian apostatizing from Christianity, and being now to be initiated in the Paganish way, by the consecration of a prae∣stigious Magician: the Divell (who was to be present at the so∣lemnity) disappeared at the signe of the Crosse (which might then be of more vertue, because of lesse superstition) at which power Iulian was more troubled, then he was at the Divels pre∣sence. But the praestigious pseudomantist excused it; and would not have him to think that the divel fled or avoyded the place for feare of it, but in hatred to it. Iulian again sacrificing to Apollo, and no answer being given of any thing whereof he enquired, he then demanded of the daemoniacall Priests what might be the cause of such his si∣lence? They answered, that no answer was given by the Oracle, because the Sepulchre of the Martyr Babylas stood so nigh. Whereupon he commanded that the Galilaeans (for so he called the Christians, should come and remove his Sepulchre from thence, which they did with great exultation, singing (even in the eares of the profane Prince) Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, and that boast themselves of Idols. At the incarnation of Ghrist all the divining Oracles of the Panym gods were shut up; as the Oracle of Delphos, among others, was constrained to confesse; and so never spake after∣wards. Wherewith Augustus being afraid, caused a great Altar to be erected in the Capitoll; signifying that it was the Altar of the Ged, the firstborn. A jugling impostor carried about a Dragon, perswading the people it was Aesculapius, saying it would give answers of all that was demanded, that whensoever he moved him in any of his circles, Oyes was made (after the manner of Athens) in these termes: if any mocker, flouter or Christian be here, let him goe forth; for no prankes could be playd while they were by.
About the time of Constantine, Apollo spake this Oracle, not out of the mouth of his Priest, as formerly; but out of a cer∣taine darke cave or denne, viz. that the just which were upon the earth (meaning the Christians) hindred him from his vati∣cinating, or presaging power. Valentinian, who was at first somewhat favourable to the Christians, was afterwards greatly incensed against them, by the Magicians, Astrologers, and Diviners, that urged him to forbid them his house, to banish them far away, and to put them to the Sword: because indeed they were obstacles to their incantations, and praestigious practices. For there were some of those holy professors, that with their very sight, and voyce, re∣prest all that their diabolicall art and efficacy. Thaumaturgus, with his companions, driven (by reason of the night approaching, and an hasty shower falling) into a Temple where divination was wont to be exercised: immedi∣ately upon their entrance the Divell gave over his answer, and departed the place. The next morning, after they were gone from thence, the Priest of the Temple began his sacrifices, to adjure the spirit to his predicting responsals againe, who cried out that he could not now have accesse to the place, as former∣ly, and all because of his entrance that remained there the last night. St. Hierome sayes, that upon our Saviours entrance into Aegypt, all the Idols there fell down, and so their divining arts and offices were undone: wherewith they had so long decei∣ved the world. And therein he takes the prophecy to be ful∣filled, Isa. 19.1. &c. Macarius of Aegypt, and Macarius of Alexandria, both these holy men were banished into an Isle that had no Christian in∣habitant in it. They were no sooner entred there, but the Devils that had there their Temple, or grove, and their divi∣ning Priest) began forthwith to quake for feare. Yea the Priests daughter being suddenly obsessed with a fury, and crying out why came ye hither, to drive ue hence? They ex∣pelled the Divell out of the Damosell. which occasioned the conversion of the Priest, and the inhabitants of the whole Isle, to the Christian faith. The like story is of these two toge∣ther with Isidorus; and the Devils own confession by the
tongue of the obstssed Damosell much more large. O your power! ye servants of Christ! every where are we expelled by you, out of Cities and Villages, Mountaines and Valleys, and desart places. We had hopes that this strange place of ours might have escaped your presence and power, but hither you are driven by your persecutors, that you might be a means to drive us hence, &c. Astyrius, by his presence and prayer, plainly detected, and utterly frustrated the praestigious conveyance of the victimes, that in certaine festivals, were cast into the enchanted foun∣taines. Apollo himselfe was forced to confesse, that the holy men which resided thereabouts, were the onely obstacles why he could utter no more his presaging truths; and being asked how those kind of men might be discerned, he answered, by their profession of Iesus Christ. 14. Of such as apostated from, or were excommunicated out of the Church of Christ, because of Magick and Astrologie. SImon Magus believed, and was baptized, and continued with Philip, and wondred, beholding the miracles and signes which were done, Act. 8.13. yet after all this, the bond of iniquity, the diabolicall compact, or magicall covenant had so entangled and insnared him, that of sometimes Samaritan, sometimes Iewish, and for the most part Pagan in his religion, he fell ut∣terly away from Christian, and had not the least part or lot in that matter. Iulian was trained up in Christianity, and professed it; but stealing to magicall Masters, they so perverted him with their Magicall sophistry, as that they utterly perverted him; and that made him (as soon as he durst appeare in his own colours) apostate, or fall away from it. Ecebolius the Sophister, who was one of Iulians Tutors while Constantius raigned, he seemed very ardently to embrace the Christian faith: but after that Iulian had obtained the Empire,
he presently conformed to those opinions and manners of the Emperour, which he, and his light, had infused into him. But Iulian being dead, he pretended again to professe the Christian Religion; and cast himselfe prostrate at the doore of the Church (out of which he was excommunicated) crying out to such as past by, tread me under feet, as unsavory salt: yet after all this, remained light and unconstant in his religion, to an utter apostasie at the last. Porphyrius, that notable contemplator in Magick, and pra∣ctitioner also, who of Christian, turn'd Platonist, and Pagan, upon this occasion. Certaine Christians of Caesarea Palestinae having reproved him sharply (some say scourged him) for the notorious scandall as well of his manners as opinions: he in∣digning to be thus dealt withall, quite deserted Christianity, became a capitall enemy thereunto, and wrote divers cursed books against Christian Religion (besides those wherein he promoted magicall Philosophy, and Paganisme) wherein he blasphemed God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost; depraved and wrested the Scriptures, calumniated the Prophets and Apostles, and slandered sundry Fathers, Doctors, and Confessours of the Primitive Church. Aquila, making some flourishes in the Christian profession, but not forsaking his former corrupt habit in the vanities of Astrologie, but still abhorring the superstitious positions of Nativities, was therefore reprehended by the orthodox tea∣chers of those times. But instead of amending those his perni∣cious errors, he perversly opposed them even against the truth it selfe. For which being expelled the Church, he renoun∣ced Christianity, turned Proselyte, and became a circumcised Iow. Pope Alexander the third (they say) suspended a Priest from his office, for the space of a whole yeere, for but consulting with an Astrologer, about a thest that was committed in the Church. Eleusius, a Novatian Bishop, and one who himselfe had sa∣crificed to Fortune, was depriued of his Bishoprick, for the baptizing of Heraclius, a presaging Priest of Hercules, and admit∣ting him to the degree of a Deacon. At Laodicea one Epiphanius a Sophister, about to recite an
Ode in the honour of Bacchus, began to declame, hence ye pro∣phane, and not initiated to the sacred Bacehanals. Notwith∣standing many of the Christians staid still, as being taken with the fame of the Rhetorician. Amongst the rest were the two Apollinares, the father, and the sonne, both Clerks, one a Pres∣biter, the other a Lector. Of which Theodorus the Bishop of Lao∣dicea being advertised, he reasonably chid the lay people, and so pardoned them. But as for the Apollinares, after long, sharp, and publique rebuke, he interdicted them the Church, and com∣munion of Christians. Anatolius, very familiar to Gregorius the Bishop, being found to have sacrificed to Idols at Antioch; and the prefect of the East being but too negligent and remisse in judging him for it: the people began to rise in tumult, and to lay hands upon Gregory himselfe; whom they also impeached of Idolatry, but unjustly. Hereupon by the command of Tiberius the Emperour (him that succeeded Iustin) Anatolius was called in question, and not having whereof to accuse Gregory, at the acclamation of the people, who could not endure such a wickednesse un∣punished, he was not only excluded the Church, but condemned to the beasts. 15. Of those that have retracted, recanted, repented of the study, practice, and consult of Magick and Astro∣logie: and that either fruit fully, or unfruit fully, despe∣rately, or contritely. MAnasseh was a Magician, for he observed times, and used inch auntments, & used witcherast, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizzards, 2 Chron. 33.6 yet we believe that he truly and unfainedly repented, and although his prayer be Ape∣cryphall, for be besought the Lord his God, and humbled himselfe greatly before the God of his father; and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication.—Then Manas∣seh knew that the Lord be was God, Vers. 12, 13. Neither doe we make any doubt of the hearty and effectuall repentance of those Exercists, Acts 19.17, 18. because feare fell on them all, and
the name of the Lord Iesus was magnified; and many that believed came and confessed, and shewed their deeds; many also of them which used curious arts, brought their books together, and burned them be∣fore all men.—So mightily grew the word of God, and prevailed. The like we believe of the Damsell, Act. 16.16, 17, 18. because possessed with a spirit of divination (passive rather then active, the divel divining by her, rather then she by the Divel.) The same followed Paul and us, and cried saying, these men are the ser∣vants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salva∣tion. A good confession in all respects, (take it to be the Dam∣sels, and not the Divels speech) giving God and his Ministers their due, and yet claming their own interest withall. But as for Simon Magus his repenting (pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me, Acts 8. 24.) who can judge it to be other then false and fruitlesse? For he was terrified onely with an apprehension of the punishment, not of the sin: and put off that duty to others, which he should have exercised himselfe. Tiberius importunate to know, who should be his successor in the Empire? it was answered, even he that should first come to him the next morning. Hereupon he gave order to his Tu∣tor, to bring his Nephew Tiberius to him, very early the next day: and the day appearing, commanded Euodus (ignorant of his intent and desire) to goe out, and bring in to him the first youth that he met, which fell out to be Caius: which when Tiberius saw, he was infinitely troubled, exceedingly be∣shrewing himselfe, that he had sought after any Augurie or presage at all. For whereas he might have lived, and died a great deale more contentedly, had he been altogether ignorant of things future; their fore-knowledge now served onely to adde both to the miseries of his life and death. After the death of Caesar, which was said to follow the fati∣dicall prediction of Spurina the Mathematician; the people lamented, and wisht that the cursed Diviner had rather lost his skill; then that a father of his Countrey should so have lost his life. Nero was himselfe held to be a great Mag astro-mancer, and wanted neither wit nor will, nor wealth, nor Tutors, nor in∣struments, nor study, nor credulity; yet for all this confessed
that he never found any argument of truth, nor experiment of reality in magicall operation; which made him at last abdicate and renounce it, reject and contemne it; and abhorre and con∣demne himselfe for ever having to doe with it. Origen is often cited by Magicians and Astrologers, as if he were their own: howbeit in his books (and especially as Eu∣sebius cites him) he plainly and abundantly refutes them. And therfore if he were more addicted to them, it is certaine enough that he converted from them. St. Gyprian sometimes addicted to the study of magick re∣pented of it at his conversion. And if that booke de duplici Martyrio be his, we have there this his confession: They that use Magicall arts have denied Christ, and made a compact with the Divell: from which evill the mercy of the Lord hath de∣livered us; as it hath also from all the rest, in which we were held, while we sometimes walked according to the old man. St. Augustine confessed that he was very much enclined to the study of Magick and Astrology; but, after his conversion, he utterly abandoned, and condemned it. And to this purpose relates this story of himselfe. A friend of his (one Firminus) and he, walking together, both of them being addicted to the constellationall way: Firminus askes his opinion of his con∣stellation, about a secular businesse he had then in hand. St. Au∣gustine, somewhat changed in his generall opinion of it, told him, that he conceived that way to be vaine and ridiculous. Firminus insisted, and told him a story from his father, and his fathers friend, two genethliacall Astrologers, and so precise observatours, as that they calculated the births of the very bruit beasts in their families. And it so fell out, that his mother bare him, and the others mayd brought forth a sonne also in one day, houre, and minute, as neere as could be guest. But now these two (so born alike) proved to be of various and contrary both fortunes and manners, in every respect. Upon this rela∣tion of Firminus, Augustine abhorred the falsity of natalitiall prognostications more and more; and so resolved to cast it off without all scruple: and not onely so, but was instant to con∣vince the other of this vanity, from his own narration, and thus to revoke him from it too.
As St. Augustine was preaching to the people, there was pre∣sented before him, in the Church, a Mathematician. Concer∣ning whom he thus spake. This man, of race a Christian, then relapsed, is now returned a penitent: and being terrified with the power of the Lord, he is now againe received to the mercy of the Lord. Seduced he was by the enemy, and long continued a Mathematician; not onely seduced, but seducing; as wel de∣ceiving as deceived. Many lies hath he spoken against God (who gave unto him a power to doe good, not to doe evill) saying, It is not a mans will, that makes him commit adul∣tery, but Ʋenus; nor yet to commit murder, but Mars: neither doth God make a man just, but Iupiter. And many other were his sacrilegious sayings. How many Christians hath he gulled of their money? How many have bought lying predictions of him at a deare rate? But now (as we believe of him) he abhors this lying trade. For having enticed others, he now perceives himself to be the most ensnared by the devil. And now penitent before God and men, he is become a true convert. For we per∣swade our selves, it onely proceeds from the awfull feare of his heart. Did we not rejoyce at that Mathematicians conversion, who converted from a pagan; although he seemed to doe it for some promotion in the Church? But this penitent seeks for mercy onely; and therefore is the rather to be commended both to your eyes and hearts. Receive him, and love him, lest Satan again may tempt him. Let your testimony and approbation confirm his conversion. He was lost, but now is found. Long did he knock at the doores of the Church, ere he was suffered to enter: but he is now brought in, and hath brought with him his bookes to be burnt (by which himselfe might have burned unquenchably) that they cast into the fire, himselfe might enter into that everlasting refreshing. We suffered him the longer to supplicate for the remedy from the schoole of Christ, because the art wherein he hath been exercised, is to be suspected, not onely of falfity in it selfe, but of fallacy in good. And therefore we delayed him, that he might not delude and tempt us. But now we have admitted him, that he might not be tempted again, and deluded himselfe. Pray ye therefore to Christ for him; for the prayer of his Church is available against all impostures and impieties.
Iulian greatly corrupted with magicall superstition, began a little (through present horrour of conscience) to look back again to Christianity: and lay a while at the Church doores, weeping and crying, Tread upon me unsauoury Salt. But Ecebo∣lius, a Magician, hindred his true repentance, and thorough conversion; and brought him back again into that damnable superstition, worse then at the first. The same Ecebolius (after Iulians death) fayned the like repentance, and is said to use the same words, but to as little fruit. The same Iulian having received his deaths wound, roared and rayled at the Sunne, which the Astrologers had made him believe was the auspici∣ous dominator at his birth; accusing it for shining so propi∣tiously upon the Persians, but not favouring him with any fortunate influence: and so died, impiously cursing God, and the Stars; but the Star-gazers and himselfe for adhering to them, not undeservedly. Wenceslaus sent for a wagon full of Conjurers to play tricks, and make sport: amongst the rest he called Zyto; who com∣ming in with a wide mouth, cloven to both his eares, swal∣lowed up the chiefe Conjurer, and voyds him again down∣ward, &c. but was himselfe carried away by the divel, which so moved Wenceslaus that he thence forwards seriously applied himselfe to the meditation of sacred things. Pope Sylvester the second, of a Monke became a Magician, insinuated himselfe into the familiarity of a Necromanticall Saracene, and stole from him a Conjuring-book; and study∣ing or practising that art, obtained (by the divels meanes) the Popedome. Which dignity so soon as he had ascended, he dissembled his black art, under that holy vestment: but kept a brazen head in a secret place, from which he sought and recei∣ved divining answers. And enquiring of the divell, how long he should live in the Papall dignity? he answered aequivo∣catingly; that he should live long, if he came not at Hieru∣salem Now in the fourth yeere of his Pontificate, as he was sacrificing in the Church of the holy Crosse, in Hierusalem, at Rome, he was suddenly stricken with a grievous feaver, and be∣gan to be convinced that thus the divell had deluded him, and now he must die. Whereupon he began to be penitent, and confessing before the people, deplored the wickednesse of his
magicall errour. Exhorting all men, avoyding ambition, and diabolicall deceits, to live well, and holily; intreating them every one, that after his death, the trunke of his body, torne and dismembred (as it justly deserved) might be laid upon a Cart, and buried in that place whither the horses carried it of their own accord. And in the extremity of his death, besought that his hands and tongue might be cut out, by which he had blasphemed God and sacrificed to divels. Trithemius retracted his opinion concerning the seven spi∣rits, in the seven Planets, governing the world in their course, by 354 yeeres apiece, and four moneths: protesting after this manner in the conclusion, that of all these he believed and ad∣mitted nothing, but as the Catholick Church believed; and for the rest, he refuted and contemned all, as vaine, fained, and superstitious. And as he disclaimed this to Maximilian the Emperour, so he exclaimed against the Artists to Another. Away with these rash men, vayne men, lying Astrologers, deceivers of minds, and pratlers of frivolous things. For the disposition of the Stars makes nothing, to the immortall soule, to naturall science, to supercelestiall wisdome. A body hath power onely over a body. The mind is free, and not subject to Stars; and neither receives their influences, nor follows their motions, &c. Cornelius Agrippa in his youth wrote a Magicall book of occult Philosophy; but in his sager yeeres wrote another of the vanity of Sciences: wherein he confutes and condemns Magick, Astro∣logy, and all kind of divination: and cals the latter his recan∣tation of the former: But if towards his death, he said indeed to his black Dog, Away wicked beast thou hast utterly undone me: without all doubt, and notwithstanding all apologie, his recantation was truer then his repentance. For that was suf∣ficient to convince others: whereas this was not sufficient to convert himselfe. Rodaick of Toledo (hoping to finde treasures) caused a Pa∣lace to be opened, that had been kept shut for many yeeres; there he found nothing, but a coffer, and in it a sheet, and in it written a prophecy, that after the opening thereof, men like those painted in the sheet should invade Spaine, and subdue it. The King was therefore sorry, and caused the coffer and castle to be shut again.
Phanias an Hierosolymitane servant, by the advice of certain Magicians, had emancipated himselfe to the divel, in his hand writing, for the obtaining of his masters daughter, by vertue of their art. But at length repenting, he was converted by the prayer of St. Basil, and the divel casting in the chirograph, he was publiquely received into the bosome of the Church. Cyprian a Magician, while he sought by Magicall arts to in∣chant and dementate Iustina the Virgin, was by her means con∣verted to Christ. For whose truth they both suffered Mar∣tyrdome. Socrates offended at the bold and blind vagations of men in their disputations about the measures of the Sunne, and of the Moon, and other Stars: wherein they laboured more in bab∣ling words, then solid arguments; undertaking to compre∣hend the whole circuit of the world with all the events there∣in, from the beginning to the end. Hereupon he withdrew his mind from these unlearned errours: and applyed it wholy to consider mans fraile condition, and the vitiousnesse and vertu∣ousnesse of affections; and to teach such manners as most per∣tained to honest and happy life. A Priest of an oraculous Temple, who had perceived that his divining divell had receded at the presence of Gregory Thea∣metargus: at the first calumniating, but afterwards admiring his power, desired to learn of him that mystery of commanding divels. He taught him therefore the mysterie of godlinesse, and confirmed it by a miracle: whereupon he was converted, for∣saking his praestigious Idolatry; yea wife, children, goods, and all, to follow him; and so became an excellent servant in the Church, and a great opposer of satan himselfe. Marcellus, and Apuleius, two martyrs, who first adhering to Simon Magus: but seeing the miracles that were wrought by the Apostles, converted from the Magicians praestigiousnesse; and gave themselves wholy to believe, and follow the Aposto∣licall doctrine: for which they were martyred afterwards. Hermogenes a magician, disliking his own art, brought a many of his magicall books, and offered them to Iames the Apostle, to be burnt.
16. Of Magicians and Astrologers idolatrous account; and other vain, confident, and servile superstitions they wrought in simple and credulous men. THere was a certain man called Simon, which before time in the same City used Magick, or sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one. To whom they all gave heed, from the least, to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. And to him they had regard, be∣cause that of a long time, he had bewitched them with sorceries or magick, Act. 8 9, 10, 11. To the same Simon, a Statue was set up at Rome, with this inscription, To Simon the Holy God. These Magicians and Astrologers in their generations were numbred among the Gods, and had their Statues, Images, Ora∣cles, Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and Services, viz. Zoroaster, Trismegistus, Mopsus, Amphiaraus, Apollonius Tyanaeus, Amphi∣locus, Accius, Nanius, Porphyrius, Diodorus, Thor, Ollerus. All these Mag-astro-mancers, and many more arrogated a divinity to themselves, from their divinations; and had it attributed unto them by the superstitious people of several Nations. Theagenes was so superstitious, that he had in his house the Image of Hecate: and durst at no time offer to stir out of doors, till he had first consulted it. For which his slavish su∣perstition, he grew into a Proverb among the very heathens themselves. Archimedes the Geometrician, by his art alone, drawing out a massy ship; which whole multitudes could not once move, hereupon Hiero the King was so transported with admiration, that he concluded, Archimedes ought to be believed in whatso∣ever he said: yea, though he should say, give him but footing, and he would remove the whole earth. Augustus together with Agrippa, coming to the chamber of Theogenes the Mathematician; and he predicting great and al∣most incredible things to Agrippa, who first consulted him: Augustus resolved to conceale his own geniture, and would by no means have it calculated, lest that lesse things might be
prognosticated of him, then were of Agrippa: at last he yeil∣ded to it by much importunity, and Theogenes leaping at it, and adoring him, prognosticating his greatnesse, because born un∣der Capricorn (for whosoever hath his horoscope in the first part of Capricorn, shall be a King, or an Emperour) Augustus had forthwith such a confidence in this fatidical praesagitian, that he divulged his natalitial Theme; and caused the signe of the star Capricorn (under which he was born) to be impressed on his Coyn, and placed in his Arms. Maximinus a great Tyrant, and persecutor, was so superstiti∣ously fearful, that he would do nothing without divination: neither would by any means be drawn to transgresse an augurie or an Oracle, no not a nayls breadth. Frederick the second, the Emperour, having married Isabel sister to the King of England, forbare her company, till a cer∣tain hour, that his Astrologers, or wizzards had assigned for that purpose; that so he might beget a son famous from the constellation. But mark the fruits of this constellatory co∣pulation, poor Isabel dyed in childbed. Ludovicus Sfortia maintained an Astrologer at an excessive charge, who in recompense thereof, would insult over his cre∣dulity by his prognostications: and make him oft times, leave his dinner, rise out of his bed, and ride away in stormes and tempests, through dirt and mire; making him believe, that this was the onely way to escape or prevent such and such emi∣nent dangers, which he foresaw were ready to betide him. The Turks are so superstitiously addicted to observe the pla∣cits of the Astrologers; that they willingly war not, but at the beginning of the new Moon. Once they sought to as∣sault Vienna, for no other cause, but because they saw a gilded Moon placed upon the top of St. Stephens Tower. St. Augustine tells Marcellinus, how ridiculous it was (in the Gentiles account of their Magicians) to compare Apollo∣nius, and Apuleius and other skilful men in Magick, to Christ: yea, and to prefer them before him. Yet he takes the compa∣rison to be more tolerable betwixt him, and them; rather then their adulterous Gods. Yea, and sayes that Scipio Nasica their Priest, was more worthy of divine honours, then their Gods themselves. Because they being consulted, commanded sceni∣cal
playes (horrid and shamelesse spectacles) for the sedating of the pestilence: but he admonished the contrary; account∣ing those cursed and filthy enterludes as the greatest plagues of the minde. Scipio Affricane was so swayed with divining superstition, that he would undertake no businesse, publique or private, till he had first stayed and consulted in the Cell of Jupiter Capi∣toline. Lucius Scylla, so often as he determined to wage any war, he would first embrace the little Image of Apollo (taken from Del∣phos) and in the sight of his souldiers, would pray it to hasten the promise, or prediction. Alexander sacrificing, and a young boy holding the Censer, a coal fell upon his arm, and so burnt it, that the standers by were troubled with the smell: yet he (so insensibly charmed he was) not once shrinkt at it, whereby he was put in minde to presage, what manly invinciblenesse should be found in his souldiers against all perils: when as he observed such undan∣ted sufferance in a very childe. As Aelius Praetor was pleading Law, a certain bird came and sat upon his head: which an Aruspick observed, and thereup∣on predicted; that it being saved, the state of his own house would be happy; but the Commonwealth miserable: but the contrary, if it dyed, which the superstitious man hearing, im∣mediately bit off the birds neck before them all. Codrus King of the Athenians upon an oraculous responsal that that side should get the victory, whose King was slain in the battail: in a superstitious rashnesse committed himself dis∣guised to the danger of his enemies darts. Oh the superstiti∣on of predictions, that expose men not only to the toleration, but election of utmost perils! Gyges living in all kind of felicity, would needs consult Pythian Apolto, if any mortall man enjoyed more happinesse, then himselfe? it was answered of a poore Arcadian, who lived contented in his own strait cottage, that he was farre more happy then he. At this he would needs throw away his enchanted Ring, and after that fell into extream misery, the end of all magicall felicity. The earth gaping, and thence an infectious ayre proceeding,
which caused a great pestilence among the Romans; and they endeavouring to fill it up, but could not: upon consult, it was answered by the vaticinators that nothing could fill that gulph, and so remedy the plague, but one that was most eminent a∣mongst them: whereupon Curtius taking himselfe to be the man presaged, and to doe his countrey service, rode headlong into the gulph, and there perished. Menecrates an Astrologicall Physician, would needs account of himselfe, as god Iupiter; and thus wrote to Philip of Mace∣don: Mencerates Iupiter to Philip health of body. He, to check his magicall arrogance, wrote thus: Philip to Menecrates, sound∣nesse of mind. Yet seeing he would not for all this, out of that conceit, nor be advertised of his proud and vaine pre∣sumption, he commanded, at a banquet, to set nothing before him but Frankincense, and such like fumes (with the offering whereof the gods were pleased) but not one bit of meat: till at length, for meere hunger he was forced to confesse himselfe to be no more but a mortall man. 17. Of the severall waies that have been used, whereby to direct, dispose, determine, moderate, remedy, or prevent superstitious hopes or feares; as concerning prodigies, and prognostications. SƲlpitius Gallus, being Lieutenant Generall of Lucius Paulus his army against King Porses, it hapned on a cleare night, that the Moon suddenly defected in an Ecclipse; at which dire omen the souldiers stood amazed, and had no heart to fight: till he made a notable oration, concerning the course of the Heavens, and the force of the Stars (as that such things have their naturall causes, and ordinarily portend no more but na∣turall effects, and not arbitrary actions, and contingent events.) And so animated the Souldiers, that they went on fearlesse, and obtained the victory. Which they ascribed to him, as an effect of his rationally perswading art, quite contrary to the other, irrationally prognosticating.
The Athenians being terrified at the sudden obscuration, or ecclipse of the Sunne, taking it to be a celestiall denunciation of their destruction. Thereupon stood forth Pericles, and dis∣coursed of the Sunne and Moones course; as he had learned of his master Anaxagoras; and so eased them of their vaine feares. Agathocles, in his warres against the Penians, when an Ec∣clipse, or any celestiall prodigie did happen, was still wont to discourse to his Souldiers, of their naturall causes and effects: and so both expelled their feares, and encouraged them to successe. A certaine Augur would needs stay the marching of Alex∣anders army, till he took auspication from a bird that sate before them. The Souldiers mean while much troubled about the doubtfulnesse of the presage: one Mesellanius alias Myss∣nianus, a Jewish souldier, impatient of the delay, took an ar∣row, and shot the bird stone dead. Which the Augur indigning, he replyed, should a whole army be stayed to note the presage of its expedition and successe from such a silly thing, as could not foresee its own fall? A bold Astrologer presumed to tell Galeacius Prince of Millaine, that the Starres promised himselfe long life; but to him a short one. This he said, thinking to terrifie him; but it so provoked him, that he presently caused him to be hanged, and lived a long time after. There comming Oracles, or soothsayings of all sorts to the Thebanes, some promising them victory, some threatning their overthrow, to the peoples infinite distraction; Thereupon Epaminondis their Captaine in chiefe, commanded that those that promised victory should be layd on the right hand the oratory chaire, and the other on the left. Having thus dispo∣sed them, he got up into the chaire, and made this pithy ora∣tion. If you Thebanes will be obedient to your Captaines, and be couragious of heart to encounter your enemies; these here (shewing the presages on the right hand) are yours. But if ye be disobedient, and faint hearted, then these (poynting to them on the left hand) are ordained for you. A Soothsayer bringing in the intrailes of a sacrificed Oxe to Philip of Macedon, sonne to Antigonus; he asked Demetrius,
what his judgement was of those signes? And whether he should keep the castle to himselfe, or deliver it to the Messini∣ans? Demetrius smiling, answered him, If thou beest of the Soothsayers mind, thou mayst deliver it up: but if thou hast the mind of a King rather, then shalt thou hold the Oxe by both the horns. Lucullus with about 10000 going against Tigranes, and his 130000 men; and that upon the day before the nones of October, on which formerly the Cymbrians had greatly discom∣fited Caesars army: one told him, that day was ominous to the Romans. Let us fight them (quoth he) the more valiantly; and so we shall make it accounted for an happy day hereafter, of an unlucky day heretofore. An Aruspex, after his solemne lustration, brought the in∣trailes to Crassus, who let them fall out of his hands. This (as an argument of his age and weaknesse) was interpreted for an ill token. Whereat he smiling said, though they thought him so old and weake in letting those intrails fall out of his hands: yet he was young, and strong enough to keep his sword in his hands. Alexander drawing up to Babylon with his army, the Chal∣daeans admonished him, to delay his entrance into the City, for some ill signes, which they foresaw. But he being resol∣ved answered them according to the common proverbe, that he was the best Diviner, that presaged the best things. Then they requested him, that seeing he was so resolved, that he would enter the City on such a port, as might be with his face towards the East, and not towards the West. He was con∣tent to observe them so farre; but finding the way exceeding foule and myrie, he entred the City the clean contrary way to their admonition. When Apollonius, and his companions were travelling in a bright Moonshine night, the phantasme of an Hagge met them, and sometimes it changed it selfe into this shape, and some times into that, and sometimes vanished out of their sight. Now as soon as Apollonius knew what it was, grievously reviling it, he advised his companions to doe the like. For he knew that was the best remedy against such invasions. A certaine Iew having told Peter of Castile, that his horo∣scope
promised him most eminent fortune and successe, in many things: which (for the most part) falling out contrary, and therefore the King angrily upbraiding the Genethliacke, with the falsity of his art. Alas (quoth he) though the hea∣vens freeze never so hard, yet a man may sweat in a bath; Con∣fessing that inferiour and ordinary meanes working contrary, are sufficient to alter and prevent the force and power of the heavenly bodies. The parents of a certaine Virgin came to blessed Macarius, entreating him to pray to God, that her humane shape might be restored to their daughter, which they imagined to be tur∣ned into a Cow. The holy man affirmed, he could see no other thing in her, but the appearance of a virgin; and praying for them, the praestigious delusion vanished; and then they percei∣ved her to be so too. The Aegyptian likewise that had his wife made to appeare in his bed, as if she had been a rugged mare, appealed to Macarius: and by his prayers, the praestigious imposture was expelled. A young man dwelling in Gareoth, not farre from Aberdine, was haunted mightily with a spectrous apparition of a beau∣tifull woman, inticing him to lewdnesse: which he discovered to the Bishop, who advised him to depart the place, and betake himselfe to fasting and prayer; and so he was delivered of the temptation. A young Gentlewoman of the Countrey of Mar, suspected by her parents, and questioned somewhat severely, confessed, that a young man kept her company by night, and sometimes by day; but how he came in, or went out, she could not tell. One day having watched, they spied an horrible monstrous thing in their daughters armes; which a Priest, knowing the Scriputres, and of honest life, caused to vanish away.
18. Of humane reason, and prudence (much more Chri∣stian wisdome) making more probable, and pertinent conjectures, presages, interpretations; then can all the art and artifice of Magick and Astrologie. IMmediately upon the destruction of Hierusalem, there was seen a comet hanging over the Temple in the similitude of a fiery sword; which did denounce fire and sword to the City. Many nights together there shone a light about the Temple and Altar, as if it had been day. The vulgar did interpret it, as be∣tokening the good and liberty of their Nation; but the more prudent thought the contrary. An Heifer also ready to be sa∣crificed, brought forth a Lambe, in the middle of the Temple. Also the Brazen gate divers nights together, unlockt, or opened it selfe, and could very hardly be shut againe: and this the most thought to be a token of some future good; but the more discerning conceived otherwise of it. In the clouds were sud∣denly seen a little before Sun-set whole troops of armed men. In the Feast of Pentecost, the Priests entring into the Temple at night to celebrate the accustomed Sacrifice, the first felt a mot∣tion, then heard a sound, and after that understood a voyce crying out, Depart we from hence. Four yeeres before, one Iesus the sonne of Ananias a plaine Countreyman cried out in a propheticall spirit, while the City was yet in peace and abun∣dance, A voyce from the East, a voyce from the West, a voyce from the foure windes, a voyce upon Hierusalem, and upon the Temple, a voyce upon the bridegroomes, and the brides, a voyce upon all the people. At which the Elders were moved, and caused him to be sharply punished; but he changed not his voyce, neither for feare, nor stripes, nor threats, nor perswa∣fions; but at every stripe cried out, woe to Hierusalem. At length they weary with inflicting, gave him over for one mad, and that knew not what he said. But he still continued in the same sad tune, till the very beginning of the siege, and then he ceased; as one that needed denounce no more, seeing the thing
denounced was now come to passe. Onely after the fire was already begun in the City, and the Temple, going about the wall, he began to cry again, Wo to the City, the people, and the Temple; and woe also to me: and so being smitten with some∣thing that was sling'd at him, he died. Many of the Astrologers conjecturing many things upon the geniture of Nero; the saying of his father Domitius was held for the aptest presage: that nothing could come from him and Agrippina, but must be detestable, and born for the pub∣lique evill. Hannibal well nothing the unskilfulnesse, and temerity of Terentius varro, and Caius Flaminius, divined of the Romans defeat, and the Affricans victory, against all the Soothsayers, or diviners. Hippecrates writing of two brothers, sickning alike, and re∣covering alike; supposed them therefore to be twins, and so fetcht the cause from their like temper and constitution, in their generation and conception: but Possidonius a stoicke (and much addicted to Astrology) would needs have it to be from the constitution of the Stars, at their conception and birth. St. Augustine gives judgement forthe physitian, against the Mathematitian, grounded upon the disposition of the parents, the soyle, the nutrition, &c. and not upon the influence of the Stars. Three brothers, sonnes to the Cimmerian King, contending about their fathers kingdome, were content to referre them∣selves to Ariopharnes King of Thrace, whom he judged wor∣thiest of it. Who gave judgement after this manner, better then all the Ariolaters. He caused their fathers body to be ta∣ken out of the Sepulchre, and to be tied to a tree, to see which of them could shoot neerest their fathers heart. The eldest shot his father in the throat, the second hit him in the brest, the youngest would rather lose his hopes then shoot at all. And to him for his pieties sake, he designed the Kingdom. Charles the great (or as some say, his sonne) beholding a stupendous Comet, one Egmund (alias Egmard) an Astrologer, willing to have him thereby apprehend some fearfull mutati∣ons either to his person, or to his dominions: yet because he would seem not to terrifie him too much, made use of those
words of Scripture (both against his own art, and mind) Be not dismayed at the signes of Heaven. To whom the Emperour answered very devoutly, We feare not Comets, or prodigious signes, but the maker of them, and us; and magnifie his mercy that would thus admonish us provoking and slothfull sinners, by these, or any other his tokens. Frederick the third, when a Countreyman came before him, complaining that one of his horses was stoln out of his Inne, askt where the thiefe was? that (said the Countreyman) he could not tell. How chance (said the Emperor) he stole not both thy horses as well as one? The man answered, the other was a Mare; and not fit for a souldiers use: whereupon (instead of going to a wise man, to finde out stolne goods) the Empe∣rour advised him to lead his mare up and down the severall streets and lanes, and so by their mutuall neighing, the thiefe came to be discovered. In the time of Edward, sirnamed the Martyr, there appeared a terrible blazing Starre, which the Wizzards and the vulgar, would have to portend this, and that: but the more wise and religious said, it was a signe of Gods anger, for their wicked∣nesse against the married Clergy. The mother of George Castriot, called Scanderbeg, dreamed she was brought to bed of a Serpent, which covered all Alba∣nia, and devoured many Turks. His father Iohn, Prince of Albania, hearing of this dream, would seek for no exposition either of Oracles or Soothsayers, but cheared his wife, tel∣ling her, he foresaw she should be delivered of a sonne, an ex∣cellent warrior, a great scourge of the Turks, and a defender of the Christian faith. Luctatius Catulus, a notable Romane in the first Punick war, was advised by the Senate not to consult the fortune of the praenestine lots. Because the Commonwealth ought to be ad∣ministred by patriall auspications; that is, by prudent coun∣sels: and not by forraine divinations. And by this means he prospered, and put an end to that war. Apollo foreseeing the ruine of the Athenians, counselled them for their safety, to betake themselves to wooden walls, sc. their ships: which very thing Themistocles, out of his prudent obser∣vation, had advised before.
Solon gave warning of the tyranny that should infest the state of Athens. For which (saith Cicero) I may call him a prudent man, but not a Diviner. Because prudence was able to forespeak such a thing, without Divination. Divitiacus Heduus, led more by Physiology, then Astrology; and by reason, more then both, as concerning the events of things future: would never be drawn on alone by the augury of a divining Priest; but would still adde thereunto his own prudent and rationall conjecture. And by that alwaies ruled his affaires, rather then by the other. Otanes a noble Persian, and most sagacious in conjecture, suspecting the Magicians usurpation in suborning a false King, a Pseudo Smerdis (for the true Smerdis being slain by Prazaspes a Magician; and Patizites a Magician setting up his brother Smerdis a Magician, who was in all parts very like the other) Otanes advised his daughter (a concubine) to feele about the Pseudo Smerdis his head (for Cambyses had cut off both the Magicians eares, for distinction sake) and thus cunningly fin∣ding out the truth, they conspired against the usurping Magi∣cians and slew them. Agathocles made an oration to his souldiers, whereby they were much encouraged. But an ecclipse of the Sunne hapned, at which thy were not a little terrified. Wherefore the King (as carefull to give a reason of that, as of the warre) told them that if it had hapned before they set forth, the prodigie might have portended something against them that made the expedi∣tion: but seeing it fell out after their setting forth, all the portent must needs be against them against whom the expedi∣tion was made. And thus he encouraged them again, and proo¦ ved victorious. William the Conquerour comming out of his ship to enter upon the English shore, his foot chanced to slip so that he fell to the ground: some doubted of the omen, but one of the souldiers said wisely, this did but signifie his taking possession of England. Christophorus Golumbus, after that he saw the Indians turne treacherous, and grow implacable towards him, told them (having some skill in Astronomy to foresee an Ecclips) that within few daies they should see the Moon his friend, and
portending terrible things to them, because of their breach of hospitality. Now when the Ecclipse hapned accordingly, they (ignorant of the cause) took his prediction to be ratified, and fearing the sequel, used him with all curtesie, and ladened him with gifts. 19. Of Magicall and Astrologicall Artists, and their Arts, wittily derided, wisely rejected, and worthily con∣temned. THe Army of the Romanes being deadly smitten by the darts and arrows of the Parthians; and Cassius labouring to preserve and order such of the dispersed as repaired to him, for another assault: a certain Chaldaean advised him, to protract the time a while, til the Moon had runne over Scorpio, and attained to Sagitarius. Oh (quoth he) I reare Sagitarius, or the Archer, more then I doe Scorpio, or the Serpent him∣selfe. Spurina admonished Caesar, to take heed of some perill that was towards him which could not be deferred beyond the Ides of March. When the day came, Caesar derided Spurina, saying, the Ides of March were come, and yet he saw no hurt. Yea (quoth the Augur) they are come indeed, but for all that they are not past. Thus they jeared one another; but ere the predicted time was compleat, the conspiracy of Caesars death took effect. And thus the Astrologers jeare, what got Caesar by jearing their Art? But have they not read that Cicero derided Spurina, as well as Caesar did? And if they compare Authors, they shall read, that Caesar himselfe had noted, that the Ides of March would be ferall to him, because of Scorpio's declining. So then it is easie to be observed, that the effect followed, be∣cause of his superstition, rather then his derision. It is well noted of the same Caesar, that for no religion (that is, fatidicall superstition) he could be deterred, or retarded from any enter∣prize. When the hoste escaped from the Immolator (a direfull omen for the sacrifice to avoid the Altar) he notwithstanding would not deferre his expedition against Scipio and Iuba. In
his profection into Africa, as he went out of the ship, he chan∣ced to fall slat upon the ground (an ill omen) yet he presu∣med it for the best sign, and said, I now hold thee fast, O Africa. Yea he carried a Baffoon Jester along with him, on purpose to elude the invincible name of the Scipio's in that province: and though he went on against the admonitions of the greatest Augurs, yet he the rather prospered for his own resolution. Pyrrhus was wont to say merrily, that he conceived himselfe to be born under Hercules his Star: because the more victories he had gotten against the Romans, the more sharply they still rose up against him. Cato used to say, he wondred how one Astrologicall divi∣ner could look upon another, and not laugh, sc. that they had so neatly agreed together to delude all others. But the world is turn'd since Catos time; and they must now give it leave to laugh at them, and their delusions. A certaine Astrologer telling it in or to an Assembly, that he had there drawn in a Table the erratulae, or wandring Stars. Lie not friend (quoth Diogenes) for the Starres erre not, nor wander at all; but they that sit or stand here to no purpose. (I adde, but they that study and practise an art to as little.) The same Cynick askt another, talking familiarly of the Stars, when the came from Heaven? Thales, as he went on looking up to the Starres, fell into a ditch of water; whereupon (besides the jest his mayd made of him at the present) others said of him afterwards, that if he had lookt down into the water he might have seen the Stars: but looking up to the Stars, he could not see the water. Bion said, the Astrologers were very ridiculous, who boasted they could see the Fish afarre off in the Heavens; and yet could not see the Fishes hard by swimming in the River. Dion, one of Plato's Scholars, and friends; an Ecclipse of the Moon chancing at the same time that he was waighing up his Anchors, to saile from Zacynthe to make warre with the Tyrant Dionysius, disregarded the vaticinall portent, set to saile notwithstanding, came to Syracuse, and prevailed to drive out the Tyrant. One shewed Vespasian a strange hayry Comet, thinking to put him in some feare of the portent; whereat he merrily re∣plie
plyed, that prodigie betokened nothing contrary to him, but the King of the Parthians (his enemy) who wore a bushy head of haire. After the death of Iulian the Autiochenians even in their sports thus derided Maximus, the greatest Magician, and chiefe of those that had seduced him by their predictions and prae∣stigious operations: where are now thy divinations. O foolish Maximus? God and his Church have now overcome, viz. the Divell, and Magicians. St. Augustine confesses his Nebridius would often deride his study of Judiciary Astrologie: and he was ready to deride him again, for ignorant in that art: till at length convinced of his own ignorance, he prevented the others smiling, by his own bewayling. Nearchus admirall to Alexander arriving neere the Isle of Nosala, consecrated to the Sunne, was told of a prophecy, that no mortall man might land there, but at the instant he should vanish away, and be no more seen. This made the Marriners refuse, butthe Admirall forced them to goe ashore, and landed there himselfe; to let them see how vaine and contemptible were all such predictions. Cato observing one to have consulted a Soothsayer, upon a Rat gnawing his hose: what an ominous portent (said he) would the man have suspected, if his hose had gnawne the Rat? When one wondred at the Snakes winding about his doore bar: what a wonder said another, would it have been, if the bar had twisted about the snake? Polydamus conjecturing an ill omen to the Trojanes, from the flight of an Eagle, holding a Serpent in his talons: Tush, quoth Hercules, the best augurizing is to fight valiantly for our Countrey. Prusias refusing to fight, because the Diviners had signified to him, that the inspected intrailes forbad it as unlucky. What (said an Athenian Captaine) wilt thou give more credit to a piece of calses flesh, then to an old Commander? Cicero reciting the Diviners prediction of some dreadfull portent, from the Mice gnawing the Souldiers Targets or Belts; then, quoth he, may I feare the decay of the Common∣wealth, because the Mice gnaw'd Plato's politie in my study.
And if they should likewise gnaw Epicures book of riot and voluptuousnesse, might we not thence dread a presage of dearth and famine? At Pericles his setting out to the Peloponnesian war, the master of the ship being somewhat dismayed because of an ecclipse of the Sun at that instant: Pericles cast his cloak over his eyes, and askt him what hurt that did him, save onely hinder his sight for a little space? Alphonsus King of Arragon, honouring all learned men, and making liberall provision for the masters of all good arts, onely ha past by, or sleighted the Astrologers. The reason of it being asked, it was answered by a pleasant wit, That the Stars rule fooles, but wise men govern the Stars. It was therefore for foolish princes to respect and entertain such; and not for the wise, such as Alphonsus was. Scaliger makes himselfe merry with a Fly-driving Configu∣rator, who having made a Talismannicall plate, for this very purpose: he had no sooner set it up, but a Fly comes presently and (as saith my Translator) shites upon it for handsell, or in contempt of all such figures. Alarielus having besieged Rome, some heathenish people had sent for certaine Tusoane Magicians, who confidently pro∣mised (by their art) to make him raise his siege, and so free the City. But Innocentius then Bishop there, drave them out thence, judging it better and safer for the City to be taken, then to be delivered by such divellish means. Frederick of Austria, being imprisoned by Lewis of Bavaria; a Magician promised Leopoldus his brother (if he would re∣ward him well for his paines) that he would (by his art) set Frederick at liberty, and bring him safe out of Bavaria, home to Austria, within an houres space. And, upon a liberall promise his divell hyed to the prison, and appeared to Frederick in the shape of a stranger, presenting there a horse before him, and bad him get upon him, and he should presently carry him home into his own Countrey. But Frederick being very in∣quisitive, scrupulous, conscientious, more then the phantasme could well away with, disappeared; and excused the frustration to the Magician, from the others refusall; and he likewise to those that had imployed him.
The Duke of Anjou consulting with the Count of Savoy, about an offer which a Magician had made unto him, as tou∣ching the betraying of a Castle into their hands, by the power of his art. The Count replied, he trusted in God, and would never consent, that it should be said, that such old Souldiers and stout, could not doe an exploit, without the advise, or help of an infamous, and forbidden art: and so caused the praestigi∣ous artists head to be stricken off. Charles the fifth not onely rejected the advice, but caused Cornelius Agrippa (with two noble men also his confede∣rates) to be banished his Court and Kingdoms; for projecting a way to him, of finding, or tempering treasure, by magicall, or mago chymicall arts, and artifices. St. Augustine derides Apollo, for hiring himselfe out to Lao∣medon, about the walling of Troy. And being himselfe called the diviner, and the father of all diviners, yet for all that he could not foresee, how Laomedon would perjure his promise, and defraud him of his reward. Theoeritus a divining Sophister himselfe, yet could he not but deride the vaine opinions men had of their divining Gods; saying, O men! be of good minds; so long as ye may see the divining Gods, and their divinations die, and perish before you. Antiphon, when one had presaged ill, because a Sow had eaten up her own pigs: he observing that the owner kept her ex∣tream leane and bare: Be merry (said he) at the good signe, in that she did not devoure thy children instead of her own. Publius Claudius in the first Punick warre, as he was upon a sea-fight, taking an auspice according to the manner; it was told him, the Pullen would not come out of their roosts to meat: then commanding to cast them all into the Sea; if they will not eate (quoth he) let them drinke. Sabinus father to Ʋespasian (being informed of strange things concerning his sonne, by the heruspicall Diviners) told his old mother Tertulla that she had a Nephew or Grandchilde begotten of him, which should be Caesar. At this the old wo∣man could not but laugh, and wondring at his credulity, said, That her sonne doted, while she her selfe was got of a sound mind.
A certaine vaticinator sate in the Market place, telling to every one their fortune; to whom one came and told him, that while he sate there, his doores were broken open, & all his goods carried away. At which hearing he straight ran home, wards sighing: to whom, another meeting him, said, Couldst thou indeed divine what should happen to others, and couldst not foresee what might befall thy selfe? A certain Sorceresse undertook for money to tell men which way to foresee and prevent the wrath of the Gods: but being accused, condemned, and led to execution, one sayd, Couldst thou teach others how to avert a divine judgement: and couldst not thy selfe escape humane vengeance? Diogenes, when he saw the Governours of provinces, the Physicians, Philosophers, and Orators, was wont say, nothing was more wise: but when he saw the Vaticinators, Conjectors, aruspects, &c. then he used to say, nothing was more foolish, then was man. Cicero, an augur (saith St. Austin) derided the Auguries, and reprehended those kind of men, that would have the counsels of life to be moderated by Crows and Daws. St. Bernard, while he was a child, lying sick upon his bed, being grievously troubled with the headache; there came to him a sorcerous hagge to mitigate his paines by her charmes: at which he crying out with great indignation, caused her forth∣with to be thrust away from him. Queen Elizabeth, when divers (upon greater scrupulosity, then cause) went about to disswade her Majesty (lying then at Richmond) from looking on a Comet: with a courage an∣swerable to the greatnesse of her state, she caused the window to be set open, and cast out this word jacta est alea, the dice are thrown. Affirming, that her stedfast hope and confidence was too firmly planted in the promises of God, to be blasted, or affrighted with those beams, which either had a ground in na∣ture, whereupon to rise; or at least no warrant out of Scripture to portend the mishaps of Princes.
20. Of the absurd and ridiculous reasons, which have been rendred by Mag-astro-mancers, both for the rules of their art, and their practice upon those rules, and the events upon those practices; yea, and the re∣medies of those events. THey of Lebedia sacrificing before the Oracle of Iupiter Tri∣phonius, the cocks hapned to crow apace all the while; This, said the Soothsaying Sacrificulists, presaged victory to the Baeotians, over the Thebanes. And they gave this reason for their divination: because that bird is silent, being vanqui∣shed; but crowes alwaies when he is conquerour. A certain Courser, intending to try his speed at the Olympick games, dreamt the night before, that he was carried thither in a Chariot: and consulting a Conjecturer upon it, Thou shalt winne (said he) I warrant thee; for a Chariot signifies swift∣nesse and speed. Another of them dreamt, that he was turned into an Eagle. Thou shalt get the mastery (quoth the interpreter) because this Foule flies the swiftest of all other. Another of them dreaming the like dream, ah (quoth the diviner) it is to be feared thou wilt come last, because this bird pursuing her prey, follows in the taile of the other. A certain Matron (longing to be pregnant) dreamt her belly was sealed up: this presages barrennesse, said one divining expounder, because nothing can come forth of that which is sealed up. Nay, said another, this imports fruitfulnesse, because no body uses to seale up that vessell, or bagge which is empty, and hath nothing in it. St. Ambrose thus derides their reasons: Can any thing be more ridiculous then to say (as the prognosticating Astrolo∣gers used) that if a man be born under the Signe of Aries, he shall be wise in counsell. And why? because the Ram is eminent in leading the flock. Item, he shall be rich. And why? because the Ram hath every yeer a rich fleece growing on his back.
If he be born under the signe Taurus, he shall be strong, labori∣ous, potent in service, &c. And why? because the Bull or the Oxe submits his neck to the yoke. He that is born under Leo, Scor∣pio, Pisees; shall be fierce, malicious, silent: And why? because Lyons are fierce, Scopions are poysonous, and Fishes are mute, &c. Upon the Statue of Augustus there was inscribed Caesar: now it being thunder-striken, it happened that the letter C was thereby blotted out: upon which it was answered by the divi∣ning Oraculists, that Augustus had onely a hundred dayes to live; because the letter C notes that number: and after that should be translated among the Gods; because Aesar in the Hetrurian language signifies a God. Livia being great with childe, and willing to take the Omen, whether she should bring forth a son, or a daughter; an egge was taken from under a sitting hen, and (according to the prescripts of divining omination) was kept warm in her hands, or in the hands of her maids, hatching it by turns; till at last comes out a Cock gallantly crested or Combed, whereupon Seribonius a Mathematician promised famous things of the in∣fant; and that he should raign, but without any kingly ensign. That it should be a male childe, he gathered from the Cock chicken; but (by the same reason) why should he be without any kingly ensigne, seeing the Cock was so bravely crested, or combed. Proelus gives an example in a spirit, which was wont to ap∣pear in the form of a Lyon; but by the setting of a Cock be∣fore it, vanished away: because there is a contrariety betwixt a Cock and a Lyon. Orus Apollo saith in his hieroglyphicks, Dawes, that are twins signifie marriage: because this animal brings forth two eggs, out of which male and female must be brought forth. But if (which seldom happeneth) two males be generated, the males wil not couple with any other females, nor females with any other males, but will alwayes live without a mate, and so∣litary. Therefore, they that meet a single Daw, divine there∣by that they shall live a single life. The Eagle portends victory, but by blood, because she drinks no water, but blood. An Owle because she goes to her young
by night unawares, as death comes unawares, is therefore said to foretel death. Yet sometimes, because she is not blinde, in the dark of the night, doth betoken diligence and watch ul∣nesse, which she made good, when she sate upon the spear of Hiero. Faustina the wife of Antonius, fell in love with a sword-player, and fell sick for him: her husband how this might be remedyed, made his consult with the soothsayers: whose ad∣vice was to kill the Fencer, and let his wife bathe her in his blood, and presently accompany with her himself; and so the passion would be allayed. Melampus the Augur conjectured at the slaughter of the Greeks, by the flight of little birds; when he saith, thou seest that no bird taketh his flight in fair weather. Swallowes, because when they are dying, they provide a place of safety for their young; do portend a great patrimony, or legacy after the death of friends. A Bat meeting any one that is running away, signifies an evasion: for although she have no wings, yet she flies. A Sparrow is a bad omen to one that runs away: for she flies from the Hawk, and makes haste to the Owle, where she is in great danger. To meet a Lyon, see∣ing she is amongst animals the strongest, is good: but for a woman to meet a Lyonesse, is bad; because she hinders con∣ception; for a Lyonesse brings forth but once. A Dog in a journey is fortunate; because Cyrus being cast into the Woods was nourished by a Dog, till he came to the Kingdom. Mice signifie danger; for the same day that they did gnaw gold in the Capitol, both the Consuls were intercepted by Hannibal, by way of ambush neer Tarentum. The Pismires, because they know how to provide for themselves, and to prepare safe nests for themselves, protend security, riches, and a great Army. Hence, when the Pismires had devoured a tame Dragon of Ti∣berius Caesar, it was advised that he should take heed of the tu∣mult of a multitude. If a Snake meet thee, take heed of an ill tongued enemy: for this animal hath no power, but in his mouth. A Snake creep∣ing into Tiberius his palace, portended his fall. Two Snakes were found in the beed of Sempronius Gracchus; wherefore a soothsayer told him, if he would let the male go, or the female
escape he, or his wife should shortly dye: he preferring the life of his wife, killed the male, and let the female escape, and with∣in a few dayes he dyed. But Tully tels the story otherwise, and reasons better upon it. I marvel (saith he) if the emission of the female Snake should bring death to Tiberius Gracchus; & the emission of the male Snake were deadly to Cornelia, why he did dismisse either of them. For the soothsayers answered nothing of any future accident, if neither were dismist. And that Gracchus his death followed, the cause (I believe) was some disease, and not the Serpents dismission. Meeting of Monks is commonly accounted as an ill omen, and so much the rather if it be early in the morning: because these kind of men live for the most part by the suddain death of men; as Vultures do by slauhgters. Apollonius, and his companions (according to his advice) cau∣sed the phantasm of an Hagge to vanish away by reviling it: for he knew that was the best remedy against such invasions. For so fearful is this kind of spirits, that they once moved, trem∣ble, and are compelled by feigned terror, and false and impossi∣ble threats. So the Hagge of Menippus Lycius, who was the cause of the Pestilence, being stoned by his command, and the pesti∣lence ceased. And was not that, because they are afraid of impossible beatings, as well as impossible threatnings? 21. Of Magicians, Astrologers, Diviners, envying, op∣posing, differing, contradicting, confuting both them∣selves, and one another. CAlchas, and Mopsus, two great Augurs, or Astorlogical di∣viners, meeting together at an Oracle of Apollo Clarius fell to contest about their skill in the conjecturing art. The question was, how many Figs there were upon such a tree; or how many Pigs there were in such a sowes belly? Which Mop∣sus guest at, and mist not a hair: but Calchas, because he could not do somuch; pining with grief, or envy, took pet and dyed. Eudoxus, the chief Astrologer of his time, affirmed, that the
Chaldeans are not to be credited in their natalitial prognosti∣cations, or predictions. Penaetius a Stoical Philosopher, and yet rejected the predictions of the Astrologers. Anchialus, and Cassander, excelling in all parts of Astrology; yet used it not, or rather abused it not to predictions. Scylax Halicarnassaeus, although eminent in Astrology, neverthelesse abandoned the whole Chaldaical way of it. Servius Tullius sleeping, his head seemed to shine, or burn: some of the Diviners said, that signifyed, he should perish by lightning; others, that it was a token he should obtain Regal dignity. Darius dreamed that the Camp of the Macedons was on fire, and that he saw Alexander coming to him, in clothes of the same fashion, as his own were, and that he was carryed on horseback through Babylon, and so vanisht out of fight. At this, the dream spellers were divided in their divinations; some interpreting it a fortune, some an infortune; some to the one side, some to the other. Betwixt the Tyrians and the Macedonians, was a semblable prodigle (blood on the one part seen in iron; and on the o∣ther part in bread.) They of either party interpret it as a token of good successe to themselves. But Aristander (the most skilful of the Diviners) expounded it thus on the Macedonian behalf; if the blood had appeared outwardly, it had signifyed ill fortune to the Macedons, that were without: but for as much as it was within, it portended the like to them that were within the City, which they now besieged. Again, a huge sea-monster appeared in the sight of both parties; and they both made themselves merry, in prognosticating (according to their Magastromantick teachers) good luck to themselves; but were both of them deceived in the truth, if not both in the event. Alexander having left off to consult with his diviners; (be∣cause he found them so various and uncertain) had yet again an itch to the superstition; and called his Aruspicks, to inspect the entrayls; commanding that the signification should be be shewed to none but himself. Aristander is the man of art, and credit; but he notwithstanding communicates the matter unto Erigius; who takes advantage thereby to disswade Alex∣anders
resolution. Upon which he calls for the artist, rebukes the betraying of his privy counsels and commands. The skilful man is now more amazed then at a prodigie: yet gather∣ing his wits together to make some Apology for himself, he con∣fessed some difficulty and danger from the inspected entrails; but deeply professed his love to, and care of his King notwith∣standing. The King perceiving the flexiblenesse both of the mans nature, and of his art; wishes him to have a confidence of fortunate successe, as well in this, as in former things. Whereupon the Aruspick pores again, and comes in with his second prognosticks; and professes to have found signs quite contrary to the first. Philip of Macedon dreamed that he did seale up his wives bel∣ly, and that the seal left behinde the print of a Lion upon it; Certain wise men, or wizzards told him, that this gave him warning to look straightly to his wife, and keep her close. At which the King was troubled; but Aristander (to make all good) told him his wife was with child, and had in her belly a treasure worth the sealing up. The same day that Alexander was born, the Temple of Di∣ana at Ephesus was burnt. This made the distracted Priests and vaticinators prognosticate, that some great misfortune was that day born to all Asia. But soon after news was brought to Philip of three great victories, which made him rejoyce ex∣ceedingly; now these predictors (to make up the triumph) praesaged that his son, which was born with three great victo∣ries, should be an invincible Emperour. Dion being about to free his Country from the tyranny of Dionysius; there happened an eclipse of the Moon, which ter∣rified the souldiers not a little. Thereupon stood up one Miltas a soothsayer, and bad his fellow souldiers be of good chear; for the signe imported the impairing of dignity, meaning the tyranny of Dionysius. But as touching the swarm of Bees, that lighted on the Poop of Dions ship; he told him, and his friends secretly, that he was afraid his acts would flourish one∣ly for a while, and soon fade away. Again, Dion getting up∣on Dionysius his Clock, or Diall; and thence making an Ora∣tion to the Syracusans, to promote their own liberty; the soothsaying prognosticators liked it wel, and said it was a good
signe; for that he did now tread the sumptuous edifice and artifice (and yet an Astrological artifice) of the Tyrant under feet. But because the hand of the Dyal sheweth the course of the Sun, which never leaveth moving, they were afraid that Dions affairs should have a suddain change of fortune. A certain Noble man of Silesia was very inquisitive with three several Astrologers, to know the manner of his own death. The first answered, he should die of a seaver, the se∣cond said, of a fall; the third answered, in the waters. And to make all good, thus (they say) it fell out. First the Feaver (forsooth) seized on him; then the frenzy thereof made him cast himself out of a window, and that window was o∣ver a Moate; and so he fell into the water, and there perished. The like tale do the Country people tell of our Merlin; the the King talking with Merlin about mens fates, caused a Faul∣coner of his to passe by disguised, and demanded, what kind of death should that man dye? Merlin answered, he should be hanged. The same man comming by the second time, in ano∣ther disguise, and the like demand made, he answered, he should be stabd; and the third time it was resolved he should be drowned. And thus (they say) it happened: The King being on hawking, the Hawke took pearch on a tree hard by a River side: the Faulconer climing up to fetch down his Hawke, a grayne of a branch got hold of his neck, and there he hung; that breaking he fell upon a splinter, and it stabd him; that not holding, he fell into the River, and so was drowned. That the Magastromancers may thus contradict themselves, and one another, is easily to be believed: but that their various prae∣dictions were thus compleated, let the faith thereof be with the Authors. Iohanues Albertus, Archbishop of Magdeburgh had the Moon in Aries, in the sixth house; which signified health, but the Moon was invironed by Mars, and he in Aries; and by Sa∣turne, and he in Taurus; and the Sunne and Mercury opposite; and those more manifest signes of daily, and cruell diseases. Tarestius or Tarchetius, a great Mathematician, who being given to the calculation of Astronomy, for the delight of spe∣culation onely, was entreated by Marcus Ʋarro to search out what houre and day the nativity of Romulus was, who having
throughly considered the adventures, acts, and gests of Romu∣lus, how long he lived, and how he died: all these being con∣ferred, he did boldly judge, that Romulus was conceived in his mothers womb, in the first yeere of the second Olympiad, the 23 day of the mouneth, which the Aegyptians call Cbaeas; and now is called December, about three of the clock in the mor∣ning; in which houre there was a totall ecclipse of the Sunne: and that he was born into the world the 21 of the moneth of Thoth, which is the moneth of September, about the rising of the Sunne. Now is not this old way of calculating a Nati∣vity, quite contrary to the new? But of the twaine, which is the most certain? that a priori, or a posteriori? sc. from the acts and accidents of life, to the birth: or from the birth to the acts and accidents of life? The Historian notes the one for false and vaine; what then is to be thought of the other? In the time of Kenneth King of Scots, appeared two dreadfull Comets; one before the Sun-rising, the other after the setting; also armies were seen in the ayre, and noyses of armes, and horses heard. Also a Bishops Crosier staffe was burned, as he held it in his hand, in time of service, and could not be quen∣ched. But the prodigies were not so various, as were the prog∣nosticators interpretations; whereof some were delivered for good, some for bad, but none for true. When the Image of Apollo Cumanus wept, some of the Aruspects were for the casting of it into the sea, because of the terrible portent: but other more skilful heruspicks, were for the intercession, because the Images weeping portended prosperous things. Proteus is a proverb of versatile mutability. And of him that part of story which is least fabulous, is this. Proteus was an Astrologicall magician; and is said therefore to transforme himselfe into so many shapes, because of his various and con∣trarious opinions, vaticinations, predictions, and prestigious prankes. A fit emblem of all such, that are seldome like them∣selves. Colophonius Xenophanes, one who confessed there to be Gods, denied all divination. All the rest besides Epicurus, babling about the nature of the Gods, approved of divination; al∣though not after one way. Dicaearchus the Peripatetick took
away all other kind of divination; and onely left those of Dreams and Fury. And besides those, Cratippus rejected all the rest. Panaetius indeed durst not deny the power of divining al∣together; yet he said, he doubted of it. Xenophon took all kinds of divination quite away. The chiefe articles that were objected against Socrates, were contempt and rejection of Ora∣cles. Eudoxus Gnidius was wont to say, that the Chaldaeans were by no means to be credited in their observations or pre∣dictions upon the lives and fortunes of men, from the day and houre of their nativity. Two men, before their contest at the Olympick games drea∣med the like dream, viz. that they were drawn by four swift coursers in a Chariot: they both consulted one Prophet, and he prophecied to the one, that he should winne; and to the other, that he should lose the prize. One told Ʋitellius, that the circles which appeared in the waters like crownes, were abodes of Empire; another of them boded thereupon, that either they signified no such thing, or else but the instability thereof. The fame is, that Iulian on a certaine time inspecting the entrayles, there appeared in them the signe of the Crosse invi∣roned with a crown. Some that partooke of the divination, were cast into a feare hereat, that the Christian Religion should gather strength, and that the doctrine of Christ should be per∣petuall; taking it for a signe both of victory, and eternity. But the chiefe divining Artist among them, bad the Emperour be of good cheere; for the victimes portended prosperous things according to his own desire: because the marke of the Christian religion was circumscribed and coarcted; as a token that it should have no large spreading in the world. Iulian again meditating warre against the Persians sent to the Oracles at Delphos, Delos, and Dodona; and they all consen∣ted to incourage him, promising him undoubted successe. But there was an old prophecy of former diviners, that utterly thwarted them all: for it foretold, that it should be exitiall to the Emperour and people of Rome, whensoever he passed with his army beyond the River Euphrates, and the City Ctesiphon. And thereabouts was Iulian slain, and his army overthrown.
22. Of jugling predictions, forged divinations, and lu∣dibrious mock-charms, as operative as the rest; and all alike effectuall, not from themselves; but from the Agents, or Patients superstition, and credulity. SErtorius a notable Captaine, was wont to faine visions, dreams, and divinations; and pretended himselfe to be in∣formed of many future events, by a white Hinde, that a skilfull friend had sent him, to be his instructor in those mysteries: and by these very devices, kept his Souldiers in order and cou∣rage; and so atchieved many notable feates and victories. Two Countrey fellows came to Vespasian, intreating his helpe in their cure, as the Oracle of Serapis had shewed unto them. One of them was blind, and he was told, that if Vespa∣sian did but spit in his eyes, that should restore his sight. The other was lame of his thighs, and he was told he should be cured, if Ʋespasian did but touch the part affected with his heele. The good Emperour was somewhat scrupulous to make experiment of a thing so vaine and improbable; but at the importunity of his friends, and earnest suite of the parties, he was drawn to doe as the Oracle or vision had directed; and the effect presently followed thereupon. Namely, upon their superstition, and the divels illusion; for the Serapidane Divel was a raid, that his divining Oracle would fall to the ground, now that Christianity began somewhat to appeare in Aegypt; and therefore he sent his patients to implore the help of Vespa∣sian, that by the rarity of the miracle he might hold up the majesty of the Oracle. Alexanders souldiers being greatly terrified and disheartned, because of a bloody Ecclipse of the Moon; hereupon he (secure of all events) called for the Aegyptian presagers, and comman∣ded them to expresse their skill. They concealed the cause of the Ecclipse, and their own suspicions from the common sort; but forged this interpretation, That the Sunne was over the Greekes, and the Moon over the Persians: and as often as she was in an Ecclipse, did portend the slaughter and ruin of that
Nation. The credulous souldiers hereupon conceived hope, went on, and prospered. Pheron an Aegyptian King, had a disease of a strange cause, but of a stranger cure. He was struck blind for casting a dart into Nilus, and so continued for the space of eleven yeeres; then consulting the Oracle about his recovery, it was answered, he must wash his eyes with the urine of a woman, that had never known other then her own husband. First he made tryall of that of his own wife, but it would not doe: and of many others more, and at last he light of one whereby he reco∣vered his sight. And forthwith called all those other women together, and burnt them; and married that one himselfe, whose water was so soveraigne. The Dictators, Emperours, and people of Rome, were taught by their augurizing and aruspicall Diviners, certaine devotory odes, or formes of direfull execration, full of barbarismes, and prophanenesse; that so the imprecating of the one added to the others vaticinating, might make the ominating much more forcible and effectuall. Erasmus having in familiarity one Bibliopegus, a Dane; they two being pleasantly disposed together, Erasmus jestingly bad him take a knife, and open any lease of Homers Iliads, and choose any verse on the right side of the lease, and he would thence undertake to tell him his fortune. Bibliopegus having observed all circumstances very strictly, Erasmus began to pre∣dict, that he should marry a wife very rich, but so ill conditio∣ned, that he should be forced to desert her. And the event of this jest fell out in good earnest. Hemingius while he was a young Student, in a Logick Le∣cture, recited these verses, used in the Schooles; Fecane cageti, Daphenes, gebare, Gedaco, Gebali stant, sed non stant Phebus, becas & hedas. Hereupon he added in jeasting manner, that these verses were very effectuall against a Feaver; if the severall words were in∣scribed upon a piece of bread, and given to the sick man in order, so as to eate every day a piece, with the word inscribed. Now there hapned to heare him a good honest simple man, who not apprehending the jeast, believed all to be spoken seri∣ously. And within a few daies after, having a servant of his
fallen sick of a Fevrr, gave him a piece of bread the first day inscribed with the Fecane; and so every day in order to the last word; and then he was cured. Others likewise seeing the efficacy of this amulet followed the example, and obtained the like effect. Till at length the jest of it came out, and so the ver∣tue of it ceased. Gotschalcus, and Wierus relate this story (one from his own knowledge, the other from anothers report; and though they vary in circumstances, yet they agree in the effect.) A certaine woman grievously troubled with sore eyes, light upon a cer∣taine knavish Scholler, to whom she complained of her in∣firmity, craved the help of his art, and promised liberally to reward him. He, either to make sport, or in hope of gaine, promised to help her: and to that end, took a piece of paper, wherein he wrote such kind of Characters as were never inven∣ted or seen before; and underneath them wrote these words in great Letters, The divel pull out thine eyes, and stop up their boles with dung. This he folds up, and wraps it in a piece of cloth, and ties it about her neck, and bids her have an especiall care that it be not taken thence, nor yet opened, or read by any means. All this she observes awfully, and her watery eyes were cured. About a yeere or two after, either she let fall off through carelesnesse, or else had a desire to see what was there conta∣ned; the charm then being opened, and read, and the cursed contents thereof understood, and abhorred, it was cast into the fire; which done, her sore eyes returned in as grievous manner as before. I have read it in an Orthodox divine, that he knew a young Gentleman, who by chance spilling the salt of the Table; some that sate with him said merrily to him, that it was an ill omen, and wisht him take heed to himselfe that day: of which the young man was so superstitiously credulous, that it would not goe out of his mind; and going abroad that day, got a wound of which he died not long after. Old Ennius fained many answers of the Pythian Apollo, and delivered them in verse; when as Apollo had long before left off his poeticall prophetizing: and yet even these spake as true, and was found as effectuall, as any of the rest. Numa Pompilius, Scipio Affricanus, Lucius Scylla, Quintus
Sertorius, Minos King of Crete, Pisistrates the Athenian Tyrant, Lyeurgus, and Zaleucus, are all noted for assimulating of reli∣gion, or a faigning of divination and oraculous predictions: and neverthelesse prevailed by this means, and ruled both by Laws and arms. Persia being oppressed with the sordid domination of the Magicians, Darius the King with some adjutors of like dig∣nity, entred into a pact, that they should ride to such a place before Sunne rising, and whose horse neighed there first, it should be taken as an omen to make him King. Now Darius his Groom, to effect it the more prosperously for his master, had rubd his hand in the genitall parts of a Mare, and when they came to the place, strok't the horse over the nose, which presently neighed upon the smell. Whereupon all the rest a∣lighted, and as from a divine suffrage, saluted him King. Alexander Severus, yet a youth, and dreaming of nothing lesse then an Empire; making (as boyes used) Ʋirgilian lots; light upon certain verses that seemed to portend or praesignifie the Romane Empire to him. Yea many such verses both of Homer and of Ʋirgil, have been often used to that end; and have proved as significant and effectual, as any presaging Oracle of them all. 23. Of the aenigmaticall, obscure, amphibolicall, am∣biguous, and aequivocating (so. so deluding speeches, studiously and industriously delivered, by oraculous, magicall, sorcerous, and astrologicall predictors, or diviners. PYrrhus King of Epyre perceiving the power of the Romans, against whom he went, consulted the Oracle of Apollo, and it gave him this doubtfull answer, Aeacides, I say, The Romans conquer may. Which he interpreted to himselfe in the best part, but found the event as various as the words were dubious.
Craesus that rich King of Lydia, consulting the Delphian Oracle, which he himselfe had so munificently adorned; to shew its gratitude, it resolved him this Riddle, If Craesus fearlesse shall passe Italy's river, A Kingdom great, wealth greater shall be shiver. He now thought he should destroy anothers wealth and power, and not his own: But instead of bringing Persia within the power of Lydia, Craesus himselfe fell into the hands of Cyrus. And the Oracle gloried, that which way soever it hapned, it still spake true. While Alexander was in a fight, some that stood by him saw or imagined an Eagle fearlessely fluttering over his head: then Aristander (the onely diviner) carrying a lawrell in his hand, and shewed the souldiers a token of victory. But it is uncertain of which he spake, the Lawrell, or the Eagle. An Astrologer advised Epaminondas the Thebane, to take heed of the Sea, for that would be fatall to him. Which he therefore carefully avoyded, but found his death in a wood, which was called by that name. Another of them bad Philip of Macedon, take heed of a Chara ret, or Cart, as a thing dismall, or dangerous to his life: where∣upon he not only refrayned, but proscribed the use of all such; yet neverthelesse had his deaths wound given him in a City of such a name: others say, the hilt of the sword that killed him had a Chariot engraven on it. Nere heard news from Apollo at Delphos, that he should take heed of the siventy third yeere of age: which made him very secure, being then but about the age of thirty three. But he un∣derstood not (till it was too late) that it was meant not of his owne, but of the age of Galba, who shortly after succeeded him. Hannibal was foretold, that he should not die, but in the land of Lybia: and when he thought himselfe secure, as farre enough from that; he took his death in a little village called Lybissa. Inlian deluded by an Oracle, in the ambiguous word thera, signifying a beast, and a river; dreaming of nothing else but victory in his Persian war, was there slain. Caligula consulting about his geniture, Sylla the Mathema∣tician
affirmed that his death was approaching. The Antiatine Letts admonished him to take heed of Cassius. For which cause he caused Cassius Longinus, then proconsul of Asis, to be slain: unmindfull that Chaerea (the man that did the deed) was so called. Zene the Emperour was told by his vaticinating prognosti∣cators, that he of necessity should be shortly in Constantinople; he presumed it of the City, and that he should goe thither in triumph, and state: but his men being beaten, and fled, he casually retired into a castle, which the inhabitants thereabouts called by that name, where he had leisure to see and bewaile his delusion. Alexander besieging Tyrus, dreamed he saw a Satyr: The Diviners expound it, Satyres, sc. Tyrus is thine. Commodus being about to give battle to the Saracenes, dream∣ed he was going to Thessalonica; the Soothsayers thus interpret it, Thes alle nikin, sc. leave the victory to another; and so he did. Appius consulting the Pythian Oracle about the event of the civill warre betwixt Caesar and Pompey; was answered, that warre was nothing to him, he should obtaine the cell of Eubea: He now supposing that Apollo admonished him not to imbroyl himselfe in that danger, withdrew himselfe to that place (pre∣sumed a place of quiet and honour) but there he got a disease, and found a grave. Daphida, or Daphas a Sophister, would needs make himselfe merry with Apollo's Oracle, or some of his vaticinating Priests, and consulted how he might finde his horse, when as he never had one: it was answered him, he should finde his horse, but it should dash out his braines. At length Actalus (against whom he had rayled) got him, and threw him headlong against a stone or rock so called. This end he had, for abusing the autho∣rity, not deriding the Oracle. Pope Sylvester the second inquiring at his brazen head, how long he should live in that Papall dignity: the divell answered out of it, he might live long, if he came not at Hierusalem; now when he thought himselfe most safe, he was suddenly stricken whith a deadly feaver, in a Church at Rome called by that name.
Pope Alexander the sixth, who was himselfe addicted to Ne∣cromancy, was inquisitive how long he should continue in the Popedome? It was answered nineteen: which he under∣stood of yeeres; but it was compleated in ten yeares and nine moneths, as some say: or as others, in eleven yeares and eight daies. A certain Bishop was forewarned by an Astrologer, to be∣ware of a fall from a high place: he hoping to avoyd the threatning of the Starres, kept continually in low roomes. At length newes being brought that he was put out of his Bishoprick; wretch that I am! said he, that I could not think on this before; for I could not have fallen from an higher place. A great Mathematician was consulted, who should be the successor to Stephen King of Poland; he wrote Deus. They were glad of so good a Governour; but soon after came in the Suedian. And the Astrologer being challenged upon his prae∣diction, replied he meant they should read the word backward, and then it was Sued. Peter the Hermit, a Soothsayer, prophecied that King Iohn should be no more King of England after Ascension day; which he would have made good in his resignation of his kingdom into the hands of the Pope, and receiving it again upon other conditions. But all his equivocation would not save him from the Gallowes. Thomas of Ersilton, a Scottish Soothsayer, being askt by the Earle of March, what kind of weather they should have on the morrow? answered, that on the morrow before noon should blow the sorest wind that ever was heard in Scotland. The morrow proving faire and calme, the Earle told him he was much mistaken in his marke. To which he answered no more, but that it was not yet past noon. Then came news of the Kings death; upon which the Wizzard replied, that was the wind he meant. The Earle of Athol trusting to a wizzards or witches pre∣diction, that before his death he should be crowned openly in the sight of the people; trayterously conspired the death of Iames the first King of Scotland. For which he was in the be∣ginning of his execution, brought into an open place, and there crowned with an hot Iron.
Iunius Brutus going to Delphos with the sonnes of Tarquin, (whom he had sent thither to honour Apollo with sacrifices and gifts) was fain (for feare of envy to offer his Gold to the divining God in an hollow staffe. And the young men con∣sulting which of them should raigne: it was answered by the Oracle, he that before other should kisse his mother. Then Brutus (seeming to slip by casualty) purposely cast himselfe groveling and kissed the earth, as common mother of them all. Tully thus bespeaks Apolle, A whole volume hath Chrysippus filled with thy Oracles, some partly false, and some true by chance: (as it often proves in any kind of speech) some so obscure, as that the interpretation needs an interpreter; and the lot may very well be referred to a lot again: and some so ambiguous, as that they may justly be imputed to a subtile so∣phister, rather then to a divining answerer. Hamilcar the Carthaginian Captaine, as he besieged the Sy∣raeusans, in his dream heard a voyce that told him, he should the next night sup in the City. At which he was glad, pro∣mised himselfe the victory, and prepared for the assault. But the Syracusans (upon advantage of a tumult amongst his men) surprized him, and so carried him with them into the City, and there he supt, as a captive, but not as a conquerour, as he was made to suppose. Cambyses warned by Apollo's Oracle to beware of Smerdis, who set lime-twigs for his Crown, supposed it to be meant of his brother, and so bereft him of his life: but after this, ano∣ther Smerdis, who was nothing of the blood, and whom the Destinies concealed in the Duke, accomplished the prophecy. The same Cambyses being advised to beware of a Town called Echatana, would never come at any of those which were in his own Dominions; but light by chance into another, where his life ended. The night before King Henry the fourth meant to set for∣ward to the holy Land, with an intent to declare his inward repentance for the wrongs which he had done at home, by war∣ring against Infidels: because it had been told him that he should die in Ierusalem; it was his fortune to fall sicke and die soon after, in a chamber bearing that name here at West∣minster.
Edward the first was made to doubt of Brough upon Stan∣mire; when as he died at Brough upon the sands. An Earle of Pembrook died at Barwick in Wales, whenas he was put in feare of Barwick upon the border. Wolsey the Cardinal of Yorke, being given to understand that at Kingston he should end, would alwaies rather ride about, then passe thorough Kingston upon Thames: but was commit∣ted to the charge of Sir Anthony Kingston, to convey him to the Tower, if he had not died by the way. The Welshmen had a prophecy, that the rood of Dernell Ga∣thren should set fire on a Forrest: a thing so farre from sense and probability, as no man could conceive what it should meane: till Cromwell, meaning to make a scorne of supersti∣tion, caused the fire, wherewith no Forrest stored with Trees, but a silly Fryar should be burnt, to be kindled with that Image. 24. Of things falling out quite contrary to Magicall and Astrologicall Prognostications or Predictions: and thereupon the Magastromancers themselves justly re∣warded by divers, for their delusive way. CAius Cornelius Hispalus by an Edict commanded that the Choldaeans within ten daies should depart the City, and all Italy; because by their light and lying wits, they made a gaine of, and a giune for the people. The Magicians of Persia devised many praestigious impo∣stunes whereby to delude and disturbe Isdigerdes their King: but their pranks being detected, he caused every tenth man of them throughout the Kingdom to be beheaded. Maximinus being overcome by Licinius, returned home in a rage, and put to death his fatidicall predictors (that had urged him to the warre, in confidence of their oraculous praesagings) as inchanters and seducers, and such as had betrayed his peace and safety. Julian that so favoured, and practised all kind of praestigi∣ous artifices, in his warre against the Persians, was not onely
hecouraged, and assured of victory by his Soothsayers; but and all manner of fortunate successe confirmed unto him by Delphian, Delonian, and Dodonaean Oracles: yet how fatall that war was to him, the event proved; and not onely so, but the heavens themselves (without, yea and against the Astrolo∣gers) foretold. As Sylla (upon an expedition) was sacrificing, there appea∣red a serpent about the Altar; of this the Ariolists made a sad presage, and would have retarded the exploit: but he procee∣ded neverthelesse, and there followed a glorious issue that day; not from the counsell of the Diviners, but of the Comman∣ders. Cicero reports from his own knowledge, that the Chaldaeans had foretold to Pompey, to Crassus, and to Caesar himselfe, that none of them should die, but in their old age, at their own houses, and with honour; in all which particulars it fell one clean otherwise to them all. So that he wonders any should believe them, that may observe so many events, so contrary to their predictions. To their objection, of Flaminius, and his army perishing, because they followed not the Diviners direction; Cicero op∣poses this answer, that Paulus observed them the yeere after, and yet both he and his army perished neverthelesse. I adde, from Orosius, that Flaminius the consul contemning the Divi∣ners counsell, inhibiting his course as unfortunate; went on, and obtained a glorious conquest. Whether it was the same, or another, it is sufficiently confuting. It is storied in Livie, that the Augurs ominating disastrous and unfortunate things to the Romane army, from their im∣molations and inspections: the Captaines resolved on the contrary, acquainted the army that all things divined were happy, and promised victory; whereupon they proceeded chear∣fully and prevailed. Nicias the Athenian, being made to believe (by the Astrolog∣gers prognosticating upon an Ecclipse of the Moon) that is was safest for him, not to stir out of the haven that night, but to stay still in his ships, was there that night surprized by the Syracusans. A great aruspicall Diviner would needs forewarn Caesar, not
to send over into Africa before winter; yet he did it; and if he had not done it, the enemy had gathered all their forces to∣gether, and utterly prevented him. After that the Serpents had thrice eaten up the liver of the sacrifices, and the inspecting Augurs had constantly interpre∣ted it for the good of T. Gracchus: yet his unfortunate end followed upon it for all that. Maxentius gave himselfe to magicall studies, and incanta∣tion, and ript up women with child, and inquired into the entrayles of new born infants, and killed Lyons to that pur∣pose, and after a secret manner adjured and invoked Divels; and endeavoured thus to avoyd the instant warre; and by these arts wholy promised himselfe the victory; and consided more in his magicall arts, then in the good will of his subjects: but the Emperour Constantine, by faith, and prayer, and the power of God, utterly vanquisht him, and he was miserably drown'd in Tyber, after all. So was Magnentius also vanquisht by Con∣stantius, and made to cut his own throat, after all the vaine hopes his Magical Diviners had deluded him withall. In the time of Leo Isaurus, Masalmas a Prince of the Sara∣cens soon entred Pergamus, although the Citizens thereof (trusting to a certaine Magician) had immolated an horrible sacrifice to the Divell; a pregnant woman being cut up, and the fruit of her wombe taken out alive, and boyled in a Kettle, and all the Souldiers directed to dip the sleeve of their right hand in the broth. Albumazar, that great Astrologer, prophecied (by his art) that the Christian Law should not last above 1460 yeers; which we now see falsified some hundreds almost. Abraham the Iew prognosticated from his astrologicall ob∣servations, that the Messiah which the Iews expected, should come in the yeere 1464. after Christ. Which how true it is, the day hath declared. Petrus de Aliaco (one that made no difference betwixt Theology and Astrology) predicted many things against the peace of the Church, which never fell out, but rather the contrary. Pope Iohn 21. alias 19. would often out of his Mathemati∣call skill, promise to himselfe long life, and Popedome, and
boast it among his familiars: but died neverthelesse of a dis∣astrous casualty within foure moneths after he was made Pope. Odo Bishop of Baia, was put in great hopes by his Astrolo∣gicall predictors, that he should happily attaine unto the Pope∣dome: but using the means thereunto, he purchased to himself a perpetuall imprisonment, and so died miserably. Oleph King of Norway was induced, by sundry prognosticks of his prevailing, to invade Denmark, but his Navy being scattered, he desperately cast himselfe into the Sea, and so pe∣rished. Ericus that conquering King of Swedes, when (by the prog∣nosticks of his art) he presumed himselfe most secure, was taken captive by Ostanes. And Hading, such another of them, after all his presumption was forced to hang himselfe. Guido of Flanders was deceived by a Necromancer (of whom he had learnt the Art) by which he had promised him, that whensoever he would, he should passe invisible out of any perill. But that immutation little availed to the safety of his life. Fredericke Stuphius (who maintained his army with magicall money) was notwithstanding taken by Rudolph of Habspurge, and burnt. Reatius a praestigious operator, being therefore convented, confessed his circulatory frauds: and afterwards was slain by one whom he had deceived by those his delusory waies. Methotin an idolatrous Magician, his frauds being detected, was slain by a concourse of people, and his body nayled to a stake. And Hollerus such another, was cruelly murdered by his own aemulators. A great Calculator confesses, that Sebastian Castalio shewed an Astrologer (to his great admiration) the genesis of his little sonne, who died in his infancy; and yet that genesis had all the aphaeticall places safe and sound; which might promise a prolonged life, or direct any judge for to pronounce there∣upon. An Earle of Aspremont would seem to entertaine all comers with all kind of dainties, but they were no sooner out of his house, but that horse and man was ready to die with hunger
and thirst. A curious inquisitor was carried out of his own house into a very pleasant place, as it seemed, but in the mor∣ning found himselfe laid upon thorns, and almost starved. One Mendoza would present his banquets, but they proved no∣thing but coales and ashes. Hamilear the Carthaginian Captaine, led on by the Ariolists, sacrificed all the while he was in fight, in hope of better suc∣cesse; but finding it, in the discomfiture of his party, to fall out on the contrary, he cast himselfe as a desperate sacrifice into the fire, to quench it with his blood, that had put him in so great hopes, and stood him in so little stead. Rhadagusus a King of the Gothes, in warring against the Ro∣mans, did nothing almost but immolate or sacrifice for auspi∣cation, or divinations sake: so that they began boastingly to spread abroad Rhadagusus (who had reconciled to himselfe the protection and assistance of such Gods) was sure to over∣come. But nevertheless he was taken and slain, with above 100000. of his army. Papyrius Cursor oppugning Aquilonia, the Pullarian Auspica∣tor would needs be presaging clean contrary to his tokens: whose fallacie being found out, the Consul praesumed a good omen notwithstanding, and beginning the fight, caused the lying Augur to be placed in the front, and the first dart that was cast by the enemy struck him stark dead. Eudemus being foretold by a cunning dream-speller, that although he was now in exile, yet he should return to his own Land within five yeares: within which space he notwithstan∣ding dyed in racusa: but to make his prediction good, he said, he meant his grave which is every mans own land. Constantia an honourable dame of Rome, having received assurance from Astrologers of a long, healthfull, and most happy life, fell sick within sive daies after of a burning feaver, and finding that there was no way but death, she strained her husbands hand, and concluded both her speech, and life, with these complaining words, Behold what truth is in the vain pregno∣sticates of fond Astrologers. Ninus who detested all Astrologers, with their deceipts, sup∣pressed Zoroastes, who would deale in nothing without their encouragement. Pompey with his guard of prophets lost his
head: and Caesar by contempt of Oracles subdued his enemies. Iustinian exiling all sorts of false Prophets with their bag and baggage, did flourish as a Conquerour; whereas Iulian admit∣ting them, with all their packs of falshoods and blasphemous lies, did perish as a castaway. At such time as Brittanicus waited for the great lot of the Roman Empire, by the comfort and encouragement of a vaine Astrologer: he lost both life and all, by the rigour of a bloody Tyrant. Thrasillus the Mathematician, whom Tiberius had taken into familiarity, presaging good things upon the sight of a ship: but things falling out contrary to what he predicted, Tiberius was purposed, as they walked together, to cast him down a praecipice for a falsary, and an intruder into his secrets. Seneca, by a pretty fancy, bringeth in Mercury perswading with the Gods, that they would abridge the life of Claudius; if not for any other cause, yet even for pitty and compassion of the poore Astrologers: who had already been taken with so many lies (from yeare to yeere) about this point: as if the destinies were not more favourable, then their grounds were sure, the credit of Astrology would decay for ever. St. Ambrose telleth of one that prognosticated great store of raine to fall, after an exceeding drought: but none was seen, till it was obtained by the prayers of the Church. Galen writeth that none of all those Prophets and Astrolo∣gers, whose skill was commended, and their depth admired in his time at Rome, gave any perfect judgement either as touching the disease, the continuance, or cure thereof. Manfredus a rare Doctor of Astrology, assured Ordelaphius a Prince in Italy, that that very yeere wherein he died, if there were any certain knowledge by his art, he should not end his life, before extremity of age had made him lame and un∣weldy. Paulus Florentinus lived till 85 yeeres of age, and yet he would assure his friends in private, that he never found one comfort that might promise long life in the figure of his birth; but sudden death, with many tragicall and most lamentable acci∣dents. The great dearth of Cattle which was so certainly expected
by the Calculators Anno 1558. turned to a wonderfull en∣crease of all kinds of sustenance. At the same time that the fond Bohemians were affraid to be consumed with sudden sire that should come down from Hea∣ven, as some preachers gave warning, they were almost drow∣ned with a second Flood, by means of excessive showres, spring∣tides, and store of land-waters, that ranne down with immo∣derate abundance, as if God had resolved to descry the falshood of their jugling. At another time, the people were so scared with an univer∣sall feare of waters scattered aboad by prophets of this kind, as a certain Abbot (seeking to prevent the worst) built him a Tabernacle upon the top of Harrow on the Hill: but the con∣clusion is, that before Summer was halfe spent, all the ditches were drawn dry, and the castle perished for lack of water. Paul Flerent noting two constellations, under which the State of Florence was refreshed, after long and bloudy warres: findeth them so crosse and opposite one to another, as himselfe is forced to confesse, that small light of assurance may be taken from the blaze of this Beacon. Pencer prognosticated upon the last Comet, that our bodies should be parched and burned up with heat; but how fell it out? Forsooth we had not a more unkindly Summer for many yeeres in respect of extraordinary cold. 25. Of the Heavens calculating their own purport, with∣out the helpe of an Artist: and the suspition of Mag∣astromancers predicting rather by diabolicall instinct, or the suggestion of their own Familiars, then from any vertue of the starres. THe day before Iulian died, one (and he an heathen) watching over night, saw a conjunction or compact of the Stars, expressing thus much in legible characters, To day is Julian slain in Persia. Also Didymus Alexandrinus had a vision of white horses running in the ayre, and they that rode
upon them said, tell Didymus, in this very houre Iulian is slain, and bid him tell it to Athanasius the Bishop. Constantine in his holy meditations, calling up his eyes East∣ward towards Heaven, saw the similitude of a Crosse, wherein were stars (as letters) so placed, that visibly might be read this sentence in Greek, In this thou shalt overcome. At what time Caesar was in the battell of Pharsalia, one Caius Cornelius a notable prognosticator in Padua, beholding the flying of Birds, cryed out, Now they give the onset on both sides; and a little after (as a man possessed with some spirit) cryed out again, O Caesar, the victory is thine. Such was that of Apollonius concerning Domitian, of which before. Numa Pompilius, a Magician or Sortiary not inferior to any, had frequent and familiar company, confabulation, and con∣gression with Aegeria a Nymphish devill. Simon Magus had a dogge, they say, could speak, and doe many prodigious pranks. Quintus Sertorius had an Hart which he consulted withall. Pope Sylvester the second had a dogge, which he held more deare then the Kingdom of Naples. Laurentius also had such an one at Roan. Iodocus de Rosa had the divell in a Ring. Petrus Apponensis, a magicall Physician, had seven spirits, which he kept in glasses. Andreas an Italian had a great red dogge that would doe many prodigious feats. Faecius Caredus is said to have an acry spirit very familiar. Stephen Gardiner had his dar∣ling cat. Iohn Faustus had a dogge called prestigiar. And Cor∣nelius Agrippa had another called Monsieur. A French Baron had a cat that vanisht into the ayre because he chid her▪ And it is reported of an English one, that had such another, which did in like manner. The same day that the Torensians overcame the Crotonians in Italy, the victory was told at Corinth, Athens, and Lacedaemon. Mercury minding to try the skill of Tyresias in vaticinating, stole his Oxen, and came to him in the shape of a man, and told him they were lost. Out they went together to make conje∣cture of the thiefe by Augury, and the blind presager bad Mer∣cury to tell him what bird he saw? he answered an Eagle flying on the left hand; that (he said) signified nothing to him. A∣gain, he askt him, what bird? he answered, a Crow, sometimes looking upwards, sometimes downward. Then understan∣ding
all by instinct, that Crow (said he) sweares by heaven and earth, that thou canst restore me my Oxen again if thou wilt. When Caius Marius had overcome the Sicambrians, at the River Mosa, the news of the victory was presently carried to Rome by Castor and Pollux the Starry gods; or as others say, by the Impish divels themselves. Plutarch reports many examples of demonicall familiars, carrying newes of victory to the Ro∣mans in a moment, from the remotest regions. Gleombrotus sequestring himselfe from the society of men, and frequenting solitary woods and caves, to become more in∣ward with Satyres, was informed that there were Daemons wan∣dring up and down to inspire dreams and Oracles, and furnish men with prophecies and predictions. Lactantius is of the mind that the cutting of the Whet∣stone by Accius Naevius, and the drawing of the Ship by the Girdle of Claudia the Ʋestall, and the like were obtained by their Familiars. To which I may adde Thucia's drawing water in a sive. Iodocus de Rosa was wont to say, that he would put none other Messenger in trust with a cause of weight, then him that lodged one night at Constantinople, and the next under his Signet. The spirit Orthon brought intelligence out of all corners of the world to Gaston Earle of Foix. The Spirit or Familiar which daily called upon Alaricus (as he related to a certain godly Monk) to begin his voyage towards Rome, came from the divels court undoubtedly.
26. Of Astromancers turning Pantomancers; or presa∣ging, not onely upon prodigies, but upon every slight occasion, by every vile and vaine means: and so occa∣sioning superstitious people to an omination upon every accident, and after any fashion. DArius in the beginning of his raigne, but changed the scabbard of his Sword, from the Persian into the Graecian fashion: and the Chaldaeans (loath to let slip any occasion of keeping their art in ure) straight way prognosticated thereupon the translation of his Kingdom to the Greekes. A Raven let fall a clod upon Alexanders head, and it brake to pieces: and then flying to the next Tower, was there intan∣gled in pitch: Aristander interprets it as a signe of the ruine of the City, with some perill to the Kings person. But what was last and least prognosticated, was first and most found. Alexander steeping Barley (as the Macedonian custome was at the making of walls) the birds of the ayre came and picked it up. Now many took this for an unlucky token. But the di∣viners (that would spend their verdict in the most triviall mat∣ters, rather then sit out) told them it betokened, that that Corn should nourish many countries. Cicero derided the Baeotian vaticinators, for predicting victory to the Thebanes, from the crowing of Cocks. So doth he the Lanuuian Aruspicks, for making such a marvelous portent, in that the Mice gnawed the Belts. The City of Rome being mightily devested by the Gaules, the Senators began to deliberate, whether they should repaire their ruined walls; or flit to Vejos. Now a certaine Centurion of theirs comming by at that instant, commanded the Ensigne to set down his Standard, or Banner in that place, saying, it was best for them to abide there. The Senators over hearing that voyce, interpreted it as an omen, and so desisted from consul∣ting any longer about their migration, or removall, but resol∣ved to stay at Rome still.
Lucius Paulus being about to warre with King Perses, as he returned from the Court home to his own house, his little daughter met him, whom he kist, and askt her why she lookt so sad? she replied, Persa was dead, meaning her whelp or Pup∣pet. And this he took to be an omen or presage of the vanquish∣ment and death of Perser. Caecilia the wise of Metellus, leading a Neece of hers (now marriageable) to the Temple, to heare some hopes of a good husband; she standing long there, and hearing no answer to any such purpose, desired her Aunt she might have leave to sit by her: That thou shalt (said she) and I will yeild thee my seat. This the Virgin accepted for an omen, that she should suc∣ceed her in being married to Metellus after her decease. Caius Marius fleeing to the house of Faunia for safeguard, set up his Asse, and gave him Provender; which he refused to eate, but got out, and went into the water: and that made him to ruminate, that there was no safe abiding for him in any house or countrey, but he must get him to sea. Pompey being routed by Caesar, fled for safety to the Isle of Cyprus; and spying there a stately building, asked the name of it; it was answered, that it was called ; this he sighing interpreted, as portending ill to him, touching the Em∣pire or Kingdom. They of Perianna imploring the ayd of the Samians, against their adversaries of Cerra: they to deride them, sent them a Sybill in a little Bark; which they interpreted as a good omi∣nation. So they of Apollonia being in distresse, and sending to the Epidamnians for succour, they returned them answer, that they would send the river Aeas for their reliefe: which they accepted as a good omen; and making the river Captaine in chiefe, got the victory, and afterwards sacrificed to it, as a God. The old Druides gathered a Serpents egge at a certaine time of the Moon, according to certaine rites and ceremonies; and so reserved it for omination of victory and prevalency in warres, strifes, contentions. And such an one a Noble man of Rome, is said to have hatched in his bosome in a controversie that he had with the Emperour Claudius. O Zoroster it is said, that he laught at his birth; and that
his braines beat so hard, that they beat off the hand that was laid upon his head: and this must signifie his profound science. Plato while an infant, and asleep in his cradle, there sate hony Bees upon his lips: and this must signifie his Eloquence. To Mydas in like manner there came pismires and carried graines of Wheat into his mouth: & this was a prediction of his riches. Servius Tullius, a mean child, while he was sleeping a flame appeared to shine round about his head; and this was made to presage a crown. Roscius his nurse awaking observed by moon-light a Serpent as it were imbracing the child: and this must prognosticate his eminent fame and glory; although his height was a Stage player. If these occasions were not slight, yet could there be slighter divinations, or more worthy to be slighted? Alexanders father dreamt that his mothers belly was sealed with the impresse of a Lyon upon it. Hecuba, when she was bringing forth Paris, had a vision of a firebrand, or burning Torch, that should set on fire Troy, and all Asia. There appea∣red unto the mother of Phalaris the image of Mercury, pouring forth blood upon the earth. The mother of Dionysius dreamed that she brought forth a Satyr. Adde to these and the like, the prodigious birth of Zoroaster, their Prince and master, and then aske the Magastromancers, what need such prodigies at births? and such presagings upon them? if the natalitiall conjunctions be sufficiently portending without them. The Oracles themselves would give answers to any kind of questions, were they never so triviall; and would presage the erection and restauration of scenicall enterludes (as parts of divine service) though never so ludicrous: And would enjoyn and accept of divining means, matters, instruments, rites, cere∣monies, though never so ridiculous. As among the Colophoni∣ans in Ionia there the Oracle would afford them the vertue of prophecying from the drinking of water. Among the Bran∣chides in the same Province, from the sucking in of certaine vapours. In another Oracle a woman sate upon a Trevet at the mouth of a cave, and was filled with the fury of divina∣tion. In another a glasse was let down into a fountaine, by a slender thred and after sacrifices and imprecations, the images of things future were seen in the glasse. In another, they descen∣ded
into a fountaine, and so vaticinated as they desired. In another, they consulting burnt lamps, offered Incense, gave gifts, and put their eares to the mouth of the Image; then stopping them, they went out of the Temple, and opening them again, the first voyce they heard from any they met, they took it for an Oraculous answer. In another they judged of things future by casting of Dice, &c. Severall Countries had their severall waies of divining, and all of them esteemed alike acceptable to the Gods, and alike effectuall among themselves. Tacitus writes thus of the man∣ners of the Germans, that they sing as they goe to warre, and encourage each other by their Bardian odes, acquiring the fortune of their fight by their singing, and he that makes the harshest noise is thought to doe it best. They take this to be much of providence in children, (especially females) neither neglect they their counsels and answers. Ʋelleda the Prophe∣tesse (although she was a trouble to them) they held for a Goddesse. Auspicies and Lotteries they observe especially. And for lots the custome is simple. A bough cut off from a fruitfull tree they divide into lesser branches or slips; and those distinguished by certain marks, they cast carelesly upon a white garment: and in publique consulting use the ministry of the Priest; in private of the father of the family; who loo∣king up to heaven takes up every one of them thrice, and in∣terprets them according to the imprest markes. If any forbid, there's no more consulting for that day: if it be permitted, then to answer the faith of the auspicies, they goe on to inter∣rogate the voyces and flights of birds. It is also the property of that Nation to experience the presages and monitions of horses. They are nourished publiquely in woods and groves; white they are, and touch no common work; onely put into a sacred chariot they are accompanied by the Priest, and the Prince, and so they observe their neighing and sweating. Nei∣ther is there more faith had in any other auspicie either by the common people, the Nobles, or the Priests. For they conceive these to be the Secretaries of the Gods, and themselves their ministers. There is another way of auspicie, whereby they ex∣plore the event of warre: they get a captive by any means of that Nation with which they warre, and commit him and one
chosen out of their own common sort, to try together in their own Country armes: and the victory of the one or the other they make to be a great presage to either side. They couple not, unlesse some sudden thing chance, but on certain daies when the Moon begins to be in the full; for that they believe to be a most auspicious beginning for the doing of businesse. The mother of Sapor King of Persia being with child, and it doubted whether it was a male or a female she went withall, (for if it proveda female, it might not succeed in such digni∣ty.) For this cause the Princes convented the Magicians, to try their skill, and pronounce upon the birth. Therefore they brought a Mare ready to fole, and the Magicians vaticinated upon it; and it falling out according to their prediction, they thereupon concluded, it was a male child the Queen went with∣all: upon this they without delay layd the Crown upon the Queens belly, and proclaimed the child scarce conceived to be their King, according to their Countries rites and laws. Augustus and Marke Anthony were playing together, and what a businesse of caution a mathematicall Aegyptian presager made upon it? advising the one (as concerning their after earnest) to take heed of the other, as whose genius was too strong for him, or his daemon afraid of his. As Pope Engenius sung Masse in the Church of Rheimes, some drops of the consecrated wine chanced to be spilt; and what prognosticating was upon it? And no lesse was there upon Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury his singing a Requiem the same day he was reconciled to the King. 27. Of the treasons, treacheries, conspiracies, seditious ambitions, usurpations, turbulencies, and busie medlings, of Magicall and Astrologicall diviners, against Princes, Magistrates, Kingdomes and States. CAmbyses having added Aegypt to his fathers Kingdomes, could not endure their magicall religion, but abomina∣ting their superstitious ceremonies, caused the Oraculous Temples of Apis, and others, to be pulled down. At length he
was murdered by means of two Magicians, who concealed his death, and usurping upon his Kingdome, raigned in his stead, and name. But their boldnesse being detected, they were appre∣hended and suppressed by Darius, who therefore by the consent of all was chosen King. Cobares, a man of magick art (if an art it be, and not a vaine mans deceit) yet what ever it be, he was more notable for his profession of it, then for his knowledge in it. He (at a feast) would needs be counselling Bessus the weaker to yield to Alex∣ander the stronger: which medling of his was so ill taken, that he hardly escaped his throat cutting; and he likewise took so ill the rejection of his counsell, that he defected and fled to the contrary part. Now what unhappy politicians are such as these (both to themselves and others) that if they may not be accepted for busie counsellors, turn malecontented fugi∣tives. Alexander being about to scale the walls of a City, Demophon the diviner would needs disswade him from some apparition of unfortunate signs. Of whom the King demanded, if it would not trouble him to be interrupted in his Science? which he acknowledging, the King replyed upon him again, avouching, that in his greatest affairs he found alwaies no greater distracti∣on, and disturbance, then that of a superstitious pragmaticall Soothsayer. Nicius the Athenian Captain kept a Soothsayer continually in his house; pretending it was to consult with him about the great affaires of the Commonwealth: when as it was onely to inquire about his own businesse, or to promote his owne ambition. Alcibiades to promote his own ambitions, suborned certain predicting Soothsayers, to presage happy successe, and honour to the Athenians, in their Sicilian warre, although his end ser∣ved, it fell out clean contrary. Meton the Astronomer very politickly feined himselfe mad, and fired his own house, pretending a mislike of the celestiall signes, as touching the common successe in that warre: but his end was to himself, sc. to release his sonne, engaged in that voy∣age, and so to ease himselfe (let the Commonwealth sinke or swim) of the charge of maintaining him there.
While Fadus governed the Province of Iudaea, a certaine Magician, Theudas by name, perswaded the people to follow him to the River Iordane, (taking their substance along with them) and he would divide the waters, as heretofore; and so work their deliverance. But Fadus pursued them, dispersed the seduced multitude, took the Magician and cut off his head. Another time, an Aegyptian comming to Ierusalem, feined himselfe to be a Prophet, but was a Magician; he perswaded the popular multitude to goe along with him to Mount Olivet, and he would there shew them strange things for their free∣dome: but Faelix followed upon them, and slew hundreds of them: onely the Aegyptian escaped, by vanishing out of sight. Another Magician seduced the people, leading them out into the Wildernesse; promising them safety, and rest from their evils: but Festus followed streight after them, and slew both the Seducer, and many of those whom he had seduced. Many Soothsaying Astrologers (grudging at the least in∣crease, or ease of the Church) had gathered themselves toge∣ther, to consult about the praenotion of Ʋalens his successor: and having tryed all kind of divination, at length they made a wooden Treuet of Lawrell, and used such execrable and dia∣bolicall incantation, that they observed a conjunction of these letters THEOD, which they expounded of one Theodo∣rus a Pagan, and usefull to their purpose: presuming on the power of their constellation, or constellated figure, to depose or set up whom they thought good. But Valens understanding it, slew both the diviners, and the party they had divined upon. Yea, his fury was so implacable, that it extended to all, either of that sect, or name. Eugenius a Schoolmaster, by the means of Arbogustes, a trea∣cherous officer, and of Hyparchus, a politick presager, having strangled young Ʋalentinian, usurped the Empire; presuming he should attain to what he went about; being thereunto indu∣ced by the word of those that took upon them to predict things future, from the immolation of victimes, inspection of entrailes, and observation of the Stars. Thrasyllus the Mathematician, having predicted certain joy∣full things to Nero, and they falling out quite contrary: he determined to cast him headlong into the sea, as a falsarie,
and rash intruder into his secrets. Yea the same Nero had an odde way of exploring his Magicall predictors; and if there were found the least suspition of vanity or fraud in them, he would cast them (as they walked upon a precipice) headlong into the Sea: and many times would doe it, lest they might be the bewrayers of his secrets; for he, who knew their treache∣ries, durst trust none of them. The ancient Brittains deeply drencht in superstition by their magicall Druides, were so enslaved to them, as that they usur∣ped the determining of all controversies, publique or private; concerning all matters or causes criminall, or reall: so that they took upon them to award recompences, or penalties, as they pleased; and who ever he or they were that refused to stand to their judgement; him, or them they presently inter∣dicted, forbidding all commerce with them. It is recorded that in France, the Magicians, Astrologers, Sortiaries, Sorcerers, Wizzards, and Witches, were so nume∣rous, that they began to boast themselves not only for a socie∣ty, but for an Army; and to professe that if they could but get some one in authority to be their Commander or leader, they durst wage warre with any King or State; and doubted not of the victory through the vertue and power of their art: Like as the Hunnes (by those very means) had formerly done against Sigebert King of France. Peter of Pomfreit, that hermeticall Wizzard, by buzzing his prophecies into the peoples eares, sought to make the commo∣tion against King Iohn. And in Ketts commotion, one main promotion of it was, upon the false prophecies that Hob, Dic, and Hic, (meaning the rusticks) with their clubs, should fill up the valley of Dussindale with the bodies of the dead. Leoline Prince of Wales rebelled against Edward the first upon a prophecy of Merlin (that ginne of errour) how he should be shortly crowned with the diadem of Brute. But his head was cut off, and crowned with Ivy, and there was his end. The Persi in Magi were not onely contented to be honoured by their Kings, but usurped the Kingdom to themselves. The Aegyptian Priests, or vaticinators arrogated great honours for their praevision and praediction of suture things, both by their sacrificings, and by their skill in the starres.
Numa Pompilius, Licurgus, Solon, Minos, Zamolxis, pretended their Laws from Iupiter, Apollo, Mercury, Minerva, and other predicting Oracles; that so they might the more easily impose upon, and domineere over the slavish people. Aristocrates King of the Arcadians, ayding the Messenians against the Lacedemonians; they so corrupted him with gifts, and besides he was so blinded with the unprosperous significa∣tion of the intrayles, that upon the joyning of the battell he disheartned his own souldiers, and fled; and so basely betrayed his old friends the Messenians. While Servius Tullus reigned, one had a very faire Cow, of which the oraculous predictors gave out, that whosoever should offer that Cow to Diana, he, his Countrey and kindred should attaine to great authority and rule over the whole world. Now the owner of it bringing it to Rome, to offer it in behalfe of himselfe and his, the presaging Priest of the Temple, commanded him not to offer it till he had washt himselfe; and while he went forth so to doe, he sacrificed it for the advantage of himselfe, and his like. Libo Drusus, a loose rash young man, was encouraged by Firmius Catus, through the confidence of Chaldean promises, magicall mysteries, and interpretations of dreams, to make insurrection against Tiberius Caesar: but in the end was driven desperately (his servants refusing) to lay violent hands upon himselfe. Immediately upon this the Senate consulted for the expelling of the Mathematicians and Magicians out of Italy, and L. Pitnanius, one of their number, was cast down a Rock. In Catilines conspiracy, Lentulus was accused both by his letters and speeches which he used out of the Sybils books; that the Kingdom of Rome was presaged to three of the Corne∣lian family, viz. Cinna, and Silla, and himselfe, the third to whom it was fated. And moreover, that now was the twen∣tieth yeare from the burning of the Capitoll, concerning which the haruspicks by their prodigies had given answer that civill warres there should be rife and bloody. The haruspicks portended great and wonderfull things for the promotion of Caius Marius his ambition. In the second Punick warre (befides a tumult and distracti∣on in the State) such a confusion there was in religion (as the
cause and continuance of the other) that men, women, young, old, noble, plebeians, all sacrisiced and prophecyed as they list∣ed: and he or she was no body that could not presage of one disastrous event or another. Apollo gave such perplexed answers to the Lacedaemonians (in their troubles) that a Pagan Philosopher was provoked to tell him plainly, If thou hadst answered thus in quiet times, it had seemed frivolous to all; only thy ignorance lurkes under our feares and distraction; because such things are most impressing and credited in such kind of times. Apuleius (saith St. Augustine) an Affricane and therefore best known to us Affricanes, for all his magicall arts could not attain to a Kingdom: no nor yet to any judiciall power in a Commonwealth, for all his judiciary Astrologie. Did he mo∣destly contemn these things as a Philosopher? Nay did he not hunt, and hire, and contend with the Citizens of Choas (where he marryed a wife) about the setting up of a Statue to him? So that if he arrived at no greatnesse, it was not because he had no will, but no power. A certain prophecy given out and published at Rome, at the removing of the Emperour Tiberius, that he should never re∣turn any more, occasioned the death of many well disposed Citizens: who ventring too farre upon this little ground, to discharge their Countrey from the clog of servitude, were cut off by cruelty. About the same time Furius Scribonianus was exiled, because he had enquired after the Princes death by Chal∣deans or Astrologers. Mahomet, and Sergius, both of them by magicall and praesti∣gious tricks set up themselves; the one for a King, the other for a Prophet. Fredericke Barbarossa leading an army against them of Mil∣laine, they sent an Arabian magician to play the veneficke, and take away his life by poyson: which being discovered, and he apprehended; notwithstanding he threatned that he could doe it with words, and would doe it, unlesse he were dismist; yet this moved not the King to feare his malefice: but he therefore inflicted on him the sharper punishment. Pope Iulius the third gave a Cardinals hat to a youth whom he favoured; and being askt the reason of it, said, That he
found by Astrology, that it was the youths destiny to be a great Prelate; which was impossible except himselfe were Pope: and therefore that he did raise him, as the driver on of his owne Fortune. Certaine rude uncivill clowns, under a colour of a prophecy, that they should conquer and subdue the holy Land, raked a sort of vagabonds and bankrupts together; who falling forth∣with to spoyle and robbery, were hanged upon Gibbets almost in every Countrey as they past. The young Duke of Viseo in Portingale, having once been pardoned by Don Ivan el Grande, at the suit of the Queen his sister; was encouraged by the Mathematicians and Astrologers to rebell again; with assurance that he should obtaine the Crown: whereof he not onely failed, but besides was deprived of his life by the course of ordinary justice. My Lord of Northampton tels the story of two Countreymen of ours, one sometimes professing Greeke in Cambridge, the other of the same calling: one contriving treason, sedition, or faction, from the starres, but clapt under hatches when the planets promised most fortunate successe: the other unduti∣fully taking armes against his Soveraigne: and often confes∣sing, he had never dealt in that attempt, but by encouragement of a certain prophecy, that he should prevaile against his Prince by popular devotion. 28. Of impostorous Magicke and Astrologie, the causes of preposterous villany: or the Magastromancers instiga∣ting to those execrable acts, which otherwise had never been invented, or intended: And other cursed consequents. CAracalla remaining in Mesopotamia, sent to Maternus, whom he had left Governour of Rome, to assemble all the Astrologers and Mathematicians, and procure them to give their opinions secretly, whether there were any conspiracies on foot against him; and to give their judgements how long he
should live, and what death he should die. Maternus did so; and (as the Astrologers had advised) wrote that Macrinus, his prefect, was the conspirator; and therefore did warn him to see Macrinus dispatcht out of the way. As the Letter came to Cara∣calla, he was at that instant upon a sport which he would not intermit; & so committed the Letters to Macrinus to read over, and make report of their contents to him afterwards. Macrinus in perusall of them finding himselfe accused of such treason as he never thought of, and doomed or necessitated to it by Astro∣logicall judgement; and considering the Emperours jealous cruelty, and Maternus his envy, thought there could now be no safety for him, either in excusing or delaying: and so set Mar∣tial, a discontented Centurion (whose brother he had caused to be put to death) to murder him. Among the other prodigies that were said to prognosticate Domitians death, there was seen a crown encircling about the Sunne. Now because Stephanus signifies a Crown, the Astro∣logers would have the Crown to signifie Stephanus; and he must be the man thus destinied to dispatch Domitian; and this very thing was it that heartned him to doe the deed. Dioclesian, because a Druid or Sorceresse had foretold him, that he should be Emperour after he had slain a Boare: he not onely killed all the Boares he could, but slew all the men he knew that had the name of Aper, or Boare. Ʋalens understanding, by a constellated figure, that one should succeed him, whose name began with Θ. or Th. there∣upon caused divers to be slaine, whose names began after that manner. Edward the fourth wrought the death of George Duke of Clarence, his brother: instigated thereunto by a foolish pro∣phecy, that one whose name began with a G. should succeed him. It was upon a prophecy or prediction, that Mackbeth slew Duncane King of Scots: and likewise Banquo, his chiefest friend; because of a prophecy, that his posterity should suc∣ceed in the Kingdome. Again, upon a Wizards prophecy or prediction, that he should never be slain by any man born of a woman; nor vanquished, till the wood of Bernane came to the
Castle of Dunsinane; this made him give up himselfe securely to all kind of wickednesse. Nisaeus tyrant of Syracuse, being foretold of his death by a Soothsayer, thereupon riotously lavisht away all his wealth beforehand. So did a rich man of Lions, upon the calculating of his Nativity, but lived and beg'd along time after. Natholocus King of Scots, desirous to understand somewhat of the issue of his troubles; sent a trusty servant of his to en∣quire of a Witch: who consulting with her spirits, told him, the King should be murdered, not by the hands of his enemies, but by one of his most familiar friends. The messenger demanding instantly by whose hands? Even by thine, said she. Whereupon he defyed her, and bad her goe like an old witch; and trusted he should see her burnt, ere he should be drawne to doe so villa∣nous a deed: intending to signifie it sincerely to the King himselfe. But by the way, as he returned, many fears and suspi∣tions arose in his mind; especially that the Kings jealousie would not be satisfied with his innocency; so that he thought it the surest way for himselfe to doe the deed; and (thus indu∣ced) he did it. Cambyses dreaming that his brother Smerdis should raigne, because he thought he saw him sitting in a regall Throne, con∣trived his death by the means of one Praxaspes a magician, who peradventure had either magically sent that dream, or else inter∣preted to that purpose. From an old orientall prophecy, that about that time such as came out of the land of Iudaea, should obtaine the whole government of affairs; the Jews slew their governour, and re∣belled, but to their own miserable destruction. Vespasian being admonished by the Mathematicians to take heed of Metius Pomposianus, because he had an imperiall Genesis: whom though he (wiser then to give credit unto such things) neverthelesse preferred; yet Domitian was drawn to put him to death upon the selfe same occasion.
29. Of Magastromancers cluding Authority; and deluding themselves in a presumption of impunity. CLeomedes for many portentous malefices, being fast shut up in a close sepulchre or coffin, with a cover that many men could hardly lift, laid upon it to keepe him safe against the day of triall: when the day came he was vanished thence, and not there to be found, neither alive nor dead. When they consulted the Oracle about his portentous escape, it commen∣ded him for it, as one of the last of the Heroes. Apollonius Tyanaeus being convented before Domitian, when he thought to take punishment of the Magician, he forthwith vanished out of his presence. Apuleius accused for magicall Arts and practices, before Claudius a Christian Magistrate; instead of confessing his fault, fell to calumniate and traduce the very Laws; for exhibiting the same under such penalties. One Diodorus, or Leodorus, a most portentous Conjurer, being therefore condemned, and led to execution: by his enchant∣ments slipt out of the executioners hands, and conveyed him∣selfe in the ayre, from Catana in Sicily to Constantinople. At last the Bishop of Catana caught him at unawares, and caused him to be burnt in a fiery furnace. At Cullen a certain Damsell being cited for playing of pre∣stigious tricks; she did many jugling feats before the Nobles, as rending of towels, breaking of glasses, and presently making them whole againe, &c. which made them vain sport, and they conclude them to be but joculatory pranks, and so she escaped the Inquisitour. David Ebroy a magicall Jew made those of his Nation believe that he was the Messiah, come to free them from the servitude of the uncircumcised. The King of Persia apprehending him, he by his sleights escaped out of prison, crossed a broad river, and could never be overtaken. One Caesarius Maltes, a praestigious Jugler, being taken at Paris, escaped prison by his circulatory tricks; for which be∣ing
questioned again in another place, and condemned; the Governour (by his power, and against Law) reprieved him; as much taken with his feats of Leigerdemaine. But nothing prospered after that in his government, and he died not long after. In the territories of Berne, one Scaphius boasted, that he could scape invisible, when he pleased: and so had oft times avoyded the hands of his capitall enemies. At length (when he grew ripe both for divine and humane vengeance) he was espied (by those that laid wait to apprehend him) through a window; and was so slain with a speare, when he least dreamt of his death. Caius Marius, a man ignoble, and a cruell author of civill warres, after the first fight wherein he was vanquished by Sylla; being taken naked and muddy by the enemy, he was brought to the Minturnians, and delivered to the Governour of the City, who sitting in councell upon him, gave sentence that he should be put to death presently; and seeing none of the Ci∣tizens would undertake the execution, they committed it to a Cimbrian horsman, or some say, a Frenchman, who, about to dispatch the businesse, heard a great voyce out of a dark place; Thou man! darest thou kill Marius? at which the man affraid, let fall his weapon and ran away, crying he durst not doe the deed, and so he escaped. At Ʋenice a certaine maleficall Sorcerer being condemned, made all the locks fall off, and doors fly open; onely by a con∣fection of certain herbs, and mussitation of certain charms, and so went his way. 30. Of God, and the Starres, and men, blasphemed, accused, calumniated, defamed, by, or by the means of Magici∣ans, and Astrologers. ALexander, in a distempered mood, having slaine Clytus his plaine, but trusty friend; afterwards ashamed of so foule a fact; and having no other way to excuse so vile and dishonourable an action, he urged his eligion spellers to try
their fatidicall arts, and to enquire whether it was not the ire of the Gods, that had necessitated him so to doe? and in con∣clusion (after much calculating, inspecting, consulting) the Gods are made to bear the blame, in fatally enforcing so foule an act. A certaine fatidicall Philosopher beating his servant for a fault, the servant cried out of his masters injustice, for punish∣ing him, for doing a thing that was not in his own will, or power. Seeing he himselfe had taught, that men are fatally ne∣cessitated to doe either well or ill. St. Augustine reports of a Mathematician in his time, who was wont to say. It was not men that lusted, but Ʋenus; not men that killed, but Mars; not men that stole, but Mercury; It was not God that helpt, or favoured, but Iupiter, &c. Iustin Martyr, Marullus, Symeon, Athanasius, Eusebius Emisse∣nus, were calumniated and slandered by Magicians and Astro∣logers; as if they had been the worst of them themselves. Kunegunde (they say was defamed for a whore, by a diabo∣licall wizzard; So was Turbula. In the time of Frederick the second, there was a German sor∣cerer, that did use to defame men by reproaching them publikly with their most secret sinnes. Blanch wife to Peter of Castile, had presented her husband with a rich Girdle, unwitting that it was enchanted by a cer∣tain Iew; so that still when the King put it on, it appeared like a snake: Maria de Padilla (the Kings Concubine, and the Iews Proselyte) having herselfe a chiefe hand in it, most calum∣niously charged the vertuous Queen with her own sorcerous act, instigated thereunto by the envious Iew, or Magician: be∣cause the Queen had justly wrought the whole sect of them out of power, and favour at Court. But now the King being so imbittered by the prodigious apparition, and other ma∣gicall predictions, the Concubine was so imboldned, that she prosecuted the poore innocent Queen to her death. And after that, so bewitched the King, that she got into her place. Elianor wife to Humphrey Duke of Glocester, was impeached of sorcery by one Bolingbrooke an Astronomer, who being himselfe apprehended, accused her as accessary: when as her
greatest guilt in that art, was her superstition in consulting, not practising of it. The prefect of Galatia missing his sonne, certain servants of his were accused by the false divination of a pseudomantist, as if they had slain him: but no sooner were they executed, but the young man returned safe home again. Alexander being admonished by the divining lots, that he should command him to be killed that first met him as he went out of the gate; by chance an Asse-herd met him, and he com∣manded it to be done accordingly. But the poore man com∣plaining of the injustice, that he should (being innocent) be adjudged to such capitall punishment; answer was made, that must be imputed to the gods, who had advised the King to slay the first that met him. If it be so (quoth the Asse-herd) the lot means another, and not me (for my Asse which I drave before me) met the King before I. The King delighted with this answer, the Asse was executed; and so the Gods, the King, and the Asse-herd were all excused by wit, more then by Lot. Rhea Sylvia, the daughter of Numitor, a vestall, being com∣pressed and found with child: both she and her parents agreed to excuse it, saying, that she had suffered force not from a man, but some God, or Genius; he that had done the deed, had like∣wise predicted that she should bring forth twins: which, though it so fell out, yet by the sentence of the Councell, the Law in that case was to be used against her. A contention arising betwixt Cleomenes and Demaratus, a∣bout the Kingdome of Lacedaemonia; Cleomenes accused De∣maratus as not the sonne of Ariston, and therefore ought not to succeed. The Lacedaemonians to be resolved in the busi∣nesse, consulted the Delphian Oracle; which (Periatis the Priest thereof being corrupted by Cleomenes) gave answer that the party enquired upon, was not Aristons sonne: Where∣upon Demaratus conjured his mother from the infernals to answer for him: who replied, that it was a God, or an Heroe that deluded her, and begat him. And thus they accused one another. Tertullian, Iustin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athena∣goras,
Arnobius, Minutius Foelix, Lactantius, Augustine; and so many as have written against the Idolatrous and magi∣call immolations of the Heathens, have had much to doe to apologize for the Christians, against all those false calumnies wherewith they impudently burdened them. In simulating the Christians to be given to chuse wickednesse, which they them∣selves were guilty of: and to be the cause of those judgements which their own impieties had provoked. Iulian, and Maxi∣minus were not onely satisfied to have them thus defamed, and slandered, but took occasion to determine their persecution, and extermination. During the Popedome of Benedict the third, in the City of Mentz a Daemoniacall Familiar that lay lurking under a Sacrificulists Pall, as he was sprinkling of holy water, accu∣sed him publiquely, that he had that night layn with his Proctors wife. A certain Praetor or Judge, having sentenced divers malefactors to death, at the accusation of an Ariolist or Pythian vaticina∣tor: at length he took upon him to tell him of one more, if he would not take it ill: the Judge earnest to know who it was, he insimulated his own wife, and prefixt an houre wherein he would shew him her in the convent of other Witches. But he (knowing his own wives integrity, and mistrusting the o∣thers calumny) at the time appointed had invited (unknown to the Ariolist) a many of his kindred and friends to suppe with his wife and him. And as they sate at supper, he took an occasion to rise, and goe with the Ariolist to the place, where he shewed him (in a spectrous apparition) his own wife in the company of other Lamian hagges. Enough to have deluded him, had he not returned, and found his wife at the table where he left her, with the testimony of all those at the table, that she had never stirred thence. Whereupon he caused the Ariolist himselfe to be executed.
31. Of praestigious Magicians and Astrologers, prodigi∣ously practising their arts, for the promotion of their own and others filthy lusts. Nectanebus an Aegyptian King, and great Magician, com∣ing into Macedonia in King Philips time; so practised it, as to make Olympias (Philips wife) to dream, that she should be married to Jupiter Hammon, and should conceive a famous childe by him. And thus it was brought about, Olympias sent for Nectanebus, to learn of him, what should become of her; in as much as it was rumored abroad, that King Philip was minded to forsake her, and to take another: he tels her under hand, that he received a charge from the Oracle, as he came out of Aegypt, to go and help a neglected Queen, whom Jupi∣ter Hammon greatly loved, and intended to embrace. The fol∣lowing night he causes her to dream of such a thing: yea and by his diabolical charm effects the like imagination in Philip, now absent in war. Thus is Olympias earnestly longing after Jupiter; and the next day calls again for Nectanebus, and en∣quires of him, when shall be this much expected time? He bids her to adorn her bed, and make her-self fit to receive so divine a Paramour; but adds, he will come to her in the shape of a Dragon, with a Goats head, and horns. At the hearing of which she greatly terrifyed, he replies, if you be afraid of such a congression, make me a bed hard by, and I will secure you from all affrightment. At night, to bed goes the credulous Queen, royally prepared, as became such an entertainment: and as soon as all was silent, the magical impostor raises a prae∣stigious commotion, and apparition; and goes to bed to the Queen himself: and so begets Alexander the Great; hereup∣on reputed the son of Jupiter Hammon. When Alexander was now grown up, he with his Tutor and Father, Nectanebus, walking abroad in the evening, and standing hard by the steep of a Rock; Alexander hastily turning himself round about, thrust the Magician down the precipice at unawares: where he
was so dashed and sore bruised in the fall, that his death must necessarily follow. Then complaining of Alexanders rash act; Alexander replyed, thou oughtest rather to complain of thine own Art, that busies thee in the searching the things of the Heavens: and lets thee not foresee, what impends thee on earth. Alas (quoth he) what mortal man can avoid his own fate? I foreknew, while I was in Aegypt, that mine own son should be the occasion of mine own death. What am I thy son said Alexander? To whom Nectanebus confesses the whole truth, and dies. A certain Aegyptian burning in lust towards another mans wife, consults with a Magician, or Sorcerer, how he might obtain his desire? He answered, nothing hindred, but the mu∣tual love that was between the husband, and the wife, where∣upon he hired the impostor to stir up a dislike betwixt them; which he laboured after this praestigious manner, making the woman appear to the man, as if he had a shagg'd Mare in his bed. A paganish young man in Gaza, extreamly loved a Virgin that was a Christian; and when all his dalliance availed not to his end, he went to Memphis, thinking to bring it about by Magical Art. Where after a yeers attendance, he was instru∣cted by Aesculapius his vaticinators, to put a certain plate of brasse, with a portentous figure, under the threshold where the maid dwelt; and to recite certain torments, or charmes of words over it. Whereupon the Virgin grew mad in love with him; and did nothing but call for the young man, nightand day. But her parents had her to Hillarion, who presently (by his wisdom and piety) dispossessed her of that magical and constellational fury. Turbula a Martyr in Persia, being falsly accused and condem∣ned by the Magicians: one of them fell greatly enamoured with her excellent beauty; would have corrupted her, with promise of safety to her and her followers, and other great re∣wards; but all would not prevail. Ʋter Pendragon coming into Gornwall, cast his eyes upon fair Igrene, wife to the Duke of that Province; whom he very im∣portunately solicits, but all to little purpose; the constant wife (that so dearly loved her Lord) would by no means be won to
do him that dishonour. Merlin therefore is consulted, who to bring her to his bow; scorns to use any petty magical Phil∣ters; but he new moulds the shape of the King, and prints up∣on his face, the very feature of Gonlois her own Lord: by which means he soon violated this Ladies chastity, in the bed of praestigious delusion. A Magical Monk in Spain, or some Fryer Praedicant, was fa∣miliar with a Nobleman, that had a fair wife. He tempts her chastity, and is repulsed; upon his unsatisfied importunity, she acquaints her husband: it is consented to admit him again, and watched to entrap him. At the time appointed, he comes in a secular habit and equipage; she is resolute still and refusing: but the night gave boldnesse to the attempt, and now what he cannot perswade, he seeks to enforce. She resists it, and cries out, to give the watchword to her husband, and those that lay in wait; but all in vain; for he by his effascinating Art, had charmed them all into a dead sleep. As they strugled toge∣ther, she spyed a dagger at his back, and therewithal stabbed him to the death. And running into the room, where her husband and the rest were, she found them so fast asleep, that all she could do, could not awake them, now having none in her family either to hear, or help her; she suspected some ma∣lefice, and went stoutly and cast the dead carcase into the street. Where passers by lighting upon it, the businesse is brought be∣fore the Corrigidor, and the dead party is discerned. The next day the Prior of the Covent is desired to summon all his fel∣lows together; who all came, onely this party is absent: they then knock at his chamber door, but no body makes answer; at last they break open the door, and there they espie a Torch in the Chimney burning very dimly. Now neither the husband nor any of the family could be awaked till that Torch was extinct. A certain souldier that by Magical Philters had sought to procure the love of such a woman; one night imagined that he enjoyed her in his dream: but he awaking, found himself cast into a filthy myry ditch, and there embracing in his arms a carcase or carrion of a dead beast. In Misnia a young man using the Art, or means of a Magi∣cian, to enjoy her whom he loved; was brought into a by∣room,
& by malefical incantations there was brought in to him the spectrene apparition of her whom he loved: the besotted youth taking it for real, put forth his hand to embrace her; at which his brains were violently dasht out against the walls; the carcase so beaten upon the Magician, that he himself lay half dead a long time after. The Oracles themselves ordained scenical and Floralian en∣terludes. The Magical Philosophers had their notorious Har∣lots: and professed not onely a necessity, but a lawfulnesse of having them. The Persians and Chaldeans were burning mad upon their own sisters, daughters, mothers. Both their Ma∣gical Religion, and Laws, were for wrong and lusts. Romulus, (whose birth, life and death was praestigious) is thought to be begot upon a Vestal by Mars, by Amulius her Uncle, by the Genius of the place, by a divining Priest, by a common souldier. The things to be chiefly noted in him are the Magical lusts of his birth, wrongs of his life, and judge∣ments of his death. Simon Magus had his Helena: and (take Helena's for Har∣lots) so had Nicolaus of Antioch; so had Marcus; so had Marcion: so had Apelles; so had Montanus; so had Priscillian. All Hereticks; most or all Mag-astro-mancers. And it is a question whether they made more use of their women in their Magick, their heresies, or their lusts. Gallirrhoe a noble Virgin, and already betrothed to an husband, bathing in the River: and according to a Magical instance, with odes and incantations, imploring Scamander to take her maiden-head: Simon the Athenian, praestigiously faigning himself to be Scamander, did vitiate her by that means. Echerates the Thessalian, coming to consult Apollo at Delphos, and there seeing Pythia a Virgin of exceeding beauty, violently ravished her, upon which it was decreed, that no Virgin, or young woman should after that be set over the Oracle: but some old Crone of fifty at least, yet in a virgins habit. Aristocrates King of the Messenians, in as much as he could not allure the Priestesse of Diana Hymnia to his lusts, and to avoid his importunity, flying to the Altar, he forceably ravished her there. For which he was stoned by the Arcadi∣ans:
and the Priesthood was afterwards transferred from a Vir∣gin to a marryed wife. Decius Mundus, a young man of dignity and wealth, falling desperately in love with Paulina, the faire, and yet chaste wife of Saturninus; offered her twenty Myriades, or two hundred thousand Attick Drachmes, for one nights lodging: which she refusing, he resolved to pine himself to death; which Ida (his fathers hand maid infranchised) per∣ceiving, chears him up, bids him be of good hope, pro∣mising him for five Myriades, to bring it so about, as that he shall obtain his desire. And knowing the vertu∣ous woman to be much devoted to Isis, she goes to some of the Priests of the Temple, and giving them two Myriads and an half, and promising as much more, adjures their si∣lence, and requires their assistance. The chief of the Priests promises to convert Paulina; and feigns a Message to her from Anubis out of Aegypt, as touching his love to her, and how he commanded that she should present her self before him. She willingly imbraces the motion, and boasts to her friends the love of Anubis towards her. Her husband also is acquainted with the solemn invitation, and consents to it, being confi∣dent of his wives chastity. To the Temple she comes, gal∣lantly adorned, and after supper the Priest shuts her up: and the lights withdrawn, and Mundus lurking in a corner, comes to her instead of the God, and lies with her all night, and de∣parts early in the morning. Though she returning home, glories greatly among her friends of her congresse with the God, to the wonder of them all. But about three dayes after, Mundus meeting her by chance, thus greets her: O well dear Paulina! thou hast saved me twenty Myriades, nd nevertheless hast satisfied my desire: neither was it little contentful to me, that I obtained it under the name of Anubis; and having sosaid, away he went. At which hearing, the deluded matron tears her garments, and tells the praestigious and flagitious delusion to her husband, intreating him not to neglect her dishonour, so as to suffer it to go unpunished. Whereupon he relates the businesse to Tiberius; who after due examination, causes Idae and the sacrificing impostors to be executed, banishes Mundus, pulls down the Temple, and casts the Statue of Isis into Tyber.
A Priest of Saturn, by name Tyrannus, would by his respon∣sals invite the noblest men and women to worship; and if the women were pleasing to him for his lust, he would tell the husband, that Saturn commanded his wife should stay there with him all that night. Then would he in their sight shut the doors, and deliver the keyes to another, and depart. But at night would secretly creep by a subterranean passage into Saturns hollow Image: and thence would he talke to the superstitiously deluded creature of those things that might the more excite her reverence, and provoke his own concupiscence. After that extinguishing the lights by his Art, then would he descend to the amazed soul, and mixe sacrilegious adultery with his profane commentations. Thus had he long and often illuded a many of them. But it so fell out, that a Matron, more wise and chast then the rest, abhorring the act, discerned Tyrannus by his voice; complained hereof to her husband: And the beastly fraud being detected, him they tormented, and the Temple and Image they demolished. 32 Of the base sordid flattery, and corrupt covetousness of Magical and Astrological Diviners; as also of Chy∣mical promisers, and presuming deluders. WHat provoked the mad Prophet Balaam the son of Bo∣sor to seek after inchantments and divination; but be∣cause he loved the wages of unrighteousnesse? 2 Pet. 2.15. Why would Simon Magus have given mony for the gift of the Holy Ghost: but because he intended to get more mony by it, Act 8. The vagabond Jews exorcists of war for their advan∣tage that they set up the trade of calling over them that had e∣vil spirits, Act. 19. And the Damsel possessed with a spirit of divi∣nation, brought her masters (who but the Magical and A∣strological diviners?) much gain by prophecying, Act. 13.16. Dardanus a most profligated Magician, was so sordidly ad∣dicted to covetousness; tha the Dardanian Arts grew into a
proverbial usage indifferently, either for Magick or covetousness Thetis, some say Democritus, foreseeing first a plenty, then a dearth of Olives; monopolized all the oyle that his mony or credit could reach too: and so in a yeer or two made him∣self very rich. Apuleius is faigned to be turned into an Asse: into an Asse for the vanity; and why not into a golden Asse, for the covet∣ousnesse of his Art? Demonax noting a certain Diviner to expose his progno∣sticks to sale, said; if these can help a man to procure his good, or prevent his evil fortune, they may be worth the mo∣ny: otherwise they are too dear of nought, if they either feed a man with vain hopes; or make a man to purchase a sense of his misery before the time. Apollonius (so covetous he was) that he often sought for Mines and hidden treasures, but he never found out any by his con∣juring Art; unlesse he milkt it out of deluded people spurses. The fame goes of Faustus, and of Agrippa likewise, that as they made their journeys from place to place, they would still pay mony in their Inns, seemingly good and currant: but by that they were gone from thence, if they told their money again, they should finde nothing else but hornes and chips, and shells, and pieces of iron and brasse, and such like rusty rubbish. Pope Martin the 2. Benedict the 9. John the 21. and the 22. Sylvester the 2. and Gregory the 7. All these are recorded by sundry Historians, to have ascended the Papal chair, by Magical and Necromantick Arts. And it is of equal observation, that their covetousnesse, as well as their ambition, did induce them thereunto. Certain of the Indians, look what wares they had lost by shipwrack, they sought to recover them from the sea again, by incantations. Stuphius used to pay his Army with Magical money. Agrippa offered Charles the fifth to gain him infinite treasures by Magical means. Macrianus an hungry Greek would needs go conjure for treasure in the Isle Paros, and the earth swallowed him up. A Prior, with two of his fellowes entring into a den neer Pu∣teoli, to finde treasure, miserably perisht there, and was never
seen more. A poor artificer of Basil, diving into another low vault, for the same purpose, found nothing but dead mens bones, and was so poysoned with the stench, that he dyed within two or three dayes after. At Pisa some tried in like manner, but were so infested with devils, that they were forced to give over the work. In the west of Wales a certain rich man dreamed three nights together, that there was a chain of gold hidden under the head Stone, which covered St Ber∣naces well: he believing his repeated dream, and minding to make tryal, put his hand into the hole, and had it most venom∣ously bitten by a poysonous serpent. A certain professor of Chymistry (which is a kinde of prae∣stigious, covetous, cheating Magick) would shew hands and feet of gold, which he pretended to have composed by his art; and so had made himself rich, and many others poor. At length he offered a golden bridle bit to Anastasius the Empe∣rour; who answered him, thou hast deceived many, but thou shalt not deceive me; and so cast him into prison, and there he dyed. Two Chymists had agreed upon a cheat, that one of them should turn druggist, and sell strange roots and powders: the other to follow still his gold-finding trade: and so he offered his service to Ernest Marquesse of Baden, who was wonderful given to that vanity: To work they go and all things proceed well, onely one ingredient was wanting, which is called Resch, pretending it a cheap commodity, and to be had at every Apo∣thecaries shop. The Prince sends his Page for some of it, and his other partner was hard by the door exposing it to sale, and lets him have a great deal of it for a matter of a shilling; and the impostor puts in this dust among the rest, and at length produces pretty store of gold. The Marquesse wonderful glad of the effect, richly rewards the man, forbringing the art to that perfection; and so dismisses him, minding to practice it by himself: which he doth with some happy successe, as long as the Resch lasted (which was a counterfeit powder mixt with the filings of gold) this being spent, he sends to the Apothe∣caries for more, and none of them could tell that ever they had seen or heard of such a commodity. And then the Prince perceived the imposture, when neither it, nor
either of the inventers of it, were any where to be found. A certain Spanish pretending Alchymist comming to Antwerp, set up his furnace, and got acquainted with foure rich Spa∣nish Merchants. He fell to inveigh against their slow trading and slender return; advising them to joyn with him, and be∣come compartners in his Art (the truth whereof he would soon demonstrate to their senses) and so they should be rich in a short time, and without any great adventure. Give him but such a little summe of gold, and they should quickly see how his Gold-begetting art would multiply it. The Merchants are content to venture so much for the experiment▪ As all was working, he hastily bids send of the Merchants men for two royals worth of the stone Onastros, to be had at any Apo∣thecaries shop; as he was going, he pretends there must be no delay, and therefore bids goe to the next Apothecary (with whom he had left a massie piece of gold, crusted over, and coloured as if it had been a stone: and left order that who∣soever came to aske for Onastros, they should have that, and at a very low rate. This being brought he plyes the furnace, ac∣cording to all circumstances, and at length drawes out a wedge of Gold, in weight and value triple to that they had put in. The Merchants send it to the Goldsmiths, and it really abides and answers the touch. At this there is exceeding rejoycing; and they are sworn not to reveale his secret experiment to any. And now they offer to trust him and his art with hundreds, nay and thousands. To which he seemed more modest then at the first. But in an evening cals upon them for the largest summes they had offered to venture, pretending to begin the like expe∣riment very early the next morning: which having got into his hands, he took horse that night, and so rode away into France. One Constantine a famous Alchymist told this story of some of his fellows; that they greedy of Gold, blew long without either livelihood or hope of it; and then consulted with a paredriall of theirs, the divell, to let them understand, if they were defective in any rite or ceremony requisite to the Art, that they mist so of their expected end. To this the Divell made no other answer but Labour, labour. Whereupon they fell to work a fresh, and plyed every thing hard, till all was consu∣med
away: then came the divel thundering and scattered a∣broad all that was left, and made all their geare to fly a pieces, and laught at it when he had done. Besides Dardanians, such as by magicall and maleficall arts, would transfer others stocks into their own fields; and others heaps of Corn into their own barnes and garners: they were also called Saccularians; because by the same art, they would charm and convey the money out of others purses into their owne. Cicero records that Demosthenes (almost 300 yeeres before him) complained that the Pythian Oracle did , flat∣ter Philip then in power, and prognosticated altogether on his part; and was to that purpose corrupted by him. And addes that the like was to be suspected of the Delphian Oracle of his daies. Apollo flattered Lycurgus for giving Laws; and knew not therefore whether he should stile him a God, or a man. And Lycurgus flattered him again; pretending his Laws to pro∣ceed from his divining Oracles: although some of them were such, that old wives and slaves might easily have both pre∣dicted and edicted. Archilochus, a viperine Satyrist; and not onely so, but a pe∣tulant obscure Poet (for which the Lacedaemonians supprest his bookes, and banisht the Author) yet was he therefore highly commended by Apollo, who foretold his father that such his sonne should be famous among men. And when he was slaine, the Delphian Oracle not onely condemned their wickednesse, but commended still Archilochus his wit. Cypselus and Phalaris, two egregious tyrants, yet both praised by Apollo's Oracle; and the one pronounced for happy, and the other for long liv'd. Vespasian having obtained the Empire, none more flattered by Sostrates, Seleucus, Basilides, and other Mathematicall divi∣ners; but makes him believe he sees his advancement and victories in the entrayles. Others by vaticinating instinct cause certaine antique vessels to be digged up in sacred places, wherein they found (they say) the image of Vespasian perfectly engraven. Another whatsoever he shall enterprise promises him the largest successe.
Alexander being ambitious to be thought of divine origi∣nall, and solicitous to redeem the imputation of his mothers infamy, sent before, and suborned the divining Priests with faire promises and large gifts: who thereupon made the Ora∣cle to give answer even as he would himselfe; which upon his first entrance into the Temple, saluted him as the sonne of Iu∣piter Hammon. The Locrians (fewer in number) being to warre with the Crotonians, implored the Gods by sacrifice for successe: which the Crotonians hearing, sent presently to consult Apollo at Del∣phos, and received this answer; that enemies must be over∣come first by vows, and then by arms. Whereupon they vowed the tenth part of the spoyle to Apollo. The Locrians understan∣ding both the answer, and their vow; vowed the ninth part, and kept it secret, lest their enemies should outvie them, and so ob∣tained the victory. In the Milesian region, one having bought the next draught of the Fishermen; they drew up (among other things) a golden Table. Great was the controversie whose this should be. Del∣phick Apollo was consulted to decide it: who answered, it ought to be given to him, that was wiser then all the rest. Whereupon they gave it to Thales their own Country wiseman, or Astrolo∣ger, and he to Bias; and he to Pittacus; and so one to another, till at last it came to Solon; & he gave it to Apollo himself. And thus was it shuffled up betwixt the Astrologers, and the Oraculists. Strepsiades consulted a Thessalian Veneficke about pulling down the Moon from Heaven by magicall ends. For at Athens they were wont to pay use, rent, taxes, &c. upon the first appearing of the new Moon. Now if there were no Moon at all to appeare, he thought this the onely way to prevent and defeat the creditors. Macarius the Mitylenian a Priest of Bacchus, bearing before him a face of justice and equity; one committed to his trust a certain sum of money; which in his presence he hid in a more safe and secret place of the Temple. Afterwards the man calling upon him to restore what was deposited, he called him into the Temple, and there cut his throat. Belesis a Babylonian Priest, skilfull in Astrology and the art of divining; had foretold to Arbaces the Mede, that he should
eject Sardanapalus out of the Assyrian Kingdome. Which so falling out, Arbaces made Belesis Governour of Babylon. Now an Eunuch of Sardanapalus finding great store of treasure in his house, brought it to Belesis; who under a colour of carry∣ing ashes, transported it away, it being the Kings due. Which fact of his the Judges sentenced for capitall, but that it was the Kings pleasure to pardon him. The Romanes having spent much treasure in the Macedonian warre; and their people greatly exhausted: It was thought necessary that so much should be exacted of the pontificall Augures, Aruspicks, Diviners, &c. as might help to supply the present necessity (for though they had praedicted faire for it, yet had they themselves hitherto payd nothing to the warre) This taxe made the predicting Priests so murmur, and exclaime at the breach of their priviledges, for that they could have wisht they had not been so forward in predicting and auspica∣ting as they were. 33. Of the infamy, danger, misery, and ruine of such as have affectedly favoured, or preferred, and superstiti∣ously credited, or consulted Magicall and Astrologicall predictors. OCtavius perswaded by certaine Chaldaean sacrifices, or praedicting Soothsayers, who had promised him that all should goe well with him, stayd in Rome, till he was there slain by Marcus his Souldiers, that had entred the City. And after he was dead a Chaldean prophesie was found in his bosome. This man (saith the Historian) was as wise and just as any Ro∣man of his time: save that he had this great imperfection, to frequent Soothsayers, wise men, and Astronomers, more then men skilfull in arms and government. Midas was so superstitiously troubled and distracted about his own dreams, that he poysoned himselfe by drinking of Buls blood. Aristodemus King of the Messenians, in his warre against the Lacedaemonians, was so disturbed at the dogs barking like wolves, and that the grasse grew in his fathers house, or
about his houshold Gods (which the diviners feared for omi∣nous) that he desperately made himselfe away. Nicias the Athenian Captain was so exceeding fearful of the portent of an ecclipse, that he sate still and suffered himselfe to be environed by his enemies: and so betrayed both himselfe and 40000. souldiers to destruction. Pomeralius (by his predictions) was the cause of a great slaughter to Constantine the sonne of Irene: and of his own death to boot. Stethatus (accounted the chiefe Astrologer of his time) by a foolish vaticination, brought destruction both to Alexius and himselfe. Emanuel Connuenus the Emperour, much addicted to this madnesse, timely (besides the perpetuall infamy) brought himselfe, and a great Navy to utter confusion. Peter Leonius, a Physician, by his vaine confidence of the Mathe∣maticks, gave occasion to the death of Laurence de Medices, and his own after that. Andronicus having made somewhat too severe an edict, not onely against Conjurers, and Necromancers, but against all their relations: to redeem the hatred of such severity, he began to encourage, and consult them himselfe. And enquiring about his Successor, the magicall diviner used his feats in water; and there was seen written backward (Si for Is.) the two first letters of his successors name. Noting Isacius, that slew him and raigned in his stead Didius Iulianus making the like in∣quisition by a glasse, a child looking in it, observed Iulians slaughter, and the succession of Severus. So was Iulian the Apo∣state deluded by his diviners to his utter destruction. Otho Sylvius was led on by his predicting Astrologers, to usurpation, and riot, and to kill himselfe desperately at last. Maxentius was so deluded (by his prognosticators) with assu∣rance of victory, that he went on confidently, but was vanquisht and perished. Licinius called together his Augurs, Aegyptian di∣viners, Necromancers, Veneficks, praestigious sacrificers, and pseudopresagers, to enquire what should be the successe of the warre against Constantine. They all at once predicted victory without doubt. The inchanters made odes, and rimes; the Augures presignified happy successe, by the flight of birds: so did the Aruspicall sacrificulists from the intrayles: and thus they made him confident to his vanquishment, flight, and ex∣tream confusion.
Italicus a Christian Governour, having an accustomed hors∣race with an aemulating neighbour a Pagan; comes to Hila∣rion entreating his prayers: because his Aemulator had used sorcerous imprecations, whereby to disable his horses, and stir up his own. Hilarion judging such an occasion not worthy of his prayers, counselled him to sell his horses which he kept for that purpose, and to distribute the money to the poore. He answered it was a publique custome, and the other would not suffer it to be laid down; and that in such their masteries, they used insolently to domineere over the Christians. He therefore being much importuned both by him and others, condescended (whether in merriment, or to be rid of the importunity) to give him a cup in which he used to drink in, and bad him fill it with water, and sprinkle his horses therewith, and so dismist him. This he did accordingly, and wanne the goale, against all expectation. Whereupon Hilarion, who thus intended to deride rather then to imitate any Magicall artifice) was simu∣lated for a Witch or Wizard, by the Paganish party, and requi∣red to penalty. Elianor Dutchesse of Glocester consulted so long with Astro∣logers, Wizzards, and Witches, till she came to be convented for one her selfe at last: and after that lived and died mise∣rably. In a town within the territories of Brunswick, they had hired a pyed Piper to conjure away all the Rats and Mice that much infested him. This he did by his piping and charming; but not being satisfied according to his expectation, he piped or charmed again; and there followed him an 130 children of that place, all whom he led unto the side of an hill, and conju∣red them every one into a gaping cleft thereof; so that he and they were swallowed up, and never seen after. A Captaine consulting with a Wizard about the next daies battle, he answered, the day should be his, upon condition he would not spare to kill the first man he met in the morning. Which he performed accordingly, and got the victory. Then returning home joyfully, found to his griefe, that he had killed his own wife, who out of her great love had come to him dis∣guised in mans apparell, thereby to take part with him in that daies adventure.
Valerian addicted to anthropomancy, or predicting by in∣trailes of men, women, children; was unfortunate in his go∣vernment, taken prisoner by Sapor King of Persia, who used him for a stirrop to get on horseback on, and afterwards caused him to be flayed alive. Another that had lost a silver spoon, would needs goe to a magicall wiseman, to finde out the thiefe; and it was agreed betwixt them, that (for better discovery) he who had conveyed it away should lose one of his eyes, and when he came home, he found that sad marke inflicted on a little child of his own, that had carelesly cast the spoon aside. Cecrops having newly builded Athens, two prodigies presently appeared in the place; an Olive tree sprung up suddenly, & water strangely gushed forth Upon these Delphick Apollo is consulted: who answered, that the Olive signified Minerva, and the water Neptune; and that it was in the choyce of the Citizens to give the name of their City to whether of these they would. The Ci∣tizens of both sexes are convented; the men are for Neptune, and the women for Minerva: and the female sex being more numerous by one, prevailed in the suffrage. But Neptune indig∣ning the rejection, did so depopulate them with waves and flouds, that they were fain to punish their women for their suf∣frage against him. Alcamenes and Theopompus being Kings of the Lacedaemoni∣ans, there was an Oraculous prophecy, that Sparta should be lost through lucre. Lycurgus calling this to mind, rejected all riches; and the people were brought truly into such a super∣stitious feare, that whereas before they thought them the onely benefactors, they now condemned them to death, that first brought money in amongst them. In the City of Come in Italy, the Officiall and Inquistor ha∣ving a great number of Witches and Wizzards in prison: taking others with them, would needs urge them to shew them their homages to the divell: but were so beaten by them, that some of them died within fifteen daies: others renounced God here∣upon and vowed themselves to the divels service. Eucrates beholding Pancrates, an Aegyptian magician doe many wonderfull feats, insinuated himselfe into his friend∣ship, and communicated all his secrets to him. The Magician
at length perswaded him to leave all his family at Memphis, and to follow him alone: and after they came into their Inne, he took a bat, a bar, or a broom, and wrapt it with clouts, and by his charms made it walke, and appeare like a man, and made it minister unto them in sundry services, as drawing water, &c. then with another charm would be turn it into a pestel, bolt, bar, or besome again. Now one day when Pancrates was gone abroad into the market, Eucrates would needs imitate his fami∣liar, and drest the bar or pestel, muttered the syllables, and commanded it to draw water; and after it had done sufficiently, commanded it to turn into a pestell or bar again. But it would not obey, but still drew water, till he was afraid of drowning; then he took a saw and sawed the bar in two; and then both parts began to fetch and poure water in abundance; till in comes Pancrates, and turned it into what it was at first, and so left his fellow, and was never seen after of him. Iohn Faustus light among a sort of his companions, who when they were halfe drunk, importuned him to play some of his pranks; and the feat must be a Vine full of Grapes, as the greater novelty now in the Winter season. Faustus consented to satisfie their curiosity, upon this condition, that they should keep silence, and not stirre out of their places, nor offer to pluck a Grape till he bad, otherwise they might pluck their own perill. The praestigious sight is presented, and every one had his knife drawn and hold of a branch, but not to cut till he spake the word. But having held them a while in suspence, all suddenly vanished, and every man appeared to have hold onely of his own nose, and ready to have cut it off, if the word had been once given. 34. Of an evill Art, worst to the Artists: or the just pu∣nishment; and dreadfull judgements befalling praestigi∣ous Magicians, and fatidicall Astrologers. THraseas the Augur, telling Busyris, the Aegyptian Tyrant, that (in a time of excessive drought) there was no other
way to procure raine, but by sacrificing some stranger to Iupiter: the King thereupon enquiring what countreyman he was, and finding him to be a stranger, sacrificed him the first. And per∣sisting in this inhumane way, Hercules (comming into Aegypt) slew both the tyrant, his sonne, and all the Ariolists, at their owne Altars. Certaine Hetrurian Soothsayers gave envious, perfidious, and unprosperous divinations, and directions to the Romans, about a statue that was stricken with thunder and lightning: for which they were slain by the people; and that gave occasion to the boys, to sing this proverbe in the streets, Ill counsell is al∣waies worst to the Counsellor. A certaine Germane warfaring in Italy, chose to him a soul∣dier that was a Conjurer to be his mate, to shew him his skill, the circle is made, the imprecation uttered, the spirit hide∣ously appears, is asked about the successe at Gouletta, confesses his ignorance, and takes time to resolve; disappeares and leaves such a terrour and stink behind, that they had like to have been poysoned with the noysomenesse, and died for feare. Examples of the Magastromancers fatall miseries, and unfor∣tunate ends, are too many to be instanc't in at large. Zoroaster the first father of them, was vanquisht by Ninus, who burnt his books; some say that he himselfe was burnt by the divell, as he was provoking him by his magicall experiments. Simon Magus as he would needs goe fly in the ayre, had his magicall wings so clipt, that he fell down and broke his neck. Cynops, as he went about to raise the dead out of the sea, was himselfe swallowed up of the waves, and died. Zarces and Arphaxat, both burnt by lightning. Chalchas died for envy. Tullus Ho∣stilius provoking to thunder, was himselfe stricken to death therewith. Nectanebus killed by his own sonne. Ascletarion ea∣ten up of dogs, as he went to execution. Onomacritus expelled Athens by Hipparchus. Messinius put to the sword by Valentini∣an. Sempronius Rufus banished by Severus. Heliogabalus, an thropomantist, slain and cast into a Jakes. Nigidius Figulus died in exile. Apoleius accused and condemned before Claudius Maximus proconful of Africa. Amphiaraus swallowed up of the earth. Romulus rapt up in a black stormy thundring cloud. Aristaeus snatcht away by an evill spirit. Zito fetcht away quick by the divel. A Count of Matscon, as he was making merry
with his friends, there came, one to the doore with a horse, and made him come forth and get up, and so carried him up into the ayre invisibly, and he audibly crying out as he was carried up and down. Another was seized on by the divell, while he was presenting the praestigious pageantry of Hector and Achil∣les. Another, the divel came into his closet, and left him there dead sitting in a chaire with his heart in his hand. Pope Bene∣dict the ninth, strangled by the divel in a wood. Iohn Faustus (the divell entring his chamber with a terrible commotion) was found dragd out of his bed, and his face wrung quite be∣hind him. Bladad (who not onely practised magicall arts, but taught them to the Britaines) in confirmation hereof, would needs goe fly, but fell headlong, and was dasht in pieces against the Temple of Apollo, in Troynovant. Odo Bishop of Baia perished in prison. Galeaceus caused a bold peremptory Astro∣loger to be hanged up. Charles the seventh of France hang'd Aegidius the Marshall, for his magicall exploits. Simon the blind exorcist slain by his own wife possessed with a divell. Stuphius taken by Radulph of Habspurge and burnt. Methotin slain by the people, and his body stak't. Reatius killed by one whom he had deluded. Hollerus slaine by his own aemulators. Oddo drowned, for all that he often sailed without a ship. Eri∣cus driven to hang himselfe. Oluph desperately drowning him∣selfe. Diodorus, after all his prestigious evasions, at length caught and burnt. Iunctin an Italian, prognosticating of him∣selfe (as Astrologers rarely can be drawn to doe) on the day he feared to be most dismall, was knockt on the head by his books in his own study. Peter of Pomfret executed for an im∣posterous traytor. A Priest of Norimberge would needs goe conjure for treasure, and digging found a hollow cave, and therein spyed a chest, and a black dogge lying by it; which he was no sooner entred, but the cave shut its mouth upon him, and there he perished. At Saltsburg a charmer undertook to enchant all the Serpents within a miles space; which while he was effecting, a great old serpent among the rest leapt upon him, wrapt his taile about him, and so drew him into the ditch, and there he was drowned. Gobrias that assisted Darius in freeing Persia from the Magi∣cians cruell tyranny and execrable treachery: a base massie Magician hard and close prest upon him; so that one of his
fellows, durst not smite the villaine, for feare of wounding his friend that had buckled with him. But he bad not spare to use his sword, though it were to the hazzard of himselfe; which he rather chose to suffer, then that such a miscreant should escape unavenged. Alexander a pseudomantist as Lucian was preparing an accu∣sation against him, rotted lothsomely, and so died miserably eaten up of worms. Manes, that magicall heretick, or hereticall magician, was in such favour with the King of Persia, that he wrote all his portents for true miacles, and his madnesse for divine fury. His sonne falling sick, he committed him to Manes his art for his cure. Who confidently undertook it, but faignedly perfor∣med it: and therefore perceiving him to be worse and worse, he fled into Mesopotamia. Whence the King caused him to be fetcht back, and flead off his skin alive, and filled it with chaffe, and gave his carcase to the dogs. At the taking of Constantinople, the Greeks superstitiously bewitched with a prophecy, that a mighty enemy should be possessed of the greatest part of the City; but should be defea∣ted in the market-place, called the Brazen Bull; were both carelesse and dastardly in suffering the Turkes to make brea∣ches upon the walls, enter the City, and arrive at the very place: where they were cruelly slain themselves. Bellantius the great Astrologer, which is said to have given warning to Savanorola, to beware of burning: was neither able to foretell, nor to prevent his own great perill, in so plain a manner by the Stars, but that he was most beastly murdered. 35. Of the reformation of Magick and Astrology, as well in Pagan States, as Christian Churches: with a Caveat (in conclusion) to English-men, for to beware of Astro∣logicall Magicians, or Magicall Astrologers; as to re∣deem the old scandall, and prevent the new calumny, of their superstitious addiction to Soothsaying Prophecies and predictions. NInus vanquished Zoroaster, and in a contempt to his Ma∣gick and Astrology, caused his books to be burnt. Numa,
Pompilius, and Dardanus would needs hae their Magical books to be buried with them. This might be their diabolicall envy, or rather the divels own policy, to have them thought, and sought as things prizeable; but it was indeed Gods providence to have them abolished as things detestable. Hermogenes his books were burned by St. Iames the Apostle. The Emperours Honorius and Theodosius ordained that such kind of books should be burned in the sight of the Bishops. Athanasius speaks of whole volumes that were burnt, even by the consent of the Arts greatest admirers. Iodocus de Rosa his conjuring books were burnt by a common Councell. Belike such a consumption hath alwaies been thought and found to be the best way of reforma∣tion: and most conformable to that great example, Acts 19.19. The Chaldaeans indigning the many oraculous and divining gods that were set up in severall countries; and presuming to reform all to their own god Ʋr, or Fire: they proposed to di∣vers Provinces, that that God which prevailed to confound all the other should be accounted as the only God. To this purpose they carry their Idol Fire in a Censer up and down with them, and commit it to conflict with the other Idols of Gold, Silver, Wood, Stone, &c. and it consumes them all. The fame of the Chaldean Fire devouring all where it came, coming to the eares of the Priest of Canopus (an Aegyptian god, in whose Temple was taught Magick by Aegyptian letters; and not unlike Astro∣logie too, or divining by the Stars, since they have a Star also of that name) this put him upon a crafty device to save the cre∣dit of his god. He took a great earthen water pot full of holes, and stopped them with Wax, and filled it with water, and pain∣ted it over, and set it up instead of his God (or rather this water pot was the belly of Canopus himselfe so fashioned.) In come the Chaldeans, and as the two gods are put to the bickering, the Wax melts, and the water runs out, and so the Fire is quenched: and now is Canopus accounted for the victor. After this comes Theophilus a Christian Priest to contest with him; and he (by the power and providence of God) makes the very creature Fire to consume all, in despight of all magicall force or fraud: and so works the reformation. The Alexandrians not well knowing how to prohibit the Astrologers directly, did it subtilly. They exacted a yeerly tri∣bute not onely of the Astrologers, but of all those that consul∣ted
them. And this exaction they called , the fooles tribute; thinking that either the charge or the shame of it would thus restrain, if not reform it. Augustus gathered up here and there all the fatidicall books he could; and those that were spread abroad under none, or no apt authors, he caused them to be all burnt, to the number of two thousand: and onely retained the Sibylline books, and them too with choice, commanding that even they should not be lookt into by any others but the Quindecemvirs onely. In the too long protraction of the second Punick warre, their religion became so distracted by the turbulencies of the times, that all sexes, ages, and degrees of people turned sacrificers and vaticinators. Complaint hereof was brought to the Senate; and they laid the blame on the inferior Magistrates for not in∣hibiting them. At length the businesse was committed by the Senate to M. Aemilius, the Ʋrbane Praetor, who made proclama∣tion, that whosoever had any books of vaticination, or writ∣ten Orisons or arts of sacrificing, letters, &c. that they should bring them all to him within such a day. And thus he freed them from such confusions as were crept into their religion. As they were plowing in the field of L. Petilius the Scribe, certain books of Numa were there found in a chest of stone. Which Q. Petilius the Ʋrbane Praetor hearing of, sent for them; and reading onely the summe or contents of them, and obser∣ving that they tended to the utter dissolving of religion, told L. Petilius, that he intended to burn them. The Scribe appealed to the Tribunes of the people; they referred it to the Senate: where it was decreed, that the Pretor should keep his vow or resolution; and so they were burned by the victimaries, or sa∣crificers themselves, in the sight of all the people. It being related to the Fathers, by Quintilian a Tribune of the people, concerning a book of the Sybils, which Caninius Gallus a Quindecemvir would have received among the rest of the prophecies; Tiberius hereupon sent letters to the Senate, se∣verely checking at Caninius, who being versed in the ceremo∣nies, would admit of an ode or a charm, whose authour was uncertain; which the masters had not read, nor the Colledge approved: putting the Fathers in mind of Augustus his edict, to carry all such to the Ʋrbane Praetor: and that the Sibylline verses, belonged to the care of the Priests, to discern which were true,
and which false. And that they should especially acquaint the Quindecemvirs therewith, and not transact any thing rashly in a cause of religion. Under Ʋalentinian, one Hilarius a Car-man was brought before Apronius the praefect of the City; because he had com∣mitted his sonne to a venefick, necromancer, or sorcerer, to be brought up or traded in such arts as were interdicted by the laws; and was therefore condemned. Amantius an aruspick was solicited by Hymetius to sacrifice for depraved and maleficall intents: which being proved by papers found in his house, the consulter was banished, and the practitioner condemned. Lollianus a very young magician, being accused, that he had written a book of pernicious arts: for feare that Maximinus would banish him, appealed to Valentinian, who more grie∣vously punished him. Palladius a veneficke, and Heliodorus a genethliacke, or one that interpreted fate by genitures, were therefore accused be∣fore Modestus the praetorian praefect. Palladius impeached Fidu∣stius, Praesidatis, Irenaeus, and Pergamius for their abhominable charms. Fidustius confesses his vaticinating malefice, and joyns with him Hilarius and Patricius. Pergamius accuses many thou∣sands as conscious of the same arts. Hilarius and Patricius con∣fesse the sortilegious fact, with all the circumstances. Wherefore all these, and many other Philosophers are punished with fire and sword; as Pasiphilus, Diogenes, Alypius, Simonides, and others. And last of all, that no mention might be found of these un∣lawfull arts, innumerable books and volumes are all heaped together, and burnt in the Judges sight. Under Manuel Commenus, one Araon was accused, in that there was found in his house the image of a Tortoise, and with in it the picture of a man chained, and pierced through the breast: and that he carried about him the old conjuring book that was called Solomons; which while he read it, legions of di∣vels would appeare, and ask him wherefore he called them, and would quickly execute his commands. Of which being convict∣ed, he had his eyes put out, the usual punishment of those times. Sicidites about the same time was impeached, for casting pre∣stigious mists before mens eyes; and for sending out his devils to terrifie and torment men. The same man sitting by the water
side with some of his companions askt them what they would give him, and he would make the Boatman (that then passed by with a load of earthen vessels) to break all his own wares, with his own Oare? Something they promised him, and he muttered a few words, and it came to passe accordingly. The man being askt after that, why he was so mad as to break his wares? answered, he thought he saw before him an ugly great Serpent ready to devoure him, which still crept neerer to him the more he struck at it, and when all his pots were broken in pieces then it vanished. For this and other ridiculous pernici∣ous tricks, he was served as Araon was, sc. had his eyes put out; an apt punishment for all peepers, and Star-gazers. In vain was all the Pagan reformation of Magick and Astro∣logie. For they put the Artists or practitioner away with one hand, and pull'd them to them with another: witnesse the edicts of Augustus, Tiberius, Nero, Ʋitellius, Domitian, &c. and their own repealing acts, and especially the Senate that banished Martha the Syrian prophetesse: and yet a little after retained and im∣braced Batabacus a predicting diviner. The Historian therefore said wel and truly on both parts. This kind of men, treacherous to Potentates, and delusive to all consulters and confiders, are alwaies inhibited our City, and yet alwaies retained in it. I say no more of Imperiall edicts: nor of those after the Emperours became Christian; nor of provinciall Lawes, nor of municipall Statutes; nor of generall Councels, nor of Ec∣clesiasticall Canons; nor of Fathers sentences, &c. All these are sufficiently collected against them. I onely conclude with an animadversion to our own Countreymen. PLiny (writing of Magick) saith, that in his daies the Art thereof was highly honoured by the Britaines, and the peo∣ple of that Nation so deeply devoted thereunto, and the practi∣ses of it performed with such complements of all ceremonies, that a man would think, the Persians had learned all their ma∣gick skill from them. And in truth our own histories report, that the first Rulers of this Land, were Magicians, Astrologers, Diviners, (such as were Samothes, Magus, Sarron, Druis, Bardus) and that under a colour to teach men the knowledge of the Stars: they brought men to the worship of the Stars. Yea, & that
they thus begat here their sects of Samotheans Magicians, (In so much as the Persians have been thought to have borrowed their word magi from hence.) Sarronides, Druides, Barditaes or Bardi∣ans: and these kinds of sects were propagated amongst us, till the preaching of Fugatius, and Damianus, in the time of King Lucius: and then they began thus to be abolished, and put to flight. What? two Preachers put down so many sects of Magi∣cians? What a shame and misery were it now, if one Society of Artists should set up themselves to pull down so many prea∣chers of the Gospel? Philip de Cominees, speaking of foolish fantasticall prophecies, saith, The Englishmen are never unfur∣nisht of such, from the cabalisticall disposing, and expounding of certain letters. What would he have said, if he had seen his own Frenchman translated amongst us? Again, he saith, The English attribute much to prophecies and vaticinations: and alwaies are weak, when they treat of hard matters, to produce some such kind of thing. Which, for all his reputed sobriety, we cannot but take for a calumny. Who doe unanimously pro∣fesse (against all Merlinicall arrogators, prorogators, deroga∣tors) that we are of the mind of William of Newborough; that sharply inveighed against Geffray ap Arthur, for adventuring to divulge under the name of authentique prophecies, the deceit∣full conjectures, and foredeemings of one Merline a Wizzard; and adding thereunto a great deale of his own. And doe herein approve of the Councell of Trent, for inhibiting the publication of Merlines books. Although we take them to be (as some of their own said of them) like the Astrologers, who to save their Phaenomena, fram'd to their conceit, Eccentretes, and Epicydes, and a wonderfull engine of orbs, though no such things were, &c. We also doe commend the many wholsome Laws, impe∣riall and municipall, among Christians and Heathens, that have been justly enacted against them. And doe advise them not to make slight of the Ecclesiasticall penances; however not to neg∣lect true repentance. Otherwise we could wish that our owne Statute-laws were but duly executed upon the severall kinds of them. And then should we have the Magastromancers posed and puzzel'd indeed, that is, not onely confuted, but confoun∣ded. Faeliciter, Cum Deo, conclusum est contra Mag-astrologos. Amen.
CHAP. XVIII. 18. From the fatuity of Fate. 1. WHether the very word, tearm, or name of Fate and For∣tune, be not of Paganish origination; and withall, of superstitious derivation and acception? As Fate or fa∣tation, from praefation or fore-speaking. And (I pray) whose speaking? not Gods, but the starres; nay not the starres, but the constellated Oracles: For these were the first Faticanes, and their hills, or cells, the first Vaticanes that ere were heard of. Although I rejoyce not much in etimologizing, neither do account an argument from the Notation to be very strong, especially in names of humane imposi∣tion: Yet something may (not amisse) be affirmed or denyed, from the notation of the name (though it be not so exquisite, but allu∣sive only) keeping the principall letters, and comming neer to the nature of the thing. Let them therefore give me leave a little to play upon the word: and if they will undertake to doe otherwise; let others judge if they be not more ridiculous. Fatum à fando; vates, quasi fates, à fando, vel à , Fatuus à fando. Fate, and Fatories, and Fatiloquists, and Fooles, all taken from talking they know not what; , and , why any of ; and not all rather of ? in as much as fatidicall men, and Fooles, both fore-speak many things, but fore-see nothing, , vel , vel , vel ; of making furious and phantasticall both connexions and Predictions; vel quasi , supposing the hand or power of the Moon, or coelestiall bodyes, to be therein; vel , sive , doubting whether the coelestialls doe signifie or presage any such thing, yea or no; vel ; whether moneths, or dayes, or years, doe indeed distribute such things as they prognosticate; vel , whether there be any such part or lot indeed; vel , whether there be any such thing as Fate in destiny remaining; vel quasi , a thing not coherent congruous, convenient, necessary. But why not of , rather than of all the rest? save that there is nothing in
this their fatall Destinie, to be loved or desired. Sic , quare non à , aeque ac à ? Take them one as well as another, and then they note all together, that Fate may as easily be occurred, and prevented, as that it must necessarily have its fact or finishing. And that it may as well be passed by, as passe upon. Sic , à , happening any way; vel a , because of every ones own fabricating or ma∣king; vel quasi ; as a thing (at best) but in a mans vowes, wishes, or desires, rather than in any reallity. Sic Fortuna quasi vortuna, à vertendo, of turning every way. Vel quasi forte una; peradventure something, peradventure nothing. But to cease from descanting upon names, the very nature of both these hath al∣waies caused the learned to call them the ; the most vain and foolish things of themselves, that a man could either fear or confide in. 2. Whether Fate or Fortune ought once to be named among Christians? And how many eminent Saints of Gods Church have retracted, and repented that ever they have so done? And how ma∣many of them have, and do daily warn men to be wary, how they rake the heathenish termes out of their ashes, and translate them into the Church of Christ? Not that they are litigious about termes, or scrupulous of titles: But because the word of God hath not a word, nor a syllable, nor a sound, nor a signification of either of them; if it be rightly translated or understood. And because nei∣ther of them can be of any edification to the Church of God: but the use of them is a prophanation both of his Word and Church. 3. Whether there be any such thing as Fate in nature, or in the world? And whether they that determine for it, doe aptly distin∣guish it: or in the determination abstract and exempt it from the very hethenish originall and acceptation? And whether all their distinctions of Fate be able to discern it, for a solide and sober truth, in any part or respect? The Theologicall sate is abusive; for that's not paganish fate, but divine providence. The Naturall fate is su∣perfluous; for that need be called no more but natures common order. The Stoicall fate is superstitious, for that binds all things, persons, actors, (in heaven or earth) to an ineluctible necessitie. The Chaldaicall, Mathematicall, or Genathliacall fate is worse than all the rest, as adding to them all a sydereall or constellatio∣nall
fancy. But what kind of Fate call they that which they make to sit in the middle, and as it were hover in the balance, betwixt the desultory levity of an indifferent casualty; and the presultory temerity of an urging, and inevitable necessity? 4. Whether Fate or Fortune doe not mutually take away one another? For necessity and contingency have alwayes been held as contraries and inconsistents. Else to what end were all those di∣sputes betwixt the Stoicks and the Epicures? But why then doe so many Authors speak of both these so promiscuously? And why doe our Fataries, and Fortunaries so confound them: especially in their prognostications, or predictions? 5. Whether the Philosophers have been more serious than the Poets, about the series of Fate? As for the Poets, what child smiles not to read the pretty fictious of the three Fates, or fatall Si∣sters; Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos; yea, or of Nona, Decima, and Morta; and of their names, derivations, progenie, order, and offices? As for the Philosophers (Stoicks and Epicures,) It were long to tell, how featly they have tost both Fate and Fertune, too and fro in their sundry argumentations, assertions, definitions, de∣scriptions, opinions, &c. But (better than all their earnest) it is excellent sport which they make (in their Mythologies, Apologues, Hieroglyphicks, &c.) with Fortunes wheel and horn on the one hand: and Fates Distaff and Spindle on the other. 6. Whether argue the more strongly; the Stoicks against For∣tune, or the Epicures against Fate? Me thinks the Stoicks (for all their gravity) doe but rayl, when they call her the Goddess of fools, an empty name, a versatile wind, a short Sunshine, a sudden tempest, a muddy torrent, a fools paradise, a labyrinth, &c. Re∣proaching her for blind, deaf, mad, brutish, instable, treacherous, envious cruell &c. Querulously accusing her for playing with her own gifts; and sporting her self with humane mortality and mi∣sery: turning all things upside down; corrupting her own nature, or rushing upon her very self; repenting of her good, rejoycing at her evill; taking the stronger part; regarding not vertue, but power; answering those more, that dare, than that implore her; carrying on things against reason, prudence, counsell, vertue; most deceiving, where she is most trusted; fooling all she fosters; smiling and kil∣ling at once; tempering her hony with poyson; immoderate both in good and evill; strangling at last her own nurselings; exalting
and depressing; giviving and taking; dealing indiscriminatly; satis∣fying the greedy, more than the needy; giving unto many too much, to none enough; now a mother, now a stepdame; when most flourishing or flattering, most feeble; and making but the more un∣happy, for having been acquainted with her happiness. But (in my mind) the Epicures (for all their levity) reason better. For though they might return the many invectives against Fortune upon Fate, yet they soberly argue thus; If there be necessitating and enforcing fatation upon things, must not such a thing be done by a man, whether he be instructed or exhorted to it or no? nay, shall he not doe it whether he will himself or no? Is not the destinating decree enough to bring all things about, although there were neither com∣mand, nor care to goe about it? Does it not robb all rationall creatures of mind, will, counsell, deliberation, to tye them up to inevitable necessitie? How then are their proper motions reserved, not only to rationalls, but to every moving creature? What natu∣rall series of causes can there be betwixt intellectualls, rationalls, spiritualls, animals, in animates, and artificialls? Is it not ridiculous, to make an indissoluble series, or conjunction of causes, where (besides a deity) reason, and accident are ever and anon making an interrup∣tion? Who will say, that all things are concluded by, and included under Fate? Is there not much arbitrariness, whether one man will beget another, or no? and much more, whether one man will kill another, or no? How can there be so much as a naturall fate or ne∣cessity over men, when we see they are not all carryed one way: as things of one nature or kind (beasts, birds, fishes, flyes) are? but men (although of one nature) are carryed diversly, as their wits and affections lead them. Were people have sundry Lawes, and they duly executed; how are they led along by their conveni∣ent edicts, rather than by the fatall decree of the Starres? Are the lawes of men and fate repugnant? and are these more prevalent than they? If all things be necessarily bound under Fate; what can be subject to reason, will, nature, occasion, time, manners, pru∣dence, counsell, society, contingency, casualty? Must not mens sins and vices be necessary also, and inforced? Why should he be pu∣nished for offending, that is not able to resist an impelling force? Is he to be blamed, that is not of his own power? we may com∣mend vertue, but what praise of the vertuous, not so by labour and industry, but by fate and necessity? Doe not the Authors of Fate
goe, and come; speak, and keep silence; offer, and forbear; con∣sult, and deliberate; procure, and prevent; exhort and dehort, praise, and dispraise; reward, and punish? and why should they doe all this, if they did believe their own doctrine of Destiny? Why should men study or labour, if their fate be sufficient to make them both wise and rich? How many things are not as the Fates will but as we will our selves? Have the Fates determined that a man shall have children, that will not marry, nor once touch a woman? that he shall be wise, that will not learn? that he shall be liberall, that will not give? that he shall be drowned, that will not come neer the warer? that he shall dye in a strange Country, that will not travell? If Fate have appointed a wound, or a disease to the body, is there not a medicine and meat to cure it? but if it could intend any evill upon the soul or mind, yet is there not education, and disci∣pline to prevent it? Many things may be effected besides nature: may they not much more then besides Fate? If every man may fa∣bricate his own Fortune, why not also contrive his own Fate? If Fate had never had name, or nature, or power, would things have fallen out otherwise than they doe fall out? why then should Fate be inculcated, since (without Fate) there is Nature and Fortune, to which all things (necessary or casuall) may be aptly referred? In this old Philosophicall dispute, what easie Moderator would not give this censure? That either side hath said sufficient, to overthrow his Adversaries opinion; but neither of them enough to establish his own. 7. Hath not the constellatory Fatation introduced so many starry Gods into the world? Yea, made so many providentiall, and tutelary Gods and Goddesses (some Select, others Ascriptitious) to have a hand in the whole administration of the Universe? But particularly so many Geniall or Genitall Gods and Goddesses, and their sundry ordinations and offices at every mans geniture. As of Janus, Jupiter, Saturn, Genius, Mercury, Apollo, Mars, Vulcan, Neptune, Sol, Orcus, Liber Pater, Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Lucina, Fluona, Luna, Diana, Minerva, Venus, Vesta. Moreover, Vitum∣nus, Sentinus, Mens, Mena, Iterduca, Domiduca, Abaona, Ade∣ona, and Dea Fatua too, not of the least ordination and operation, either in the birth, or life, or death? And no marvell that they make so many Consent-Gods goe to the fate of a Man: when they will have so many to be busie about the fate of an herb. As Seia
fatally president of the sowing; Segetia or Segesta, at the com∣ming up of the Corn; Nodotus or Nodinus, at the knitting or knot∣ting; Volutina, at the involving of the leaves; Patellina or Pa∣tellea, at the opening of the blade; Proserpina at the budding; Hostilina, at the equall shaping of the eare; Flora, at the flourish∣ing; Lasturtia, at the nourishing; Tutilina, in the keeping; Ma∣tuta, or Matura, at the ripening; Messia, at the mowing; and Runcina, not only at the weeding, but at the plucking up by the roots. 8. Whether Fate be one or many? If it be one simply, then what needs any reduction? if it be many, why is it not redueed to one? And then, in vain is that done by many, which may be done by one: and it is prophane, to ascribe that to many, which ought to be ascribed to one. If it be one truly, then is it undivided in it self, and divided from all others: which how can that which is a series, or connexion of so many things, be? especially having its inherence in movables or mutables. If it be but one by accident, why should it imply all under a necessity? If it be but one by aggregation, col∣lection, connexion, so are things fortuitous as well as fatall. Be∣sides, such an unity is in the meanest degree of entity. Wherefore then should it order, and subordinate things of a more perfect de∣gree than it self? If it be many, or a multiplicity; then is it une∣quall, indeterminate, uncertain, and next to a nullity. If it be one, why then do they make it so diverse, according to divers conjuncti∣ons and constellations? If it be many, how can they make any certain and particular pronouncing upon it? 9. Whether that they call Fate, be in the first, or among the se∣cond Causes? If in the first, that is as much as to make it equall unto God: If among the second, then is it inferiour unto man. For among second causes, and especially in involuntary actions, and all such as fall under humane counsell and deliberation; the in∣tellectuall mind, and rationall will hath no superiour. And what more contrary to the order of nature and creatures, than that the lesse noble should be disposing, and governing those more noble than themselves? 10. Whether there be a fatall necessity upon all acts or events? If upon all acts where's Liberty? if upon all events, where's con∣tingency? And whether upon these, both good and evill? and that whether naturall, civill, or spirituall? If upon naturall acts and
events, good, or evill; then what use of means either to preserve; or to prevent? If upon acts civill, and good; what merit? what praise? if upon acts civill, and evill; what laws, what punish∣ments? If upon events civill, and good; what thanks? if upon events civill, and evill; what hopes? If upon acts spirituall, and good; what free grace? if upon acts spirituall, and evill; what free will? If upon events spirituall, and good; what free bounty? If upon events spirituall, and evill; what free mercy? 11. How can there, or why should there be such a thing as Fate, imposing a necessity upon actions, and events? when as divine pro∣vidence it self doth it not: so as to exclude liberty, contingency, or casualty from things. But works with second causes according to their own motion, and manner. Permitting sometimes their exu∣berancy, sometimes their deficiency: preserving to them their sundry orders, offices, and degrees of efficiency. Suffering the remoter cau∣ses, or agents, to be impedited by the more proximate; that all ef∣fects might not be taken for naturall, and necessary; but that his own free disposing might appear. Although nature, and every na∣turall agent, be of it self, and ordinarily, determinated to one ef∣fect; and to the producing of it after the same way: yet he suf∣fers it to be impedited by one debility, and indisposition, or ano∣ther (either to come to pass otherwise, or else to be altogether pre∣vented) that so he might preserve a contingency in all naturall causes: to the intent nothing might be thought absolutely neces∣sitating, but his own will and pleasure above. Much more doth he confirm a freedom to the rationall will; not only that good may the more chearfully be done, and accepted; but the evill also that is done, or suffered; may not unjustly be imputed to pro∣vidence, because of a necessity imposed. 12. If fate be (as they define it) the Series, order, nexure, li∣gation, complication, constitution, disposition of second cau∣ses, &c. what feeble things are all those seconds put together without the first? what can their own motion work to, without his speciall concurrence? what if he work not with them? what if without them? what if against them? Leave them to themselves, and what knot in a rope of Sand? Can there be a perpetuall se∣ries, or indissoluble connexion betwixt causes so disparate, yea so adverse, as naturall, internall, necessary, and arbitrary, adven∣titious, accidentall? yet after this order is fate oftentimes finished.
A languishing man not only consumes away within himself; but the ayr, meats, drinks, poyson, act the fatall consummation. To an ordinated destiny of an unfortunate end; comes in inordinate∣ly fire, water, a fall, a gun, a sword, an unlucky hand, &c. and hath not this necessitating fate now the complement by accident? and is there not a casuall intervention (of more force to the fatall effect) than all the causall connexion? How many accidents fall out fatally, that can have no second cause ordinatly assigned to them; much less prospected in them (but must be referred meer∣ly to divine will and pleasure) unless you will have accidentall in∣struments (that interven inordinately) to be such? 13. The Physicall fate they will have to be a series of pure na∣turall causes, &c. (viz. betwixt the stars, the elements, the tem∣perament, the inclination, the manners, the action, and the issue or event) now where are all these causes knit together? in the efficient, the form, the matter, or the end? How are they worthy to be called causes, or so proved? How are they pure, naturall, and ne∣cessary causes; when some of them are voluntary, and contingent? what connexion of them is that, which carrys on prime, and se∣cond causes; naturall, and voluntary; necessary, and contingent, with one fatall force, or inevitable agitation? what series is that which (as hath been said) is so often interrupted? what copulation betwixt the first, and the last; when as (by their own confession) the stars are not the causes of all events; neither doe all those ef∣fects fall out necessarily, whereof they are the cause; How are they fatall then; or their complement of fate? 14. Whether in the series both of fate, and of fortune (although two contraries) Astrologers have not delivered the same order, and connexion of causes (as the stars, tempers, manners, actions, events) or else what difference doe they make between them? Nay wherefore doe the same Authors speak of fate, and fortune so promiscuously, and indiscriminately? (especially in their progno∣sticating, or predicting way.) Is it not because they are not able to distinguish them? Or is it not because they are conscious of a fortuitousness of event, even in their strictest fatality? 15. Whether (in the series of fatall causes) the effect doth fol∣low the universall, indefinite, equivocall, and remote: or else the univocall, proximate, specificall, and particular cause? And which of these is that which doth determine, and distinguish the effect?
Does not a man generate a man; and a Beast, a Beast; what ever the position of the stars be? Those that have been borne in the same region, at the same moment, under the same position; have they all been the same? nay, how divers have they been (for all that) in their ingenies, their fortunes, and fates? And why so? but because they have taken their severall affections, and incli∣nations from their particular causes? 16. As for second causes, means, agents, instruments; seeing God Almighty makes use of them, to bring his own purposes to pass (not out of any defect, or necessity; but to make his own ef∣ficiency the more perceptible.) Yee seeing he oft times renders the most noble, and convenient means ineffectuall, and uses the meanest, and unaptest of them, to the producing of very eminent effects; Why then should we be bound to lurke at that order, which God himself observes not? why should our faith be taught to respect, or rest upon the middle things; in a prejudice to that providence, which is the absolute beginning, and end of all? 17. Whether the second causes be not ordained as the reme∣dies, rather than as the means of fate, or fortune? providence it self that has determined such an accident, or event, has it not also ordained second means, to help, and relieve, in such a case? wher∣fore are the creatures, and their offices created to such ends: if they be not to be used to such ends, for which they were created? what ever the fate, or fortune be; is there not a naturall Law (imprest in every creature) to labour for the conservation of it self, both in its being, and well being? To what end hath God given men a mind, will, reason, affections, counsell, deliberation, science, art, obser∣vation, experiment, means, instruments, &c. but as well prudently, and diligently to discern, procure, fortify, prevent, remedy; as thankfully to accept, or humbly to submit? Hath not the Spirit of God secretly, and sweetly suggested to his dearest children (in their sudden, and extraordinary perils, and perplexities) even pre∣sent advices, and succours; besides the inward consolations, and confirmations of his grace? yea, is not this one cause why men are kept so ignorant of future accidents (and of their utmost issues, after that they are already happened) that men might not only prepare for them; but make use of such means, as God himself hath prepared against them? Otherwise, should they not tempt God, in a neglect of them?
18. Whether there be not in the whole course of nature, in the universall world, and especially throughout the whole Church of Christ, farre more effectuall causes, means, orders, connexions, rules, guides, guards, helpes of life, of health, peace, libertie, socie∣ty &c. for counsell, actions, passions, accidents, events, than the coe∣lestiall bodies can possibly be? ought these then to be respected more than all they? or yet in comparison to them? 19. Who is able to bring into one series, or can reconcile to truth the old Philosophicall opinions, about the exercise, or execu∣tion of Fate, by second causes? As whether by Angels, Spirits, Geniusses, Demons, Devills, by the Soul of the world, by the Souls of men, by the totall subservience of Nature, by the mo∣tions and influences of the Starres, and caelestiall bodies, by sen∣sible agents, by artificiall instruments, yea, and by very accidents and cafualties? Christians know, and acknowledge all these creatures to be the ministers, or instruments of providence. The Angells doing his will, are the more eminent ministers both of his mercies and judgements: administring not only in temporalls, and in spiritualls, but likewise to eternalls. And if it be so as Philosophie sayes, that they are the Intelligencies, that move the caelestiall orbes; then have they an ordination over the admini∣stration of the Starres. The Devills are not only permitted, but wisely and justly used in the execution of temptations, tryalls, judgements. (But how comes in Fate and Fortune? who can tell? unlesse they intrude among the Devills, and be indeed of their foysting in.) As for the heavenly bodyes, they are to be con∣fest, as of Gods ordination and employment in their order, light, motions, and prodigious appearances. But he makes speciall use of mens reason, understanding, wills, affections, memories, coun∣sells, deliberations, policies, vocations, societies, arts, artifices, Lawes, Customes, actions, and experiments, in the government of the world: and yet more especially their gifts, graces duties, offices, fervices, in the governing of his Church. Last of all come in the whole hoste of creatures to act here as he hath ordained. Now what fatation, or fatall necessitation to man, among all these? Angels or Devills can but inject into the mind: they cannot com∣pell, no nor yet incline the will. That's only for the infinite power of God himself to doo, men (as to naturall, civill, and morall acts) are still actors in their own liberty. As for bodyes (Coelestiall
or terrestriall) they work directly but upon bodyes only: and the terrestriall are held, and found to be the more proximately, parti∣cularly, and sensibly disposing. Besides the friendship and hatred, the complyance and adversness of men, is not the service, or disser∣vice of the brute creature; the vertue or venome of an herb or minerall; yea, the defence or offence of a sword, a knise, a spear, a gun, a club &c. are not all these more sensibly apprehended, to be more neerly advantagious or prejudiciall to health or sicknesse, riches or poverty, honour or disgrace, prosperity and adversity, life or death; than are all the joynt benevolences or malevolencies of the fatall Starres? If therefore a fatidicall prognostication may be made from the Caelestiall: why not rather from the terrestriall motions? 20. Whether Fate be above the Starres, as their governour; or else under them as their minister? If above them, why make they the starres to be the causes of fate? For so they must needs be superiour to it. If under them, how then are the starres them∣selves subject to fate? for so they must needs be inferiour. How then should the starres dispose of others fate that are not able to dispose of their own? Is it for creatures (terrestriall or caelesti∣all) to perform that to others, which they are not able to preserve to themselves? Ought not therefore such a disposition to be referred solely to him, that hath the ordination, and gubernation of all things (both in heaven and earth) simply, freely, eternally and immutably in himself? 21. How can the fatall series of causes be from the starres? when as the starres themselves are not causes, as in humane and ar∣bitrary actions. Not causes, where they may be signes; as of things already done, and past. Yea, God himself may signifie many things, whereof he is not the cause: as in evill, and sinfull actions. Nay, have not the fatidicall Vaticinators themselves made many fatall signes, which could never be causes, nor yet once come into any se∣ries, or necessary connexion? As in their aruspicies, and auguries; from the entrailes of beasts, flight, and noise of birds, &c. as also from lots, dreams, prodigies, casualties, yea and physiogno∣mies, &c. 22. How can the starres be the first in the fatall series of second causes? When as (of all creatures) the spirituall, intellectuall, or rationall are the supreme: and the corporeall, animate, or inani∣mate,
their inferiours. Now the starres are both corporeall, and inanimate; Spirits, and souls; as they have more similitude to, so they participate more vertue of divine providence than all other creatures: For they are both the cognoscitive, and the operative in∣struments of providence, which the other are not. For these being but the executive only: may either be directed, or diverted by the iutellectuall, and ordinative. As acting of themselves with liber∣ty, deliberation, discretion observation of right rules, application of fit means, and intention to a due end. And therefore are the more eminent ministers of providence, than all things else, in hea∣ven or earth. 23. Whether any such cut as fatation, may be properly sayd to be in, or from the starres? For fatation imports a primordiall law or decree; not an influence only, or effect: what sacrilege is it then to ascribe that to the instrument, which is only peculiar to the prin∣cipall agent? Since it is for instruments (especially the inanimate) not to ordain, but execute only, (Yea, it is a question, whether there be any fatation even in fate it self?) it being accepted and discerned, not for a seminall disposition, but for an ultimate execution: and that inherent in the moveable or mutable subject. Wherefore, seeing fatation is neither in the starres, nor in fate it self: whether can any thing be sayd to be fatall with respect to the starres? For the starres are but second causes. And with respect to all such, some things may be sayd to be naturall, some things arbitrary, some things indifferent, some things contingent, some things uncertain, some things casuall: but few or none fatall. 24. Whether it be in the power and validity of the celestiall bo∣dyes to impose a fatall necessity, either upon humane actions, or yet upon naturall things? For if the starres be any such causes; then must they cause principally of themselves, intentionally, directly, immutably. Now how can they be principall causes; when provi∣dence is above them? how of themselves; when they work not upon humane actions but by accident? how intentionally; since they want a mind, or soul? how directly; when they operate upon humane actions but indirectly? how immutably, when their ordi∣nation or disposition may be impedited? Again, were they thus acting; then should there be no contingents, or accidents; no liber∣tie, or free actions, nor prevention of any events or issues; no par∣ticular causes should be defective, nor distance of place, nor in∣disposition
of the mean; no neglect of the means, no endeavour to the contrary, or opposition should be available: nay, not only the understanding, but the will should be tyed to corporall organs and matter; yea, and the starres should not only be of sufficient, but of infinite power. 25. How doe the celestiall bodyes work so fatally upon these inferiours: when as they here operate not upon a necessity, as to the producing of the effect. For albeit their impressions be naturall; yet are they not received, but according to the manner of the recei∣vers, which are fluxible, and not having themselves still after the same way. Because of the matter, that is in a potentiality to many, yea, and to contrary formes. The matter also is movable, and cor∣ruptable, and may easily defect of it self, may be intrinsecally in∣disposed, and extrinsecally impedited. And the staries themselves are but indefinite, and remote causes; to which the effect can never follow determinatly, and necessarily, unless the middle causes be ne∣cessary; and then they follow them, and not the other. But in the foresaid series the middle causes are most of them contingent: and from many contingent causes can come no effect of necessity, be∣cause any one of them, and all of them together, may be defective, and not attain unto their end. 26. Seeing the heavenly bodyes act not upon these inferiours, but by their light and motion; and so communicate nothing to the matter they work upon, but light, motion and heat: Now why may not all these flow from all the starres in generall? And why then should such, and such fatall inclinations, be attributed to such, or such positions or conjunctions? And if there be any particular vertues of the light and motion of some stars, contrary to the ver∣tues of the light and motion of other flarres; how is that demon∣strated? And how comes it to passe, that they should be operative and effectuall one way, in their simple natures or qualities: and yet another way in their relative aspects and positions? Is an ima∣ginary relation, or respect of more validity, than a reall substance or propriety? 27. They seem to define fate more acurately, that make it to be the series, or connext order of naturall causes. Now till they can di∣rectly and successively deduce those naturall causes, down from the starres, to those fatall events: what reason is there to credit their proposition, much lesse their prognostication? They likewise will
have fate (in the best sense they can take it) to digest and distribute all things, according to certain motions, successions, orders, forms, places, times. Now if their fate cannot be well understood, or discerned, without these same astrictions: why are they so con∣sounded at the inexplicableness of the circumstances? Otherwise, why doe they not predict usually the very times and places, to∣gether with the fates themselves? Moreover, the first definers of fate, held it to be, not in the superiors, but in the inferiors them∣selves. Namely, a disposition inherent in the moveable thing: and that urging to an immoveable event. If indeed it be such; ought not every mans fate to be collected from himself, rather than from his Stars? 28. How should the things of fate, and fortune be foretold; when it is not yet (with one consent) told what things they are themselves? Some have gone so high, as to say that they are Dei∣ties, or Gods: others are fallen so low, as to make them vanities, and nothing. Some confound these two together: some set them so opposite, as that they make them confound one another. Some admit many things of both (as they say) at the fore-gate: and exclude all again at the back door. Some place them in the be∣ginning, in the middle, in the end of a business. Some make us to be in their power: Some them in our power. Some would have us believe both but inquire neither. But if they would no inquiry after their nature, and properties: why make they such inquiry into their operations, and effects? 29. Whether fate be mutable, or immutable? If mutable; how is it fate? Is there not then a contingency of fate: as well as a face of contingencies? If immutable; what hope? what colour? what means? what remedy? Nay, if immoveable; how moves it (as they say) according to the nature, and order of all moveable things? That is to say, with naturall things, naturally; with ne∣cestary, necessarily; with voluntary, voluntarily; with contingent, contingently; with violent, violently; with remiss, remissely. And all this, not as a prime, and free; but as a second, and necessary cause. Why may we not as well say, with rationall things, ra∣tionally; with brute, brutishly; with sensuall, sensually; with ver∣tuous, vertuously; with vitious, vitiously; with prosperous, pros∣perously; with adverse, adversely; with uncertain uncertainly, &c. And then what irrefragable law of fate is that, which is fain to con∣form
to, and comply with every ones manners, and manner of working? 30. Whether fate be absolute in decree, or conditionate? If ab∣solute; then can it not be otherwise, and what remedy? Nay then is it infinite, omnipotent, eternall, and with superiority? If con∣ditionate (and that not from a liberall dispensation of its own, but a naturall ordination from another) what fatation is that then, that comes upon condition? that depends upon others actions, not its own determination? If it be absolute; then is it cruell, and unjust in many things: if it be conditionate; then is it variable and certain in nothing. Set aside the first act, which is the eternall decree; and the last act, which is death: these indeed may be said to be both absolute, and conditionate; but Christians are not taught to call these fate. But take it (as they doe) for the middle act; then can they make it to be neither absolute, nor condi∣tionate. 31. Whether fate, and fatall events follow the body; or the mind? If the body; what difference betwixt the fate of a man, and of a beast? In events (good or evill) who is worthy? who is guilty? And how follow they the mind; seeing the stars (neces∣sarily and directly) make no impression there? Because it is supe∣riour, according to the order of nature: and not subject to matter, time, or place: but united to an intellectuall, and spiri∣tuall substance; and therefore cannot suffer from corporeall things, although celestiall. Nor can they so exceed their own sphear, and species; as to act directly upon it. And if not upon the intellective faculty, which acts necessarily: much less upon the elective power, which is free; and never acts but freely; nor is subject to fatality, or fatall necessity. For then should the election of the will be no more, but a meer naturall instinct; should be determi∣ned to one thing; should act but one way; should have the like motions in all, upon the like representations; should not have any thing in its own power, to discern, deliberate, choose, refuse, &c. but must be carryed on, either naturally, or violently, as the Stars doe incline, or enforce? 32. Whether fate or fortune, be either in good, or evill acti∣ons? If fate be in good actions; are they not necessitated, and in∣forced? if fortune be there; are they not fortuitous, and acciden∣tall? And so, what praise of them? what reward? The like may
be affirmed of evill actions; and if likewise thus inferred; what shame? what punishment? In vitious actions, either fate offers violence to a mans will, or leaves to its own liberty. If the first, is not a mans will to be excused in evill? and if the last, is not every mans will the cause of his own fate? yea and of the hardest and heaviest fates? For they are such which follow sin, and wic∣kedness. 33. Wherefore should man (or his actions) be made the subject, yea the slave of sate; when as indeed man, as man, is superiour thereto? For fate being but a sydercall service of second causes, must be reduced to the providence of the first cause: and in that reduction, man himself hath place, or preferment, before all the stars of heaven. Because the divine providence receives to it self, or extends it self in a more speciall way, to intellectuall, or rationall: that it doth to all other creatures else. In as much as they excell all others, both in the perfection of nature, and in the dignity of end. In the perfection of nature; Because the rationall creature hath the dominion over his own actions, and operates voluntarily: whereas the other act not so much, as are acted. In the dignity of the end; because the intellectuall creature only, by his operation, reaches to the ultimate end of the universe, sc. to know, and love God. But the other creatures touch not that end, by an inspired intention; but only according to some participated similitude. Furthermore, God provides for the intellectuall nature principal∣ly, and as it were for selfs sake: and but for all other crtatures se∣condarily, and in order to it. The rationall creature is Gods agent: the other are but his instrumens. Now God cares more for his agents than he doth for his instruments. Yea they are the instruments of this very agent: and he makes use of them either in his practice, or contemplation. God hath more regard to the free, and liberall: than to the necessitated, and servile acts of his creatures. The ra∣tionall creatures are the more noble in themselves, and of more neer accession to the divine similitude; and therefore tendred by God, before and above all others. They are the more principall parts of the whole universe: to which the less principall are but subser∣ving; as intended for their sakes, and working for their ends. In∣tellectuall natures have more assinity with the whole; as appre∣hending all things else besides themselves: whereas every other creature is but a part, and capable of no more but a bare partici∣pation
of its own particular entity. Now it is not for the in∣apprehending part, to have an ordaining power over the appre∣hensive whole. By the course of nature, the rationall creature uses all other things for it self, as either for the perfection of its intellect, the explication of its science, the exercise of its vertue, or else the sustentation of its body, to which the intellectu∣all nature is united. And therefore it is not for them, to dispose, tule, govern, impell, necessitate him him: but for him to observe, rule, govern, dispence moderate, and make use of them. 34. Whether any thing can be sayd to be fatall (with re∣spect to us) till it have taken effect? For a fatality before it be, is but a contingency to us: and to us a contingency, after it is, is a fatality. Why then should we be bound to believe the prognosticated things of Fate or Fortune before hand? yea, though they may have some naturall cause, remotely necessary, or of some indefinite probability: yet is not all this sufficient for our faith in particular; because, as concerning many such naturall causes, there is in us nevertheless (besides the supreme) a liberty, and power to prevent. 35. Suppose the Fates have destinated one man to be hangd, or kill'd by another; why should not that be prognosticated from another mans nativity, as well as his own: seeing he also comes necessarily into the series of second causes? Indeed some of the old genethliacks have boasted to foresee, or fore∣tell a mans fate, or fortune, from the nativity of his parents, Brethren, children, &c. But have not others of them held it for a foolish fancy, that the fate or fortune of one man should lye involved, not only in his own; but in the constellations of so many mens nativities? 36. Whether they that suffer the same fate, have the same starres coupling, or compacting thereunto? Et è contra. Sup∣pose them suffring (and suffring to death, the last line of Fate) for Christ, the Gospell, religion, and conscience. Is this fatall destiny also from the starry order, and connexion? who ever heard that the starres made Martyrs, or necessitated unto mar∣tyrdome? How then hath it come to passe, that young, old, men, women, of severall ages, sexes, nations (and therefore not of the same constellations) have all agreed to undergoe the same event?
37. Whether that be true Fate, which they would mingle together with providence? and how can divine providence, and Pagan Fate agree? For Providence is the beginning, and con∣tinuation of all things: Fate is the end or utter confusion of them. Providence is in the ordering of casuals, as well as fa∣tals: Fate is opposing all things fortuitous; and therefore not disposing them. Providence is an act in God: their Fate is no more but an event upon the creature. Providence is a disposi∣tion impendent, or out of the thing: Fate is a disposition inhe∣rent, or in the thing. Providence comprehends all things (past. present, and to come) so does not Fate in her connexion of Causes. Providence is in and over all things, from the greatest to the least (good, evill, celestialls, terrestrialls, spiritualls, corporealls, universalls, singulars, naturalls, rationalls, vo∣luntaries, necessaries, contingents) so is not Fate. Providence is more speciall to one, than to another: but Fate is a necessity to all alike. Providence can work immediately, without, and against means: Fate can operate nothing but according to her series, or connexion. Providence can act with every creature, reserving to it its own motion (as with free agents freely; with contingents contingently, &c.) whereas Fate hath no way to work but fatally, that is necessarily, for∣cibly, inexorably, immutably, inevitably. The rules, order, successe of divine providence, are either written in his own book, or in his own breast: and not in the Starres and Pla∣nets, as Fate is. The wisedome, justice, power, goodnesse of his providence; all this is written in his own book: the par∣ticular successes, issues, events thereof, all these are written in his own breast. Even wise Providence it self is not herein to be discerned or determined before-hand: what satuous thing is Fate then, that is so obvious and triviall, as for the Faticanes to foretell? Is not this difference enough between them, and never to be reconciled; Providence is a prudent counsellor, and will have the particular issues kept secret: Fate is a silly babbler, and will have them commonly foretold? 38. Whether (had it not been for the fictions of Fate and Fortune) there had ever been hatcht opinions and heresies, so projudiciall to divine providence? and that even amongst Pa∣gans
themselves, that had experience sufficient to convince them of the truth, and power of it: and of the justice, yea and good∣nesse of it in great part. Had the divine providence ever been denyed: if Fate and fortune had not been held for Gods? Had God himself been implanted under Fate, or made subject to the decrees of it, or slandered for a sloathfull & careless spectator of humane things, and terrene: if they had not confined and limi∣ted God to content himself with the reiglement of the heavens; as if it had veen beneath his dignitie and majestie, to vouch∣safe to look down to sinall things, or once to take notice of of what was done here below: but to commit the care and rule of all sublunary and inferiour things, to the starres and celestiall bodyes; as his substitutes and their superiours? Had prophane and wicked men ever accused providence, and excused their impieties: had they not heard of fatall starres necessitating and inforcing both their wills and actions? 39. Was not the constitution of Fate and Fortune, first in∣vented in a derogation to God, and his divine providence: and that through a paganish and infidelious scandall at good things happening to bad men here; and evill things to good men, which had never been excogitated, or had soon vanished, had they been thus Christianly instructed, viz. That the all provi∣dent Creator dispenses these middle things with an indifferent hand, as unto creatures. That the best men upon earth, are not worthy of the least of goods things: & may deserve to be invol∣ved in the utmost of evill things, that can here befall them. That the wise Disposer knows how to turn these outward good things to the evill, of evill men: and these outward evill things to the good of good men. That this present world is no time of full punishing, or rewarding: but these two precisely pertain to the world that is to come. 40. Admit that either Fate or fortune was so indeed as they presage; or much more than they can imagine: yet how is the best of them both sufficient to moderate all fond hopes and fears? Or what is able to doe that; but a lively faith (voyd of these heathenish superstitions) and assuredly believing, That there is an all-provident God, that only foresees all things necessarie: and to whom nothing is contingent or casuall.
That can, will, and doth work (for the best of his) both with second causes, and exteriour means; as also without them, yea and against them. That binds not the world, much lesse tyes his Church unto them. That hath written his childrens names in the book of life: and much more then (they may be assured) hath numbred the hairs of their heads, as concern∣ing all earthly accidents. That shines, and moves in the Sun and Moon, and starres: and makes their generall influxes more, or lesse effectuall, as he is pleased to adde, or abstract his speciall motion; or oppose his immediate administration, or interpose the office of his more excellent Ministers, Angells, and reasonable Souls.
CHAP. XIX. 19. From the affinity to Witch-craft. 1. WHat difference betwixt Astromancy, Ma∣gomancy, or Magastromancy (as touch∣ing a sorcerous both superstition, and ope∣ration) and all these after-named? viz. Stareomancy, or divining by the Elements; Aeromancy, or divining by the ayr; Pyromancy, by fire; Hydromancy, by wa∣ter; Geomancy, by earth; Theomancy, pretending to divine by the revelation of the Spirit, and by the Scriptures, or word of God; Daemonomancy, by the suggestions of evill Daemons or Devills; Idolomancy, by Idolls, Images, Figures; Psychomancy, by mens souls, affections, wills, religious or morall dispositions; Antinopomancy, by the entrails of men, women and children; Theriomancy, by Beasts; Ornithomancy, by Birds; I cthyoman∣cy, by Fishes; Botanomancy, by herbs; Lithomancy, by stones; Cleromancy, by lotts; Oniromancy, by dreams; Onomato∣mancy, by names; Arithmancy, by numbers; Logarithmancy, by Logarithmes; Sternomancy, from the breast to the belly; Gastromancy, by the sound of, or signes upon the belly; Om∣phelomancy, by the navell; Chiromancy, by the hands, Paedo∣mancy, by the feet; Onychomancy, by the nayles; Cephaleono∣mancy, by brayling of an Asses head; Tuphramancy, by ashes; Capnomancy, by smoak; Livanomancy, by burning of Fran∣kincence; Carromancy, by melting of Wax; Lecanomancy, by a basin of water; Catoxtromancy, by looking-glasses; Char∣tomancy, by writing in papers; Macharomancy, by knives or swords; Chrystallomancy, by glasses; Dactylomancy, by rings; Coseinomancy by seives; Axinomancy, by Sawes; Cattabo∣mancy, by vessells of brasse, or other metall; Roadomancy, by
starrs; Spatalamancy, by skins, bones, excrements; Sciomancy, by shadowes; Astragalomancy, by dice; Oinomancy, by Wine; Sycomancy, by Figgs; Typomancy, by the coagulation of cheese, Alphitomancy, by meal, flower, or branne; Crithomancy, by grain, or corn; Alectromancy, by Cooks or Pallen; Gyroman∣cy, by rounds or circles; Lampadomancy, by candles and lamps; And in one word for all Nagomancy, or Necromancy; by inspecting consulting and divining by with, or from the dead. The question is not about the difference of all these (from the first, to the last) in matter, instruments ceremonies, or circumstances; but whether they be not of like maleficall sorcery, for main substance and formality? And whether divi∣ning by the Starres and Planets; be not a cause enclining and disposing; at least an occasion inviting and encouraging (what through imitation, estimation toleration) to all these sorts of sorcerous divination, and the like? 2. Whether there be any kind of Magick simply so naturall, or laudably so arted▪ as many serve to abstract it from the ma∣leficall, and diabolicall? For though there be many occult qualities and miracles of nature, and actives and passives there, which perfectly known, and fitly applyed, might help to work wonders, without either tempting of God, or the Devill: yet because of the difficulty of such things; and not that alone, but their uselessnesse: and because of mens ignorance, and for all that their curiosity; and because of the Arts insufficiencie, and besides that, the fallacie; and chiefly because of Satans pri∣vie suggestions, and delusory seducements; the study and search after these things proves very confused, indiscerned, unsafe and pernicious. And because of all these the abuse of this astro∣magicall art is as palpable as the practice: but the use as oc∣cult as the Art it self. But especially as touching the practice of this art if there be an artifice of doing, wholly separate from malefice; why then are the same things done by those, that are altogether ignorant of the art; so they have but a saith? and why (without such a faith) is nothing to be done by the Art it self? How many things have been done by all manner of Magicians, that can have no naturall causes, no
true rules of art, no power or comprobation from God? and therefore must needs be acted by a confederation and fami∣liarity with some evill spirit. How many things have they presumed to predict or foretell; which neither divine wis∣dome is pleased to reveal; neither is it ordinarily for humane reason, or art to find out; but must only be done by a de∣moniacall sagacity, or suggestion? what sounds, and syllables, and words, and sentences doe they murmure, or pronounce; and that to the very inanimates; whom words can in no wise effect or move: or else are so barbarous and insignificant, as that (if they were uttered to the intelligent) they cannot conceive them, their extent, or use. Now by whose inven∣tion is it, that such words should be most operative in ma∣gick art; that are operative upon no understanding? How many rites, solemnities, ceremonies, preparations doe they use, which have naturally no force or vertue to the producing of the effect; not yet can any way prepare the matter to the receiving thereof? What sacrifices, immolations, consecra∣tions, prostrations, adorations, invocations, execrations, im∣precations, attestations, comminations, exorcisms, adjura∣tions. &c. And none of all these commanded by God; and therefore not done to him: how easy is it then to suspect, by whom all these are suggested, and for whom they are in∣tended? 3. Whether if be (in Magick, and Astrologie) that the art hath power over the heavenly bodies: or the heavenly bodies power over the art? not the first because for the Art to have power over the heavenly bodies (so as to stop, or turn the course of the stars; or by odes, and incantations to fetch down the moon from her orb. as the old Magicians have boasted) this is beyond the power of a Devill, or an Angell: and were not only against the particular order of nature, but would utterly confound the whole course of it. And (by conjurations, or confections) so to prepare the mat∣ter, as to allure, or force down influences; and to make it (by art) capable, and sufficient both to receive, and retain them:
this were to mingle heaven, and earth; to subjugate the su∣periour bodies, to their inferiors; to preferre accidents, to sub∣stances; and turn the whole universe upside down. Not the second; for not only the speculations; but also the practicks of their art (a many of them) are meerly intellectuall, ratio∣nall, arbitrary: over which the stars and planets can have no power. The stars are corporall things, arts or sciences are mentall: how come these then to impress, and impose upon one another? All power is from action; all action is from forms; all forms are either naturall, or artificiall: now by what third kind of form doe the stars, and the Art, worke one upon another? And how agree their proper forms to act upon a third subject? How can the stars, or the Art (in in∣troducing forms and producing effects) work either naturally, by art; or artificially, by nature? Can a naturall form give principles of life, and motion, to an artificiall matter: or an artificiall, to a naturall matter? which way then will they have these two to conspire, or consent, either for the operating between themselves; or upon a third? 4 Whether that power which Magicians, Necromancers, conjurers, inchanters insultingly boast of, against Devils, and evill spirits, by way of coaction and compulsion: be not in∣deed by way of invocation, and subjection? For though Christ, and his Apostles subdued Devils; and ejected them by a divine, and extraordinary power: but as for meer men, and the vilest of men, since God hath denyed them the singu∣lar gift; who hath taught them the triviall art of acting over, or commanding evill spirits? Or have they taken it upon themselves (as did the Jewish Exorcists Acts 19.3.) and is not indeed all their power and authority of the same force, as was theirs? But instead of preaching to such, let me first reason with them. Is it credible, that a mortall man should be able to bind an immortall Spirit? and bind him by a word, a sound a syllable, a character? and these insignificant, and no vertue of Gods promise in them? Can these men doe that to the Devill, which he cannot doe to them: compell him to
doe good, or evill? If they can compell him to doe the thing that good is; then are they able to doe as much as God him∣self doth: and to compell him to doe evill, that they need not, he is alwaies as ready to doe that, as they. Devils are a∣bove the order, and power of sensible things: how then should they be sufficient to move them, either by way of allurement, or constraint? If the Devill doe at any time work with man, he will not doe it gratis, or freely; unless it be upon his own errands, and to his own ends; for he hates mankind, and their indifferent commerce. And therefore since he will not doe it voluntarily, and cannot be compelled; if he acts at all, it must either be upon a temptation of his own, or else upon a confederation of theirs. And if he be enjoyned to obey by covenant or compact, then is not the malefice as much as confest? Reason and experience prove, that the Devil can∣not be forced to stand to his own promises: how much less then to any mans precept, or command? And therefore if the Devill appear at the provocation, recede at the commina∣tion, answer at the call, and obey at the command of a Ne∣cromancer; what dissimulation of obedience is there on both sides? One secretly imploring, and outwardly injoyning: the other outwardly observing, but inwardly inslaving. For it is not they that bind the Devill; but the Devill that binds them to obedience. Only he seems to be enforced to doe theirs; that so he may make them willing to do his will. Or that his feigned constraint might either the more excuse him; or else set them the more without excuse both before God, and men; what command or inforcement is that, which is done not only to others injury but oft-times to the actors own hurt? especially if he be doubting, and have not a strong faith, and observe not all the circumstances of adjuring; which shews all the force (on one part, or other) to be only in a pactionall arti∣fice. The main thing that the Astrologicall Magicians, Ne∣cromancers, conjurers, and inchanters pretend, is, that they can stand without his chain, and yet bring him (will he, nill he) within their circle: and all by vertue of the celestiall orbes; only calling, and urging him under certain aspects,
conjunctions, constellations. But alas! these cannot im∣press, or impose upon him (neither of themselves, nor by ac∣cident; neither directly, nor indirectly) he being a meer spi∣rituall substance, and formally united to no body. If there∣fore he be observant upon such tearms, it is to indulge a superstitious faith, and perswasion of the vertue of such things, and efficacy of such an art, besides, above, against the word of God. And he obeys now, not as necessitated thereby, as by causes; but yeelding thereto, as unto Signs. Signs indeed of a compact, or confederation. And in that regard, seems very observantially to submit, not only to stars, and Plane∣tary constellations: but to plants, herbs, stones, metals, cir∣cles, odes, verses, words, sounds, characters, figures, fabrica∣tions, confections; and indeed to any rites or ceremonies whatsoever, used as seals to such an intent. Otherwise, was it not for the covenant on the one part, there would (not∣withstanding all the art, and authority) be but little perfor∣mance on the tother. Having thus disputed with, now let me preach to my magicall Dominator; who by vertue of the spirit of the world (not of the Lord) and by vertue of the spirits in the Planets (not of him, that hath the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars, Revel. 3.1.) presumeth that he hath thus got the Devill in a string, and can make him bow at a beck. Job. 41.1, &c. Canst thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord which thou lettest down? Canst thou put an hook into his nose? and bore his jaw thorow with a thorn? Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto thee? Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant for ever? Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? wilt thou bind him for thy mai∣dens? Shall thy companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the Merchants? Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears? Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battell: doe no more. I hope he is not ignorant that the allegory is very apt for his own application.
5. Whether Magicians and Astrologers be not only obnoxious, or lyable to; but noxious, or guil∣ty of a diabolicall compact, and commerce (not only implicite but explicite,) As pretending to false science, propounding false grounds, urging false causes, using false means, exhibiting false circum∣stances, practising false arts, provoking false af∣fections, and intending false ends: and especially, seeking, and teaching to supply the defect, or fay∣ling of all these, by a false, and superstitious faith? A faith that is not in the things of faith; and there∣fore cannot be divine. A faith that in the things of reason, denys, and exclaims against the demon∣stration of reason; and therefore cannot be hu∣mane. Must not the effect of such a faith be super∣stitious: and the event prestigious? Moreover what proneness hath here been confest? what proper∣ties of a diabolicall covenant have been found? Besides a vanity, and superstition of faith; likewise of observation, imagination, affectation, investi∣gation, invocation, adjuration, temptation. Signs empty, and delusory; Feats jugling and presti∣gious; wonders wrought without the command, and approof of God; creatures abused contrary to their nature, and institution; art pretended with∣out any true principles; words invented, and mut∣tered, and they barbarous, insignificant, false, ab∣surd, apocryphall; yea though Canonicall and sa∣cred, yet applyed to such acts and ends, for which they were never ordained; admirable efficacy at∣tributed to syllables, sounds, numbers, rites, solem∣nities, ceremonies, circumstances, of time, place,
and person; Fabrications of images, statues, figures, characters, circles, rings, seals, &c. Confections of herbs, minerals, waters, oyls, juyces, spirits, &c. acting and effecting at an improportionate di∣stance, and without convenient means; spectrous Phantasmes, or apparitions, to affright men into a credulity; ludibrious pranks, only to make sport, and so feed mans curiosity; and divining predicti∣ons (of things, lost, absent, future) without either calling, or cause. 6. Whether Magicall feats be wrought by things corporeall, or spiritual? Not by things corporeal, be∣cause of improportionate matter, form, cause, effect, means, instruments, distance, &c. How can a body work upon a body, to make it sign, and signify things hidden, lost, absent, future? to make a dead body walk, speak, &c. To make a living body walk invisible, transform its proper shape, &c. And if by things spirituall; then whether by spirits good, or bad? Not by the good (neither of Angels, nor men) for where's the true and good cause, Mini∣ster, means, object, and end of Magicall opera∣tion? Nay which of all these is not evill? 7. Is it not the known property of God, to know things future absolutely, and exactly? Wherefore then did the Devill arrogate to himself divination; but in an emulation of Divinity? Now whether of these two doe the Diviners imitate? God, or the Devill? It cannot be God; because they have no command to imitate him, in these his powerfull
properties; no promise upon the imitation. It must be the Devill then; and to imitate him, must needs be maleficall. And they may imitate him many ways: for he hath used himself to divination, by spirits, by men, by living men, by dead men, by the celestiall bodies, by the elements, by things natu∣rall, by things artificiall; yea and by things sacred and religious: and may not they then be like him in all these? 8. How easy is it for the Devill to predict those things which he intends to act himself? As sup∣pose he intendeth (by Gods permission) to practise the sickness, death, destruction of man, or Beast: is it not easy for him to suggest such his intention to his instruments, and Ministers; and so make them to predict the same? Yea though it be done from him; is it not easy for him, and them, to pretend it from some other cause: albeit abused besides the naturall end thereof? Is it a matter of much arti∣fice, for veneficks, or witches to forespeak their own purposed and laboured malefice? How readily may he presage anothers death, or ruin; that hath him in his own power, and so hath already determined that such a day it shall be done. In like manner, how many have perished according to wizzardly predictions: and that only because of wizzardly purposes, and perpetrations? And therefore it may (not unjustly) be doubted, whether many of those prognosticated evill fates, and fortunes, against Princes, Magistrates, Ministers, and other Chri∣stians (especialy such as opposed them in their fa∣tidicall
way) were not (besides the Astrologicall speculation) practised by goeticall Magick as by charms, curses, poysons, treachery, violence; or by making maleficall images, pictures, figures, con∣stellated under the ascension of that man, whom they would maliciously destroy, or prejudice. And why may not this be justly suspected of them; since it is a thing not only of their own practising, but of their teaching? And it being so, how can they themselves deny? and what understanding man would not pronounce upon them, for the most ar∣rant inchanters, sorcerers, veneficks, maleficks, wizzards, and witches in the world? 9. Whether there may not be an effascination, or bewitching, by inspecting the stars; as by ima∣gination, by breathing on, by looking on, by tou∣ching, by fabricating of images, &c. We know none of these acts are malevolent, or maleficall in their own nature: but that any one of these, as well as another, may be abused to sorcery, and witchcraft, through a Satanicall stipulation, or suffrage, who can deny? 10. What practice of sorcery, or malefice, more superstitious, than the fabricating of Astrolo∣gicall, and of magicall images, pictures, statues, figures, &c. For as a tacite compact hath been sus∣pected, as touching the Astrologicall: so hath an ex∣press one been concluded, and confessed, as con∣cerning the magicall configurations. And what is the one, on the other of these? but the making of
an image, or figure, either of man, or beast; in gold, silver, brass, copper, wax, wood, stone, clay; under such a conjunction, or constellation; For the inviting, and alluring of Angels; for the expelling and ejecting of Devils; for the pro∣curing of love; for the provoking of hatred; for the atchieving of victory; for the effecting of death; for the raising, or allaying of storms, or tempests; for the causing or preventing of pe∣stilencies; for the driving away of Serpents, and vermine, &c. Now in such a compact, what vertue or efficacy, besides that of a compact on∣ly? what similitude, or resemblance, betwixt the figure of a round star, or Planet: and a mon∣struous many-shap't, magicall configuration? The vertue of the celestials are but universall, and in∣determinate as to the producing of this, or that effect: neither, but by naturall, and particular causes. And who will say that any such particular figures are ei∣ther causes, or naturall? what preparation can there be of such a matter; for the receiving, and retai∣ning such constellatory influences? And what such kind of efficacies can it have thereby for the ad∣mitting of such effects? The heavenly bodies ope∣rate no way, but naturally: these figures or fabri∣cations, operate no way, but artificially (being the artifices of humane invention, and used arbitrarily) how then should these modify, and determine those? How come their vast influences to be restrained only to such a figure, and that only for such ope∣rations? How come the stars and Planets so to neglect the matter, and its disposition; and so to
respect the figure, and its composition; as accor∣dingly to dart in their influences, for the figures sake; let the matter be what it will? what vertue can there be (for all the celestiall influences) more than the matter is disposed unto? what efficacy, or ap∣titude of an artificiall form, more than accidentall, and instrumentall? what principles of life and a∣ction from artificiall forms? Is not the vertue of the matter still the same, although of divers forms or figures? why should artificiall figures be more apt to receive the starry influences, than are naturall figures? In all such configurations, must not the efficacy of the Stars rather attend, or depend upon the imagination and fancy of the artist, or artificer: than either upon the matter, or form it self? why should the inscription of characters, letters, words, numbers, make the figure, or image more efficacious? why should not the constellated vertue last so long as the substantiall matter lasts: but only so long as the accidentall form or figure lasts? See∣ing therefore there is neither vertue nor efficacy in such fabrications, or figurations, from God, An∣gels, nature, art, stars, matter, form, or figure: whence then (if an effect follow) must all the effica∣cy be, but from the sign? the sign of a diabolicall and maleficall contract, Sacrament, suggestion, suffragation, operation, and delusion. Who can think otherwise even of a materiall image, or figure that cannot be operative or efficacious beyond its proper species, and form? how much more then of that, which is only fantasticall, painted, or in∣graven?
11. Whether of such kinde of configuration, were not the Jewish Teraphim, especially according to the Rabbinical use, and account? likewise the Talismanical sculptures of the Per∣sians, together with these French toyes, Gamalies; which (set this fabrication aside) are but the Games of Nature (as our English word founds, aptest) or her apish and accidental sports, by confusedly shadowing one kinde of creature in a∣nother. And causing them to rise and fall in their own mud, (like the imperfect animals in Nilus) without any further hurt or help to the whole universe: save that men may consi∣der, that He, who made all things of nothing, can make any thing resemble every thing: and that Christians might learn to blesse their Creator for their more perfect formation. But idle-witted and fantastical men, have fancied figures, and fa∣ces, in stones, and roots (like as we have done of late on To∣bacco-box lids) and therewith have fraught their studies, as Papists have done their Sacraries with Reliques: or as women have deckt their closets with shells. Neither is the vanity all; but they have superstitiously, nay, and forcerously made these umbrages of creatures, to be the tutilaries of Kingdoms, Na∣tions, Countries, Cities, persons, from devils, thunders, tem∣pests, shipwracks, pestilences, poysons, serpents, vermine; and who knows what? 12. Whether a diabolical compact, and familiarity may not justly be there suspected, where praestigious things are appa∣rent, and yet miracles are denyed, the Law affords no precept, the Gospel hath made no promise, Nature hath no power, Art hath no principles, the means have no warrant, and the end hath no profit; no profit neither to Church, nor Common∣wealth? 13. What is the difference betwixt those that call them∣selves Magicians, Mathematicians, Astrologers, Prognostica∣tors, Diviners: and those that are called Soothsayers, Necro∣mancers, Conjurers, Inchanters, Sorcerers, Wizzards, and Witches? Is this all the difference, that the one is guilty of a compact or covenant: the other not? Why there is an impli∣cite covenant, as well as an explicite; and one leading to the other: and by how many of both parties hath even an explicite covenant been confessed? Or that one is arted, the other un∣learned?
What good of an art, without a gift? the more learned in an evil art, the more to be abhorred. Let them both see to it, whether the main of their learning be not of a delu∣sive suggestion, rather then of a diligent acquisition. Or that one is imperious over the Devil, wheras the other is his supply∣ant? The Devil smiles alike at the pride, and at the humility of a superstition. And can no more be enjoyned then he can be entreated. And will yield that either of them shall open∣ly command, so they will but secretly implore. Or that the one operates by the celestial, the other by terrestrial imps? Hath not idolatry, and superstition, (and why not witchcraft?) been committed by things in Heaven, as well as things on earth? Me thinks a Magician operates by the baser imp of the two. For a Witch works by a living dog, cat, mouse, rat, &c. But he by a dead one, configured, constellated, written, paint∣ed, ingraven. Or that Witches are for the most part female, but they male? Oh! the nobler sexe abusing it self, is alwayes the viler. Or that Witches are poor, and envious, to the in∣festing of women, children, cattel, &c? How proud are they then that dare do the like to Nations, Kingdoms, Princes, Ma∣gistrates? &c. Or that Witches are violent and revengeful in their practices; but Magicians are pleasant and merry in their pranks? Certainly, it is good neither to play with Saints nor Devils; such their sports, are Satans earnest. Doth not the one thus act with more reluctancy, and the other with more complacency? For such passions may have more of en∣forcement; and such pleasures more of assent. 14. Whether the appellations of Magicians, Mathematici∣ans, Astrologers, Genethliaks, Planetarians (to say nothing of the old Chaldeans, Aegyptians, Gazarens, Samanaeans, Hiero∣phants, Beachmans, Gymnosophists, Thessalians, Hetrurians, the Cabalistical Rabbins, the Greek Arithmeticks, the Roman Au∣gurizers, the French Druids, the English Bards, &c.) as also Ne∣cromancers, Conjurers, Inchanters, Charmers, Wizzards, Wit∣ches, Sorcerers, Soothsayers, Sophisters, Impostors, Circu∣lators, loculators, Juglers, Gipsies, Physiognomists, Fortune∣tellers, Prognosticators, Praedictors, Diviners, &c. be not terms of a promiscuous usage? And whether the community of words, argue not some community of things? Nay have
not the holy Scriptures condemned them, under these tearms or names indifferently? Do not the Fathers, Councells, Schoolemen, Casuists, Divines, Historians, and Poets thus speak of them indiscriminately? Have not the Ecclesiastical, Imperial, Provincial, Municipal Lawes, (under these mixt notions, and nominations) decreed, and doomed them alike to penalty? 15. Why the Devil chuseth to have, both his most solemn confederation; as also the most stupendious operations, that follow thereupon, to be made and done under certain con∣stellations? Is it not because he would have the Starres wor∣shipped for Gods; who himself is worshipped in any thing that is not God? Or that he would thus have all the male∣fice devolved upon heavenly bodies? For what mischief he is permitted to do upon earth, he would make men believe it comes from Heaven. Or indeed, that he would thus delude the Sorcerers themselves; in perswading them, that what they do, they do not by fraud, but by an innocent, nay, an exquisite Planetary Art? For how many rank wharsicks have laboured to excuse their execrable Arts, by accusing the male∣fick Stars? 16. How many Magicians, Astrologers, and Planetary Prognosticators, have had their Paredrials, their Assessors, and Obsessors; their Consiliaries, and Auxiliaries; their Martinists, Maisterels, and Ministrels; their Imps, and Fami∣liars, as well as other Witches? And whether have not they made the same use, and employment of them, as the other have done? 17. Whether the Artists (in Magick and Astrology) de∣nying, exclaiming, and cautioning against Idolatry, Supersti∣tion, Sorcery, Witchcraft, be sufficient to purge their Art, and quit themselves of the same? When as their very specu∣lations are expressely coinquinated with much in all these: and their practises palpably guilty of much more; and that to all mens judgements, but theirs that use them. Therefore rather, whether are not their intermingled negations, and affirmations, disclaimings, and acclaimings, vowings, and disavowings, cautions, and concessions, distinctions, and confusions, an Argument of a consciousnesse, or convi∣ction
of something (in this kinde) to be greatly suspected, and censured? 18. How many of them that have pretended nothing but nature, and natural causes; and boasted Art altogether, and principles of mysterious Art: yet when the mystery of delu∣sion, and iniquity, hath been discovered; and themselves straightly examined by prudent and careful Magistrates, or the day of their disastrous and unfortunate ends or execution, ap∣proaching: I say, how many of them have then confest, and cryed out upon compacts, confederacies, Devils, delusions perdition, damnation? 19. Whether the superstitions of Sorcery and Witchcraft be not taught and promoted, countenanced, and encouraged, by the Printing, and permitting such multitudes of Magical books? Especially the translating of them (by way of Vindication, and Apologie) into the vulgar tongue? 20. Whether such books may be read? (unlesse with an inimical Science, not a social Conscience; not with an invi∣tatory operation, but an expugnatory refutation.) And whe∣ther their signes and ceremonies may be used or assented to by any (either ignorantly or affectedly) without great danger of being seduced, and infected; if not with the Sorcery, yet with the superstition of the Art? Let a man but well examine himself, and observe others; and he needs no Oedipus: his own observation and experiment will soon teach him to re∣solve the case. CHAP. XX. From the Ominatings of vain observation. 1. WHether the superstition of vain observation, and the more superstitious ominations thereupon; have not been occasioned, and increased, by the prognostications, predictions, and divinations, of Magick, and Astrologie? For (besides the suggestions of Satan him∣self)
where is the source, and root of all such vanity, and su∣perstition (at least the imitation, and example) to be found: save in those Arts and speculations, that teach to observe creatures, images, figures, signes, and accidents, for constella∣tional; and (as they call them) second stars: and so to omi∣nate, and presage upon them; either as touching themselves or others? As namely, to observe dayes, for lucky, or un∣lucky; either to travail, sail, fight, build, marry, plant, sow, buy, sell, or begin any businesse in; to bode good or bad luck, fortune, successe, from the rising up on the right, or left side; from lifting the left leg over the threshold, at first going out of doors. From putting on the hose uneven or a crosse, and the shooe upon the wrong foot. Item, The Band standing awry, the going abroad without his girdle on, the bursting of the shooe latchet, the tingling of the ear, the itching of the eye, the glowing of the cheek, the bleeding of the nose, the stam∣mering in the beginning of a speech, the stumbling as first going about an enterprise; the meeting a begger, or a Priest the first in a morning, the meeting of a Virgin or a Harlot first; the running in of a child betwixt two friends, the just∣ling one another at unawares, one treading upon anothers toes, to meet one fasting that is lame or defective in any mem∣ber, to wash in the same water after another, to be over merry on a suddain, to be given to sighing, and know no cause why; from the dreaming of gold, silver, eggs, gardens, weddings, dead men, dung, &c. From the snorting in sleep, from the sneezing at meat, the spilling of the wine, the overturning of the salt, the dogs howling, the cats licking themselves, the swine grunting, the cocks crowing unseasonably, the pyes chattering about the house, the owles scritching, the swallows falling down the chymney, the crickets chirping behind the chimney stock; or creeping upon the foot-pace. A hare crossing the way, a crow lighting on the right hand, or on the left. To collect, or predict mens manners, and fortunes by their names, or the Anagram upon the name, or the allusion to the name, or the numbers in the name, &c. Who can reckon up all the vain observations, and superstitious ominations of several Nations, persons, sexes, ages, conditions, and occupa∣tions of men? And what hope is there it should be otherwise;
while such artifices and practises are tolerated, which teach to observe them from signal constellations, and Magical opera∣tions? 2. Whether the vain observation of vain dreams, proceed not from the vain dream, and phantastical of the coelestial influences upon the phantastick spirit? For do they not say, That as the coelestial influxes upon corporal matter produce diverse forms: so from the same influxes upon the phantastical power, which is organical, phantasms are impressed, by a coele∣stial disposition, consentaneous to the producing of any effect, especially in dreams; because the minde is then more freed from corporeal, and external cares, or troubles; and so more freely receives those divine influxes? Whence it comes to passe that many things are made known to sleeping men, in dreams, which are hid to the waking. And if this be their chief reason, whereby they would reconcile an opinion of truth to Dreams, why are they not agreed (among themselves) of the causes, yea of the sydereal causes of them? One will have the Intelligence that moves the Moon to cause them, by the means of its light, whereby mens phantasies are irradia∣ted, while they sleep. Others refer them to the influxes of the superiors, yet by the means of certain species, whereby they continually flow from Heaven. Another will have them to depend upon the powers of the soule, the influxes of the Hea∣vens, together with certain images, or resemblances, whether of fantasie or configuration. Others will have them wholly caused by their constellations And if they would bring in the Devil among the rest (as some of them have confest he is not to be kept out) they should finde him to be the greatest cause of all: especially of the vain observation of them, and superstitious omination upon them. Who will deny, that there may be some observation of some dreams, and some in∣terpretation made upon them, as touching either the health, or sicknesse of the body, the vertuous or vitious inclinations and affections of the minde; yea, and (though rarely and ex∣traordinarily) for the caution, and encouragement, as touching some special actions and events? But I demand, of Magical and Astrological men: not so much whether there be one common rule to all, for the interpretation of
dreams, As whether this (taught by themselves) be either a second cause of dreams, or a safe rule to interpret them? viz. That dreams are more efficacious, when the Moon over-runs that signe, which was in the ninth number of the Nativity, or revolution of that yeer; or in the ninth signe, from the signe of perfection. For it is a most true and certain divination; neither doth it proceed from nature, or humane arts, but from purified minds, by divine inspi∣ration. They shall do well, not onely (by true reason) to re∣solve us fully, of the truth they speak: but also (in good sense) of the terms, they speak withal. 3. Whether the vain observations, and superstitious, nay ridiculous ominations of Physiognomie, had ever been so vul∣garly taken up, but by reason of Magick, and Astrologie? For without Physiognomy coelestial; to what purpose is Physiog∣nomy terrestrial? Do they not gather the Physiognomie of Elements, from stars, and starry influences or dispositions? And the physiognomy of Minerals, Gemmes, and Stones; from starry signatures, and figures? The Physiognomie of Herbs, and Plants, from the stars, and Planets? And from their natures and influences; yea, from their signatures, and figure; and so conclude their vertues of sympathie, and anti∣pathie, to be accordingly? The Physiognomie of Beasts, Birds, Fishes; still from starry signatures, and dispositions? Yea, and the Physiognomie of Man, his powers, and parts, from starry temperaments, and planetary inclinations? Nay, do they not call these kinds of impression, second stars: and so prefer them in their Physiognomical ominating, or divining; and thus, not conjecturing onely (upon mens manners, and fortunes) but defining? Herereupon (that I may proceed in their own order) are subtilly obtruded upon the simple world these par∣ticular observations, and ominations; so vain, superstitious, ridiculous; even to the judgement of the Metoposcopists them∣selves. 1. Obs. That a great head is an omen, or a sign of a sluggish Fool; a little head, of a subtile knave; a mid∣dle head, of a liberal wit, a round-head, of a senselesse irrational fellow; a sharp head, of an impudent sot, &c. 2. Obs. That an hard hair signes, or ominates one valiant; and a soft hair, effeminate; and a thin hair, luxurious; and a thick hair, churlish; and a curled hair, covetous; and a plain
hair, prodigal; and a white hair, timerous; and a black hair, violent; and a yellow hair, ingenious; and a red hair, tre∣cherous. 3. Obs. That a great face signes or ominates an epi∣cure; and a little face, a flatterer; a fat face, a sluggard; a lean face, one envious; a long face, injurious; a broad face, litigious; a round face, light; a smooth face, deceitful; a wrinckled face, distrustful; a red face, riotous; and a pale face, malignant. 4. Obs. That a broad forehead signes or marks a man stupid; a little forehead, unconstant; an high forehead pertinacious, a low forehead, lascivious; a square forehead, bold; a round forehead, loud; a wrinckled forehead, thought∣ful; and a smooth forehead, jocond. 5. Obs. That great eyes portend, or signifie shamelesse; and little eyes, covetous; gray eyes, fearful; yellowish eyes, fierce; blewish eyes, pusilla∣nimous; greenish eyes, stout; black eyes, crafty; red eyes, cruel; brown eyes, impudent; spotted eyes, perfidious; rolling eyes, angry, and lustful; twinkling eyes, irresolute; set eyes, stupid; akewed eyes, envious; purblind eyes, perverse prominent, or goggling eyes, simple; and hollow eyes, dis∣sembling. 6. Obs. That the eye-browes or lids, if they hang down, mark or note one intemperate; if thick, shamelesse; if broad, foolish; if little, crafty; if they bend towards the nose, austere and rigid; if to the temples, jeering, and dissembling; if long, arrogant; if thin, silly. 7. Obs. That great eares, presage or note a foole: and little eares, a knave; and long eares, a babbler; and hanging eares, a clowne; and prick eares, a medler; and red eares, shamefast; and plain eares, rude; and soft eares, easie; and hard eares, inexorable. 8. Obs. That a very great nose is a marke or figure of a man that is given to admire himself, and deride all others; a very little nose, signes a man mutable; a long nose, bold; a strait nose babbling; a crooked nose, crooked conditions; a thick nose, impudent; a flat nose, pretending; a bottle nose, dull; a hook nose, dissembling; a broad nose, churlish; a sharpe nose, teasty; a round nose, vainglorious; and a hawk nose, venereous; and a red nose, a lover of strong drink. 9. Obs. That thick cheeks betoken a vain trifler; and fleshy cheekes, a sound eater; and red cheekes, a notorious drunkard; and thin cheekes, a false treacher; and round cheekes, a wanton
deluder; and smooth cheekes, an easie nature; and hairy cheekes, an harsh humour. 10. Obs. That thick lips fore∣speak a foolish talker; and thin lips, a cunning pretender; a prominent upper lip, an injurious slanderer; and a promi∣nent under lip, a vain boaster; an hare lip, a cunning cheater; a pouting lip, a peevish scold; a purse lip, a scraping sneak; and a bladder lip, a nasty slut. 11. Obs. That a great mouth is an omen, or presage of one manly or warlike; a little mouth, of one effeminate, or wanton; a pouch mouth, of a great talker; a purse mouth, of a great lyer; a wide mouth, of a great eater; a narrow and contracted mouth, of a great envyer. 12. Obs That a little chin signes one envious; and a short chin, perfidious; and a long chin, loquacious; and a round and smooth chin, muliebrious; a diffected, and retorted chin, libidinous; and a square and hairy chin, valorous. 13. Obs. That if the teeth be long, sharp, thick, thin, broad, narrow, fast, loose; they signe long lived, or short-lived; and mixtly, gluttonous, audacious, lying, suspitious, envious, versatile, &c. 14. Obs. That a long tongue speaks a man garrulous; a short tongue, dumpish; a broad tongue, liquo∣rish; a narrow tongue, querulous; a quick and voluble tongue, rash, and hasty; a slow and drawling tongue, dull, and reserved; a stuttering or stammering tongue, ignorant, or but half witted. 15. Obs. That as the voyces of men are great or small, high, or low, quick, or slow: so are they to be argu∣ed for angry, or gentle; true, or false; audacious, or time∣rous; modest, or impudent, &c. 16. Obs. That to be facile of speech, notes levity; and to be difficult of speech, morosi∣ty; short speech, notes passion; and long speech, affectation; to speak through the teeth, notes folly, and fantasticknesse; and through the nose, lying, and dissimulation. 17. Obs. That a long and lean neck, notes one for talkative, foolish, fear∣ful; a short neck and fat, for rude, and voracious; a thick fleshy neck, for angry, and ireful; an hard neck, for indocible; a fat neck, for docible; a stiffe neck and immoveable, for per∣tinacious; a straight neck, for proud and contumacious; a crooked or wry neck, for penurious and malignant; a neck leaning to the right hand, for shamefast; to the left hand, for shamelesse. 18. Obs. That a sharp and narrow throat
signes a man light, and loquacious, a wide throat, voracious, or greedy; the bunch upon the throat, if it be outwardly pro∣minent, signes a man malepert; if it be inwardly contracted, it signes him difficult, and troublesome. 19. Obs. That a great breast is marking and figuring a man strong, & magnanimous; a little breast weak and pusillanimous; a broad breast, wise and honest; a narrow breast, witty and subtile; a fleshy breast, timo∣rous, and lazy; an hairy breast, libidinous; a smooth, effeminate; an out breast, unconstant; an hollow breast, deceitful; a red breast ireful; swagging breasts, drunken, and whorish. 20 Obs. That a great belly and fleshy, shews one gluttonous, drunken, lustful, proud; an hard belly, rude and gluttonous; a soft belly, ho∣nest and magnanimous: a mean belly, prudent and ingenious; an hairy belly, lustful, light, instable. 21. Obs. That strong ribs signe manly; weak ribs, womanish; slender and short ribs, pusillanimous, malignant, voracious; puft and swol∣len ribs, loquacious, and nugatious; fat ribs, sottish; lean ribs, wily. 22. Obs. That a great back is a signe of a man strong and stout, and a little back, of one wretched, and time∣rous; a lean back witty: a fat back, lazy; an hairy back, ri∣gid; a bunch back, malicious. 23. Obs. That broad shoul∣ders signe valiant; narrow shoulders, illiberal; high, or out shoulders, arrogant; cromp shoulders, malicious. 24. Obs. That long arms betoken a man ambitious; short armes, male∣volous; brawny armes, dull; and veiny armes, venereous. 25. Obs. That short thighes signe envious; and hairy thighes lustful; and leane thighes, peevish; and thick thighes, slug∣gish. 26. Obs. That loose kneed, signifies lascivious, and baker kneed, effeminate. 27. Obs. That fat and fleshy hips signe mulierous; leane and lank hips, malignant. 28. Obs. That the spindle legd, are fearful; hairy legg'd, lustful; stump legg'd, servile; bow-legg'd, various. 29. Obs. That the long footed, are fraudulent; and short footed, sudden; and splay footed, silly; club footed, naughty. 30. Obs. That long and lean toes, signe rude, and unwise; short and thick toes, rash, and heady; toes that clinch together, signe covetous and luxurious; toes that start asunder, signe light, and loqua∣cious. Oh! Is not this a rare and profound art (fit for none but Gipsies and Juglers to professe) that teaches to judge of
men as men judge of horses; by their shape, and making: or as country swayns estimate their cattle; by their horn, and hide, and hoof? 4. As Metoposcopie, or the inspecting of the front, or fore∣head; (together with other parts of Physiognomie) boasts it self for the Scholler: so whether Chiremancy, or Palmestry; (the inspecting of the hand, or palme) may not be account∣ed for a mistresse, in observating, and ominating Magick, and Astrologie? Why distinguish they betwixt Chiromancy Phy∣sical, and Astrological? As it physical conjectures were not e∣nough; there must also be Astrological divination. And to this purpose; what fictitious appellations of Minuts and Lines to be reckoned according to the number; and explained ac∣cording to the nature of the Planets? What a Chyroscopi∣cal horoscope, or a Planetarian Manual, of jugling, legerde∣main, and superstitious imposture? From the Magical cha∣racters of the heavens, in the hand; what Astrological prog∣nostications, or ominations; not of corporal motions, and temper; and not onely of civil actions, and events; but even of spiritual affections, and manners? Is it by the help of art, that they here probably conjecture? Nay, is it not by diabolical instinct, that they here peremptorily vaticinate, or ominate of long life, short life, marriage, single life, fortuni∣ty, infortunity, vertue, and vice? Yet for all that, what's here that is not as vainly observed, and as ridiculously ominated and portended; as in any other part of Physiognomie? As a great thick hand signes one not onely strong, but stout; a little slender hand, one not onely weak, but timerous; a long hand, and long fingers, betoken a man not onely apt for me∣chanical artifice, but liberally ingenious; but those short on the contrary, note a foole, and fit for not hing: an hard braw∣ny hand signes dull, and rude; a soft hand witty, but effemi∣nate: an hairy hand, luxurious; long joynts, signe generous; yet if they be thick withal, not so ingenious; the often clap∣ping and folding of the hands, note covetous; and their much moving in speech, loquacious; an ambidexter is noted for ireful, crafty, injurious; short and fat fingers, mark a man out for intemperate and silly; but long and leane, for witty; if his fingers crook upward, that shewes him liberal; if down∣ward,
niggardly; the lines spreading at the bottom joynt of the thumb, signe contentious, the line above the middle of the thumbe, if it meet round about, portends a hanging destiny: many lines transverse upon the last joynt of the forefinger, note riches by heirdome: and right lines there, are a note of a jovi∣al nature: lines in the points of the middle finger (like a grid∣iron) note a melancholly wit, and unhappy: if the signe on the little finger be conspicuous, they note a good wit, and eloquent, but the contrary, if obscure: equal lines upon the first joynt of the ring finger, are marks of an happy wit; long nayles and crooked, signe one brutish, ravenous, unchaste: very short nails, pale, and sharp, shew him false, subtile, be∣guiling: and so round nails, libidinous: but nails broad, plain, thin, white, and reddish, are the tokens of a very good wit. I say no more, but could they respect the heart, as well as the hand (and not the substance, but the qualities of it) they might learn to speak the words of truth, and sober∣nesse. 5. Which way go the Physiognomists, Metoposcopists, and Chiromantists to work (for all this observation, and omina∣tion of theirs) but either (as they pretend) from the cause, to the effect. And how is that? but first judging and pro∣nouncing the man, or the member, to be Saturnine, Jovial, Martial, Solar, Venereal, Mercurial, Lunar. Or else, from the effect, to the cause (as they say) by collecting their horoscope from the habitude of the body? And thus what do they? but trifle, and delude which way they please, by inspections, observations, ominations, predictions of manners, and for∣tunes, to the great dishonour of God, and reproach of Na∣ture; were it not that their art is proved to be an absurd im∣posture, both by reason, experience, vertue, and Grace. For what can they say? but that passions, and affections may break forth, and shew themselves in the alterations of some outward parts. What then? Because they may do so in some parts: will they therefore make all to be signifying, and signing? Nay, and even in those parts, where those eruptions, or signi∣fications are, it is but upon a present provocation: will they then make such collections, and presagitions by them, as if they were habitually seated there? But I am weary of these frivo∣lous
Artists, I will therefore only turn them over to their own fautors, who tell them plainly, that it is not necessary, nor of any rational consecution, that the condition, manners, and studies, and institutes of mans nature (together with the pro∣pensions, and agitations of his minde) should be accommo∣dated to external marks: neither yet to be measured by any signal lineaments of his body. Because a man may conceive, and agitate many things inwardly in his minde: whereof there is not the least shew or appearance outwardly in his bo∣dy. And because a man may be of an enormous body, and distorted members: and neverthelesse possesse a minde excel∣lent in all good culture: and on the contrary, be of a decent and compleat frame or shape, and yet of manners ugly and ill∣favoured enough. And that there is not the least reason, nor any rule of truth for these their conjectures, observations, and ominations: neither are they agreed among themselves, about their own absurd figments. And therefore it is to be suspe∣cted, that these nugacious kinds of men do onely dote through the instinct of the devil, drawing them from errour into su∣perstition, and from that into infidelity. 6. Whether Augurizing, auspicating, and aruspicinating (and all such heathenish observations, and ominations) were not founded upon Magick and Astrologie? For not onely these descended from the Chaldeans, to the Greeks, and from them to the Hetrurians: and from them, to the Latines. But there had never been (very like) neither faith in, nor practise of any such, had not the Artists taught, that there are certain lights of praesagition, descending from the coelestial bodies, upon all inferiour creatures: as certain signes in their motion, site, gesture, flight, voice, colour, meat, &c. So that omination, or divination may well be made from the similitude, and conve∣nience betwixt them, and the stars. For beasts, and birds, their parts and entrails, their flyings, and cryings, &c. How can these (considered onely in themselves) be causes of future events? Yea, how can they be so much as signes? Unlesse they be taken as effects of some other causes, that may cause, or signe future things. And what can they be, but the coe∣lestial motions? And therefore they must prenuntiate future events, in their conformity to the coelestial bodies: and sub∣jection
to the disposition of the stars. So that thus it is, that they are brought to presage (besides out of a natural instinct, such things as may concern themselvs, as in storms, and showers) out of a preternatural and astral disposition, such ominous acci∣dents as may befal others. To have observed an old Augur, seat∣ed on the top of his tower, the ayre being cleer, and cloudlesse, with his Lituus in his hand; quartering out the regions of the heavens, &c. who would not have taken him to have been an Astrologer? And who would not take our Astrologers to be Augurs, and Auspicinators; that can fancy no more apt and comparable motion of the stars: then that the stars flit and hover in the heavens, just as the birds flie and flutter in the ayre? 7. Whether the Cabalistical art, was not the tradition of Rabbinish Magicians and Astrologers? And what a shame is it that Magicians themselves should tell us, that although the art be old, yet the name and appellation, is but of later in∣vention, and not known, till imposed by, and among Chri∣stians? But it is well, that they themselves will acknowledge it, to be a certain Theurgical Magick, and nothing else but a meer rapsodie of superstition, a play of allegories, and speculati∣on of idle brains. And indeed, who can think otherwise of it? When they teach, that he who is expert in this Cabalistical Magick of names, numbers, letters, characters, symbols, fi∣gures, elements, lines, points, accents, spirits, and other mi∣nute things, all significative of the profoundest secrets: he shal foreknow, and foretel things future; have power over An∣gels, and Divels, command whole nature, make all things o∣bey him as he will; work miracles, rule the heavens, make the Sun stand still, and go back; divide the Sea, dry up Rivers: remove mountains, raise the dead, &c. and all this at his own will, and with lesse then a word. 8. Whether the paganish Oracles were not founded upon Magick, and Astrology, or by Magicians and Astrologers? And whether it be not confest by them, that they could not o∣minate, or give answer: because the stars made not way for them? 9. Whether the art, called the Art Notorie, had ever been so notorious, but for Magick, and Astrologie? A notorious
art indeed: and worthy to be noted with a black coal, or a piece of the blackest art, for all the white pretext; Which is, to attain unto science, or knowledge (not onely of things na∣tural, and moral, but spiritual, and divine) by inspection of certain figures, and characters, and prolation of certain un∣known words: yea and by some pact (solemn, or secret) with the devil: not without the vain observations of certain super∣stitious acts and ceremonies, in fasting, prayers, confessions, humiliations, invocations, adorations: upon certain days of the new Moon, about Sun rising: either in Churches, houses, barns, fields, or woods. And so start upon a suddain (by some inspiration or insused suggestion of an evil spirit, prompting the mouth to speak like a Parrot, but not enlightning the mind to apprehend, or understand) a preacher, a teacher, an ex∣pounder, a prophesier, predictor, wiseman, artist: and that without any study, labor, hearing, reading, conference; or other ordinary way of acquisite learning. And so to boast himself illuminated and instructed, like any Prophet, Apostle, or Angel of God. And now (it is agreed among themselves) their Art shall no more be called the Notorious (for in truth, they neither conceive what they say, while they are uttering, nor remember it after they have uttered: nor are able to give any reason of their faith or science, that is in them, or comes from them) but the art Spiritual, the Angelical, yea the Pauline art. For they are now gotten beyond Solomons way of wis∣dome, and have already attained to revelation (after an ex∣tatick and enthusiastick manner) not unlike, nay not unequal to that of Paul himself, when he was wrapt into the third heavens. Of this Diabolical, Magical, Necromantical, Sor∣tilegious, Fanatical Art, or injection, fame is common, as concerning a young man (at this day) in our neighbouring Country: which I but onely intimate from the generall re∣port, as not being particularly informed thereof. Onely I would ask of our Magical Planetarians, what is the reason that they are so furious for the rooting out of the Mini∣stry? Is it not because they would set up others in their stead, according to this their own Art of Ordination? 10. Whether Alchymie (that enticing, yet nice harlot) had made so many Fooles, and Beggers, had she not clothed,
or painted her selfe with such Astrological phrases and Ma∣gical practices? But I let this Kitchin Magick, or Chimney Astrology passe. The sweltring drudges: and smoaky sculli∣ons of it (if they may not bring in new fewel to the fire) are soon taught (by their past observed folly) to ominate their own late repentance. But if they will obstinately per∣sist, in hope to sell their smoak, let others beware, how they buy it too dear. 11. Whether Pericepts, Amulets, Praefiseinals, Phylacteries, Niceteries, Ligatures, Suspensions, Charmes, and Spels, had ever been used, applyed, or carried about: but for Magick and Astrologie? Their supposed efficacy (in curing diseases, and preventing of perils) being taught from their fabricati∣on, configuration, and confection, under such and such sy∣dereal aspects, conjunctions, constellations? 12. Whether many of the fantastick errors, and opinions, concerning the coming of Antichrist, of the thousand yeers, of the end of the world, and of the day of judgement: have not at least been renovated, and promoted by Astrologers and Magi∣gicians? For these have been suspected by their friends (such is their arted fury) for dropping into enthusiastical and fana∣tical prophecies and predictions. And we know they have undertaken to determine the time of the worlds durance; and to foretel the day of judgement from the stars: and were they but well interrogated about the other two; surely their all∣seeing Art would not sit out. CHAP. XXI. From the singularity of Prophecy. 1. WHether, as it hath been a great pretext of humane curiosity, so it hath not been a great defect of humane incuriousnesse; in not discerning di∣vine Prophecy; but confounding it promiscuously, and syno∣nymously with other prophane names, and mysteries: As Di∣vination,
vaticination, praenotion, omination, ariolation, praesagition, praediction, prognostication, conjectation, &c? All which tearms are either of a bad acceptation; or not good, save onely in a civil sense, and that but as touching some parti∣culars onely, whereas Prophecy simply is alwayes taken in the best Part: neither is the act of prophecying; nor the appellati∣on of a Prophet, attributed to any (the whole Scriptures throughout) that are not called and approved of God Unlesse it be so ironically, as that the context, yea and the very adjuncts set forth a plain note of difference; that they are only so called from their own presumption; or else from a popular repute. 2. Whether these sundry differences have not been observed concluded, confessed, betwixt divine Prophecy and divina∣tion in all the names, and kinds. viz. 1. Prophecy is from God, a gift inspired by the Holy Spirit: Divination is from the Devil, a delusion suggested by an evil spirit. 2: Prophecy was never but according to Gods Covenant; Divination is sel∣domwithout a pact, or covenant with the Devil. 3. Prophe∣cy is Gods consulting with the creature: Divination is the creature consulting with the creature. or, one is a consult∣ing with God, and not with the creature: the other is a con∣sulting with the creature, and not with God. 4. Prophecy is first motioned, and freely offered by God: Divination is temptingly, and sorcerously sought for (as was Balaams own way) and not onely provoked, but presumed also. 5. Pro∣phecy hath been concerning some special persons, and their ex∣traordinary actions: Divination (even the Magical, and Astro∣logical) is ordinary for all men, their manners, and fortunes. 6. Prophecy hath never been, but of matters weighty, and serious: Divination hath often been of things vain, and ludicrous. 7. Prophecy is of those things that are necessary to be known: Divination (Magical and Astrological) is of those things that are not necessary to be known. 8. Prophecy is of those things, that are onely known to God; and cannot be known to others, without Prophecy, or Revelation: Divination is either of those things, that cannot be known by divination; or else of those, that may be known without it. 9. Prophe∣cy is of things true, certain, infallible; because immediately from God, the first cause: Dvination is of things false, and uncertain, and but probable at most; because either from the
Devil, or but from the creatures, and second causes. 10. Pro∣phecy considers things in God, and therefore is im∣movable: Divination considers things in the creature, and therefore must be mutable. 11. No Prophet ever made him∣self the author of his own Prophecy; but Thus saith the Lord, &c. But the Devil, and Diviners arrogate their predictions to themselves, and to the absolutenesse of their own Art. 12. The gift of Prophecy ceased in the act: But Divination they wil have to remain still in the Art. 13. Prophecy is not a permanent ha∣bit, but a transient act, that the prophets themselves might know and confesse, that they had it not but by gift, and occasionally according to Gods good pleasure (for the prophecy came not at any time by the will of man. 2 Pet. 1.21.) but Divination, or Astrological prediction is a stated Art (as they say) and they may not onely study it, but practise it at their own wills and pleasures. 14. It is not for every Prophet to know every thing that is prophecyable: But (for so they pretend) it is for any prognosticator, to know any thing that is prognostica∣ble. 15. Prophets, besides the Spirit of Prophecy, may have the instincts of their own spirits, which might sometimes de∣ceive them: But Diviners, and Prognosticators, besides the in∣stinct of their own spirit, are obnoxious to Satanical delusion; whereby they often both are deceived, and do deceive. 16. Pro∣phecy is true in the ground, although it may fail in the effect; because the principle thereof is the prime verity: Divination, though it take effect, yet is it false; both because of falsity in the author, and ground, and means, and end. 17. The pre∣vention of things prophecyed, argues no falshood, or defect in Prophecy; because God may reveal some things to his Pro∣phets, as in their second causes, which may be impedited; and some things might be prophesyed conditionally, and with in∣tent that they might be prevented; however to be referred to Gods good and wise dispensation; yea and the Prophets themselves were instructed, and enabled to prophesie as well of their prevention, as of their consecution: But who can say so much of Divination? 18. God may (in mercy) suffer a true Prophesie to be frustrated: and (in judgement) may per∣mit a false divination to take effect. 19. The Prophets were sometimes prevented, as touching their predictions of evils, and judgements: But the diviners and false prophets were fru∣strated
in their predictions of blessings, and good things. 20. The Prophets foretold Gods judgements with grief and condoling; wishing that they might rather be accounted for false Prophets then that such heavy things should befall Gods people transgressing: the Diviners, and Prognosticators, glo∣ry to presage confusion to Nations, Kingdomes, Churches, Christians; and are very little touched with the destruction of all or any; so their predictions may take place. 21. That Prophecy hath been prevented, or failed in effect, was meerly because of the liberty of Gods will: but Divination, or A∣strological prediction, may be defeated even by the liberty of mans will alone. 22. Prophecy, enlightens the understand∣ing, and perfects it: so does not Divination; but onely (af∣ter a confused manner) alters the imagination. 23. In Prophecy, it is the intellect that moves the phantasie: but in Divination, it is the phantasie that moves the intellect. For Prophecy illuminates immediately, beginning at the mind and heart: which divination cannot do; because it begins at the senses, and so to the phantasie, to the imagination. So that a Prophet understands his own Prophesie: so doth not a diviner his own divination. 24. Extasies of Prophets did not so abalienate their mindes, as that they apprehended not what they did, or said: as indeed it is in the dementating fu∣ries of divination. For theirs was onely but an abstraction of the minde from outward, sensible, and terrene things: not a distraction of it within it self; as in these. 25. The Pro∣phets mingled godly and wise instructions, together with their Predictions; that they might not seem to neglect the present, by prying into the future: both which, are both the sloath, and businesse of all prognosticating predictors. 26. Prophe∣sies serve to instruct all ages: divinations, instead of instru∣cting, have onely proved to distract present times, and that's all. 27. The gift or grace of Prophecy was given for the things of Faith, and true worship: Divination hath onely been used to seduce from both. 28. Prophecy was inspired by God, for the prevention of Idolatry, superstition, sorcery: Divination hath been suggested by the devil, as an occasion, and promotion of them all. 29. All things are subject to prophetical illumination; as things past, present, and to come,
things necessary, contingent, casual; things natural, superna∣tural, spiritual; things intellectual, rational, arbitrary; things moral, religious, temporal, and eternal: so are they not to di∣vination, or Astrological prediction. 30. Prophecy hath been of the very thoughts of the heart themselves; because immediately from God, who knoweth the heart: but Divina∣tion can discern of no thoughts simply, as they are in the in∣tellect; neither of affections, as they are meerly in the will: but onely guesses at them by certain external species, signes, or effects. Yea, though they be thoughts of the devils own in∣jecting, yet he discerns not their affirmation, or negation (sc. their complacency, or reluctancy) in the immanent act of the understanding, or the will: save onely as transeunt, or break∣ing forth externally by certain signes and symptomes of pas∣sions, and affections. 31. Prophecy is then most high and admirable, when it exceeds all humane reason: Divination, or any such kinde of prediction, is then most vile and abomi∣nable, when it is not subject to it. 32. The devil can neither prophesie, nor make prophets: but the devil can both predict and make predictors. 33. Prophecy, as it is not hereditary by nature: so neither is it propagatory by art: but Magical divination is the one; and Astrological is the other. 34. Prophecy, in obscurest things, is sincere: Divination, in plain∣est things, is equivocal. 35. Prophecy is not venal, or to be bought, and hired with mony, and preferments: as Magical divinations, and Astrological predictions are. Neither were the true Prophets mercenary, covetous, ambitious; as the false Prophets and Diviners were. 36. Holy men were alwayes humble in the gift of Prophecy: prophane men have been proud of the Art of divination, or prediction. 37. True Prophets never prophesyed things formally false: much lesse those wittingly, and willingly; as false Prophets and Divi∣ners have done. 38. True Prophets never hunted the favors of man in place, and power; by flatring predictions even to evil men, and sad presages even against good men: as Magical and Astrological Diviners have alwayes used to do. 39. Pro∣phesies were then most rigorous, and the Prophets most zeal∣ous; when they themselves were most persecuted, and despised: but let Magicians, Necromancers, Diviners, Soothsayers, for∣tunetellers,
Gipsies, Juglers, Prognosticators, and Predictors. &c. be severely examined according to Lawes; and then the sortilegious spirit straightway leavs them. And now, they are able to forespeak no mans fate, or destiny; they are so di∣stracted in suspecting their own. Thus the Art perishes, in the peril of the Artificer: as the malefice is prevented, or cured in the execution of the Witch. 40. It was a curse, and expres∣ly threatned as a curse; for the Church of the Old Testament to want her Prophets: but it was a blessing, and expressely promised as a blessing, that Diviners, Soothsayers, and all such like, should be expelled out of her. And what faithful man and wise, would not think it a like blessing to a Christian Church, and Commonwealth? Now, if any man will take the pains to order this accumulation of differences; how easi¦ly might he observe (through various particulars) Prophecy, and Divination, to be two things utterly different in Author, means, matter, form, subject, object, end, and effect? 3. Whether these true signes of false prophesyings, serve not sufficiently to discern falseness, or superstitiousness of Magi∣cal and Astrological predictings; As 1. If the prophesying or predicting be of such things, as humane reason, or prudence, might justly suspect, or easily finde out, without it. 2. If it serve to set open such presumptions, as are not according to the eternal Law of the written Word. 3. If it pretend to put ex∣traordinarily upon such actions, to which the ordinary rules of the word are a plain guide; and the exhortations a suffici∣ent spur without it. 4. If it intends falshood, under a pre∣text of truth: or evil, under a colour of good. 5. If it di∣rectly tend to a discouraging of vertue, and vertuous men: or an encouraging of vice, and vitious man. 6. If it be of some lesser good, to hinder a greater good. 7. If it be for the use of unlawful means, although to seeming good ends. 8. If it tend to heresie, errour, innovation, schism, and faction in the Church of Christ. 9. If to the subversion, or obstruction of good Lawes in a Christian Commonwealth. 10. If to set civil States in a combustion; especially such as are Christian. 11. If it be to the advancement of a few; and to the disad∣vantage of a Many: and those as dear children of God; as eminent in parts, and piety; and every way as hopeful, as use∣ful
for Gods glory and the publike good. 12. If the prophe∣syer or predictor shall presume himself for singularly, and ex∣traordinarily chosen out, and stirred up, to reveale secrets, a∣mongst a hundred, both of more eminent places, and graces, then himself. 13. If he shall pride himself in a singular gift: or prefer it to the favour, and comfort of a saving grace. 14. If vain, or corrupt imaginations immediately forego, or fol∣low the revelation. 15. If erroneous, inordinate, passionate, affected words, and phrases accompany the delivery, or pro∣nuntiation thereof. 16. If the person of the prophecyer or predictor be noted for idolatry, infidelity, superstition, here∣sie, schism, athiesm, hypocrisie, prophaneness, carnality, inso∣briety, covetousness, ambition, sedition, curiosity, vanity, le∣vity, sorcery, envy, flattery, &c. Oh that we did but observe these, and the like, to examine upon them! Doubtless, we might with sounder judgements, and safer Consciences, pronounce upon our predictors, and their predictions; then either of them could do upon us. 4. Whether the Devil can Prophecy, and Predict? Prophe∣cie he cannot; for that's to speak from the Holy Spirit; which the devil cannot, will not do. Yea it is to speak so, as moved by the Holy Ghost. Now though the Holy Ghost may move, or command the devil to speak whether he will or no: yet for him to do it as moved, that was not onely to be inspired, but to receive the inspiration with approbation; or some conformi∣ty of affection, and intention; which to a devil is incompa∣tible. Nevertheless, predict he may in some things, through the divine both permission and injunction. And but in some things. For the devil cannot foreknow, or foretel such things, as depends absolutely upon Gods wil. Nor yet those things, which depend arbitrarily upon mans own will. Nor the thoughts, and immaginations of mans heart. Nor what entertainments his own suggestions have there, at their first motion. Nor what the good Angels intend. Nor what they are sent to ef∣fect in the world, or the Church. Nor can he foresee any thing in it self, nor any thing, that hath not a natural, and particular cause. Nor yet what particular impediment may hinder that natural cause from effecting. Now I would ask of Magicians, and Astrologers; whether they can foresee, or
foretel more, then the devil himself can do? Yet I would ask again; whether the Magical and Astrological prescience, and presagition, be not much after the same manner, as the diaboli∣cal is? For the devil acquires his, by long observation, and of∣ten experience of things. He knows well natural causes, and can see their following effects as present in them. He under∣stands mens bodily temperaments, and to what passions or af∣fections they usual dispose: and which way mens sensitive ap∣petites may ordinarily prevail to incline their wills. He can recollect the wickedness of Times, and Nations; and can guess by the multitude, lawlesness, and impunity of their iniquities among men; how ner they are to the judgements of God; And accordingly can conjecture, and predict the punishment of a people; by war, famine, pestilence, &c. He can certain∣ly foretel these things, that depend upon necessary causes; and have no other natural cause to hinder them: as the motions of the stars, Eclipses, conjunctions, &c. But if they be not necessary (although falling out for the most part) but may have some other natural causes hindring them: those he can foretel but probably, and by conjecture; as showers, storms, tem∣pests, &c. He can certainly foretel those malefices, which (by Gods permission) he intends to act, either by himself, or by his sworn instruments. He can disclose such corrupt cogitations as himself hath injected: especially so far forth, as he observed them to take impression with complacency. And for secret lusts, manners, and actions (such as himself hath been an in∣timate witnesse of) he can reveal them to his Magical instru∣ments: and make them (if God will permit) object them to mens faces, and bewray them to the world. He is continual∣ly so going to and fro in the earth, that he can tel what is doing even in remotest places: and (such is his agility) can suddenly convey it to his absent instruments, or Artists; and make them relate it as if they were present. Hidden treasures, lost goods, thefts, murders secretly committed; these (because done in his presence, and kept in his remembrance) he can disclose to, and by his Agents; if men will consult, and God give leave. Yea, he can presage many things from the prophecies of the Word; whose historicall part he understands better then men.
5. Why God permits the devil and Diviners oft times to predict things future? Is it not to distinguish betwixt his speci∣al, spiritual, and saving graces: and his extraordinary, tem∣porary, and transient gifts? That none might presume of an inlightened minde, or a conformed will: because of such acts as may be without the least touch, either of the one or the other? Nor arrogate to themselves a likeness to Angels, for such presagitions, as wherein the beasts may surpass them? Is it not, that ungodly men and profane may thus so much the more be given over to their own superstitions, and diabolical delusions? And to teach the faithful, and godly, not to covet, affect, admire, or undiscreetly approve of those gifts: which are no perpetual and infallible tokens of Gods grace, and fa∣vour. Especially, neither to be acting in, nor attending to, those vain curiosities; which Satan may suggest, and wicked men and infidels may attain unto. 6. Whether the devil or divining predictors, ought to be be∣lieved, should they foretel truth? The Devil abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lye, he speaketh of his own: for he is a lyar, and the father of it. Joh. 8.44. Eve ought not to have believed him, because he spake of his own, Gen. 3. Ahab was not bound to be perswaded by him, 1 King. 22.20, 21, 22. Because though he had a Com∣mission or permission from God; yet he exceeded it, and spake of his own. But I make a question whether Saul ought not to have believed him; 1 Sam. 28.19. Because he now spake not of his own. God is to be believed even in the Devil him∣self. But then, it might be evident, that he not onely speaks the things of God, but from God: that is, both the truth, and by a special warrant. Otherwise, there's no accepting of his Testimony (be it never so true) if he take it up of his own Authority. And therefore our Saviour Christ would neither assent to, nor approve of the Devils, although they spake the truth, Mark. 7.24, 25. & 3.11, 12. No more did St. Paul, to the truth that was spoken by the Spirit of Divination, Act. 16.16, 17, 18. We are taught, that Satan may transform himself into an Angel of light, and so may his Ministers like∣wise. And therefore we held our selves not obliged simply to believe either the one, or the other; even in the best they can
say. Because they may lye, in telling truth; may tell truth, to deceive; may prejudice a greater, in uttering a lesser truth; may usurp it of themselves; may arrogate it to themselves. When did God send the devil on a message, to instruct his Church in the truth; or to promise good unto his children? If he be sent extraordinarily to pronuntiate to the wicked, and reprobates, their destinated judgements, and deserts; they may be so conscious within themselves, as to have cause to be∣lieve them. But as for holy men, and elect, if they be not tyed to believe their truth, how much rather ought they to take heed of their strong delusions, as not to believe their lyes? 7. Whether a wicked man may prophesie: or a godly man divine? Although godly men are more subject to wicked mens sins, then wicked men are capable of godly mens graces; Yet godly men (as godly men) cannot be infected with wicked mens divining: neither can wicked men (as wicked men) be endowed with godly mens prophecying. Joseph is pretended to divine: yet is it but a pretence, of a pretence; if it be taken in the worst sense, as hath been said before. Balaam took up his parable (a dark saying, which he himself understood not) and God put a word in his mouth (which never affected his heart) But Balaam had no more the gift, and spirit of prophesying, then his Asse had the gift, and spirit of speaking. May we not then determine it thus? God may be pleased so to dispense prophecying, as sometimes to prompt a wicked man with the act, sound, or prolation of it: but inspires, or indues godly men alone with the gift, sense, and spirit of prophecy. For the spirit of prophecy delights in sanctity, and purity. And to perfect prophecy is required, not onely the illumination of the minde; but the assent also of the will (as to Gods revela∣tion, authority, pleasure, message, truth, glory) which indeed cannot be in an ungodly man. In Scripture a good man, and a Prophet, are Synonyma's: and a man of God, and a Prophet, con∣vertible terms. And a bad man is never so called, but with some epithete betokening the abusive appellation. Goodness of manners, though it necessarily prepares not of it self, to the acquisition of prophecy (because it is a free, sudden, extraor∣dinary insult, or illapse) Yet badnesse of manners is alwayes
of it self, an utter impediment. Onely, God may be pleased (in such singular acts) so to abalienate, or suspend corruptions for the present, as sometimes to make good use of ill instru∣ments, for others sakes: but not often, or for their own; as he hath been been pleased to act with those, whose hearts he hath changed, and renewed. 8. How chance the Prophets that prophecyed not onely by words, but by Facts, and by Signes also (and by so many, and ordinary Signes) yet none of them, once prophecyed from the stars, or their constellations? Was not that vertue in them? Or was it not observed in them, in their time? Were they fain to make use of terrestrial signes, because the coe∣lestials were out of their reach? Nay, was it not to let us un∣derstand, That God, and his Prophets could make the meanest signes upon earth, to confirm their Prophecies: whereas the devil and diviners are not able to make the great∣est signes in Heaven, to confirm their Prognostications? Why did Christ refuse to shew a signe from Heaven, in proof of his Messiahship? Matt. 16.1, 4. Because they sought it; and sought it temptingly, and sought it for themselves. They would have signes among signes, and miracles among mira∣cles; and such signes and miracles as they themselves fancyed; and such as might assimilate their own prognosticating super∣stition, and vain observation; and such a signe, as was not prophecyed, that the Messiah should do; and such as had nei∣ther just cause, necessity, nor end, for which they should desire it. Besides, that the Prophets revealed nothing from the stars; and Christ denyed to make any such demonstration of himself, his doctrine, and miracles; because it was not prophecyed of him: and therefore he refers them onely to a prophecyed sign, the signe of the prophet Jonas: enough to signifie, of how little necessity all sydereal observation, or operation is to pure Pro∣phecy. But I demand further; if there were any congruity, or consistency betwixt Prophecy, and mag-astro-mancy; why then was the one a singular, extraordinary, and temporary gift to Gods people, and the other made a common Art, or Trade, to Idolators, Infidels, and men prophane? 9. Whether Prophecy be natural? Or yet of any artificial preparation? The Occult Philosophizers, Magical Mirabi∣laries,
and astral Fabricators, are for both (yea besides the seed of the soul, and the humours of the body, they pretend the parts of beasts, stones, herbs, and outward ceremonies, all to be effectually disposing to Prophecie.) But the truth is for nei∣ther. For Prophecy indeed is not natural, but supernatural: not artificial, or acquisite; but infused, or inspired. Prophe∣cy is immediate, sudden, momentany; the disposition (at one instant) infused together with the act: yea and the very par∣ticular disposition ceasing, when the particular act ceaseth. It never finds it subject capable to receive it, but makes it so: neither leaves it in the least capacity to acquire, or expect it presently again. But if it please to return, it still makes its own way (oft times another, a new way) for it self. What inclination of nature, or preparation of Art doth it require; when it can take the ignorant, as well as the learned; the Idi∣ot, as well as the Artist; yea a corrupt heart, and a false mouth and neverthelesse make it forespeak its own infallible truth? No nature or essence is prophetical of it self, but that which is incomprehensible, and comprehending all things. If our na∣ture had any such inclination in it self; why should we not all prophesie? And alwayes prophesie? And prophesie when we please? And prophesie of one thing as well as another? And one prophesie, as well as another? To whom then should we prophesie? And how should our pronuntiating be of those things, which are hidden to the common sense, and ordinary apprehension of men, among whom we are con∣versant? How should Prophecy be said to exceed all natu∣ral cognition; if it may proceed from any natural inclinati∣on? And how shall we distinguish betwixt Prophecie, which hath revealed, and reveals things, as they are in them∣selves: and prognostication, which (at most) can but predict some things, as they are in their natural causes, and dispositi∣ons? What praevious disposition to prophesie (either natu∣rally, or artificially) was there in Ames, when he said, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophets son; but I was an heardman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit. And the Lord took me, as I fol∣lowed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go prophecy. Amos 7.14, 15. As for Elisha's calling for a Minstrel: 2 King. 3.15. This was not to procure, or excite prophesie: but to
sedate passions and affections; and so make himself fitter for contemplation and devotion. Not as if (according to the Rabbinical conceit) the spirit of Prophecie had now made its recesse from him, because of some perturbation of his, in be∣ing so exasperated against Jehoram; For that was a true zeal of God, and that is never inordinate: neither serves it to a∣bate, but promote Gods gifts. But say he had been somewhat disquieted, and distracted from the spirit of Prophecie; how was it in the force and vertue of Musick to restore it? Musick could do that neither naturally, nor artificially: if it did it at all, it must do it miraculously. The prophets very calling for Musick, was a prophesie; Signifying that the spirit of Pro∣phecie rests not in turbulent, distracted, factious, seditious minds: but in harmonious, unanimous, appeased, and peace∣able hearts. But let them contend Prophecie to be of natural disposition, and artificial preparation; that would so take off theirs, from being thought diabolical: what need we do so, that hold Prophecie to be wholly divine? Nature, and Art cannot so much credit the Astrological, as they prejudice the Theological prophesie. 10. Whether Prophesie be not now ceast? It was never in∣tended to be perpetual. Even while it was, it was an act; not an habit: not permanent, but transient. The Spirit now in the illapse, and again upon the recesse. It was a gift or grace, not so much personal, as vocational: pertaining not to or∣dinary duty so much, as extraordinary occasion. Nor was it so necessary, that men should be taught to look after things future: as how to use the present time aright. The prophets were but types of that great Prophet: and all prophesie had its main end, and completion in Christ. It was therefore meet that the shadow should recede, now that the substance came in place; Prophecy was necessary for the Church of the Old-Testament, because Christ was not yet come: but not so in this of the New; because Christ is come already. We have an Evangeli∣cal prophesie, abundantly recompencing that lack of the legal: being a gift or grace not extraordinary, but ordinary; not temporary, but perpetual; not singular, but universal; not vocational onely, but personal; not an act common to repro∣bates, but an habit peculiar to the Saints. Not of propound∣ing
things of future times: but of expounding the future things of eternity. Be it in heaven or earth; Prophecies shall fail, when that which is perfect is come, 1 Cor. 13.8. In heaven, they must needs fail; because there's no future to be contem∣plated, or expected; all is an eternal present. And in the Church of Christ, they must needs fail; because there is no future truth (not another Gospel) to be expected; the pre∣sent truth is eternal. Prophecie failed in the Church, as did the other extraordinary, and temporary gifts: viz. Working of miracles, and speaking with Tongues. Neverthelesse I conceive, God hath absolutely denyed his Church none of all these: but that the Spirit may be pleased to stir up some men, at some times, and to some particulars, to act in any of them; if just cause and necessity be. Yet, though a man should be raised to prophesie now, and that by the same Spirit; I cannot think it to be by the same degree, or authority of the Spirit as the former Prophets were. Because the authority of the Spi∣rit in them, was not onely prophetical, or historical: but sa∣piential, and dogmatical. And so their prophesies were recor∣ded, not onely for a particular and certain prediction of truth: but for an universal, and perpetual instruction of Faith. And therefore, either there must be no end of adding to the Scrip∣tures: or else none such must now be raised. There may be some prudential predictings of good men; and suspicious presagings of evil men; and shrewd conjecturings of common men: but what are all these to the prophesyings of holy men of God in old time? Yet we say, Gods hand is not shortned, but that he can still raise up such: but who can say, that he will do it? Or that there is just cause why he should so do? We conclude therefore, in the general, that Prophecy is ceast. And that of an extraordinary gift at first; it is become more extraordinary to after ages. What reason then have we to be so blind of Faith; as to admit of a stated art of divination in its stead?
CHAP. XXII. From the rarity of Miracles. 1 WHether every thing that is affected above, besides, or against the course and order, faculty and pow∣er, hope and expectation of nature; may truly be said to be miraculous? Not every thing. 1. Because, it is not a thing effected against particular nature, but against whole nature, that makes a Miracle. 2. Because in particular nature, there are antipolliges, or occult qualities of actives and passives; naturally acting, or disposed to act one against ano∣ther. 3. Because it is neither nature acting contrary to some part of her self; nor is it Art urging or tempting Nature: but it is God totally exceeding the law, vertue, and order of Nature; that makes it to be a Miracle. 4. Because many things may be done against Nature, or natural propensity; which notwithstanding are but ordinary and trivial; as the causing of heavy things to ascend upwards, &c. 5. Because there are many sins and vices, that are against Natures law and vertue, which who will say that they are miraculous? There∣fore we conclude against Magical Mirabilaries? that although every Miracle be an act or effect above Nature: yet every act or effect besides, or against Nature, is not a Mi∣racle. 2. Whether that may absolutely be said to be a Miracle, whose effect is manifest; and whose cause is occult or un∣known to us? No. Except it be acted simply by the first cause; and for causes onely known to him. 2. Except it ex∣ceeds all mans exact knowledge indifferently; one as well as another. 3. Except the cause be altogether past such finding out, even to sober and prudential observation, art, industry. Otherwise, it should not be a Miracle, so as it is in it self, but so as it appears to us. Our ignorance should necessarily come
into the cause of Miracles. That should be miraculous to one man; which is not so to another. And a prophane curiosity of Art would boast of more light, and experiment in divine works: then indeed is vouchsafed to the perswasion of a pi∣ous faith. 3. Whether the power of working Miracles be not proper to God alone? This must be affirmed, and cannot be denyed. 1. Because He onely can work a Miracle of himself, to whom nothing is a Miracle. 2. Because He onely can work against the order of Nature, and second causes, whose will is suffici∣ent to institute, Order, alter all things. 3. Because God is a transcendent, and is not under, nor yet within the predica∣ment, of any part of the whole order of Nature; as the crea∣ture is: and therefore he onely can act that against, and besides above the order of Nature; which the creature cannot. 4. Because a divine power requires not a subject to work upon (for it is able to create all things of nothing) neither looks it at the possibility, or propensity of that subject, to the produ∣cing of the effect, as every created power doth. 5. Because the proper cause of a Miracle must not onely be uncreated, infi∣nite, omnipotent, indeterminate, &c. But it must also be oc∣cult, unsearchable, incomprehensible: now no cause is sim∣ply so; but the hidden God himself. 6. Because it cannot be a Miracle, unless it be absolutely, and universally wonder∣ful; or to be equally admired of all creatures of the same kinde. Now it is onely for God; and neither for Angels, or men, to do such things, as shall be admirable to their fellows, and not so to themselves. 7. Because if any other could work Miracles but God, or but by God, then Miracles could not be the indubitable signes, and proofs of a God; nor of Gods Word, and Truth. 4. Whether the good Angels can do Miracles? Ministeri∣ally, and instrumentally they may: but not principally and au∣thoritatively. For Angels are finite both in their nature, ap∣prehension, and power. And divine Miracles (absolutely considered) are as strange and wonderful to them: as they are to us men. Yet Angels (out of the vertue and perspicuity of their own nature) may know how to do many things, that may seem miraculous, or be marveilous to us. Because they
are a superior power or vertue unknown to us; and may have a particular power (over inferiours) not known to us; and therefore may act above, besides, against the particular order of Nature, that is known to us. But being part of whole cre∣ated nature themselves, they cannot act against it (the main reason of a Miracle) for so they should act against them∣selves 5. Whether Devils can do Miracles? If not Angels; much lesse devils. Neither doth the Lord make use of the devils to be instruments of his mighty works; as he doth of the Angels. For Miracles were never intended or effected (immediately or mediately) but for the confirmation of the truth: to which the devils are no apt instruments; because all that they do is with intent to seduce therefrom. The devils indeed have a faculty, and sagacity (both much enabled by long experience in things) above us men: and so may work (in many things) to amaze, as well as delude us. But such stupendous and pro∣digious facts, as they (by divine permission) busie themselves about, are no true Miracles: because false, either as touching the reality of the effect; or else the sincerity of the intent. And for the reality of effect, it is not so much thanks to their admirable power, or manner of working, as to the natural (though secret) disposition of the matter they work upon. Neither are they permitted often to work any reality of effect (but onely to delude with prestigious appearances) because God seldom suffers Nature, or the creature to be so blemished, or abused. And though they had a liberty to effect really, in things to be admired: yet (so false is their disposition) they would chuse, and labour to be prestigious. And where they are tempted (or urged as they say, by Art) to do those things that are not within their power, or permission: there are they forced to be prestigious, and delusory; for the saving of their credit amongst their own. Now this prestigiousnesse or illu∣sion (whether freely from themselves, or as it were forced by others) is a signe of their impotency, as well as their fallacy: and either of them are a sufficient argument to exclude them utterly from a power of working Miracles. And therefore, if they will needs be contending for the devils power in, and by Magicians, Astrologers, Necromancers Conjurers,
Witches, &c. We leave both them, & theirs, to their lyingwonders. 6. Whether there be any such secrets in Nature, as where∣by to work Miracles? Although it be confest, that there are sundry admirable secrets hidden in Natures bosome: yet we must professe, that her hand is here shortned. Because it is the nature of a Miracle to exceed Natures power. It must be above, besides, against Nature: and not particular onely, but universal, or whole created Nature. Though a Miracle be wrought in Nature, yet it must be quite beyond Natures prin∣ciples, law, order. Nature of it self must not so much as incline or dispose to it. Yea it must be in the very nature of the thing to be otherwise, then the Miracle hath made it. Al∣wayes, the more alien the effect is to Nature, and the more remore from Natures order: the greater is the Miracle, and the more to be admired. Wherefore we conclude (against those Mirions, who would make themselves to be Natures Apes) that not onely any particular nature, is not able to worke a Miracle besides, or against the order of whole Nature: but the vertue even of whole Nature, is not able to worke a Miracle upon any particular nature whatsoever. 7. Whether Miracles may be wrought by Art? The flat Negative is to be concluded upon these Arguments. 1. Art cannot exceed Nature. Now Nature (in all her mirables) is but Miracles Ape; and Art is but Natures Ape: what then are the Magical Mirabilaries (at most) but Apes of Art? 2. The strength of Art is acquisite: the vertue of Miracles is in∣fused. 3. An Art operates onely according to reason and knowledge: but a Miracle altogether above them. 4. Art effects nothing, but according to ordinary rules, observations, experiments, customs: but a Miracle is so extraordinary, that it were no Miracle, except it were effected contrary to all these. 5. Art (for the most part) is of necessaries: a Miracle (for the most part) is of contingents. 6. If Art served to worke Miracles, then were the power of them acquisite, arbitrary, of mans will, and industry: yea one man might do Miracles as well as another. 7. None of Gods servants ever wrought Miracles by Art. 8. If it were in the Artists power, it should be a Miracle to one man, and not to another. 9. Prophane men, and the greatest tempters of God, the De∣vil,
and Nature, should so do most Miracles. 10. Art rather serves to prevent many things for seeming Miracu∣lous: because it helps to finde out the suddain cause. For either it lets to understand the cause, or not: if it doth not, then it is no Art; if it doth, then it is no Miracle. 8. Whether it be lawful, necessary, convenient (not onely for the working of Miracles, but for the finding out of Mi∣rables) to operate (either by Art, or violence) against the order plac't in Nature? Doubtlesse, it is no further lawful; then it may be either necessary, or convenient. That is pro∣bably, and directly tending to some publike, or private use, or benefit. Nature may have many pretty mirables (which they title Admired Auditions, Natural history, Mirables of the world, Occult Miracles of Nature, Occult Philosophie, subtilities and va∣rieties of things, secrets, mysteries, memorables, unheard of curiosi∣ties, &c.) Yet for all that, are they not such, as Magicians fain, or fable, in animals, plants, herbs, stones, &c. Nor are they (a many of them) so mirable in themselves; as either to mens fancies, or ignorances. Her actives, and passives, sim∣pathies, and antipathies, are so occult and profound: as who can tell where to finde them; or how to apply them; so as to urge Nature (by the help of Art) to worke wonders? Who can do such a thing (especially make it his trade, pro∣fession, ostentation, so to do) and not be subject to, or guil∣ty of tempting God, provoking the Devil, tormenting Na∣ture, abusing the creature, losing time, disparaging himself, and deluding the world? It is for none but God to worke ab∣solutely against the order of whole created Nature: because he could have instituted another order of Nature. And all things are subject to him; not so much from a necessity of Na∣ture, and second causes: as according to the absolutenesse of his own power, and liberty of his own will. And it is for none to undertake to alter the order of particular Nature; but in, by, under, and for God: yea (I may say) according to God; and not otherwise. As. 1. God acteth not against the order of nature (in any particular of it) save onely up∣on just and weighty causes: how then dare prophane men of∣fer to do such a thing joculatorily, jugglingly, to make sport and pastime; or yet for no other end or use, but vain and idle
experiments sake; or onely to feed, or satisfie vain and pre∣sumptuous curiosity? 2. God, though he may act against that order which one creature hath to another: yet acts he not against that order, which the creature hath to himself. For should he act against the order of nature, as it depends upon himself; he should so act against himself: in like manner, neither ought man to act against the order of nature, or of the creature so far forth as it depends upon God; nor yet so far forth as it is not intended by God, to be serviceable and useful unto men. 3. God acts not against the law and course of nature, so as to violate his own great Law; so that of his wisdome, goodnesse, justice, in disposing the creature: neither ought men so to do, beyond the great Law of using the creature aright, and to those very ends for which God ordained it. For it can never be lawful or warrantable, so to transgresse natures order, as to abuse the creature in any kinde. Now do they not know, that the creature may as well be spiritually, and speculatively abused, by superstition, and curiosity: as practically, and car∣nally, by violence, or sensuality. 9. Why, amongst all the Miracles that Christ wrought a∣gainst the Devils, among men, and in the other creatures: he did work none at all from, or by the heavenly bodies, the stars? Besides the reason above mentioned, why he refused to shew a signe from heaven; this may now be added above all the rest. It was because there now was a greater Miracle wrought upon the earth, then ever was wrought in the Heavens. E∣ven the mysterious Miracle, or miraculous Mystery of God and Man. Doing such works upon earth, as whereat the Angels, and whole powers of heaven might well stand amazed with admiration. Indeed there was a wonder in Heaven, a star (a new star) at his birth: and another wonder in Heaven, an Eclipse of the Sun (a new Eclipse) at his death. Such a star, and such an Eclipse, as were miracles (in their nature, site, motion, portent) to all other stars, and Eclipses. Such a star, and such an Eclipse, as were the mysteries of all other stars and E∣clipses. Set apart to signifie his power in Heaven, at the great∣est instants of his infirmity upon earth. Thus they testified of him; and yet was not among these Miracles, nor mighty works that were wrought by him.
10 Whether Miracles may be wrought out of the Church. Although we make not the power of working miracles to be the perpetual note of Gods Church: yet we determine the Church to be the proper seat of them. And in determining, we do thus distinguish; That God may be pleased to work mi∣racles all the world over; and that by his Angles, as his Mi∣nisters in the Government thereof: but employs not men to that purpose, save onely within his Church. And do distin∣guish again, that privative miracles, or those of wrath and judg∣ment, may be wrought out of the Church: but not positive, or those of Grace and mercy. And our reasons are. 1. Be∣cause the main end of working Miracles is for the plantation and confirmation of the Gospel, the truth of Gods word: and that cannot be without the Church. 2. The power of wor∣king Miracles is from a promise, and that belongs to the Church alone. 3. In a Miracle is considerable not so much the evident effect as the secret intent, and this consideration is onely for the faithful in the Church. 4. The truth of the word is not to be measured by miracles; but the truth of mi∣racles by the Word: and where is that but in the Church? 5. Miracles tend as to the glory of God, so to the edification of the Godly; and who looks for that or them, out of Gods Church. 6. Satans stupendous prodigies are mostly wrought out of the Church: but Gods wonderful miracles within it. 7. Though it hath been said, that miracles were intended for Infidels; yet were they not effected but by believers: and by believers, either to convince, or to convert those Infidels. 11. Whether wicked men and reprobates may be workers of miracles? Not by Angelical assistance, not by diabolical confederation, not by the secret of Nature, not by the study of Art: but by divine dispensation they may. 1. Because God may be pleased to employ them to this purpose; and yet give them no more but a faith of miracles; which is common to reprobates. 2. Because that of miracles is a gift not simply making accepted: but may be given onely for others sakes. 3. God hath wrought miracles by dead instruments: and why not by men of a dead faith, and dead in trespasses and sinnes? 4. Wicked men may be used in the working of miracles, for a testimony of Gods truth: yet not in a manifestation of their
own graces. 5. Bad men have been imployed in working of miracles: that good men might not be proud, or overween∣ing of common gifts. 6. The working of miracles is not appropriated to godly men: lest ordinary Graces might be undervalued; and weak Christians might take scandal, and despair in their defect of the extraordinary gift. 12. Wherein differ true and false miracles: or divine and diabolical; Theological, and magical? 1. The one kind are wrought by God, by Angels, Prophets, Apostles, and some∣times by the Saints: the other not but by devils, magicians, Juglers, ungodly men. 2. The one are solid and real in ef∣fect: the other are phantasmatical, and praestigiously deceive∣ing the sense. 3. The one God freely calls to do: the other are not done but by tempting both God, and the Devil. 4. The one are serious, and upon occasions of importance: the other are ludicrous, and serve to make vain men sport. 5. The one tend to confirm the Church: the other to seduce from it. 6. The one are liberal: the other mercenary. 7. The one profitable: the other pernicious. 8. The one make humble and modest: the other arrogant and full of ostentation. 9. The one serves to instruct: the other onely to astonish. 10. The one are wrought with devout Prayer, Supplication, Thanksgiving: the other by superstitious imprecation, adju∣ration, incantation; with many ridiculous signes, and execra∣ble ceremonies, nothing pertaining to the producing of the effect. And thus they differ in their Authors, instruments, dig∣nity quality, duration, utility, end, and effect. 13. Whether Magicians, Conjurers, Inchanters, Witches, &c work not their miracles, (or rather signes, wonders, pro∣digies, portents) by the devils means? It is affirmed that they do so, for these reasons. 1. Because they do them not by God, Angels, Nature, or Art (as appears sufficiently by what hath been said already) and therefore they must needs do them by the devil. 2. Because they operate upon a compact: which is evident in that invocation, adoration, sacrifice, immolation, &c. is hereunto required. 3. Because they operate by idola∣trous, superstitious, sorcerous, execrable, ridiculous signes, rites and ceremonies. 4. Because they secretly invoke, although they outwardly would seem to command: which implorati∣on,
and imperiousnesse, yea and dissimulation between both these, is to God, and good Angels, abominable. 5. Because their Prayers and preparations are blaspheming, railing, exe∣crating, threatning, prophane, superstitious, absurd, ridicu∣lous: which neither God nor good Angel can indure. 6. Be∣cause they seek either to allure, or compel their operating pow∣er, by things sensible. 7. Because the fact exceeding Natures order, and Arts efficacy: yet there can be no reasonable cause why such an effect should be ascribed either to God, or good Angels. 8. Because the effect is by them ascribed to times, places, figures, characters, rites ceremonies, &c. 9. Because there are used hereunto words (besides names of God, and Angels) barba∣rous, unknown, insignificant, incoherent, apocryphal, super∣stitious, sorcerous, detorted, absurd, ridiculous, &c. 10. Be∣cause they make use of means unlawful, unapt, and not ordai∣ned to such a purpose. 11. Because they do their feats upon vain and light occasions. 12. Because they effect that (or seem so to do) at a distance: which the causes themselves could not naturally do, were they proximately applyed. 13. Because their miracles or wonders are not wrought, but at certain times, in certain places, and by certain means: as under such constellations, by such configurations, by such animal parts, stones, herbs, preparations, confections, &c. 14. Be∣cause they seem to make many cautions in the preparation; which they violate in the execution. As they caution to clean∣nesse, chastity, temperance, sobriety, justice, charity, &c. yet the exercise is wholly of, and to the contrary. 15. Because they are not onely ungodly men that do them: but they do them for wicked ends: As idolatry, murder, theft, covetous∣nesse, lusts, pride, ambition, vain-glory, &c. 16. Because if there be any truth or reality of extraordinary effect, either through natures secret disposition, or Arts studious operati∣on: yet diabolical suggestion intervenes, and prompts the in∣struments to mingle many vanities and fallacies of signes and ceremonies, whereby to delude and deceive. 17. Because they are seldome or never so prodigious and stupendous in effecting; as in troubled and distracted States. 18. Because their monstrous prodigies & portents are mostly wrought out of the Church, or in false and heretical Churches, or where
the Church is declining, and flitting; or else to the scan∣dal, prejudice, persecution of the true Church of Christ. 14. Whether there be any verity, or reality of miraculous effect, in those things that are miridically done by the Devill, and Magicians: Reallity of effect there may be seen; but of miraculous effect none: That is, there may be some reall effect upon the patient indirectly, and consequentially (as in in∣cantation, sorcery, effascination) although there be none such primarily, and directly, as from a miraculous Agent. For we see that men are really affected, and terrified, even from spectrous and ludibrious phantasmes. Our conclusion there∣fore thus stated, stands firm, for these proofes. 1. The Devill and Magicians cannot doe that which is possible to neither a∣part, nor to both of them together, (no though they had all the Angels joyned to them) that is, to worke true miracles. 2. God seldome or never permits. and the devill seldome or never intends, any verity and reallity of effect in such cases; Because he delights to be a false emulator, but no true imita∣tor of Gods workes. 3. If there be produced (at any time) any reallity of effect; it is not beyond the secret disposition of the matter they worke in; then which nothing can bee more defective to the forme of a miracle. 4. All their mira∣culous transformations, and transportations are but to sub∣stract one thing (by a swift and imperceptible motion) and substitute another in the place; and so either delude the phan∣tasie, or deceive the sight. 5. Those mutations, or alterati∣ons which they worke, are but by actives and passives artifici∣ally applyed; which though nature alone would not have produced peradventure; yet art alone could never have pro∣duced them, without some naturall property or capacity thereunto in nature. So that the vertue of effecting is simply and primarily in the naturall power, or property; and but se∣condarily, and conditionally, in the artificiall or cunning application. 6. All their representations, and ostentations are phantasmaticall and spectrous; either in respect of the prestigious transposition of the object, the organ, or the meane. 7. The intent and end of such their operations are repugnant to true and faithfull profession, and holy and righteous conversation; and serving only to insinuate or
confirme a lie; and therefore must be but lying wonders at most. 15. Whether those things that were done by Pharaohs Ma∣gicians, in emulation of Moses, were miraculous, and real in ef∣fect; as his were? Some contend they were so: but others (upon better grounds) conclude they were otherwise. For 1. What Moses did, he did at the call or command of God, Exod. 7.6. But the Magicians did theirs at the call or command of Pharaob, vers. 11. And therefore seeing there was not the same Authority of doing miracles; doubtlesse there was not the like efficacy between them, or miraculous effect. 2. The Magicians of Egypt, though it be said, they also did so, or in like manner: yet it is to be understood in specie, non jure; in appea∣rance, but not indeed. Because it is added (by way of diffe∣rencing) with their inchantments, vers. 11. And the original word some derive from a root that signifies to flame, because with fiery flashings, and flamings, they used to perstringe the eyes of the beholders: and not onely so; but was hereby the greatest incendiaries, inflaming mens minds with idolatry, su∣perstition, lies, and calumnies, &c. Others derive it from ano∣ther root, that signifies involving, covering, hiding; to note, with what occult and involved slights and covertures, they sought to conceal their prestigious pranks; so as they might appear otherwise then indeed they were. Besides, the word is ocmmonly used (in Hebrew Authors) to signifie diabolical and prestigious works. 3. True miraculous effects may con∣sist, and concord together; and never oppose, or destroy one another: it is a sign of false circulatory phantasms, that they are soon vanishing, and dispersing, when they presume to come in competition with true divine miracles. Thus Aarons rod swallowed up the rods of the Magicians, vers. 12. Whether his rod did so while it was yet turned into a serpent, it skilleth not to dispute: the Miracle was the greater, if it did so after it was turned into a rod again. For there was the form of a miracle confounding the form: but here was the very matter of a miracle destroying the very matter of an impostor. But what say you, if their rods were as phantastical and prestigi∣ous as their serpents were: and therefore the rather dispelled even by a substantial rod? 4. True miracles serve to confirm
the truth: but to what end served those false mirables of the Magicians, but to roborate or harden Pharoahs heart, both against Gods message and the true miracles? vers. 22.5. Concer∣ning that of the Frogs (chap. 8 v 7.) Why did not Phaaoh. command his Magicians, to take away their Frogs? Was it not because theirs were only prestigious spectres, and could of∣fend no more but the sight; and not infest the other (and lesse delusive) senses; as the other did? And why calls he for Mo∣ses, and Aaron, to intreate the Lord to take away the Frogs from him: but because they that were of his sending, were the real Frogs; and those that really plagued him? v 8.6. Where∣fore did God cause them to fail in counterfeiting the least things (the Lice v. 18.) but that he would thus convince them by the least things, that their greatest were but counterfeits? And while they confesse, this is the finger of God, v. 19. Do they not as good as confesse, that each of theirs was the finger of Beelzebub. 7. When the Magicians were smitten with boyls and blains, so that they could not stand before Moses, ch. 9.11. Why did they not conjure up all their Art and force, to in∣fect Moses again: if that they had been able to do any thing really as Moses did? 8. How stands the comparison of here∣ticks resisting the truth; like as Jannes and Iambres withstood Moses: 2 Tim 3.8. But that these did it by fallacies, or ap∣pearances of spiritual truth: as they did it by phantasmes, or appearances of corporeal truth? Many Philosophical reasons might be added: but these (so clear from the Text) are suffi∣cient to prove them impostors. What may we then judge of the later Gipsies: since it it was no otherwise with their fore∣fathers, these Aegyptians? 16. Whether the gift of working miracles be not now ceas't? Miracles were never but extraordinary, and temporary. Their very gift not perpetual: and simply no saving Grace: but might instrumentally be acted even by reprobates, as well as by the elect. Having no principles of working habitually remaining in the Soul. Were intended onely to be certain signes, upno great occasions, and present helps, in the defect of ordinary means. Needful in the beginning of the Church; to streng∣then weak Faith. They have had their main end already (the sufficient confirmation of the truth) and the end accomplish∣ed,
that which was destinated to the end, might well cease. Christ was not onely the most eminent in miracles; but in him they had their perfection, and completion. His Disciples believed in him, before ever they saw him do a miracle: how much more then may his Church, without them; that toge∣ther with the memory of them, hath the ordinances and ordi∣nary means? The permanency of miracles would but have di∣minished the efficacy of Faith: because it would have been an occasion not to have believed without them. The truth of the Gospel would still be called in question, and thought du∣bious and uncertain; if it always needed such confirmation. The promises and faith would thus be evacuated: because the walking would be, not by Faith, but by sight. There would be no end of seeking after sensible fignes and means; and so prophane men would still be tempting unto them; and weak Christians would be discouraged in their defect. Not onely ordinary graces would so grow vile; but even miracles themselves: for they would be thought no miracles, by being so commonly obvious, and assiduous. What need we to stand upon such, when the greatest work of God, and most profitable for man, is not alwayes the greatest miracle? Have we not perpetually Gods spiritual miracles, in our voca∣tion, conversion, justification, regeneration, sanctification, &c.? And his ordinary miracles, in our creation, propaga∣tion, conservation, &c.? And what need we more? To conclude, was there no other cause, our sinnes are sufficient to make divine miracles to cease: shall we then look after Ma∣gical miracles, signes, and wonders; such as are set up by the sins of men.
CHAP. XXIII. From the fables of Miracles. IS not the rarity of miracles (already proved) enough to prove the stories of Magical Mirables to be but meer fa∣bles? We need not therefore their pardon to call them so: nay, they ought to gratifie us that we call them not worse then so. Seeing the vertue of miracles and miraculous operation, is in Gods word alone: and neither in Nature, nor Art, nor Artifice. What can we say lesse, then that all such natural Mirables, are onely for meere naturals to admire? Whose Authors have been some of them spurious; most of them ob∣scure; all of them (in that particular) vain and nugacious. Who take up their authorities by tradition; from paganish story, poetical fiction, and my thological relation, of such won∣derful things, as were never in Nature, or the world. Who use to cite their mirables with such a (they say) as if they them∣selves were not onely ashamed to own them; but afraid to re∣port them. Who stuffe up their legendary stories of magical mirables, with tales of such strange things, and they so incre∣dible; and under strange Names, and they so unknown; and in such strange places, and they so remote: as that they are not worth seeking after; or if they were, yet neither name, nor thing, nor place is to be found. Who urge us one∣ly with this; that such their wonders are not to be proved by reason, but referred to experiment: and yet we are as far from seeing the one; as from hearing the other. Neverthelesse, all these are impudently urged, and imposing upon our Faith, to admit, and admire, what wonderful effects of configurations constellations, influences, impressions, seales, characters; up∣on Elements, Minerals, Stones, Vegetables, Animals; yea and Rationals not excepted. Nay and a many of these so im∣posed, as tending effectually to Prophecy, Divination, Predicti∣on,
Prognostication. And therefore omitting the ridiculous rabble of magical mirabilaries (for I have neither list nor lea∣sure to meddle with them at large) I shall onely instance in a few of them, which they not onely report confidently; but impudently prescribe to this very purpose. Advising the Rea∣der by the way, that (for all this) they cannot be believed without superstition, nor practised, without sorcery. 1. There is an herb among the Chaldeans called Ireos; among the Greeks, Mutuchiol; among the Latins Elitropia: this herb is of so admirable vertue, that if it be gathered in August, while the Sun is in Leo, and wrapt in a Lawrel leaf, adding thereunto the Tooth of a Wolf; and so at night laid under a mans head: if any thing be stoln from him, he shall see the Thiefe, and all his conditions. 2. The herb called by the Chaldeans Aquilaris, by the Greeks Valis, by the Latines Chelidonia; if it be taken with the heart of a Mole, and be laid upon the head of a sick man; it may so be discerned, or divined, whether he shall dye of that disease, or recover ye or no: for if he now sing out, it is a signe he shall die; but if he weep, then shall he not dye at that time. By the like, the conquering of an Enemy, and recovery of a Suite is to be foreknown. 3. The herb which by the Chaldeans is called Luperax, by the Greeks Esifena, by the Latins Viscus querei; this herb with a∣nother herb called Martegon: if it be put into a mans mouth, and he begin to forethink who is a coming (be it friend, or soe) if he shall come, it will fixe upon his heart; if he shall not come, it will leap from it; nay, will it not leap out of his mouth? 4. The herb which the Chaldeans call Tsiphilon, the Greeks Orlegenea, the Latins Centaurea; this herb (the Magicians say) hath admirable vertue: for if with the blood of a female Lap∣wing, and oyle, it be put into a Lamp; it makes all that stands by believe themselves to be Magicians; and that their heads are in heaven, and their feet upon the earth: and if the same be cast into the fire, the stas shining; the stars will seem to justle and skirmish one against another. 5. The Stone called Sylonites, bred in an Indian Snail, con∣fers the prescience, and presence of certain things future▪ while a man hath it under his tongue, let him bethink him of
any businesse, whether it ought to be done, or may cometo passe, or not: and if it may, or ought; it will cleave so fast to his heart, as that it cannot be plucked thence: if not, the heart will leap back from it. 6. If thou wouldst interpret dreams, and Prophetize of things future, take the stone which is called Esmundus, or As∣madus; and it will give Prophetization, interpretation of all dreams, and make to understand riddles. 7. If thou wilt divine of things future, take the stone cal∣led Celonytes, of a purple and various colour, and is found in the body of a Snayle: if any man carry this stone under his tongue, he shall Prophesie, and foretell future things. 8. By the stone called Elitropia (or as the Nigromanticks) the Babylonian Gemme; with certain verses, and Characters, Princes have predicted by divining: for which cause the Priests of the Temples made special use of this stone, in the feasts of their Idols. If thou wouldst foreknow any thing future, take the stone called Bena, and put it under thy tongue: and so long as thou so holdest it, thou shalt continually predict by divining things future; and shalt not (in any wise) erre in divi∣ning. 10. If thou wouldst judge of, or declare the opinions, and cogitations of others; take the stone which is called Gera∣rides, and is of a black colour, and hold it in thy mouth. 11. If thou wouldst whet the wit of any one, or increase his wrath, or foretel future things: take the stone which is called Smaragdus, &c. For it (carried about him) makes a man to understand well, confers a good memory, increases the wealth of him that carries it about him; and if any man hold it under his tongue, he shall Prophecie forth∣with. 12. A Weasel is a creature sufficiently known, if the heart of this creature be eaten, while it is yet panting, it maketh to know things to come. 13. If thou wouldst (as the great diviners have done) un∣derstand the voices of Birds, take with thee two companions on the first of the Kalends of November; and go into the wood with dogs, as if thou wentst an hunting; and that beast thou
first findest, carry it home with thee, and prepare it with the heart of a Foxe, and thou shalt straight understand the voices of Birds, and Beasts: and if thou wouldst that another should understand them, do but kisse him, and he shall under∣stand them likewise. 14. A Suffumigation made with the congealed blood of an Asse, and the fat of a Wolfe, and Storax, &c. will cause to foresee things future in sleep; whether good, or evil. 15. If any one swallow the heart of a Lapwing, or a Swal∣low, or a Weasel, or a Mole, whilst it is yet warm with natural heat; it shall be helpful to him for remembring, understand∣ing, and foretelling. 16. The stone that is bred in the apple of the eye of a Ci∣vet Cat, held under the tongue of a man, is said to make him to divine, or prophecy. The same is Selenites, the Moon-stone reported to do. — Also there is an herb called Rheangelida, which Magicians drinking of, can Prophecy. 17. They say also, that a Tyke if it be pulled out of the left ear of a Dog, and if it be altogether black; hath great vertue in the Prognostick of life. For if the sick party shall answer him that brought it in, who standeth at his feet, and shall ask of him concerning his disease, there is certain hope of life: and that he shall dye, if he make no answer. 18. They say, that fumes made of Linseed, and Fleabane seed, and roots of Violets, and Parsly doth make one to foresee things to come; and doth conduce to prophecying. — They say also, that if any one shall hold a Viper over a vapour with a staffe; he shall prophecy. — So it is said that the stone Selenites, idest, the Moon stone, and the stone of the Civet Cat, cause divination: also vervaine, and the herb Theangelis, cause soothsaying. 19. Melancholly men, by reason of their earnestness, do far better conjecture, and fitly conceive a habit, and most easily re∣ceive an impression of the celestials. — The Sybills and the Bacchides, and Niceratus the Syracusan, and Ancon, were by their natural melancholy complexion, Prophets, & Poets.—For this, when it is stirred up, burns, and stirs up a madnesse, conducing to knowledge, and divination: especially if it be helped by any celestial influxe; especially of Saturn, who seeing he is cold
and dry, as is a melancholy humour, hath its influence upon it, increaseth, and preserveth it. 20. The Rabbines say, there is an Animal called Jedua, having a humane shape, in the middle of whose Navel comes forth a string, by which it is fastned to the ground like a Gourd, and as far as the length of that string reach∣eth, it devoures all that is greene about it: and deceiving the sight, cannot be taken, unlesse that string be cut off with the stroke of a dart, which being cut off, it present∣ly dyes. Now the bones of this Animal, being after a cer∣tain manner laid upon the mouth; presently he whose mouth they are laid upon, is taken with a frenzie, and soothsaying. Now, what a rare Mirable of Art is Magical Divinati∣on, yea and Astrological Prediction: that hath all these, and many more (if one would take the paines to collect them) Mirables of Nature, peculiarly subserving there∣unto? I say even Astrological Prediction. For with∣out a constellated fabrication, or confection; all these presaging Mirables (and the like) signifie nothing in ef∣fect. And therefore (for the manner of acting in, and by such as these) they caution straitly to observe the Planet, benevolous, or malevolous; as they wolud presage upon the effect, good, or ill. And not onely so, but the dominion of the Planet, and the day of that domi∣nion, and the houre of that day: as they would have the predicted effect to be now, or then. So that, to what end serve the feigned Mirables of Nature, but to feigne the Mag-astro-mantick Art for the greatest Mirable?
CHA. XXIV. From the Ceremonies of preparation. WHether these (and the like) rites, and ceremonies (taught, and practised by themselves) as prepa∣ring, and conducing to magicall, and astrologi∣call constellation, configuration, fabrication, operation, di∣vination, prediction, omination, presagition, conjectation, prognostication, &c. bee not the most blasphemous, idola∣trous, superstitious, heathenish, hereticall, hypocriticall, a∣theisticall, sorcerous, prestigious, impostorous, prophane and impious; not onely to pure minds, and consciences; but even to common reason, and sense? viz. 1. He which knowes how to compare the divisions of Provinces, accordingto the divisions of the stars; with the ministry of the ruling Intelligences, and blessings of the Tribes of Israel, the lots of the Apostles, and typicall seales of the sa∣cred Scripture; shall be able to obtaine great propheticall ora∣cles, concerning every Region, of things to come. 2. If thou desirest to receive vertue from any part of the world, or from any star, thou shalt (those things being used which belong to this star) come under its peculiar influence, &c.— When thou dost to any one species of things, or individuall, rightly apply many things, which are things of the same subject scattered among themselves, conformable to the same Idea, and star; presently by this matter so oppor∣tunely fitted, a singular gift is infused by the Idea, by meanes of the soul of the World. I say opportunely fitted, viz. under a harmony, like to the harmony which did infuse a certaine ver∣tue into the matter— The celestiall harmony produceth that into act, which before was onely in power, when things are rightly exposed to it in a celestiall season. As for exam∣ple, if thou dost desire to attract vertue from the Sun, and to
seeke those things that are solary amongst vegetables, plants, metals, stones, and animals; these things are to be used, and taken chiefely, which in a solary order are higher. For these are more availeable; so shalt thou draw a singular gift from the Sun through the beames thereof, being seasonably received together, and through the spirit of the world. 3. By artificiall mixtions of things, such as agree with the heavens under a certaine constellation, descends a vertue, by a certaine likenesse and aptnesse that is in things amongst themselves towards their superiours.— So from a certaine composition of herbes, vapours, and such like, made according to naturall Philosophy, and Astronomy, there re∣sults a certaine common forme, endowed with many gifts of the stars.— When therefore any one makes a mixture of many matters, under the coelestiall influences; then the va∣riety of coelestiall actions on one hand, and of naturall pow∣ers on the other hand, being joyned together, doth indeed cause wonderfull things, by oyntments, by collyries, by fumes, and such like. 4. Then the vertues of things do then become wonderfull, viz. when they are put to matters that are mixed, and prepa. red in fit seasons, to make them alive, by procuring life for them from the stars, as also a sensible soule, as a more noble forme. 5. Magicians teach that coelestiall gifts may through infe∣riours, being conformable to superiours, be drawne down by opportune influences of the heaven: and so also by these coe∣lestiall, the coelestiall Angels, as they are servants of the stars, may be procured and conveyed to us.— That not onely coelestiall, and vital; but also certaine intellectuall, angelicall, and divine gifts, may be received from above, by some certain matters, having a naturall power of divinity (idest) which have a naturall correspondency with the superiours, being rightly received and opportunely gathered together, accor∣ding to the rules of naturall Philosophy, and Astronomy. — That an Image rightly made of certain proper things, appropriated to any one certain Angell, will presently be ani∣mated by that Angel. 6. A Magician doth make use of things manifest, to draw
forth things that are occult, viz. through the voyce of the stars, through fumes lights sounds, and naturall things, which are agreeable to coelesstiall: in which, besides corporall qualities, there is a kinde of reason, sense, and harmony, and incorpo∣reall and divine measures, and orders. 7. No man is ignorant, that supercelestiall Angels, or Spi∣rits may be gained by us through good workes, a pure minde, purest prayer, devout humiliation, and the like. Let no man therefore doubt, that in like manner, by some certaine mat∣ters of the world, the Gods of the world may be raised by us; or at least the ministring spirits, or servants of these Gods.—So we read that the ancient Priests made Statues and Images, fore∣telling things to come, and infused into them the spirits of the stars, &c. 8. Some suffumigations, or perfumings that are proper to the stars, are of great force for the opportune receiving of coe∣lestiall gifts, under the rayes of the stars; in as much as they do strongly worke upon the aire, and breath.—Where∣fore suffumigations are wont to be used to them, that are about to southsay, for to affect their fancy; which indeed being ap∣propriated to any certain Deities, do fit us to receive divine in∣spiration.— The most powerfull fume is that which is compounded of the seven Aromaticks, according to the pow∣ers of the seven Planets.— Know also, that according to the opinion of the Magicians, in every good matter, as love, good will, and the like, there must be a good fume, odorife∣rous, and pretious: and in every evill matter, as hatred, anger, misery, and the like, there must be a stinking fume, that is of no worth. 9. By certain Alligations of certain things, as also, suspen∣sions, or by simple contract, or the continuation of any thread, we may be able to receive some vertues thereby. It is necessary that we know the certain rule of Alligation and sus∣pension, and the manner which the Art requires, viz. that they be done under a certain and sutable Constellation, and that they be done with wyer, or silken threads, bair, or sinewes of certain animals, or fine cloaths, and the like, according to the sutableness of things. 10. Rings also, which were alwaies much esteemed of by
the Antients, when they were opportunely made, do in like manner impresse their vertue upon us, &c.—Now the manner of making these kind of Rings, is this; viz. When any star ascends fortunately, with the fortunate aspect or conjuncti∣on of the Moon, we must take a stone, and herb that is under that star, and make a Ring of the mettal that is sutable to this star, and in it fasten the stone, putting the herb or root under it: not omitting the inscriptions of Images, Names, and Cha∣racters, as also the proper Suffumigations, &c. 11. The countenance, gesture, the motion, setting, and fi∣gure of the body, being accidental to us, conduce to the re∣ceiving of the coelestial gifts; and expose us to the superior bodies, and produce certain effects in us.—Whosoever therefore doth the more exactly imitate the coelestial bodies, either in nature, study, actions, motion, gesture, countenance, passions of the minde, and opportunity of the season; is so much the more like to the heavenly bodies, and can receive larger gifts from them. 12. It conduceth very much for the receiving the benefit of the heavens, in any work; if we shall by the Heaven make our selves sutable to it, in our thoughts, affections, imaginations, elections, deliberations, contemplations, and the like. For such like passions do vehemently stir up our spirit to their likenesse, and suddainly expose us, and ours, to the superiour significators of such like passions; and also by reason of their dignity, and neernesse to the superiours, do much more par∣take of the coelestials, then any material things. For our minde can through imaginations, or reason by a kinde of imi∣tation, be so conformed to any star, as suddainly to be filled with the vertues of that star; as if it were a proper recep∣tacle of the influence thereof.—We must therefore in e∣very work, and application of things, affect vehemently, ima∣gine, hope, and believe strongly; for that will be a great help — Therefore he that works in Magick, must be of a constant belief, be credulous, and not doubt at all of the ob∣taining the effect. 13. The Arabians say, that mans minde, when it is most in∣tent upon any work, through its passion, and effects, is joyned with the mind of the stars, and intelligences: and being so
joyned, is the cause that some wonderful vertue be infused into our works, and things. — And according to this is ve∣rifyed the Art of Characters, Images, Inchantments, and some speeches, and many other wonderful experiments to every thing which the minde affects. — For all those things which the minde acts, and dictates by characters, figures, words, spee∣ches, gestures, and the like, help the appetite of the soul, and acquire certain wonderful vertues, as from the soul of the O∣perator, in that hour when such a like appetite doth invade it: so from the opportunity, and coelestial influence, moving the mind in that manner. — And it is a general rule in them, that every minde that is more excellent in its desire, and affections, makes such like things more fit for it self; as also more effica∣cious to that which it desires. Every one therefore that is willing to work in Magick, must know the vertue, measure, order, and degree of his own soul, in the power of the universe 14. Those words are of greater efficacy then other, which represent greater things, as intellectual, coelestial, supernatural; as more expresly, so more mysteriously. Also those that come from a more worthy tongue, or from any of a more holy or∣der: for these, as it were, certain signes, and representations, receive a power of coelestial, and supercoelestial things, as from the vertue of things explained, of which they are the vebieula: so from a power put into them by the vertue of the speaker. 15. Proper Names of things are very necessary in magical o∣perations.—Hence Magicians say, that proper Names of things are certain rayes of things, every where present at all times, keeping the power of things, as the essence of the thing signified rules, and is discerned in them, and know the things by them, as by proper, and living images. — According to the properties of the influences, proper Names, result to things. — Every voyce therefore that is significative, first of all signifies by the influence of the coelestial harmony: Se∣condly, by the imposition of man; although oftentimes o∣therwise by this, then by that. But when both significations meet in any voice or name, which are put upon them by the said harmony, or men; then that name is with a double vertue viz. Natural, and arbitrary, made most efficacious to act; as oft as it shall be uttered in due place, and time, and seriously,
with an intention exercised upon the matter rightly dispofed, and that can naturally be acted upon by it. 16. In composing of verses, and orations, for the attracting the vertue of any star or Deity; you must diligently consider what vertues any star containes; as also what effects and o∣perations; and to infer them in verses, by praysing, extol∣ling amplifying, and setting forth those things, which such a kind of star is wont to cause by way of its influence: and by vilifying, and dispraising those things which it is wont to destroy, and hinder. And by supplicating and begging for that, which we desire to get: and by condemning, and detesting that, which we would have destroyed and hindred. And after the same manner, he make an elegant oration, and duely distinct by Articles, with competent numbers, and pro∣portions. 17. Moreover Magicians command that we call upon, and pray by the names of the same star, or name to them to whom such a verse belongs; by their wonderfull things, or miracles, by their courses, and waies in their sphere; by their light, by the dignity of their kingdome; by the beauty and brightness that is in it; by their strong, and powerfull vertues; and by such like as these.— Besides, with the divers sorts of the names of the stars, they command us to call upon them, by the names of the Intelligences, ruling over the starres them∣selves. 18. Magicians command, that in every worke, there be imprecations, and inscriptions made, by which the Operator may expresse his affection: That if hee gather an herbe, or a stone, he declare for what use he doth it; if he make a picture, he say, and write to what end he maketh it. 19. When thou art working any thing which belongs to any planet, thou must place it in its Dignities, fortunate, and powerfull, and ruling in the day, houre, and in the figure of the Heaven. Neither shalt thou expect the signification of the worke to be powerfull; but also thou must observe the Moon opportunely directed to this; for thou shalt doe nothing without the assistance of the Moon. And if thou hast more patternes of thy work, observe them all, &c. 20. Thou shalt observe that the Angles of the Ascendant
and a tenth and Seventh be fortunate; as also the Lord of the Ascendent, and place of the Sunne and Moon; and the place of part of the Fortune, and the Lord thereof; and the Lord of the foregoing conjunction, and prevention, &c. 21. Magicians advise us, that in casting, or in graving I∣mages, we would write upon it the name of the effect; and this upon the back, when evill, as destruction; on the belly, when good, as love. Moreover in the forehead of the Image let be written the name of the species, or individuum, which the I∣mage represents; or for whom, or against whom it is made. Also on the breast let the name of the signe, or face ascending, and the Lord thereof be written; also the names and charact∣ers of its Angles. Moreover in making the Image, they advise that prayer, for the effect for which it is made, bee used.— Now they use the Images being made diversly, according to the vertues thereof. Sometimes they hang them, or bind them to the body; sometimes they bury them under the earth, or a River; sometimes they hang them in a chimney over the smoak; or upon a tree, that they may be moved by the wind; sometimes with the head upward, and sometimes downward; sometimes they put them into hot water, or into the sire. For they say, as the workers of the Images do affect the Image it selfe; so doth it bring the like passions upon those to whom it was ascribed, as the mind of the Operator hath dictated it. 22. To make one fortunate we make an image, in which these are fortunate; viz. the significator of the life thereof, the givers of the life, the signes and planets. Moreover to the Ascendant, the middle of the heaven, and the Lords thereof, be fortunate: also the place of the Sunne, and place of the Moon, part of Fortune, and Lord of conjunction, or preven∣tion made before their nativity, by depressing the malignant planets. But if we will make an Image to procure misery we must doe contrarywise; and those which wee place here fortunate, must there be infortunate, by raising malignant stars.— Also for the destroying or prejudicing any, let there be made an Image under the ascension of that man, whom thou wouldst destroy, and prejudice; and thou shalt make unfortunate the Lord of the House of his life, the Lord
of the ascending, and the Moon, and the Lord of the house of the Moon, and the Lord of the house of the Lord ascending, and the tenth house, and the Lord thereof &c. 23 The youth to be initiated to Diaination by magick spells, ought to be chosen, sound, without sicknesse, ingenious comely, perfect in his members, of a quick spirit, eloquent in speech; that in him the divine power might be conversant, as in the good houses: that the minde of the youth having quickly attained ex∣perience, may be restored to its divinity. — If therefore thou shalt be a man perfect in the sound understanding of Religion and piously, and most constantly meditatest on it, and with∣out doubting believest; and art such an one on whom the au∣thority of holy Rites, and Nature hath conferred dignity a∣bove others, and one whom the divine powers contemn not; thou shalt be able by praying, consecrating, sacrificing, invoca∣ting, to attract spiritual, and coelestial Poems; and to imprint them on those things thou pleasest; and by it to vivifie every magical work. 24. Sacred words have not their power in Magical operati∣ons, from themselves, as they are words; but from the occult divine powers, working by them in the mindes of those who by faith adhere to them: by which words the secret power of God, as it were through Conduit pipes, is transmitted into them; who have eares purged by Faith, and by most pure con∣versation, and invocation of the divine Names, are made the habitation of God, and capable of these divine influences, whosoever therefore useth rightly these words, or Names of God with that purity of minde, in that manner, and order, as they were delivered; shall both obtain, and do many wonderful things. 25. To work Miracles by divine names, words, seales, cha∣racters; all must be done in most pure gold, or virgin parch∣ment, pure, clean, and unspotted; also with Inke made for this purpose of the smoak of consecrated waxe lights, or incense, and holy water. The actor also must be purifyed and cleansed by sacrifice, and have an infallible hope, a constant Faith, and his minde lifted up to the most high God, if he would surely obtain this divine power. 26. There are four kinds of divine phrenzy proceeding from
several Deities; viz. from the Muses, from Dyonisius, from Apollo, and from Venus. The first phrenzy therefore proceed∣ing from the Muses, stirs up, and tempers the minde, and makes it divine, by drawing superiour things to inferiour things, by things natural. Of which there are nine degrees, &c.— The second phrenzie proceeds from Dionysius; this doth by expiations exteriour, and interiour, and by conju∣rations, by mysteries, by solemnities, rites, temples, and observa∣tions divert the soul into the minde, the supreme part of it self, and makes it a fit and pure temple of the Gods, in which the divine spirits may dwell, which the soul then possessing as the associate of life, is filled by them with felicity, wisdome and oracles; not in signes, and marks, and in conjectures; but in a certain concitation of the minde, and free motion, &c.— The third kinde of phrenzy proceeds from Apollo, viz▪ From the minde of the world: this doth by certain sacred mysteries, vowes, sacrifices, adorations, invocations, and certain sacred Arts, or certain secret confections; by which the spirit of their God did infuse vertue, make the soul rise above the minde, by joyning it with Deities, and Daemons, &c.—The fourth kind of phrenzie proceeds from Venus; and it doth by a fervent love, convert and trans-unite the minde to God, and makes it altogether like to God, as it were the proper image of God. — The soul therefore being converted and made like to God, is so formed of God, that it doth above all intellect, know all things by a certain essential contract of divinity. — Doth, besides that it hath by its integrity obtained the spirit of prophecy, sometimes work wonderful things, and greater then the nature of the world can do, which works are called Miracles. 27. It was a custome amongst the Ancients, that they who should receive Answers, certain expiations and sacrifices being first celebrated, and divine worship ended, did religiously lye down, even in a consecrated chamber, or at least on the shrines of sacrifices, &c. 28. Whosoever would receive divine Dreams; let him be well disposed in body, his brain free from vapours, and his mind from perturbations; and let him that day abstain from supper, neither let him drink that which will inebriate; let him have
a clean and neat chamber, also exorcized, or consecrated; in the which a perfume being made, his temples annointed, things causing dreams being put on his fingers, and the representation of the heavens being put under his head; and paper being con∣secrated, his Prayers being said; let him go to bed, earnestly meditating on that thing which he desireth to know: so shall he see most true and certain dreams, with the true illumination of his intellect, &c. 29. Every one that works by Lots, must go about it with a minde well disposed, not troubled, not distracted, and with a strong desire, firm deliberation, and constant intention of knowing that which shall be desired. Moreover he must, being qualified with purity, chastity, and holinesse towards God, and the coelestials, with an undoubted hope, firm faith, and sa∣cred Orations, invocate them; that he may be made worthy of receiving the divine spirits, and knowing the divine pleasure. For if thou shalt be qualified, they will discover to thee most great secrets by vertue of Lots: and thou shalt become a true Prophet, and able to speak truth concerning things past, pre∣sent, and to come, of which thou shalt be demanded. 30. Whosoever being desirous to come to the supreme state of the soul, goeth to receive Oracles; must go to them being chastely and devoutly disposed, being pure and clean to go to them; so that his soul be polluted with no filthinesse, and free from all guilt. He must also so purifie his Minde, and Body, as much as he may, from all diseases, and passions, and all irrational conditions; which adhere to it as rust to iron, by rightly com∣posing, and disposing those things, which belong to the tran∣quility of the minde; for by this means he shall receive the truer, and more efficacious Oracles. 31 We must therefore first observe cleanness in food, in works, in affections; and to put away all filthinesse, and perturbations of the minde, and whatsoever sense, or spirit, that offends, and whatsoever things are in the mind unlike to the heavens; not on∣ly if they be in minde and spirit, but also if they be in the body, or about the body: for such an external cleannesse is believed not to help a little to the purity of the minde, &c. 32 They that desire to have this spirit pure, and potent; let them use dryer meats, and extenuate this grosse body with fast∣ings,
and they make it easily penetrable; and lest by the weight thereof, the spirit should either become thick, or be suffocated; let them preserve the body clean by Lotions, Frictions, exercises, and cloathings; and corroborate their spirits by lights, and fumes; and bring it to be a pure and thin finenesse. 33. We must acquit and avert our mindes from all multi∣tudes, and such like passions, that we may attain to the simple truth? which indeed many Philosophers are said to have at∣tained to in the solitude of a long time. For the minde by solitude, being loosed from all care of humane affairs, is at leasure, and prepared to receive the gifts of the coelestial dei∣ties. 34. It is believed, and it is delivered by them that are skil∣ful in sacred things, that the minde also may be expiated with certain institutions, and sacraments ministred outwardly, as by Sacrifices, Baptisms, and Adjurations, Benedictions, Consecrati∣ons, sprinklings of Holy water, by annointings, and fumes; not so much consecrated to this, as having a natural power thus to do. 35. Moreover, the Magicians when they made any confe∣ction, either natural, or artificial, belonging to any star; this did they afterward religiously offer and sacrifice to the same star: receiving not so much a natural vertue from the influence thereof, being opportunely received, as by that religious obla∣tion receiving it divinely confirmed, and stronger, &c. — Moreover to the coelestial and aetherical Gods white sacrifices were offered: but to the terrestrial, or infernal, black &c. 36. Moreover, we must petition for, and to the effectors of the thing desired; viz. Such an Angel, Star, or Heror, on whom the office lies: but observing that our invocation on them must be made with due number, weight, and measure; and according to the rules delivered concerning inchantments. 37. Consecration is a lifting up of experiments, by which a spiritual soul, being drawn by proportion and conformity, is infused into the matter of our works, according to the traditi∣on of Magical Art rightly and lawfully prepared, and our work is vivified by the spirit of understanding.—So in the consecration of water, fire, oyle, places, paper, swords, &c. Let there be commemoration made, &c.
38. Whosoever therefore thou art, who desirest to operate in this faculty, in the first place implore God the Father, being one; that thou also maiest be one worthy of his favour: bee cleane within and without, in a cleane place. — Wash your selves oft, and at the daies appointed, according to the mysteries of number, put on cleane cloaths, and abstaine from all uncleannesse, pollution, and lust.— Be not thou coupled to a polluted or menstruous woman, neither to her who hath the Hemachoides, touch not an uncleane thing, nor a carkase.— Thou shalt wash, and annoint, and perfume thy selfe, and shalt offer sacrifices.— Further, perfumes, sacrifice and unction penetrate all things, and open the gates of the elements, and of the heavens, that through them a man may see the secrets of God; heavenly things, and those things which are above the heavens, and also those which descend from the heavens, as Angels and Spirits of deep pits, and profound places, apparitions of desert places, and doth make them to come to you, to appeare visibly, and obey you. 39. Moreover, whatsoever thou operatest, do it with an earnest affection, and hearty desire; that the goodnesse of the heavens, and heavenly bodies may favour thee; whose favour that thou mayest the more easily obtaine; the fitnesse of the place, time, profession, or custome, diet, habit, exercise, and name also do wonderfully conduce: for by these the power of nature is not onely changed, but also overcome. For a fortunate place conduceth much to favour.— What place is congruous to each one, must be found out by his nativity, &c. 40. Make election also of houres & daies for thy operations. For not without cause our Saviour spake, Are there not twelve houres in the day, and so forth? For the Astrologers teach, that times can give a certaine fortune to our businesses. The Ma∣gicians likewise have observed; and to conclude, all the anti∣ent verse men consent in this; that it is of very great concern∣ment, that in what moment of time, and disposition of the heavens, every thing whether naturall, or artificiall, hath re∣ceived its being in this world: for they have delivered, that the first moment hath so great power, that all the course of
fortune dependeth thereon; and may be foretold thereby. All these are not ashamed to shew themselves in English, ere this. I have onely now collected them here, and there (with a running hand) to the intent, that (at one view) it might be discerned; at least (by comparison) examined; whether these dignifications, qualifications, dispositions, preparations of Magick and Astrologie; be not onely so superstitious; as of Magick and Astrologie; be not onely so superstitious; as for conscience, and religion, to abhor them: but so ridiculous as for reason, and sense to deride them? And whether these their preparations, be not meer pollutions in themselves; and these their dignifications very vilisications, to natural, and moral men: and these their consecrations, be not utter abomi∣nations to God, and all good men? Nay, and whether the most damnable witches, have not been initiated, by such kind of preparative solemnities: and their most execrable witch∣crafts operated, by such effectual ceremonies, as these; yea and they more fair seeming, then the fairest of them? CHAP. XXV. From the folly of Interrogations, and Elections. WHether, besides the superstition, and vain curiosity; it be not extreme folly, and madnesse; to make ob∣servation, inquisition. election of dayes and hours (from a mans geniture, and the disposition of the stars) where∣in to auspicate a businesse; be it greater, or lesse? Especially seeing the directing Art it self is not onely depraved commenti∣tiously (as themselves confesse) by the arrogance, ambition, vainglory, covetousnesse, and deceitfulnesse of the Artists: but how are they able to vindicate it from a more commentitious invention, and idle speculation, or inspection (according to such numbers, additions, substractions, such days, hours, minutes, scruples, &c.) of such a star, or planet, in such a positure, or a∣spect; such a conjunction, constellation, configuration; such a
house, such a Lord of the Ascendant, such a Lord of the Horo∣scope; such a significator, such a Promissor, such a Peregrinator, such an ambulator, such a prerogator, such a dispositor, such an E∣missary, &c. with such motions, congressions, profections, fortifi∣cations, oppositions, corrections, rectifications, directions, elections, &c. And how do they prove that such fictions (not onely of things, but of names) at least such disorderly confusions of both, should not onely be the Rulers ordaining, and ordering; but the rules of foreknowing and foretelling mens fates and fortunes, manners, actions, businesses, successes; fortunate or unfortunate, &c.? Is it not great imprudence then, for any to be here onquiring? And as great impudence for them to under∣take to be here resolving? 1. As concerning Fortune in general; If you would know whether your fortunatenesse or infortunity, prosperity or ad∣versity shall be more, or lesse; in the beginning, middle, or end of your life; in body, minde, name, goods, relati∣ons, &c. 2. As concerning Religion; If you would know, whether you shall be of any Religion, or none; whether of a true, or of a false Religion; whether heretical, schismatical, hypocri∣tical; whether constant, or wavering in Religion, &c. 3. As concerning marriage; If you would know whether you shall ever marry, or not; when, or about what age you shal marry; how many wives, or husbands, you shall have; whe∣ther you shall get a wise easily, or after long and hard suit; which shall love first, or most, sc. the husband the wife; or the wife the husband; whether you two shall live long together; and love mutually, equally, and constantly; whether your wife shall be a virgin, a widdow, or an harlot; be noble, or base; beautiful, or deformed; rich, or poor; faithful, or disloyal; vertuous, or vitious; wise, or foolish; sullen, or cheerful; frugal, or lavish; subject or imperious; modest and silent, or light and loquacious; which of you twain shall die first, or the one bury the other, &c. 4. As concerning children; If you would know, whether your wife shall be fruitful, or barren; whether she shall bring forth twins, or monsters; whether boys, or girls; when and under what constellations to lie with your wife; for the be∣getting
of children male, or female; tall, or low of stature; fair, or deformed; healthful, or sickly; dull, or witty; wise, or foolish; rude, or mannerly; long lived, or short lived; whether your children shall be many, or few; dutiful, or un∣gracious; thriving, or prodigal, &c. 5. As concerning friendship; If you would know, whether your friend shall be true, faithful, useful, constant; or on the contrary; whether your enemies shall be potent, or impotent; noble, or base; secret, or open; reconcileable, or implacable; whether you shall have more enemies then friends; and your enemies more ready, and able to hurt; then your friends to help; whether your greatest friends or enemies shall be aliens, or allies, &c. 6 As concerning honours; If you would know, whether you shall be honourable or despised; preferred or disgraced; abroad, or at home; whether you shall attain to honour, and preferment by the Princes favour, by wealth, by the mediation of friends, or by your own deserts; whether your honours shall last, and how long, &c. 7. As concerning Magistery and Magistracy; If you would know what course of life you shall lead; publick, or private; military, or civil; liberal, or mechanick; when, under what constellation, and with what election to auspicate, or enter upon your Science, Art, Trade, Occupation, Profession, Office, Place, Calling; what shall be your advantage, or prejudice hereby, &c. 8. As concerning servants; Whether you shall live, or die a servant; whether you shall serve a good, or a bad master; when and under what planetary elections to go to service, that so it may be both more easie, and beneficial, &c. 9. As concerning building; when, or according to what electional houses of the heavens, to build your house on earth: so as it may stand firm against wind, and rain, escape fire, and be freed from rats, mice, &c. 10. As concerning husbandry; If you would know accor∣ding to what sydereal elections, to hire, let, plant, improve, plow, sow, reap, &c. 11. As concerning commerce; If you would know when and under what fortunate position of the starres; to buy and
sell, and gain by the bargain; what commodities will be cheap, or dear, and when; &c. 12. As concerning Riches; If you would know whether you shall waxe rich by inheritance, acquisition, dead mens goods, merchandizing, other mens mony, by mines, woods, cattle, husbandry, finding of hidden treasures, by offices, pla∣ces, executorship, feoffeship, &c. Whether you shall get goods lawfully, or unlawfully; with ease, or industry; when your wealth will grow upon you, to what measure or value they wil amount, and how long they shall last: And whether you shall become poor by suertiship, compartnership, contention, idle∣nesse, luxuriousnesse, unprudence, fire, water, winds, rots, mur∣rains, thieves, robbers, plunderings, and whether your riches, or poverty shall be first, or last. 13. As concerning Laws, and Lawings; If you would know on what lucky day, or electional hour, to enter your suit: whether your advocate will be faithful and diligent in plead∣ing your cause; and the Judge just; and whether win the day, or get the better of your adversary, &c. 14. As concerning travelling; If you would know under what aspects to begin your jurney prosperously; whether it is safest to go by sea, or by land; by night, or by day; with com∣pany, or without; on horseback, or on foot; whether your journey shall be long or short, your travel pleasant, or tedious; your return safe and advantagious, &c. 15. As concerning wars; If you would know under what happy conjunction to raise your men, whether they shall be trusty and couragious; what weapons to make choice of; what fortunate day to appoint for the battle; where to take your ground; when to give the onset; when to retreat; how to get the victory, &c. 17. As concerning things lost or stoln; If you would know where they are, who is the thief, whether you shall recover your goods; and how improved, or impaired, &c. 18. As concerning sports, and recreations; If you would know whether it is best to take your pleasure within doors, or without; when to goe on hunting with sport, and successe; whether you shall win, or lose, in playing at cards, dice, &c. 19. As concerning the minutest matters; If you would
know with what auspication, and election, to wash your hands; kemb your head; cut your hair; pair your nails; put on new cloaths, greet a man, or meet a beast that is com∣ing towards you, &c. 20. As concerning health, or sicknesse; If you would know which of these shall be first, or last; whether natural, or accidental; what degree of malignity is to be gathered from the hour of decumbency; whether the sicknesse, or disease be curable, and recoverable yea, or no; &c. 21. As concerning death; If you would know, whether it shall be natural, or violent; honourable, or shameful; a∣broad, or at home; suddain, or after long languishing; soon∣er, or later: whether you shall die by justice, cruelty, treache∣ry, and casualty; by poyson, pestilence, sword, famine, thun∣der, shipwrack, fire, water, beasts, thieves, robbers, servants, children, neighbours, strangers; by open or secret enemies, &c. Besides all these (and infinite such like) speculative interro∣gations, as touching auspicating elections (common both to prescribers and consulters) there are, together with these con∣stellations, certain practical configurations: as the fabricati∣ons of Images, statues, pictures, Talismanus, idols (painted, molten, graven) under certain sydereal conjunctions; for the repelling of things hurtful from you; and procuring of things helpful to you, viz. If you would drive away any ve∣nemous serpent, or noysom beast; make the figure thereof in some certain matter, under some convenient constellation, and inscribe thereupon the name of the signe ascending, and the name of the thing you would expell, &c. And for the con∣trary effect, do it after a contrary constellation, &c. And observe the like, in alluring to love; or in provoking to hatred; in curing of diseases, and procuring of health, &c. But by no means (so conscientious, or cautious they are) ascribe the ef∣fect to the Image; for that's (say they) idolatry, superstiti∣on, witchcraft: but to the constellation: and I pray, what's that? But I am weary with reckoning up (in part) things of so great folly; and of greater impiety. Onely I ask (not them, but the sound, and sober) if indeed they be not so? I mean, if the businesse, and folly of the world (brought and
sought to be directed by the businesse, and folly of an Art) be not very much repugnant to humane prudence; and to divine providence much more? CHAP. XXVI. From the conviction of Confession. WHether Magicians and Astrologers themselves, have not plainly and plentifully, discovered and ac∣knowledged, the vanity and impiety of Magick and Astrology? And whether it be not an Argument irrefra∣gable against an Art, or operation: whenas the Arch-Artists are so far convinc't, as to confesse the pravity, and obliquity thereof themselves? For who can more truly and fully set them forth, then they that have given themselves over to study and practise them? How many things (of old, and of late) have been spoken (either through a spirit of recantation, a conscience of conviction, or a sury of exclamation) by magi∣cians, against Magick; and by Astrologers, against Astrology? Hear what one of them saith both against himself, and all the rest; of what kind or sort soever. Whatsoever things have here already, and shall afterward be said by me; I would not have any one assent to them: nor shal I my self any further, then they shall be approved of by the unit versal Church, and the Congregation of the faithful—Magi∣cians, and those who were the authors of this Art amongst the Antients, have been Chaldeans, Aegyptians, Assyrians, Persi∣ans, and Arabians; all whose Religion was perverse, and pol∣luted idolatry. We must very much take heed, lest we should permit their errors to war against the grounds of the Catholike Religion: For this was blasphemous, and subject to the curse; and I also should be a blasphemer, if I should not admonish you of these things in this science. Wheresoever therefore you shall find these things written by us; know that these things are
onely related out of other Authors, and not put down by us, for truth; but for a probable conjecture, which is allyed to truth; and an instruction for imitation in those things that are true.—Of Magick I wrote (whilst I was very young) three large books, which I called Of Occult Philosophie; in which what was then, through the curiosity of my youth, erroneous, I now being more advised, am willing to have retracted, by this Recantation: For I have heretofore spent very much time and cost in these vanities. At length I grew so wise, as to understand how, and by what reasons I was bound to dehort others from this destruction. For whosoever do not in the truth, nor in the power of God, but in the delusions of Devils, according to the operation of theevil spirits, presume to divine, and prophe∣cy, and by magical vanilies, exorcisms, inchantments, love-po∣tions, allurements, and other devilish works and deceits, of I∣dolatry, exorcising prestigious things, and making ostentation of phantasms, boasting themselves to work miracles, presently vanishing: all these, with Jannes, and Iambres, and Simon Ma∣gus shall be destinated to the torments of eternal fire. The antient Philosophers teach us to know the nature of the genius of every man, by stars, their influx, and aspects, which are potent in the nativity of any one: but with instructions so diverse, and differing amongst themselves; that it is much dis∣ficult to understand the mysteries of the Heavens by their dire∣ctions, &c. Cicers following the stoicks, affirms that the foreknowing of future things belongs onely to the Gods. And Ptolomie the A∣strologer saith, that they onely that are inspired with a deity, foretel particular things. To them Peter the Apostle consents saying, Prophesying is not made according to the will of man, but holy men spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Take heed that you be not deceived by them that are decei∣ved. Neither can the great reading of books direct you here, since they are but as riddles. How great writings are there made of the irresistible power of magical Art, of the Prodigious Ima∣ges of Astrologers, of the monstrous transmutations of Alchi∣mists, of the blessed stone, by which, Mydas-like, all mettals that were touched, were presently transmuted into Gold, or Silver. All which are found vain, fictitious, and false, &c.—What∣soever
the monstrous Mathematicians, the prodigious magi∣cians, the envious Alchymists, and bewitching Necremancers can do by spirits. See where their Faith is placed, where their hope is reposed, who endeavour to subject the Elements, Heavens, Fate, Nature, Providence, God, and all things, to the command of one Ma∣gician: and seek for the preservation of a kingdom from De∣vils, the enemies of publike preservation; Saying in their heart with Ochozias, there is not a God in Israel, let us go and consult Beelzebub, the God of Achron, &c.—Are they not delivered over to a reprobate sense, who desire the certainty of secret counsels from the Devil, the father of lies: and hope for victory elsewhere, then from the Lord of Hosts?— All these ungodly follies are wont to bring destruction to the admirers thereof: to which truly they who especially confide, are made the most unfortunate of all men.—Surely it is unknown to these Fools, and Slaves of the Devil for to finde out things to come; and to pronounce truth concerning those things which hang over our heads, and are occult, and from heaven portended unto men; and to effect things which exceed the common course of Nature, &c.—O Fools, and wicked! Who by these Arts would establish a kingdom; by which formerly most potent Empires have fallen, and have been utterly overthrown. It is now time to speak of the Mathematical disciplines, which are reputed to be the most certain of all other; and yet they all consist not, but in the opinions of their own Doctors; to whom much faith is given; who also have erred in them not a little. Which Alhumasar (one of them) attests to us, saying; that the Antients, even since Aristotles time, have not plainly known the Mathematicks. For seeing all these Arts are chiefly conversant about the spherical, or round, whether figure, or number, or motion; they are forced at length to con∣fesse, that a perfect round, or spherical, is no where to be found neither according to Art, nor according to Nature. And these disciplines, although they have caused heresies in the Church, few, or none; yet (as Augustine saith) they nothing per∣tain to salvation; but rather induce to errour, and recall from God: and (as Hierome saith) are not sciences of piety.
This Arithmetick (vaine and superstitious) hath brought forth Geomancy, and divination, and cogging, dicing, or chan∣cing, and whatsoever is of that sort of sortilegious numerals. Although almost all doe adopt Geomancy to Astrologie, be∣cause of the like judiciall way: and because they draw the power thereof not so much from number as motion.—Of this there have written among the Antients, Haly; among the moderne, Gerardus Cremonensis, Bartholomeus Parmensis, and one Tundinus. I also have written a certaine Geomancy, farre different from that of others: and yet not lesse superstitions, and fallacious; or if you will, let me say, not lesse lying then all the rest. Neither do I think that to be passed over which the Pythago∣ricks did assert; and which others think that Aristotle himselfe believed: sc. that the elements of Letters doe possesse their cer∣tain numbers; out of which they did divine by the proper names of men: the numbers of the letters of every one being collected in summe; which compared, they gave to him the palme, whose summe exceeded the other; whether it was en∣quired about warre, or strife, or marriage, or life, or any other the like.—And there are, who by the same compute, promise themselves to finde out the Horoscopes: as I know not whom, one Alchandrius by name, an obscure Philosopher, hath delive∣red concerning them. Moreover I cannot easily say, what Pythagoricall mysteries, what Magicall powers, they dream to be in numbers; although divided of things themselves: yea and dare say, that the world could not have been created by God, but by those instruments and exemplars: and that the knowledge of all divine things are contained in numbers, as in a rule, of all, most certaine. Hence arose the heresies of Marcus, and Magus, and Valenti∣nus, founded on numbers, and proceeding from numbers: who presumed themselves able to finde out, and declare divine religion, and innumerable secrets of the divine truth, by most frigid numbers.—All which are vaine, and feyned, and false; neither remaines there any thing of truth to these Arithmeti∣cians, but an insensate and inanimate number: and yet they suppose themselves to play the part of a divine, or divining men, because they know how to number
The Astrologie, which is Astronomie (or rather the Astrono∣mie which is Astrologie) is wholly fallacious; and much more nugacious then the fables of Poets, whose Masters (bold men in truth, and authors of prodigies) out of an impious curiosity, after their owne fancy, and above humane capacity (as if it were Basilides the hereticke his Abraxas) fabricate the heavenly orbes; and depaint the measures of the starres, their motions, figures, images, numbers, concents; as if they were but of late descended downe from heaven, and had been there conversant for some time: by which they imagine all things stand, are done, and may be knowne. And yet about these very things they are greatly disagreeing among themselves, and contrary, and repugnant one to another: so that I doubt not to say with Pliny, it plainly argues the incon∣stancy of this Art, and that it is none: in that, teaching the very principles of it, one way thinke, or judge the Indians, o∣therwise the Chaldeans, otherwise the Aegyptians, otherwise the Mores, otherwise the Jewes, otherwise the Arabians otherwise the Greekes, otherwise the Latines; otherwise the ancient, o∣therwise the moderne Authors. For, treating of the number of the Spheres; Plato, Proclus, Aristotle, Averroes, and almost all the Astrologers before Alphonsus, a few only excepted, doe number eight Spheres only; yet Averroes and Rabbi Isaac say, that Hermes, and some of the Babylonians, placed the new orbe, or ninth sphere. To which opinion adhere, Azarcheles the More, and Tebith, and the same learned Rabbi, Isaac, and Alpetragus; to which assent Albertus the Almaine, of his age (I know not for what famous enterprize of his) called the Great: and all they, who approve of the accesse and recesse of motions. But the junior Astrologers now surmise, that there are ten Orbes; which Albertus himselfe supposes Ptolomie also to have held Averroes also supposes him to reckon up nine; when as in truth Ptolomie affirmes no more but eight. But Alphontius some∣time following the judgement of Rabbi Isaac, by surname Ba∣zam, held nine Spheres: yet four yeeres after the edition of his Tables, adhering to the opinions of Albuhassen the More, and Albategni, he recal'd himselfe againe to eight. Also Rabbi Abraham Avenezra, and Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Abrabam Za∣cutus, do suppose there to be no moveable orbe above the eight:
and as touching the motion of the eighth Orbe, and of the fixed Stars, they are very various amongst themselves. For the Chaldeans and the Aegyptians affirm it to be carried with one motion onely: to whom assent Alpatragus, and of the mo∣dern Alexander Aquilinus. But the rest of the Astronomers, from Hipparchus to our times, say that it is carried about with many motions. The Talmudisticall Iewes assigne to it a double motion. Azarcheles and Tebith, and Johannes Regiomontanus have ascribed to it the motion of Trepidation, which they say is of accesse, and recesse; above the little circles that are about the head of Aries and Libra. But in this they differ among themselves: because Azarcheles saith, the moveable head cannot be distant from the fixt, more then ten parts. But Tebith saith, not more then four parts, with ten, and almost nine minuts. Johannes Regiomontanus saith, not more then eight parts: and therefore the fixed Stars not alwaies varying to the same parts of the world; but they conceive them sometime returning where they began. But Ptolomy, Albategni, Rabbi Levi, Aven∣nezra, Zacutus, and (amongst the moderne) Paulue Florentinus, and Augustinus Ritius (very familiar to me in Italy) affirm the Stars to be moved alwaies and continually, according to the successions of signes. The latter Astronomers attribute a tripple motion to the eighth Sphere; one proper, which we have called that of Trepidation; which is compleated once in seven thousand yeeres: another which they call that of Gy∣ration, from the ninth Sphere, whose circumvolution is not finished in lesse then forty nine thousand yeeres: the third, from the renth Orbe, which they call the motion of the First moveable, or the motion of Rapture, or the Diurnall; which within a naturall day returns daily to his beginning. Further∣more they who attribut a double motion to the eighth Sphere, doe not all of them agree among themselves: For almost all the modern, and they who admit of the motion of Trepida∣tion, doe argue it to be hurried along in a superiour Sphere: but Albategni, Albuhassen, Alfraganus, Averroes, Rabbi Levi, Abraham Zaeutus, Augustinus Ritius, doe think that the Di∣urnall motion, which others think to be the motion of Rap∣ture, is not proper to any Sphere, but is done by the whole Heavens. And Averroes himselfe saith, that Ptolomy (in his book
which he inscribed of narrations) doth deny the motion of Gyration. And Rabbi Levi saith, he thinks with Averroes, that the Diurnall motion is done by the whole Heavens. Again, they no more agree, about the measure of the motion of the eighth Orbe, and of the fixed Stars. For Ptolomy thinks that the fixed Stars are moved one degree in an hundred yeers. Albategni contends this to be done in sixty six Aegyptian yeers: To whom assent Rabbi Levi, Rabbi Zacutus, and Alphontius, in the cor∣rection of his Tables. Azarcheles the Moore saith, they are moved one degree in seventy foure yeeres: Hipparchus in se∣venty and eight. Many of the Hebrews, as Rabbi Iosue, Moyses, Maymonides, Rabbi Avenezra, and after them Hay Benrodam, in seventy yeeres: Johannes Regiomontanus, in eighty yeers: Augustinus Ritius holds the middle betwixt the opinions of Albategni and the Hebrews; thinking that the fixed Stars are not moved one part of the Heavens, sooner then sixty yeeres; nor slower then seventy yeers. But Rabbi Abraham Zacutus (as Ri∣tius tels us) testifieth out of the tradition of the Indians, that there are yet in Heaven two Stars Diametrally opposite one to the other; which, contrary to the order of signes, fulfill not their course in lesse then an hundred forty foure yeeres. Also Alpetragus himselfe thinks, that there are in the Heavens vari∣ous motions, yet unknown to man; which if it be so, there may be Stars and bodies there, to which those motions may agree; which either men cannot discerne by reason of the ex∣ceeding altitude; or no Arts as yet have by observation found out. To which Phavorinus the Philosopher in Gellius, assents; in his oration against the Genethliacks. It therefore remaines to conclude, that no Astronomer as yet hath descended from Heaven, who could teach us the inerrant motion truely and certainly. Neither hath the true motion of Mars hitherto been known; which also Johannes Regiomontanus complaines of, in a certain Epistle to Blanchinus. Also one Gulielmus de sancto Clodoaldo, an excellent Astrologer, hath left written the errour of the same motion, in his observations two hundred yeers since and more; and none of the latter hath hitherto corrected either him or it. Moreover it is unpossible to finde out the true ingresse of the Sunne into the aequinoctiall points: which Rabbi Levi proveth by many reasons. But what should
we speake of those that are found out since; how the former have erred about them? For many, with Tebith, have thought the greatest declination of the Sunne to be continually varied: when neverthelesse it is alwaies carried in one measure. Yet Ptolomy thought otherwise of it; and it wat otherwise found out by Rabbi Levi, Avenezra, and Alphonsus. In like manner, concerning the motion of the Sunne, and measure of the yeère, they have found it otherwise, then Ptolomy, and Hip∣parchus have delivered. Likewise, as touching the motion of the Stage of the Sunne, Ptolomy conceives one thing; but Al∣bategni, and the rest another. Moreover of the images, and considerations of the fixed Stars; the Indians have delivered their opinions after one manner, the Aegyptians after another, the Chaldeans another, the Hebrews another, the Arabians another, Timotheus another, Arsatilis another, Hipparchus another, Ptolemy another, and the moderne writers another. I passe by here to tell, how they befoole themselves about the right and the left principle of the heavens; concerning which St. Thomas Aquinas, and Albertus the Almaine, two superstitious divines, while they seriously endeavoured to say something, could finde nothing to say: neither could any man certainly ever finde out any thing. Moreover the Galaxia, or the milkie circle, what it is, the Astrologers are yet ignorant of. I also forbeare to lengthen my speech about the excentricks, concen∣tricks, apicycles, retrogradations, trepidations, accesses, recesses, raptures, and other motions, and circles of motions: seeing all these are not; are neither the workes of God, nor of na∣ture: but monsters of the Mathematicians, and trifles of Feig∣ners, derived from corrupt Philosophy, and the Fables of Poets; to which neverthelesse, as it were to true things, and created by God, or established in nature, these Masters are not ashamed to give so much Faith, as to referre unto these trifling vanities, as unto causes, whatsoever things are done in these inferiours: and say, that those feined motions are the princi∣ples of all inferiour motions. Such Astronomers as these, A∣naximenes his mayd hath opportunely castigated, by a saying not to be despised; for she using to walke abroad with her master Anaximenes, who on a certain day going early out of his house to inspect the Starres, while he was surely intent in
looking up to the heavens, he, unmindsull of the places site, fell suddenly into a ditch; then said his mayd, I wonder Ma∣ster upon what reason you should perswade your selfe that you can foreknow such things as are in Heaven; when as you cannot foresee those things that are before your own seet. The same facetious passage is reported concerning Thales Milesius; in like manner reproved by his hand mayd Tressa. And it is not unlike to these, that Tully saith; The Astrologers while they are searching after the coastes of Heaven, none of them perceives what is before his own feet. I my selfe of a child, have taken in this Art from my parents; and further, I have lost much time, and labour in it: at length I have learned that this whole art, and every part of it, leaves you no other founda∣tion, but meere toyes and figments of imagination. And it now irketh, and repenteth me of my labour lost heretofore; and I did desire to bereave my selfe of all memory, and use of it, and had long since cast it out of my mind; nor would I ever have reassumed it, but that the violent intreaties of some potent ones (who are wont sometimes to abuse great & good wits, to unworthy artifices) had compelled me to fall upon it again; yea, and my own domesticall utility did perswade me, that I ought sometimes to enjoy their folly, and to observe them with trifles, that so greatly coveted after trifles. I truly say trifles; for what else hath Astrologie, but meere trifles of Poets and Fables, and portentous figments, with which they faine the heavens to be fully stored? Neither doe any kind of men agree more together, then Astrologers and Poets doe; excepting that they dissent about Lucifer and Vesper: the Poets affirming, that on what day Lucifer appeares before the Sunne rising, on the same day it followes the Sunne setting; which almost all the Astrologers deny to be done, besides those who place Ʋenus above the Sunne: because those Starres which are more remote from us, they seem in their rising to rise sooner, and in their setting to set later. But this discord of Astrologers about the site of Stars and Planets, had I not now remembred it, I had passed it by: in as much as it belongs not to Astrolo∣gers so much as Philosophers. For Plato after the Moon, places the second Sphere of the Sunne (or the Sphere of the Sunne second &c.) the same doe the Aegyptians, placing the Sunne be∣twixt
the Moon and Mercury. But Arebimedes, and the Chal∣daeans place the Sunne the fourth in order. Anaximander, Me∣trodorus, Chius, and Crates say, that the Sunne is the supreame of all, after which the Moon, and beneath these the rest errant, and inerrant. Xenocrates thinks that all the Stars are moved in one and the same superficies: and they discord no lesse about the magnitude and distance of the Sunne, the Moon, and the rest of the Stars. Neither is there any constancy of opinion amongst them about the Celestials, nor yet truth; neither is that any marvell, seeing the Heaven it selfe, which they search, is of all other most inconstant, and most replenished with tri∣fles and fables; for the very Twelve signes, and the rest of the Boreall and Australl images, had never ascended up to heaven, but by Fables. And yet the Astrologers live by these Fables, and impose them upon others, and make a gain thereby. But the Poats in the mean while (the egregious inventors of them) grow poore, and hungry. There remaines yet another species of Astrologie, which they call the Divinatory, or the Judiciary; which treats of the revolutions of the yeers of the world, of nativities, of que∣stions, of elections, of intentions and cogitations, of ver∣tues, or powers; for the foretelling, casting up, eschu∣ing, or repelling the events of all things future; even of the secret dispositions of divine providence it selfe. Hereupon the Astrologers doe mart, or vent the effects of the Heavens, and the Stars, from yeers most remote, and before all memory of things, or the times of Prometheus, or (as they say) from the great conjunctions before the Flood. And they affirm that the effects, forces, motions of all living creatures, stones, metals, herbs, and whatsoever things in these inferiours, doe flow from these same Heavens, and Starres, and doe altogether de∣pend upon them, and may be searched out by them. Verely these are incredulous men, and not lesse impious, in not ac∣knowledging this one thing, that God had already made the Herbs, Plants, and Trees, even before the Heavens and Stars. Moreover, the most grave Philosophers, as Pythagoras, Democri∣tus, Bion, Favorinus, Panaetius, Carneades, Possidonius, Timaeus, Aristoteles, Plato, Plotinus, Porphyrius, Avicenna, Averroes, Hippo∣crates, Galenus, Alexander Aphrodisaeus, Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch,
and many more, who have searched the causes of things from every Art and Science; yet never remit us to these Astrolo∣gicall causes: which although they were causes, yet because they plainly knew not the courses of the Stars, and their forces (which is a thing most known to all wise men) they there∣fore cannot give a certain judgement of their effects. Neither are there wanting among them (as Eudoxus, Archelaus, Cassan∣drus, Hoychilax, Halicarnassaeus) most skilfull Mathematicians, and many other modern and most grave Authors, which con∣fesse, that it is impossible that any thing certain should be found out concerning the science of such judgements: both because of innumerable other causes cooperating together with the Heavens, which must be attended together; for so Ptolomy bids: as also because very many occasions doe hinder them; as namely customes, manners, education, shame, command, place, geniture, blood, meat, liberty of mind, and discipline; seeing these influxes compell not (as they say) but incline. Fur∣thermore, they who have prescribed the rules of judgements, doe for the most part determine such diverse and repugnant things of the same matter; that it is impossible for a progno∣sticator to pronounce any thing certaine, from so many, and so various, and dissonant opinions; unlesse there be in him some intrinsicall sense of things future, and occult; or some instinct of presage, or rather occult and latent inspiration of the Devill, by which, among these he may be able to discerne, or may be induced by some other way, to adhere now to this, now to that opinion: which instinct whosoever wanteth, he (as Haly saith) cannot be a Tel-troth in Astrologicall judge∣ments. Wherefore now, Astrologicall prediction must consist not so much of Art, as by a kind of obscure, lot, or chance of things. And as in the books, or games of Lottery, sometimes such an one is drawn forth, as speaks truth, and hits right; yet not by art, but by chance; so it is by chance, and not by art, that vaticinations come forth truely either from the mind, or the mouth of an Astrologer. To which Ptolomy attests say∣ing, the science of the Stars is from thee and from them: mea∣ning, that the prediction of things future and occult, is not so much from the observation of the Stars, as from the affecti∣ons of the mind. Therefore is there no certainty of this Art,
but it is convertible to all things, according to the opinion which is collected by conjectures, or imagination, or an im∣perceptible suggestion of Devils, or some superstitious lot or chance. This art therefore is no other then a fallacious con∣jecture of superstitious men, who through the use of long time, have made a science of uncertain things: in which, for the beguiling men of their money, they may deceive the unskil∣full, and may also be deceived themselves. And if the Art of these men be true, and be understood by themselves, whence then bubble out so many and so great errors in their progno∣stications? But if it be not so, doe they not vainly and foolish∣ly, and impiously, to professe a science of things, that are not, or not understood? But the more cautelous of them pro∣nounce not upon futures, save obscurely: and such as may be applied to every thing, and time, and Prince, and Nation. Out of a versatile artifice, doe they feyne ambiguous prognosticks; and after that any of them shall happen, then doe they gather the causes thereof; and after the fact or effect, then doe they establish old vaticinations with new reasons; to the intent they may seem to have foreseen. Just as the interpreters of dreames, who when they have a dream understand nothing of it for certain: but after that something is hapned unto them, then doe they adopt the dream to that which hapned. Fur∣thermore, seeing it is impossible, in such a variety of Stars, but to finde some of them well, some of them ill posited; here∣upon they take occasion of speaking what they please; and to whom they will they predict life, health, honours, riches, power, victory, soundnesse, off-spring, marriage, Priesthood, Magistracy, and the like: but if they be ill affected to any, to them they denounce deaths, hangings, reproaches, destructions, banishments, barrennesse, desolation, calamities, &c. not so much out of a wicked art, as out of wicked affections, drawing on to destruction those men that are credulous to these impi∣ous curiosities: and oft times committing among themselves both Princes and people, in deadly seditions and warres. If that Fortune fall in with their prognosticks; and among so many ambiguous things, if that one or other of them happen to be true, it is a wonder then to behold how they bristle, being crest-swolne; and how most insolently they predicate their
own predictions. But though they lie daily, and be convinced of lying, then they excuse it by blasphemy, or cover one lie with another, saying, a wise man ruleth over the Stars: when as in truth, neither doth a wise man overrule the Stars, nor the Stars a wise man, but it is God that ruleth over them both; or else they say, that some ineptitude, or incapacity of the receiver hindred the celestiall influxes. And they are angry at them who require any further faith, or proofe. Notwithstanding these circulators finde Princes and Magistrates that believe them in all things, and adorn them with publique stipends: when as indeed there is no kind of men more pestilent to a Com∣monwealth, then those that spread vaticinations, and promise things future from the Stars, and inspected Ghosts, from dreams, and such like artifices of divination. Besides they are men alwaies offensive or abominable to Christ, and to all that truly believe in him. Of whom Cornelius Tacitus complai∣neth, saying, The Mathematicians (for so they vulgarly named them) are a kind of men trecherous to Princes, and deceitfull to those that give credit to them; they have alwaies been pro∣hibited our City, and yet we could never have them expelled thence. Yea and Varro, a grave Author, testifieth, that the vani∣ties of all superstitions have issued from the bosome of Astro∣logie. There was in Alexandria a Tribute which the Astrolo∣gers used to pay, called Blacenominon, for the folly of it; because by an ingenuous folly they got their gain; and because that none but fooles and rash men used to consult them. For if from the Stars be mens lives and fortunes, why feare we? why are we troubled? Rather let us leave these to God, and the Hea∣vens, who neither can erre nor doe evill. And since we are but men, let us not be over wise in high matters, and more then is meet, and above our powers; but only so far forth as behooveth humane creatures. And moreover, in as much as we are Chri∣stians, let us leave to Christ the houres, and to God the Father the moments, which he hath put in his own power. But if our life and fortune be not from the Starres, then doth not every Astrologer run in vaine? But there is a kind of men so time∣rous and credulous, which (like as children doe their Goblin tales) more believe, and are more affraid of those things that
are not, then those that are: and by how much a thing is lesse possible, they feare it the more; and by how much it is lesse like to truth, so much the more firmly doe they believe it: who truely, if there were no Astrologers and Diviners, would die for hunger. And the foolish credulity of these men, forget∣full of things past, and negligent of things present, and head∣strong upon things future, doth so favour these deceivers, that whereas in other men the faith of the speaker is rendred or suspected by one lie, that all the rest of truths are thereby ob∣scured? on the contrary, as concerning these lying Masters, one fortuitous truth must get credit even to notorious lies. To which truely they who trust most, are rendred of all men the most unhappy. As these superstitious vanities are wont to bring destruction to their observers; which antiquity witnes∣seth in Zoroastes, Pharaoh, Nebuchadonosor, Caesar, Crassus, Pom∣pey, Diotherus, Nero, and Julian the Apostate: who as they were most addicted to these toyes, so they perished most miserably in the confidence of them. And to whom the Astrologers had promised all things fortunate and joyfull; all things fell out most dolefull and unfortunate: as to Pompey, Crassus, and Cae∣sar; to none of whom they promised other, then that they should die old, at home, and with glory; and yet every one of them perished miserably, and untimely. Verily this is a perti∣nacious and preposterous kind of men, who professe them∣selves to foreknow things future; and yet are ignorant of things past and present: and while they professe themselves to all men, that they can declare all things, although most occult, yet very often they know not what is done in their own hou∣ses, in their own beds. Such an Astrologer More the English∣man taxes in this handsome Epigram. Thou aery Prophet! to whom every Starre Opens it selfe, and straight way makes a warre, Of each mans future Fate. Thou hast a wife That ope's herselfe to all; she is so rife. This the Sunne sees, and all the Stars; and yet Not one of them forewarneth thee of it. Saturn's aloofe, as blind as e're; nor can Though nigh, discerne betwixt a stone and a man.
The beauteous Moon can with her bashful eye, Being a virgin, a virgin onely spie, Jove heeds Europa, Mars, Venus; Venus Mars; Sol looks to Daphne; and Mercury to Heres, Hence thy wifes Loves to thee they make not known; They have enough to do, to tend their own. Moreover, it is known to all, how the Jewes, Chaldeans, Ae∣gyptians, Persians, Arabians, do dissent in the very rules of the Judiciary way: and how Ptolomie rejecteth the whole Astrolo∣gie of the Antients: and as Avenrodam defends him; so Albu∣masar inveighs against him. And all these doth Abraham Ave∣nezra the Hebrew lash. To conclude, Dorothaeus, Paulus, Ale∣xandrinus, Ephestion, Maternus, Homer, Tebith, Alchiudus, Za∣hel, Messahalla, and almost all the rest conceive and think o∣therwise. And since what they say, they cannot prove to be true; they only defend themselves by way of experiment: neither do they all of em unanimously agree even about that. Nei∣ther do they differ lesse about the proprieties of the houses; out of which they prole the predictions of all events: which Ptolomie assignes one way, Heliodorus another, Paulus another, Manlius a∣nother, Maternus another, Porphyrius another, Abentagel ano∣ther, the Egyptians another, the Arabians another, the Greeks and Latines another, the Antients another, the Modern another. And for as much as it is not evident amongst them, after what manner they ought to constitute the beginnings, and the ends of those houses since the Antients fabricate them after one fashi∣on, Ptolomie after another, Campanus after another, Johannes Regiomontanus after another: whence it comes to pass, that they themselves by their own observations, do diminish all faith and credit to themselves; in that divers of them do ascribe divers properties to the same places; and not only so, but beginnings also, and ends. An impious kind of men! who attribute those things to the stars, the stars, that are belonging to God alone: and do make us free-born, to be the stars born slaves. And whereas we know that God created all things good; they deliver that there are certain stars malevolous, and authors of wickednesses, and of evil influxes: not without the greatest injury of God, and the heavens, that may be, defining that in those coelestials, and in that divine Senate, evils, and wickednesses are decreed to be
done. And impute wholly to the stars, whatsoever is committed by us, through the fault of our own will; and what may fall out against order in nature, through the fault of the matter. Yea they fear not to teach most pernicious heresies, and infidelities; namely, while they prophesse with impious temerity, that the gift of Prophecy, the power of Religion, the secrets of Consci∣ence, the command over devils, the vertue of miracles, the effi∣cacy of supplications, and the state of the life to come, do all depend upon the stars, are vouchsafed by them, and may be known from them. For they say, that the star of the Twins a∣scending, with Saturn, and Mercury joyned under Aquarius, in the ninth coast of heaven, a Prophet must be born: and that therfore the Lord Christ was excellent in so many mighty works because in the same place, he had Saturn in Gemini. Also the sects of Religion, over which they place Jupiter as chief patron, they distribute by commixtion of other stars: so as Jupiter with Saturn, should make the Religion of the Jews; with Mars of the Chaldeans; with Sol of the Egyptians; with Venus of the Saracens; with Mercury of the Christians; with Luna, that of Antichrist, which they say is yet to come. And that Moses, from Astrological rules and reasons, instituted the Sabbath of the Jews, to be observed as a Religious day: and that the Christians therefore do erre in not resting from labour, and keeping holy day on the Jewish Sabbath, seeing it is Saturns day. Also they think that the fidelity of every one, towards men, or towards God, and profest Religion, and secrets of Conscience, may be deprehended from part of the Sun, and from the third, ninth, and eleventh houses of heaven: and they delivering many rules of foreknowing the thoughts, and as they say, the intentions of men. And they set up the coelestial configurations as the cau∣ses of the very miraculous works of divine omnipotence; as namely, of the universal flood, of the Law given by Moses, and of the virgins child-birth: and they fable, that the death of Christ the Redeemer of man-kind, was the work of Mars: and that Christ himself, in his miracles, used the election of hours, in which the Jews could not hurt him, while he went up to Je∣rusalem; and therefore he said to his Disciples diswading him, are there not twelve hours of the day? They say moreover, that whosoever hath Mars happily placed in a new house of hea∣ven;
he shall, by his sole presence, expel devils out of the pos∣sessed. And he that shall make supplication to God, the Moon and Jupiter, with the Dragons head, being conjoyned in the mid∣dle heaven; shall obtain all things, whatsoever he shall ask. And further, that the felicity of the life to come is bestowed by Jupiter and Saturn. And that if any man in his geniture▪ hath Saturn happily constituted in Leo; his soul, after this life, be∣ing freed from innumerable miseries, shall passe to heaven, the first beginning of its original, and be applyed to the Gods. But for all this, to these execrable fopperies, and pernicious heresies Petrus Apponensis, Roger Bacon, Guido Bonatus, Arnoldus de nova villa, Philosophers; and Alyanensis, a Cardinal, and a Theologue, and divers other Doctors of a Christian name (not without an infamy of heresie) do subscribe: yea and dare testifie, and de∣fend, that they have experienced these for truth. But Johannes Picus Mirandula of late yeers, hath written against Astrologers, in twelve Books; and that in so great copiousnesse, that scarce any argument hath escaped him: as also with so great efficacy; so that hitherto, neither Lucius Balnutius, an eager propugna∣tor of Astrologie, nor yet any other defender of this Art, could save it from those reasons, that Picus hath brought against it. For he proveth, by most strong arguments, it to have been the invention not of men, but of Devils. Which self-same thing Firmianus saith; by which they have endeavoured to abolish all Philosophie, Medicine, Laws, and Religion, to the utter exter∣mination of man-kind. For first, it detracts from the faith of Religion, it extenuates miracles, it takes away providence: while it teaches that all things come to passe by the force of constellations, and that they doe depend by a fatal necessity up∣on the stars. Moreover it patronizes vices, excusing them as de∣scending from heaven upon us. It defiles and overthrows all good Arts; especially Philosophie; traducing causes from true reasons, to fables; and Medicine in like manner, turning from natural, and effectual remedies, to vain observations, and perverse superstitions, destructive both to body and minde. Further, it utterly undoes Laws, manners, and whatsoever Arts of humane prudence: while it would have Astrologie onely consulted, at what time, after what maner, and by what means any thing is to be done; as if it alone, drawing its authority over all down from heaven; did hold the scepter over life,
manners, and all both publike and private matters; and as if all other things were to be reputed vain, that did not acknow∣ledge it for patron. Indeed an Art most worthy for devils to professe from the first, to the deceit of man, and dishonour of God. Moreover the heresie of the Manichees, wholly taking away all liberty of will, flowed not elswhere, then from the A∣strologers false opinion, and doctrine of Fate. From the same fountain also sprung the heresie of Basilides, who pronounced 365. heavens, made of one another by succession and similitude, and the oftension of these to be the number of the dayes of the yeer (or the number of the days of the yeer to be the oftension of these) assigning to every one of them certain principles, and vertues, and Angels, and feigning names for them: but the chief of them all is Abraxas; which name, according to the Greek letters, containeth in it 365. which namely are the local posi∣tions of those heavens commentitiously divised by it. These things are therefore shown, that ye may know, that Astrology is the begetter of hereticks. Furthermore, as all the most emi∣nent Philosophers do explode this divinatory Astrologie: so Moses, Esaias, Job, Jeremias, and all the other Prophets of the old Law, do detest it. And of the Catholike Doctors, Augustin censures it as meet to be expelled Christian Religion; Hierome disputes it to be a kinde of Idolatry; Basil, and Cyprian do de∣ride it; Chrysostome, Eusebius, and Lactantius, do refute it; Gre∣gory, Ambrose, and Severianus inveigh against it; the holy Tole∣tane Councel forbids, and damns it; also it was anathematized in the Synod of Martin, and by Gregory the younger, and by A∣lexander the third, Popes; and was punished by the civil Laws of the Emperours. Among the antient Romans under Tiberius, Vitellius, Dioclesian, Constantine, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theo∣dosius the Emperours, it was prohibited the City ejected, and punished; and by Justinian himself condemned capitally, as is manifest in his Code. This place admonishes me to speak of the other Arts of divi∣nation, which yield vaticinations not so much by observation of the coelestials, as of inferiour things, having a certain sha∣dow, or imitation of the coelestials: that they being understood ye may the better know this Astrological Tree, from which do fall such fruit: and from which, as a Lernaean Hydra, a beast of many heads is generated. Amongst the arts therefore that are
hasty to divine for their own gain, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy, Chiro∣mancy, Aruspicy, the Speculatory, & the Onirocritical, which is the in∣terpretation of dreams, and the Oracles of the furious, here challenge their seat. Now all these artifices are of no solid doctrine, neither do consist of any certain reasons but inquire of occult things, either by fortuitous lot, or agnition of spirit, or certain appearing conje∣ctures, which are taken up from quotidian observations of long time. For all these prodigious arts of divination are wont to defend themselves no other way, but by the title of experience, and to ex∣tricate themselves out of the bonds of objections; so often as they teach or promise any thing above faith, and beside reason. Of all which it is thus commanded in the Law; There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son, or his daughter to passe through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an inchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizzard, or a Necro∣mancer. For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord. Physiognomy, following from the inspection of the whole body, presumeth it can by probable signs attain to know, what are the af∣fections of body, and mind, and what a mans fortune shall be: so far forth as it pronounceth him Saturnial, or Jovial; and him Mar∣tial, or Solar; another Venereal, Mercurial, or Lunar: and collecting their horoscopes from the habitude of the body; and from affecti∣ons transcending, as they say, by little and little, unto causes namely Astrological; out of which they afterward trifle as they list. Metoposcopy, out of a sagacious ingenie, and learned experience, boasts her self to foresent all the beginnings, the progresses, and the ends of men; out of the sole inspection of the forehead: making her self also to be the pupil of Astrologie. Chiromancie feigns seven mounts in the palm of the hand, accor∣ding to the number of the seven Planets; and supposes it can know from the lines there to be seen, what a mans complexion is, what his affections, and what his fortune, &c.—But we need no other reason to impugn the error of all these Arts, then this self-same, namely, that they are void of all reason. Yet very many of the An∣tients have written of these, &c.—But they all can deliver no∣thing beyond conjectures, and observations of experience. Yet, that there is not any rule of truth to these conjectures, and observations is manifest from this; because they are voluntary figments; and upon which their teachers, even of equal learning and authority, are not agreed.—But this trifling kind of men is wont so to
doat through the instinct of devils, drawing them from error in∣to superstition, and from this by degrees into infidelity. To the art of Augury they make faith, who teach that certain lights of presagition do descend from the coelestials, upon all those inferior living creatures: as certain signes constituted in their moti∣on, site, gesture, going, flight, voice, meat, colour, work, event: by which, as by a certain ingraffed hidden force, and firm consent, they so agree with the coelestial bodies, with whose powers they are af∣fected; that they can presage all things whatsoever that the coelesti∣al bodies intend to do, whereupon it is manifest, that this divinati∣on followes not, but from conjectures, partly taken from the influ∣ences of the stars, as they say: and partly from certain parabolical fimilitudes: then which nothing can be more fallacious. Where∣fore Panaetius, Carneades, Cicero, Chrysippus, Diogenes, Antipater, Jose∣phus, and Philo, have derided it; the Law, and the Church, hath con∣demned it. They who endeavour to perswade that nothing is dream't in vain say; that like as the coelestial influxes do produce divers forms in corporal matter: so from the same influxes in the phantastical fa∣culty, which is organical, there are phantasms impressed by the coe∣lestial disposition, consentaneous to the producing any kind of ef∣fect; especially in Dreams; because the mind is then more freed from the body, and external cares, and so receives those divine in∣fluxes more freely: whence it comes to passe that many things are made known in dreams to men sleeping, which are concealed from them waking. By this reason chiefly they labour to reconcile an o∣pinion of truth to dreams: and yet of the causes of dreams, both in∣trinsical, and extrinsical, they do not all of them agree in one opi∣nion, &c.—Of dreams nothing is delivered but meer dreams, &c. To these dreamers, we may number those, who give a faith of di∣vinity to the vaticinations of madmen: and think they have attain∣ed to a divine prescience of things to come, who have lost all know∣ledge of things present, all memory of things past, together with all humane sense: and that mad men, and sleepers see those things, which wise men and waking are ignorant of: as if God were neerer to them then to the sound, watchful, intelligent, and premeditating. In truth, they are unhappy men, who believe these vanities, and obey these impostures; who cherish these kind of artificers, and submit their wits, and faith, to these their vain delusions. All these artifices of divination have their rooting, and founda∣tion
in Astrologie. For whether the body, the face, or the hand be in∣spected; whether a dream, or a prodigie be seen; whether an auspicie, or a Fury be inspired; they consult to erect a figure of Heaven; out of whose tokens, together with conjectures of similitudes & signs, they hunt for opinions of things signified, and so all Divinations chal∣lenge to themselves the Art, and use of Astrologie; and confesse this to be as it were the key to the necessary knowledge of all secret things. Wherefore, all those arts of divination, how far they are from truth they plainly discover themselves in this; in that they use principles so manifestly false, and feigned by a poeticall temeri∣ty: which neither are, nor have been, nor ever shall be; yet are they made the causes, and signes to which all events of things are to be referred, contrary to all evident truth. Magick is so neer joyned to, and of affinity with Astrologie; so that he who professeth Magick without Astrologie, doth nothing, but erreth altogether. There is an Art given to mortal men, whereby they might gene∣rate certain latter things, not partaking of truth, and divinity, but might deduce certain images like unto themselves: and Magicians, most audacious men, have gone so farre to perpetrate all things, that old and strong Serpent, the promiser of Sciences, especially favour∣ing them, that they, like to him, Apes, have endeavoured to emulate both God and nature. To such a height of madnesse some of the Magicians are grown, that from diverse constellations of the Stars, through internals of times, and by a certain reason of proportions, being rightly obser∣ved, they think that a fabricated image of the heavenly creatures may with a becke receive the spirit of life and understanding, where∣by it may answer those that consult it, and reveale the secrets of hid∣den truth. Hence it is plain; that this naturall Magick some∣times enclined towards Goetie and Theurgie, is insnared very often in the wiles and errours of evill spirits. Of ceremoniall Magick there are two parts, Goetie and Theurgie. Goetie unfortunately began by the commerce with unclean spirits, compacted of the rites of wicked curiosity, unlawfull charms, and deprecations, is exerated, & banished by the verdicts of all Lawes.—These are they who carry about them familiar spirits—doe feigne themselves to prophecy.—Some of them study to call and compell evill spirits adjured by some certain powers, especially of divine names, &c.—Others most wicked, and by mischiefe detesta∣ble, and to be punished with all fires, submit themselves to devils,
sacrifice to them, and adore them, and are become guilty of idolatry, and the vilest abasements; to which crimes if the former be not obnoxious, yet they expose themselves to manifest dangers. For even compelled divels doe watch, to the intent they may alwaies deceive us in our errours. From this Sect (or rather sinke) of the Goeticks have issued all these books of darknesse, &c.—excogitated by men of deplored wits.—Which books to him that more acutely looks into them, and into the canon of their precepts, the custome of rites, the kind of words, and characters, the order of extruction, and the insulsate phrase, doe openly bewray themselves, to containe no∣thing else but mere toyes, and impostures; and to be pulcht up in latin Hims by the forlorne artificers of perdition, ignorant of all ancient Magick, out of certain profane observations, mixt with the ceremonies of our religion, many unknown names and seales inser∣ted; that they might terrifie the rude and simple, and be an amaze∣ment to the sencelesse, and such as know not good Letters.—But this is the reason why these Goeticks onely make use of evill spirits; because good Angels will hardly appeare; for they expect the com∣mand of God, and assemble not but with men of clean heart, and holy life; but the evill ones easily exhibite themselves to be invoked, falsly favouring, and belying a divinity, are alwaies at hand, to de∣ceive by their subtilty, to the intent they may be worshipped and adored. Many think that Theurgie is not unlawfull, as if this were go∣verned by good Angels, and a divine power: when as very often under the names of God, and Angels, it is obstringed with the falla∣cies of evill spirits.—Of this schoole are the art Almadel, the art Noterie, the Pauline art, the art of Revelations, and many more of the same superstition; which are so much the more pernicious, as to the unskilfull they seem the more divine. The Cabalie is an art (as is reported) very ancient, and yet the name hath not been known among Christians but of later times. — This art of Cabalie, which the Hebrews so boast of, I sometimes have sear∣ched with much labour; and I finde and confesse it to be nothing else but a meer rapsodie of superstition, & a certain theurgicall magick, but if proceeding from God (as the Jews boast) it any whit conduced to the perfection of life, to the salvation of men, to the worship of God, & to the understanding of the truth; verily that Spirit of truth, which (the Synagogue rejected) came unto us to teach us all truth, would not have concealed it from his Church until these last times,
which truly knoweth all things that are of God.—But that we try, and see, that by the revolutions (as they call them) of this art, won∣derful sentences of great mysteries are wrested out of sacred Letters; the whole is nothing else; but a certain playing upon Allegories; which idle men, busied in every letter, point and number (which this tongue, and the manner of writing easily suffer) do feign & refeigne at their pleasure.—Therefore this Cabalie of the Iewes is nothing else but a certaine pernicious superstition, which collecteth, divi∣deth, transferreth words, and names, and letters scatteringly placed in the Scripture; and as they list making one thing of another, they dissolve the parts of truth, the speeches, the inductions, and making parables here and there of their own fictions, they would adopt un∣to them the words of God, defaming the Scriptures, saying, that their figments do consist of them, they calumniate the Law of God by their impudently extorted supputations of dictions, syllables, let∣ters, numbers; they attempt to inferre violent and blasphemous proofe of their perfidiousnesse. Furthermore, being puft up with these trifles, they boast themselves to finde out, and to know the in∣effable mysteries of God, and secrets that are above the Scriptures; by which they are not ashamed to lie with great boldnesse, and without blushing, that they themselves can prophecy and work mi∣racles and mighty works. But let us return unto Magick, parcell whereof is the artifice of prestigious things, that is, of illusions; which are only done accor∣ding to appearance, by which Magicians shew phantasms, play many miracles by circulatory frauds, and cause dreams: which is done not so much by Goeticall incantations, imprecations, and deceits of de∣vils; as also by certain vapors of perfumes, lights, phyltres, collyries, alligations, and suspensions; and besides by rings, images, glasses, and such like drugs and instruments of magicall art, and by a na∣turall and celestiall vertue. Also many things are done by a prompt subtlety and industry of hand; of which sort we see some are done daily by Stageplayers and juglers, which therefore we call Chiroso∣phists, that is, slight-handed.—And now, by what hath been said, it is plaine, that Magick is nothing else but a collection, or compact of idolatry, Astrologie, and superstitious Medicine. And now also there is, by Magicians, a great company of Hereticks risen up in the Church, who as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so have they resisted the Apostolicall truth. All this is uttered against them by our Arch magician, I mean Cor∣nelius Agrippa: not a little to the like affect might be collectd out
of another of them, namely Johannes Trithemius; yea undoubtedly, he that had but the opportunity to peruse their Authors (old, and of late) needs for their confutation, to urge them with no more, then their own confession. Onely I would aske of them this one thing, what doe they think of this one Magician, for this one act of his? Whether doe they conceive him (in charity) to have thus confessed, retracted, recanted, repented returned? &c. or, doe they uncharitably account him for it, to be humorous, cynicall, satyricall, invective, distracted, mad, malecontent, &c? And whether for this one under∣taking of his will they have him called a Philosopher, a Daemon, an Heroe, a God, all things, or nothing? Does not he himselfe tell us, what kind of censure he suspects from all kinds of Mag-astro-man∣cers? Alas (quoth he) with how many of their machinations will they oppugne me? with how many devices will they assaile me? with what ignominies will they persecute me? — The impious Mathematician will prescribe me both earth and heaven. — The sortilegious Pythagorist will suppute for me unlucky numbers. The pointing Geomantick will cast unhappy figures, and project for me a prison, and sorrow.—The Fatall Astrologers will threaten any hanging, and by a slippery turning of the heavens, inhibit my as∣cent to the Gods above. The menacing Diviner will ominate all manner of evill to me. The importunate Physiognomist will defame me for frigide, and insufficient. The doting Metoposcopist will pro∣nounce me for a brainsick Asse. The fatidicall Chiromantist will divine all things sinisterly of me. The presaging Aruspex will ex∣augurate me with all manner of ill luck. The portentous Speculator wil send revengefull flames of Iupiter, and fires of presaging thunder. The dusky Oniropolist, or Dream-teller will affright me with no∣cturnall Ghosts and Goblins. The furious Vaticinator wil deceive me with an ambiguous Oracle. The prodigious Magicians wil trans∣form me (as another Apuleius or Lucian) not into a golden, but peradventure into a dirty Asse. The black Goeticke wil persecute me with Spectres and Spirits. The sacrilegious Theurgist wil consecrate my head to the Crows, or perhaps to the Jakes. The circumcised Cabalists wil imprecate their curse upon me. The old doting praesti∣gator will represent me as an headlesse Eunuch, &c. To conclude therefore in a word, since this is the suspition of one of their own, what then must another expect from them? But (God be blessed) we are taugh to discover their madnesse, and despise their malice, by a better light, and strength, then all their own confessions can afford us.
