G532A R220316 99831734 36201
A more full and impartial ACCOUNT Of the FIGHT between the Dutch and the French, AT FLERANS. Sent in a Letter by His Highness Prince Waldeck, which is as followeth. Dated at Brussels 3d. of July. High and mighty Lords, SINCE I gave my self this Honour to acquaint your High∣nesses Army and that of France; This is to let you know, that the Enemy having passed the Sambre, it was necessary for me to go and meet them to prevent their Designs; so I gave the Van-Guard to Lieuetenant General Wembenum, with a great Party of the Horse, and I my self followed with the Body of the Army to Melle, where I Encampt: The General Flodorffs having been afterwards Commanded towards Namur, with Orders to do his Duty with that Garrison; he brought word in his March, he per∣ceiv'd nigh Flerans our Enemies Troops, and we had advice after∣wards, that a great Body of their Army was in march, which ob∣liged me to draw my Army up in Batallia. As for what pass'd that day, between to Monsieur the Pensionaire Heynsius; so that your Highnesses may be informed of him. When I per∣ceived the Enemy was returned to their Camp the same Night, the 30th. of June, we rested all night, and ranged in Batallia; and it was thought fit the Army should be more advantageously posted then it was now, but having understood the next Morning, that the French had not changed their ground, we thought it not necessary to remove without knowing where the Enemies marched, who pre∣sently appeared, followed by the whole Army, which presently draw∣ed up before that of your Highnessess, and endeavoured to sur∣round by marching along the Flanck of our left Wing. We endea∣voured wite all the care imaginable to shun it, and draw'd some Troops from the Point of the Right Wing to reinforce the Flanck and the Rear: The Prince of Larbruge, Monsieur D'hubuy the Spa∣nish General, and the Prince of Birckenfolt with the Brigadeers, Com∣manded,
that Wing whilst the Prince of Nassaw, Governour of Fri∣nd, the Lieutenant General Aylva. Lieutenant General Webbynum, with their Brigadeers, Commanded the Right Wing, with the Bo∣dy of the Battel; we entrusted Lieutenant General Delwich with the  first Lines, which was seconded by his Brigadeers. The Count Flodorff was ready at call; we disposed of the Cannon and Baggage, the best way we thought fit. After which the Enemy both Foot and Horse poured upon our Left Wing, and upon the Flank with so much fury, that several Squadrons of the 2 first Lines were put into dis∣order, and had no sooner reinforced them, but the French attacked a fresh our Horse, which was supported by the Foot, who acted very Couragiously; the Lieutenant General Hubuy, was detached from the Right Wing, to attack the Enemy in the Flank, which they did with so much success, that they brought off some of their Canon; but they being much more in Number then we, they poured upon us instantly with fresh Forces, which was vigorously suported 6 or 7 hours. After which having no more Horse to assist us, we were obliged to attack both their Horse and Foot, with our Foot only, who had so good Success, that the French daring no more to attack us. I retreated with 9 whole Regiments, amongst which were the Lieutenant General Ailva and Webbedum, and came to Niville, afterwards I brought them hither with four other Regiments, who joyned us in the March. The two Princes of Nassaw, with several Regiments retired to Charle Roy, so that I cannot tell what Regiments remain; but according to the Report that is here, there be 20 yet in good condition, and several other indifferent, but not so bad, but that they may be quickly re∣cruited: And your Highnessess Forces have taken from the Enemy several Standards and Colours, of which I will give your High∣nesses an Account, as well as of the Officers and Souldiers that are killed, so soon as I shall have an Account my self. We might have brought away some Canon from the Enemy with our Foot, had not our Horse failed us. I have done my Duty as much as my advanced Age would permit: I could not prevent this ill Fortune. I hope that God will for the future bless your Highnesses Arms with Success, and that by a soon re-establishment of your Army and other Neces∣saries, may grant you a happy Campaign. We are making here a Bo∣dy, with a design to fight them again, so soon as the Electoral High∣ness of Brandenburgh's Army shall arrive. Brussels, 3d. of July. G. F. P. V. WALDECK ADVERTISEMENT. A Moral Essay on the Soul of Man, in Octavo. Sold by Tho. Jo at the White Horse without Temple-Barr. London, Printed for Abel Roper at the Miter, next door to the Old Devil Tavern, Fleet-street,  Tho. Jones at the White Horse without Temple-barr.
