G725A 99833963 38442
With Allowance, October 20th. 1674. Roger L'Estrange.
The Anglers Delight: Containing The whole ART of Neat and Clean ANGLING; Wherein is Taught the readiest Way to Take all sorts of FISH, from the Pike to the Minnow, together with their proper Baits, Haunts, and Time of FISHING for them, whether in Mere, Pond, or River. As also, The Method of Fishing in Hackney River, & the Names of all the Best Stands there; with the manner of Making all sorts of Good Tackle Fit for any Water what¦soever. The like never before in Print. By WILLIAM GILBERT, Gent. depiction of a fisherman fishing. London, Printed for W. Birch at the Peacock at the Lower end of Cheapside, 1676.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, and Worthily Admired Sr. RICHARD FISHER. SInce it is Generally known, that no Man lives without Fault; but that We all Trans∣gress daily, even against Our Soveraign Good, from whom notwithstanding, we Receive Innumerable Benefits, with large Promises of Forgive∣ness: So in this Case, I have a Matter of Encouragement, that, although I may have of∣fended,
thus rashly appear∣ing, to offer These follow∣ing Lines to Your view, (no wayes to be compared to Your Great, and Masculine Spirit;) yet that I should not doubt of Your Obliviating this my present Offence; but also obtain (from Your Re∣al Generosity) a Favourable Acceptation, and Reception of these first-Fruits of my pub∣lick Endeavours: I have ta∣ken the Boldness to make this Dedication, hoping that my Presumption (taken as an Er∣ror) may be understood to proceed from the Assurance of Countenance, under so worthy a Personage; where∣by
it may more safely appear upon the Stage of the World, encounter the greatest Op∣positions, and rest Secure from the Cruelty of Envy. The Great God, who hath hitherto Blessed You with Health and Means, continue the same, and multiply it to Your last Period: and when You shall Cease to be among the Living, give You the full Fruition of Eternal Glory; So wisheth, SIR, A Real Honourer of You, and all Your Worthy Family. W. Gilbert.
To all the Ingenious LOVERS & PRACTICERS Of the most Noble Science of ANGLING. Kind Reader, I Know (and you know) that the Wits of this Age are Ripe, Accute, and Various, and how to please all Men, is a Task too great for my Ʋndertaking; I have here laid open the whole Art and Mistery of Clean, Neat, and Gentile Angling, in a far more Plain, and Easie
way, than ever was yet in Print; All from Experience, and not Borrowed from other Books, and many Things never be∣fore heard of, by most Peo∣ple: So that, if there be any Thing that may yield you Pro∣fit, Solace of Mind, Recreati∣on of Spirit, or Content, I have my end, and shall rejoyce, and think my Time well spent; O∣therwise I shall be troubled that there is Nothing worthy your Acceptance, and only intreat you to lay down the Book again, and there is no Harm done be∣tween you, and an Artist's Friend, W. G.
THE Anglers Delight. Of the Pike, And how to Take Him several wayes. THis Pike is the King and Commander of all Fresh-Water Fish; therefore I begin with him first: And he is Ravenous, that I my self, at Boately, near Oxford, with my Trole, took a great Over-grown Pike, that was within an Inch of a Yard-long; and when he came to be opened, he had an other large one, of above a Quarter of a Yard-long, in his Belly: And I will, upon occasion, bring evidence, that the
Pike, which was taken out of the others Belly, had a small Bird that is used to lodge in the Reeds, in the Pouch of it: But no more of this. Now for my pro∣mise, which was, How to catch this depiction of a pike His feeding is generally of Roach, Dace, Gudgeons, or Froggs; but above all, he delighteth most in Fair Gudge∣ons: and where there is not store of small Fish, he feeds of a Weed called, Pike-rell-Weed. Now your first way of Taking a Pike, that I shall teach, is, By a frixed Bait, which is done (if in a standing Water) by having a Line of about twenty Yards long, made fast to a stick, stuck in the ground; and having baited your Hook with a Live Gudgeon, Roach, or Dace, throw it as far as conveniently you can, or in the like-liest place you see for a Pike, leaving two Yards, or there-a∣bouts, loose upon the ground by your
Peg, that you may see when your Line is run out strait; at which time be as∣sured, that you have got a Pike. You may make use of as many Lines as you please, the more you Lay out, the like-lier you are to have the more Sport. But if you would take a Pike in a Ri∣ver, or any other Moving Water, I will shew you the best way ever inven∣ted, which you may perceive by the Figure. diagram of a method for fishing for pike Take a piece of Cork, about little more than a quarter of an Inch thick, cut it round, as you see in the Figure, and then hollow it round the sides, to
lap or wind your Line in, which must be about twelve Yards; tye it fast round the Cork, and tye a Hook to it, baited with a live Bait, as you see in the Figure: And when you have left so much of the Line, at the end the Fish hung to, as you think will reach half depth of the Water you intend to fish in, catch your Line in the Cleft of the Stick, which must be put through the Cork, as you see the Figure; and this will boy up your Bait, at any distance you place it. This being done, throw your Cork, Line, and Fish, all into the middle of the Water you intend to fish; if in a Ri∣ver, the Stream will carry it down; in a Mere or Pond, the Wind will give it Motion: So that, if you have but two or three of these, you need not fear Sport enough. Now, when the Pike bites, his snatch∣ing so eagerly, as they generally do, pulls your Line out of the Cleft in the Stick, and gives him the whole length of the Line, to pouch your Bait with: This being done, he will run up and down a little, but will presently be tyred; but let him go whither he
will, you need not fear; For, your Boy will continually be above Wa∣ter. Now to take him, you must have a strong piece of three twist Pack-thred, of thirty Yards long, with a Plummet at the end, of a quarter of a Pound weight; which cast beyond the Line, between your Boy and the Pike, and let it sink; and it will bring you both Boy and Pike: So that, try all the wayes that are, you will find none so pleasant or profitable as this, to take a Pike. Many use to Troule for a Pike; but that is so easie, that I shall not spend time in giving Directions: For, it will be far easier learnt, by once go∣ing with any Person that understands it, in ones day time, than is possible to be Taught by a Printed Direction. So much for the Taking of him. Now for the Dressing of him. All Pikes, that are not half a Yard long, are fitter to be Fryed or Boyled, than any other way; but for a Pike to exceed that Length, either little or more, Roast him in this manner:
First, Open your Pike at the Gills, and if need be, give a little cutt to∣wards his Belly; out of these take his Guts, but keep his Liver, which you are to shred very small with Tyme, Sweet-Marjerome, and a little Winter-Savory; to these put some Pickled Oysters, and some Anchovies, two or three of both, the last whole (for the Anchovies will melt, and the Oysters should not); to these add a Pound of Sweet-Butter, which you are to mix with the Herbs that are shred; and let them all be well Salted: those being mixed with a Blade or two of Mace, must be put into the Pike's Belly, and then his Belly sowed up so close, that, if possible, it may keep all the Butter in his Belly. Take not off his Scales: Then you are to thrust the Spit through his Mouth, out at the Tayle: And then with five or six split Stixs, or very thin Lathes, with a good quantity of Filliting. These Lathes are to be tyed round about the Pikes Belly, from his Head to his Tayle, and the Tape tyed something thick to prevent his break∣ing or falling from off the Spit. Let him be Roasted very leasurely, and
often Basted with Claret VVine, and Anchovies, and Butter, mixt together; and also, with what Moysture falls from him into the Pan. VVhen you have Roasted him suffi∣ciently, you are to hold under him, (when you unwind, or cutt the Tape that tyes him) such a Dish as you in∣tend to eat him out of, and let him fall into it, with the Sauce which is Roasted in his Belly; and by this means the Pike will be kept unbroken, and compleat. Then, to the Sauce which was within, and also in the Pan, you are to add a fit Quantity of good But∣ter, and to squeeze the Juyce of three or four Oranges: Lastly, You may either put into the Pike, with the Oysters, two Cloves of Garlick, and take it whole out, when the Pike is cutt off the Spit; or, to give the Sauce a Hogo, let the Dish (into which you let the Pike fall) be rubbed with it. The using, or not using of this Garlick, is left to your Discretion. E. H.
So much of the Taking of a Pike, and the Best way of Dressing of him. I shall now come to the way of Fishing for, and Dressing of a TROUT. Of the Trout. The Nature of His Breed∣ing, and the Place of His Haunts; and How to take Him either with Worm, Minnow, or Fly. HE is an Excellent Fish, and high∣ly admired by all People, in all Nations. He hath some-thing of the Nature of Venison, being so like to a Buck, that he comes-in, and goes out of Season, even as the Stag and Buck do.
He may claym Place of all Fresh-Water Fish, for Precedency, and Dain∣tiness of Tast; for, the most Curious Palats, when he hath been in Season, have admired him. He is at his Perfection in May, and doth Decline, as before, with the Buck. He Spawn's generally about October, or November. His Haunts are in gravelly clear Ri∣vers, in the most Shady Places. He delights much near Wires, and Flud∣gates, and any Falls of Waters. His Baits are, usually, that he is Caught with, a Worm, or a Minnow, or else with a Flye, viz. either Natural, or Artificial Flye. First of Worms; there are many, as Earth-VVorms; others that are bred of Plants, as the Dug'd-VVorme; others of Excrements, or in the Bodies of Creatures, as the Maggot, or Gentle, &c. But of all these, the Dew, or Lob-Worm, and the Brandling, are the best for a Trout.
And if you would catch so large a Trout as this, depiction of a trout take the Lob-Worme. And your best way is to put them to some Mosse, till they are poor, by cleansing themselves; and then, by giving them the Yolk of an Egg, they will become lively, and fit for use: But if you are straitned for VVorms, squeeze some VVall-nut Tree-Leaves in water, which poured up∣on the ground, will make them rise out of hand. Now to Bait your Hook neatly, that it may Trole or Runn upon the Ground, without Tangling, or Catching against any Sticks, Gravel, or Weeds, ob∣serve: If you have a big Lob-Worme, put your Hook into it, some-what above the middle, and out again, a little be∣low the middle; having so done, draw
your Worme above the Arming of your Hook. But note, That at the entring of your Hook, it must not be at the Head-end of the Worme; because the Point of your Hook may come out to∣wards the Head-end: and having drawn him above the Arming of your Hook, then put the Point of your Hook again into the very Head of the Worme, till it come near the place where the Point of the Hook first came out, and then draw back that part of the Worme that was above the Shank, or Arming of the Hook, and so Fish with it. But if you mean to Fish with two Worms, which you may do: If one be not big enough, then put the second Worme, before you turn back the Hook's head of the first Worme. So a little trying will make you Expert; and you may Fish without danger of Stopping or Catching upon any gravel, or the like. For the Minnows. They may be had easily in March or April; for then they appear in the
River, where you may take them at your Pleasure: Of which, for to take a Trout, the middle size are best, and must be so put upon your Hook, that it must turn round, when it is drawn against the Stream; and for the nim∣bler turning thereof, put it upon a big si∣zed Hook, which put in, at his Mouth, and out at his Gill; then your Hook being drawn two or three Inches be∣yond his Gill, put it again into his Mouth, and the Point and Beard out at his Tayle; and then tye the Hook, and his Tayle very neatly, with a white Thred or Silk, which will make it the apter to turn quick in the Wa∣ter: That being done, pull back that part of your Line, which was slack, when you put your hook into the Minnow, the second time: So that, it shall fasten the Head; and the Body of the Minnow shall be almost straight on your Hook. Then try how it will turn, by drawing it cross the Water, or against the Stream; and so turn the Tayle to your right or left hand, till it turns to please you; if not, you're not likely to catch any thing; if you cannot get a Minnow, a Loach or a Stickle-bag, will serve neer as
well: If you can get an Artificial Min∣now at the Shops, you had best take one with you, lest you fail else∣where. As for Flyes. I think either for Trout, or any other Fish, that will rise at Flyes, those that they rise-at most, that Season when you Fish for them, are the best to take them with; and there are so many, that I cannot (for fear of making my little Piece swell beyond its Price) stand to name them. Now, as to the Artificial Flyes, take only this Rule with you; that is, To provide all Colours of Silk, and Fea∣thers, and such things as are conveni∣ent for the making of them: and ne∣ver go about to make one, Artificially, without a Natural one before you, what-ever it is you would imitate: But you had better go, or send, to the Three Fishes, over-against the little North-Door of St. Pauls, in London, where you may have them Better and Chea∣per, than you can make them: And so much of the Trout.
Of the Barbel. His Haunts, Baits, and the Manner of Taking him. THey are a Fish, that love to keep one another Company dearly, and flock together much: They are at worst in April, at which time they Spawne; But are not long before they come in Season again. He loves (all the Summer) the Shal∣low, and Sharp Streams, and lies lur∣king under Weeds, and feeds most on Gravel, against a rising Ground; For, he Roots with his Nose like a Hog, and Nests himself in the Gravel. He loves also such places as London-Bridge, or any deep Place, where the Fierceness of the Water, stirs the Gra∣vel; where he will take hold of Mosse, or Weeds, that the Water, though ne∣ver so fierce, is not able to stir him. He is mighty Curious in his Baits,
and if they be not Sweet and Clean, he will not touch them; therefore you must have your Wormes well scoured with Mosse, and he will bite at a well-scoured Lob-worme, as boldly, as at any Bait whatsoever: But your best way will be, to Bait the Place where you intend to Fish for them, with some Lob-Wormes, cutt to pieces, a night or two before you go to Fish. You cannot Bait too much; nor well Fish too early, or late, for him. Gentiles are also a good Bait for him; but then they must not be scoured. Ma∣ny use Cheese, which is also a good Bait. He is a very fine Fish, to look on; but not so good as he seems to be. depiction of a barbel So much of the Barbel.
Of the Cheven, or Chub. His Haunts, Baits, and Manner of Taking him; as also, The best way of Dressing him. THE Chubs or Chevens, (in hot Weather) lye playing together, under the Shade of Willows, or Weeds; and when the Sun shines not, then generally they lye where the Wa∣ter runs neither fast nor slow, under a Bank, where they have Covert enough, or else in the Deep, in the midst of Rivers. They delight in Grass-Hoppers, Snails, Paste, or Cheese, of which I shall give you an account, when you come to my Method of Hackney Fish. I shall only here give you Directions, how you
may, the best way, Dresse this Chub, or Cheven, viz. First, scale him, and then wash him clean, and take out his Guts; and to that end, make the Hole as little, and as near to his Gills as you can possibly: and especially make clean his Throat from the Grasse, and VVeeds, that are usu∣ally in it (for else if that be not clean, it will make him tast mighty Sowr); having so done, put some Sweet Herbs into his Belly, and then tye him with two or three Splinters to a Spit, and Roast him, basted often with Vinegar; or rather Verjuce and Butter, with good store of Salt mixed with it; And so much of the Chub, or Cheven.
Of the Carp. His Haunts, Baits, and Way to Fish for him, and to Dresse him. NOw if you have a mind to Catch this Carp, that is so Cunning, and Difficult to be Caught; depiction of a carp First, You must expect to have your Patience sufficiently tyred, if you Fish for a River-Carp; and like-wise in some Ponds too: If you intend to do any good with him, you must be at him ei∣ther early or late; For, they will not
bite in the middle of the day. You must (if you fish in a Pond for a Carp) first, throw in Blood and Grains, or the like, to bring them to the place where you would Fish; and then some of the same Bait which you intend to Angle with. The Carp bites either at Worms or Paste. The blew-Marsh or Medow-Worm, is best for him. When he is in the Hu∣mour, he will some-times bite at a large Gentle: And for Pastes, there are more sorts, than there are sorts of Fishes; but sweet-Pastes are best, that are made either with Sugar or Honey: Which (that you may the better beguile him, he being so cunning) should be thrown where you intend to Fish, an hour or two before you undertake your skill with your Angle-Rod: And your best Bait is made of the Flesh of a Rabbet, Kitling, cutt small; and Bean-Flower: and if that may not be gotten, other Flower; mix them together, and put thereto either Honey, or Sugar; and beat them together in a Mortar, some∣time working them in your Hands,
being very clean, and make it into a Ball or two, as you think fittest for your use. If you Fish for a Carp with Gentles, put upon your Hook a small piece of Scarlet about this bigness diagram showing size of bait , it being soaked in Oyle of Peter, or Rock-Oyle, and you are like-lier to Kill this cun∣ning Fish this way, than by any other: But still, as you are Fishing, Chew a little Bread in your Mouth, and cast it into the Place where you fish. To Dresse a Carp. If you can take him alive, scove him, and rub him clean with VVater and Salt: But scale him not then. Open him, and put him, with his Blood, and Liver (which you must save when you open him) into a small Pot or Kettle. Then take Sweet-Marjerome, Tyme, and Parsley, of each half a handful; A Sprig of Rose-Mary, and another of Savory; bind them in two or three small bundles, and put them to your Carp, with four or five whole Onions, twenty Pickled Oysters, and three An∣chovies; Then put upon the Carp as
much Claret as will cover him; and season your Claret well with Salt, Cloves, and Mace, and the Rinds of Oranges and Lemmons. Cover your Pot, and set it on a quick Fire, till it be sufficiently boyled: then take out the Carp, and lay it with the Broth into the Dish, and pour upon it a quarter of a Pound of Fresh Butter, melted, and beaten with half a dozen Spoon∣fuls of Broth, the Yolkes of two or three Eggs, and some of the Herbs shred. Garnish your Dish with Lem∣mons, and so Serve it up. J. H. So much of the Carp.
Of the Bream, And how to Take him. TO take this Fish, called the Bream, depiction of a bream observe, That Breams do most of all love Ponds, and Meres; but the chiefest way to Take them, is; first, Get as big a Red-Worm as you can find without a knot: Get a pint of them, or more, in an Evening, in a Garden, after a Showr of Rain; and put them, with clean Moss, well washed, pick'd, & the Water squee∣zed out of the Mosse, as dry as you can, into an Earthen-Pot; and change the Mosse for three or four dayes, for three
weeks, or a month together; and then your Baits will be in a good conditi∣on. Having your Baits ready, get your Tackling in this manner; Take three long Angling-Rods, and as many, and more Silk-Lines, and as many large Goose-, or rather Swan-Quill-Floats; Then take a piece of Lead made thus depiction of a lead weight and fasten them to the lower end of your Lines: Then fasten your Link-Hook also to the Lead; and to the end of your Line: Let there be about a foot, or ten inches, between the Lead and the Hook, (but be sure the Lead be heavy enough to sink the Float or Quills under-water, and not the Quill to bear up the Lead); and the Link, next your Hook, must be smaller than the rest of your Line; if you dare venture for fear of a Pike, or Pearch. Now, the Worm being well baited, it will crawle up and down, as far as the Lead will give it leave; which much en∣ticeth the Fish to bite without Suspition. Your Float must be (part of it) an Inch above the Water: Then where you think there is Fish, Angle: But first note, That you must bait your
Ground at Night, and Fish about four in the Morning; and without doubt, you will not fail of Sport e∣nough. So much for Bream-Fishing.
Of the Tench, And how to Fish for Him. A Tench is the Doctor, as I may say, to all other Fishes; and delight∣eth more in Ponds, and Pits, than in Rivers. And if you will Catch this Tench, depiction of a tench be sure, first, where-ever you Angle, to throw in some sweet Ground-bait: and know, that his Biting-time is about nine in the Morning: But you may Fish for him from seven till eleven, and proba∣bly have good Sport, if there be store in the Place where you Fish; and if you follow these Directions following, viz.
He will bite at Paste made of Brown-Bread, and Honey, or at a Marsh-Worm. He delights much in any Paste, where∣with Tar is mixed. He will bite also at a smaller Worm, with his Head nipped off; and at a Cod-VVorm, put on the Hook before. He onely bites in the three hottest Months in the year; For, in the other nine, he stirs not at all. VVhatsoever Bait you fish for him with, be sure you dip it in Tar; and be chewing still some of the Crum of a White-Loafe; and be often a casting of it into the Water where you Fish, round about your Float; and if they once begin to bite, you will catch them as fast as you can Lay-in: And so much of the Tench.
Of the Pearch. And how to Take Him. HE delights most in deep places, and in Holes by little Streams, where the small Fish come: And where you must Angle, if you will Catch Pearch; depiction of a perch He is a very bold biting Fish; and if you light on a Hole, where there be never so many, you may take them all at one Standing. His Baits are, a Worm, a Minnow, or a little Frog; of which you may find many in Hay-time; and the best Worm is a Brandling, which you will find in most Dung-hills; but they must be well
scoured in Mosse, or Fennel; or a Worm that lies under a Cow-Turd, with a blewish-head. If you Fish for him with a Minnow-bait, as I directed you to bait for a Trout: Observe to keep your Min∣now, fishing for a Pearch, at mid-wa∣ter, by the help of a Cork; But be sure, what-ever you Fish with, give a Pearch time enough in biting; for he will not leave you. And this is sufficient for Mr. Pearch; For, every Boy can Catch him, he is so Bold.
Of Eeles, And how to Take them; their Haunts, &c. and how to Dresse them. AN Eele is Caught by more Baits than any other Fish; For, they are so greedy, that they will bite at powder'd-Beef; and be taken with a Lob-Worm, or a Garden-Worm; with a Minnow, or Gut of a Hen, Chicken, or the Guts of any Fish: But the Eele may be (especially) taken with a very little Lamprey; but some call it a Pride: and may (in the hot Months) be found in the River Thames. Now an Eele never (except it be by chance) stirs in the day-time; and therefore, are usually Caught in the night, by laying a Line, with a many Hooks to it, cross a River or Pond; baited with some of the afore-said Baits: But these are Things so com∣mon, that it is not worth while to write
of. But there is a very pretty way to take them, which is called Snigling, which is thus; Observe your time (which must be in a hot Summers-day) when the Water is lowest, you may take a strong small hook, tyed to a small strong Line, about a yard long: And then (be∣cause that the Eeles hide themselves un∣der Board-Planks, about Floud-gates, or Wires, or Mills, or in Holes in the River-Banks,) you may put into one of these Holes, or between any Boards about a Mill, or under any great Stone, or Plank, or any Place where you think an Eele may hide, or shelter her self) there (by the help of a short Stick) put-in your Bait; but leasurely, and as far as you can conveniently; And if there be an Eel there, he will certainly gorge up your Bait; and you need not doubt to have him, if you pull him not out too soon, but by degrees: And see, here he comes. depiction of an eel
How to Dresse this Eele. First, Wash him in Water and Salt, and then pull off his skin, below his Rent, or Navel, and not much farther: Having done that, take out his Guts as clean as you can; but wash him not. Then give him three or four Scotches with a Knife; and put into his Belly, & into these Scotches, Sweet-Herbs, and Anchovies, and a little grated Nut meg; and your Herbs, and Anchovies must al∣so be cutt very small, and mixed with good Butter and Salt. Having done this, then pull his skin over all but his Head, which you must cutt off. By the reason you may tye the skin over the end where his Head grew, it must needs keep all his Moysture within his Skin. Then tye him to a Spit, with Tape or Pack-thred, and Roast him leasurely; and baste him with Water and Salt, till his skin breaks: And then with Butter, having Roasted him enough, let what was put into his Belly, and what he dropt, be his Sawce: And so far of Eeles. FINIS.
THE METHOD OF FISHING IN HACKNEY-RIVER; WITH THE Names of all the best STANDS There; and the manner of Making the best TACKLING to Fish There, or in any Pond, or River, whatso∣ever. By WILLIAM GILBERT, Gent. LONDON: Printed by T. M. for W. Birch, at the Sign of the Peacock, at the Lower-end of Cheap-side, 1676.
THE Anglers Delight: OR, THE Method of Fishing in Hack∣ney-River. Of making the Tackle. FIrst, You must be provided with a good Angle-Rod, of at least four Yards, when it is at the shortest; which must be Taper all the way: And to take in so many pieces, that you may make it of what length you please. Then you must go,
and buy some Hooks, of all these sizes, viz. depictions of fish-hooks The Bleak, or Gudgeon. The Roach, or Dace. The Roach. The Pearch, or Barbel. The Chub. Next, You must be provided with excellent strong, round, long, and white or gray Stone-Horse-Hair; Silk to whip your Hooks with, and Wax to wax the Silk. Then must you have Swans, and Goose-quill-Floats, of all sizes; And for Chub-Lines, or Barbel-Lines, you may buy them Cheaper of Silk and Hair, than you can make them: But for Hair-Lines, you will not meet with any to be sold, that you can do any good with, in Hackney-River: Therefore, being thus provided, begin to make (first) a Line for the Chub, or Cheven; putting eight Hairs in the first Link next your Rod; and so make it Taper (by leaving out a Hair every other Link) till you have made it; when it comes to the last, to be but four or five Hairs at
the bottom; to which, tye such a Hook as is before described for the Chub. Next, You must put on a Float, one of the largest you have; and Lead, in manner following: So that Line, Float, Lead, Hook, and all (being fixed toge∣ther) will be thus depiction of a fishing line with float, lead and hook Now, for your Roach, and Dace-lines, they must be far more fine; for, you must not (by any means) exceed above one Hair, at, or next the Hook, or two at the most; for, if you do, where you take one Fish, they that Fish with a single Hair, will catch half a dozen: And ob∣serve, that, be it for what Fish you will, the finer you Fish, the more, and larger Fish you will Catch. But you must ne∣ver be without your Landing-Hook, or Landing-Net. You may for Roaches, put three hairs next your Rod, and two about the mid∣dle; but at the bottom only one: And these Lines ought to be a yard, or a half-yard shorter than your Rods, for
your conveniency of striking your Fish: And you must fit them with three sizes of Float, though you have Hair at the Hook; that is to say, the larger Float∣ed Line for swift Streams, the middling size for Streams that run slow, and the smallest of all, which ought to be of a Duck's Quill: for those which scarce move at all, you must leaden them with small Shot, eight Inches from the Hook; and then you will find this Line to be thus Compleat, depiction of a fishing line When you have two or three of a sort of these Lines, and Shots, and Floates, Links, Hooks, and Supplies for every thing that you can possibly use; then go to Mother Gibert's, at the Flower-de-Luce at Clapton, near Hackney and whilst you are drinking of a Pot Ale, bid the Maid make you two or three Peny-worth of Ground-Bait, and some Paste (which they do very neatly, and well); and observing of them, you will know how to make
it your self for any other Place: which is too tedious here to Insert. Then go down to Cunnis-Hole, or else Maries-Hole; where pull out your Tackle, and Fish there-abouts; First, Plumming your Ground exactly, that your Paste may swim within half an Inch of the bottom. The Plummets must be made of Lead, with a Pin in them, after this man∣ner, depiction of lead plummets some bigger, and some lesser, according to the size of your Line: And be sure that you find your Ground eeven at the bottom; and if it be between two little Ascents, the Place is the better. Then seeing your Float swim, accor∣ding as you would have it, you must (in that very Place) throw in some of your Ground-Bait; and if it be in a Stream, you must knead a little Pibble Stone, in∣to some of your Ground-Bait, in the fa∣shion of a Ball, of this size; and that will sink it to the bottom, which other∣wise the Water would cary away: And when you have thrown in five diagram showing size of float
or six of these Balls, you may Fish there. The more you are out of sight the better; and you must be sure that you put not a bigger Bait upon the Point of your Hook, of your Red-Paste, than this size, viz. diagram showing size of bait ; For, if you do, the Fish will bob & bob at it, and make you think you have a Bite, when you have not. Now, you must observe, That your Float swim just over the Place, where your Ground-Bait lies; and then obser∣ving (with a diligent and quick Eye) the first Motion of your Float, that then you strike gently; and, according as as you find the weight of the Fish you have hold of, to play him: You need not doubt of Sport enough, following but these Directions. There is an excellent Stand, in the second Meddow, on the left-hand, be∣yond the Ferry, under a Willow-Tree; in the midst of the Meddow, by the Water-side. But in my former Piece (where I did speak of the Chub), I did promise that I would give farther Directions for the Taking of him; So that, now, I intend to perform it. And now, when you have filled your Basket of Roach, and Dace; or else the Wind is so high, that
you cannot well Angle for them, or that you find they will not bite; then I would have you try this way (which I am going about to teach you) to Take a Chub: And first, observe, That here are large ones in Hackney; and there∣fore, provide you strong Silk, and Hair Lines, with your Swan's-Quill-Floats, as was before directed: And walk either up or down the River, till you see a Place clear from Weeds, that you can swim your Float half a score yards without danger of Entangling: But if you knew the place before, it would be better; for fear your coming too near the Water should fright away the Chubs, that may, peradventure, be there: But this must be in such a Place as I told you before (in my Discourse of the Chub or Cheven); where the Chub, or Cheven's Haunts are. Then must you keep as much out of sight as you can, that you can but just see the Top of your Float swim; And having baited your Hook with a Pellet of Paste thus big diagram showing size of pellet , you must first throw in a Ball of your Ground-bait, about
as big as a Walnut without a stone in it, a little broken between your Fingers; and then follow it with your baited Hook, and it is very likely you will have a Fish within eight or ten Swims, or else there is none there. But trying two or three likely Places, you need not doubt of having a good Chub, or Cheven. If you fail in your Expecta∣tion of Chub-Fishing, then be upon the Drable for a Barbel, which is in this na∣ture: You must have a strong Line, of about six yards long of Hair and Silk; which must be put (before you fasten it to your Rod) through a piece of Lead thus diagram showing line and lead that it may slip to and fro, if any thing bite at it; and that the Water may move it upon the Ground, which will entice the Barbel to bite without Suspi∣tion of Danger: And being baited with a good Lob-Worm, it is not much to be questioned, but you will Catch a Bar∣bel.
How to Make the Ground-Bait. NOw, by reason that some People in the Country may be ignorant of the way of Making this Ground-Bait, I thought meet to let such know, that it is made by cutting a two-penny, or three penny Loafe (according to the quantity you would make) into Slices, and lay them in soake into a Platter of fair Water; which, being soaked half a quarter of an Hour, powr the Water from it; and with Bran, make the Bread up into a Stiffe Paste; and then make that Paste up into two or three large Balls for your use; which you must make use of according to my former Directions. But note, If you Fish in a Pond you need not put Stones into your Bait, but rather Crumble it.
To make Paste. THis is made by the cutting off, of the Crust of a White-Loafe, that is two or three dayes old; and holding it in your hands, being clean washed, about two Minutes in fair Wa∣ter till it be soaked; then squeeze out the Water: and (with a little Pains in working of it in your hands) it will come to be a very stiffe Paste, and hang mightily upon the Hook without wa∣shing off. You may colour it with a lit∣tle red Lead, either more or less, ac∣cording as you find it most agreeable to the colour of the Water where you Fish. There are many sorts of Pastes; but I esteem this the best for any Fish, ex∣cepting a Carp; for, they love sweet Pastes best, as those made of Bean-Flower, Honey, &c. I might say more, but I think this suf∣ficient; only letting you know, that if you would be set-out like a Fisher-man, as you ought to be: Then, when-ever
you go out to Fish, faill not to have with you, viz. A good Coat for all Weathers. An Apron to put your Ground-Bait, Stones, and Paste in. A Basket to put your Fish in. A neat-Rod of about four Foot long, in several pieces, one within another. Two or three Lines fitted up, of all Sorts. Spare Hooks, Links, Floats, Silk, Wax, Plummets, Caps, Floats, and a Lan∣ding-Nett, &c. And if you have a Boy to go along with you, a good Neats-Tongue, and a Bottle of Canary should not be wan∣ting: To the Enjoyment of which I leave You. FINIS.
