G910 18446572 107662
THE Deemon of Marleborough, OR, More News from VVilt-shire. In a most Exact Account of the Aparition of the Ghost, or Spirit of Edward Aven. Published heretofore, but now much Augmented, with many more Discoveries, containing wonderful Passages, from its first Ap∣pearance there, to the 24th. of Jan. 1674-75. BEING The Examination of Thomas Godard, the said Avens Son in Law, taken before the Major, and other Majestrates of that Borrough. I the Ʋnder-written did examine the Above Named Thomas Godord, who declared the whole matter, as it is herein related, and he doth affirm the same to be true in all Circumstances, and to my knowledge he is a Man of a good Ʋnderstanding, Honest Life and Conversation. VVitness my Hand, VVilliam Houldbrook. Printed in the year. 1675.
SIR, THis is to Certifie you, that Edward Aven doth still appear, and shews himself to se∣veral people: First to Elizabeth Hibertt, next to one Goodman Butten, otherwise VViat, next to M. Richard Coleman's maid of this Town, and in the same Cloaths, which he wore in his life time; as a long White-Crown'd hatt, Blew Cloaths, and White Stockings: All this Last Week he was seen. William Houlbrook.
A Relation of Tho. Godard, of Marle∣borough, in the County of Wills, Weaver; made the 23. of November, 1674. VVHo saith, that the ninth Day of November, about nine of the clock in the forenoon, be∣ing Munday, he (going hence to Ogburn, Sr. Andrew in the same County, to one Iohn Hawks in the same place, Husbandman, with a piece of serge, which he had woven for the said Iohn Howks) at a Stile neer Godres grounds in Ogburn, neer the High-way, there he saw the perfect apparition of Edward Aven, late of this town Glover (with whose Daughter this relatant married) in the shape of the same Cloaths, Hat, Shooes, and Stockings, that he usually wote whiles he lived; who to this Relatants own knowledge dyed at Collingborn-Kingston, in this County, on the eleventh of May last, and was by him, this relatant and others of his relations, brought thence, and buried here in St. Mary's Church-yard, the next day, viz. the twelfth Day of May; and he saith, that the Apparition to his seeming, leaned over a stile; and, when he was come near the said stile, the ap∣paration did speak with an audable voice these words, viz. Are you afraid? To which the relatant answered, I am think∣ing of one who is dead and buried, which you are like to: to which the Apparition answered with the like voice of Ed∣ward Aven, I am he that you was thinking of, I am Edward Aven, your Father-in-Law, come near to me, and I will do you no harm, and this relatant replied, viz. I trust in him, who hath bought my soul with his precious blood, you shall do me no harm, and the apparition said; How stands cases at home, and the relatant said, what cases? and the apparition
said, How do Will and Mary, meaning this relatants Wife and her Brother, which is the said Avens Son and Daughter, then the Apparition said, What? Taylor is dead, meaning as this relatant supposed, one Iohn Taylor of London, Shooma∣ker, who had maried Sarah another of the said Avens daugh∣ters, which said Taylor as this relatant hath heard, dyed about Michaelmas last past; Then the Apparition held out his hand, and in it as this relatant supposed money about twenty or 30 shillings in silver, and it said, with the like audable voice, take this mony and send it Sarah, for I shut up my bowels of com∣passion towards her in the time of my life, and now here is some money for her, and further said, Mary is troubled for me, but tell her that God hath shewed mercy to me beyond my desarts, and this relatant said, upon offering of the said money to him, he replyed to the said Apparition; In the name of Jesus Christ I refuse all such moneys. Then it spoke these words; I perceive you are afraid, I will meet you some other time, then im∣mediately as this relatant perceived it went up the Lane; whereupon this relatant went over the stile as aforesaid, be∣ing in much fear, and for that time saw him no more: And this relatant further saith, that he being at work at his Loom in his own house about seven a clock in the Evening of the same Day the said Apparation lift up the lid of his window, and finding it to be the same apparition that he had met the same Day at Ogborn stile as aforesaid being in much fear, run out of his shop, and saw no more of it that night, but saith; that the next night after this relatant went forth into his back side about the same hour with a candle in his hand to make water, and as he was so doing the like Apparation came round his Wood house, and this relatant also being in a fear and his Candle waxing out, he run into his house, and said he saw it no more that night, but saith further, that on Thursday the 12th. of this instant November, as this relatant was rid∣ing
homeward from Sir Bolstrock VVhitelocks house, in Chilton Lodge in this County about 3 or 4 a clock in the Afternoon in the bottom neer Ramsberry Manner-house, as he was rid∣ing down the hill there to his apprehension he saw a Hare running out of the old Park, there a thwart in the highway in∣to the Cops, at which the relatants horse afrighted, and rared on his hinder legs, overthrew into the dirt, and as soon as he could recover on his legs, he saw the like apparition stand∣ing about 8 foot from him, directly in the way before him, & said with the like voice. Thomas you have tarried long, and then said to this relatant, Thomas bid Will Aven take the sword that he had of me which is now in his house, and carry it to the wood as we go to Alton to the upper end of the wood, which lyeth by the Way side, for with that sword I did wrong above 30 years ago, and he never prospered since he has had the sword, and bid Will Aven give his Sister Sarah 20 shillings of the money which he had of me, and do you talk with Edward Laurence, for I borrowed 20 shillings of him several years ago, and did say that I had payd him it when I did not pay it him, and I cannot be at rest till the 20s. be paid, and I would desire you to pay him the 20s. out of the money which you had of James Elliot at 2 pay∣ments. Which money he this relatant affirmeth was 5 Pound, which he the said Iames Elliot a Baker of this Town owed him the said Aven whiles he lived upon bond, which money this relatant received from the said Iames Elliot since Micha∣elmas last at a payments, viz, 35 shillings at one time, & 35 shillings at another, and then the Apparition further said to this relatant. Tell Margret, meaning as this relatant confer∣eth it might be, the said Avens wife, that I would desire her to deliver the Kettel which I gave to little Sarah Taylor to the lit∣tle child, or to anyone that she will intrust for it, but if she will not speak to Edward Laurence to perswade her, but if she will not, then tell her I will see her suddenly, and said, see that this be done
within twelve months and a day after my Death, and peace be with you; and so it went away over the rail into the Wood there, as any man may go over a stile, to this relatant's apprehensi∣on; and so this relatant saw it no more at that time; & this re∣latant further saith, that accordingly he has paid the said Ed∣ward Lawrence the 20s. who also was here present, affirmeth, that he had lent the said Aven 20 s. above 20 y. ago, and that none knew thereof but the said Lawrence and his Wife; and the said Aven and his Wife; and this relatant further saith, that the last night he making relation of the said Apparition and passages unto Christopher Lipperd now Mayjor of this Town and others he was advised by them to order VVilliam Aven to carry the said sword to the said Copps neer Alton, & that this relatant should go with him thither; whereupon the relatant & the said Aven did resolve to go as on Tuesday following, which was on the morrow, and saith, that he this relatant and his Brother-in-law, as he affirmeth, were both ve∣ry much troubled in mind to see, that they could not sleep until they were both resolved to carry the sword to the said Copps on that day; and accordingly both did, and saith; that both of them comming to the said Cops about 9 of the clock in the morning, the said VVilliam Aven took the sword, and laid it down neer the place, as this relatant was directed by the said Apparition; and both of them turning about to come away from thence, this relatant looking back saw the Appari∣tion in like habit of cloth as aforesaid; which when this rela∣tant discovered, he said to his brother-in-Law, Here is the Ap∣parition of Father; but he said, I see it not; so this relatant falling on his knees, praying to God to preserve them both, asking his said Brother-in-law, whether he did see it, who said, No; and then he said, Lord open his eyes that he may see it; who then replyed, Lord grant that I may not see it if it be thy blessed will; & then the Apparition beckned his hand to him to come to
it, & this relatant then said, In the name of the Father, Sn, and Holy Ghost what would you have me to do? and the Apparition said to this relatant. Thomas, take up the sword and follow me, & this relatant said, Should both of us come, or one of us, to which it said, Thomas do you take up the Sword; so this relatant took up the sword, & the Apparition went on before him further into the Copps-Wood about 20 lugs; & this relatant then fol∣lowing it, the Apparition turning back, he this relatant stood about a lug and a half from it, his said brother standing neer the place, where he first laid down the sword, & this relatant laid down the sword upon the ground, & saw something like a Mastiff-Dog of a brown colour, and the Apparition wav∣ing towards this relatant, he stepped back about 3 steps, & the Apparition said, Do not be afraid Thomas, for I have a per∣mission for to reveal things unto thee, but have a Commission not to touch you; & when it had taken up the sword, & went back to the place, at which before it stood, when this relatant saw the Mastiff-Dog which as before, the Apparition pointed the top of the sword into the ground, & said, In this place ly∣eth buried the bones of him that I murthered in the year 1635. which are now rotten and turned unto dust, Whereupon the re∣latant said, I adjure in the name of the Father, Son, & Holy Ghost, wherefore did you this murther; and it said, I took mo∣ney from him, and he contended with me for to keep it, and I was too hard for him, and so I murthered him with his own sword, which is this, and this relatant asked it, who was confederate with him in this murther, this relatant being directed by the said Mayjor so to do; to which the Apparition said, None: but my self; & this relatant said, what would you have me to do in this business or thing? & the Apparition said, this, that the world may know, that I murthered a man, & buried him in this place in the year 1655. Then the Apparition layed down the Sword immediately upon the bare Ground;
whereon grew nothing, but appeared to this Relatant a naked piece of ground, like a grave sunk in, and then the Appari∣on, rushing further into the said Copps, Vanished out of his sight, and he saw it no more; whereupon this Relatant, and his said Brother-in-Law, Will. Aven, leaving the Sword, and both coming away, this Relatant's Brother-in-Law, VVill. Aven, asserted, that he heard and understood what he said, and heard some other Voyce, distinctly from this Relatant's, but could not understand a word of it, and he saw no Appa∣rition at all, as the said Will. Aven, affirmeth, All which this Relatant affirmeth, and doth attest it to be true under his hand the Day and Year above-said, and shall be ready to te∣stifie the same upon Oath, when he shall be required: VVitness his Hand, Tho. Goddard. In the presence of Mr. Christopher Lipyard, Major: And Joshua Sethcenerel Minister of St. Peter's in Marlebo∣rough. And Master Rolf Bayly, Town-Clark of the said Borough. And many other persons of credit. FINIS.
