H1245 13378354 99340
THE English Rogue Containing a brief Discovery of the most Eminent Cheats, Robberies, and other Extravagan¦cies, by him Committed, &c. To which is added a CANTING Dictionary Words now in use with Beggars and Gypsies. Two mounted highwaymen, one firing a pistol at the other and that one brandishing a sword at him Read, but take heed that you such actions shun For Honesty is best when all is done. Licensed according to Order. printed for J. Blare, at the Looking-Glass, on London-Bridge, 1688.
THE English Rogue, &c. An Introduction to the following Discourse. OUr Witty Extravagant (of whom this following Tract is to give Relation of, and whose Matchless Contrivance, tending to all manner of Vice, Gus∣man, Lazarillo de Tormes, and all others Re∣markable for such like Villanies, are compell'd, as being out-done, to strike Sail) was Born of English Parents, whose care was great in the bringing up of this their hopeful Son; but the Planet Mercury was so predominant at the hour of his Nativity, as presag'd him not to be cut out for Plow-Jobbing (such as his Ancestors were) but for more Politick Designs; who now having attain'd the Eighth Year of his Age, wee'l give him leave to relate all his Knight, Errand Attempts from his own Mouth.
CHAP. I. Shewing how he serv'd his Fathers Turkies, his Cheating a Woman of a Basket of Cherries, his being plac'd in a Boarding-School, and his mischievous Transactions there. My first Martial Attempt was this; My Father keeping several Turkies, one above the rest generally Assaulted my Bread and Butter, for Revenge, I con∣triv'd this Stratagem; I tempted him with Bread and Butter in my Hand, to the Orchard Gate, holding it so as for the Turkey just to put his Head through, holding the Bait for him to catch at, which no sooner done, but clapping the Gate, sur∣priz'd my mortal Foe, and with my Cat-stick soon beat his Brains out; which done, I deplum'd his Tayl, sticking the Feathers in my Cap, as a glory to my Tryumphant Conquest: At another time (coming thro' a Market) observing a Woman with a Bas∣ket of Cherries; I ask't her what she would have for as many as I could take up in both my Hands? she answer'd Two Pence; so I gave it her, and took up Bassket Cher∣ries and all, and walkt away: the Woman
amaz'd, follow'd me, making a great Our cry; at last, a Gentleman examining the Matter, I told him the Contract, who ad∣miring my Policy, gave the Cause (it be∣ing left to his decision by consent) on my side, but withal, paid the Woman the whole worth of her Cherries. Thus being incou∣raged, I tenter-hook't my Inventions to please my Appetite, continuing my daily Waggeries, as Robbing of Orchards, pul∣ling the first and seconds of 40 or 50 Geese at a time, milking the Goats or Cows into my Hat, and so drink the Milk, and then at Night haunting the Hen-roosts, where if the Hens cackl'd too much, I made their Eggs satisfie for their Heads. If at any time Geese came in my way, our came my short. Stick with a string and Bullet at the end of it, which twirling about their Necks soon brought my Prey. For the speedy conveyance away of all these things, I had a trusty-Trout, an Ale-House Keeper hard by, who giving me now and then six-pence for that which was worth a Crown, and feasting me withal, made it a very good Recompence to me: But this Trade was too hot to hold, for the daily Complaints made by the Neighbourhood, so incens'd my Parents, that (to prevent my future Misdemeanours) I was straight∣way
placed in a Boarding-School, under the Tuition of a stern and rigid Master; nei∣ther could this deter my Natural Inclina∣tions, for (having new matter to work on) I soon became a Book-Worm, having so many ways to Metamorphize a Book, that the Owner thereof should not know it again; if New I would gash their Skins, if much us'd tear out all the Remarks, painting their old Faces, and so make Sale of 'em, having my Factors for these as well as the before-mention'd Merchandizes. At last, what with Complaints from the Schollars, the daily Admonitions of my Mother, and the hourly Bastinado's from my Master, I resolv'd to quit this my not-to-be-endur'd-li∣ving, and to seek my Fortune as the Fates should direct. CHAP. II. He runs away from his Parents, Enrolls himself in a Gang of Gypsies, and gives you the choi∣cest of their Canting Words, with the mean∣ing of them in plain English. TWas in the Month of July I took my intended Progress: the first Dinner I had was upon Black-berries; Night ap∣proaching,
I began to wish for the Flesh∣pots, together with a soft Feather-bed to refresh my weary Limbs on; but these wi∣shes were in vain; no food but Black-ber∣ries, and such like, no Lodging but what a Barn presented; when entring therein, I beheld a great many strange Creatures, and talking in a Language I understood not: we were all equally surpriz'd, at last they told me, that they were Gypsies, and if I would be of their Gang and take part of their Fortunes, they would be glad of my Company; to which I consented, and the next day being stript out of my Holy-day-Habit, into Tatters and Rogs, I became one of the Fraternity, ha∣ving my Face so be-daub'd with Green Wallnuts, that I lookt as much like a Gyp∣sie as the best of 'em: And that I might be perfect in their Canting Words, I had a Scroll given me of the most material things necessary to be known by those of this Pro∣fession; which take as follows. AUtem mort. A Married Woman. Boose. Drink. Bouzing Ken. An Alt-house. Boarde. A Shilling. Bounge. A Purse. Bufe. A Dog. Bleating Cheat. A Sheep.
Betty. An Instrument to break a Door. Budge. One that steals Cloaks. Buckle and File. Pick Pocket & his Mate. Cove. A Man. Cuffin quire. A Iustice of Peace. Cramp Rings. Bolts or Shakles. Chats. The Gallows. Crackmans. Hedges. Couch a Hogs-head. Go to sleep. Cackling-cheat. A Chicken. Cassan. Cheese. Crash. To Kill. Cloy To Steal. Cly the Jerk. To be whipt. Clapper-dudgeon. A Beggar born. Cully. A soft-pated Fellow. Duds. Goods. Doxy. A Wench. Dueswins. Two pence. Fambles. Hands. Famble-Cheats. Rings or Gloves. Flag. A Groat. Fogus. Tobacco. Glimmer. Fire. Gilt. A Pick-Lock. Harmanbeck. A Constable. Harmans. The Stocks. Heave a Booth. To Rob an House. Half-board. Six-pence.
Hearts-ease. A twenty Shilling piece Ken. An House. Knapper of Knappers. A Sheep-stealer. Kate. A Pick-lock. Lowre. Money. Libben. A House to lye in. Maunder. To beg. Margery Prater. An Hen. Make. An Half-penny. Mint. Gold. Prancer. An Horse. Prigger of Prancers. Horse stealers. Rome-Padders. High-way-padders. Togeman. A Cloak. Thus have I given you a taste of the Can∣ting-Tongue, and having continued with 'um a small time, I abandon'd their Company to seek out other Adventures. CHAP. III. He leaves the Gypsies and begs by himself, a Merchant likes him and takes him Appren∣tice, he gets the Maid of the House with Child, and then goes for Ireland. Thus quitting my Canting-Crew, I re∣solv'd to set up for my self; when com∣ing
to London, and getting Acquaintance with a sturdy Beggar we straight went to a Boozing-Ken and bubb'd rumly, conclu∣ding an Everlasting Friendship: he having instructed me in the Maunding-Trade, next morning we took our Stands in More-fields, some distance from each other; where I soon began, With a God bless you Master, and let Heaven Reward what you have here done on Earth; with these and such like Speeches did we get store of Money from Charitable Persons: when one day as I was begging, a Merchant coming by and observing me to be a stubbed Fellow, offer'd me a Service if I would live with him; to which I soon agreed, came to his House, was stript from my stags, good Cloaths put on, and soon af∣ter was bound Apprentice to him, with whom I might have liv'd in a happy Con∣dition, but that my too forward Lechery was the unhappy cause of my Misfortune; for scarce had I serv'd four Months of my Time, but that I had so far insinuated into the Maids favour, as to become now and then her Bedfellow; but this our Noctur∣nal Dalliances was of small continuance: for she coming to me one day when I was a∣lone, after many Heart-fetcht Sighs, told me, That she was with Child; I thought I should have dy'd with this surprizing
News; however, to set the best side out∣wards, I bid her be of good cheer, and that I would take such care as she should not be disgrac'd, telling her I had Wealthy Pa∣rents living in the Country (far enough you may imagine) where I would in a short time send her, there to lye-Inn, and that I would quit my Service soon after, come down into the Country and marry her, not questioning but to live well together, ad∣vising her to lace her self very straight, and keep down her growing Belly with two or three Busks: the poor Soul not imagining the Denom which lay under these fair speeches, in keeping her in suspence, until I had an opportunity to rub off, which soon after hapned; my Master and Mistriss be∣ing absent, it fortun'd that I took for Wares that day about Threescore Pound Sterling; over-joy'd with this Success, I pack't up Bag and Baggage, resolving for Ireland, far enough out of my Masters reach: All things favouring my Design, in three Weeks I arriv'd there, when changing my Name as well as Habit, the next Chapter makes mention of my Extravagant Trans∣actions.
CHAP. IV. In Ireland he was Cheated of all his Money, the ways he had to get more, he comes into England again, and turns Highway-man. THE next day after my Arrival in Ire∣land, I sent for a Barber to Shave my Hair off, buying a Periwig contrary to the colour of my own Hair, in order that if I met any one that was of my Acquaintance, or fatal Messenger from my Master, they might not know me: the truth o'nt is, in this Disguise I knew not my self; for when my Landlady where I lodg'd, call'd me by the new Name I gave my self, I ei∣ther star'd upon her, or look't another way, (thinking she had spoke to some body else) at last, fearing this would betray me, I pre∣tended my self Deaf, which Apology took away all suspition. In this manner I li∣ved a Month, frequenting Taverns, Ale-Hou∣ses and Brothel-Houses, when in one of those places I met with a person who bubbl'd me at Hazard (a certain Play with Dice) not leaving me one Penny, but withal he was so kind (curse of his favour) as to dis∣charge the whole shot. Now I leave any
one to judge the deplorableness of my Con∣dition, who had neither Monies, Friends, nor Credit, and in a place utterly unac∣quainted with their Language. But (tho' Fortune frown'd at this Juncture,) yet in a turn I was on the top of her Wheel again, for now being reduced to stretch my Wits, I thus put them in Practice. Wealthy and Aged Widdows, or Thrifty Maids, who had laid up what they had gotten in Ser∣vice, as a Bait to procure an Husband, such did I daily hunt out and visit 'em by turns: I was not sparing of Amorous Expressi∣ons, by which means I deluded several, some I was forc'd to give Earnest to for their Goods, before they would trust me with what they had: This course I follow'd 'till I was taken notice of for a grand Deceiver. Having now gotten a round Sum of Mo∣ney by me, I resolv'd to return into England, this place being now too hot for me: so cros∣sing St. Georges Channel, in 24 hours I land∣ed at Chester; the next day proving Market∣day, I bought an excellent Gelding, with Sword, Pistols, and other Furniture. In this Equipage mounted, I took leave of the place, intending to be a Knight of the Road; I had not rode far, before three mounted rode by me (I found them afterwards to be the Van-guard) having as many more in
the Rear. At the bottom of an Hill they be∣fore fac'd about, bidding me Stand, in the in∣terim those behind came up, so I saw 'twas in vain to resist, but told them, I wonder'd they would rob one of their profession; when they searching me, and finding good store of Money, they asked me where I had it? I answer'd, 'Twas not an hour since I met with a Booty, this being it, and that, if they pleas'd, I would willingly Enrol my self in their Fraternity; They seeing me well Arm'd, and of a port∣ly Stature, consented, and away we rode to the next Inn, to make merry at my new Admittance. CHAP. V. He and his Companions commit two Robberies, he dislikes their Company, and Robs by himself. COming into a private Room, they pull'd off their False-Beards, Vizards, Hoods, Patches, Wens, Muffles and Perriwigs with o∣ther Disguises, so that they appear'd as o∣ther Men, which done, Come, says the Ma∣ster-Thief, I perceive you are a fresh Man and therefore want some Instructions as well as Dis∣guises, which he imparted to me in a plenti∣ful manner, and after that I was adopted a
sworn Brother: Fraught with these Devi∣ces, and well liquor'd with Sack, we all re∣solv'd to attempt some Enterprize that Eve∣ning: so about six a Clock we planted our selves in a convenient place, and I only was sent out for a Discoverer: not rightly understanding my Trade, I rambled too far, however I met with a single person whom I bid Stand, which he would have done, and surrender'd his Purse, only he was on a Stone horse, I on a Mare; the word was no sooner spoke, but his Stone horse wheel'd off and came in the rear of me (for there was something it seems under my Mares Tayl very powerful, which I then thought not of; I led him round several times, till the poor Gentleman (fearing he had provok'd me by these delays, which his Horse was the cause of) cry'd out, Worthy Sir, take what I have and spare my Life; at that very instant his Horse rear'd his two fore Feet upon me and my Mare, insomuch that I thought he said, I'le take both Life and Money too presently; fear had then rendred me so incapable of perform∣ing the Office of a Thief, that putting spurs to my Mare, I fled for safety, notwith∣standing the Stone-horse was still close at my Heels; thus disorderly flying, one of my Pistols went off, which I thought my back-friend had discharged at me, which
made me roar out for Quarter; he on the o∣ther side cry'd out, As you are a Man show your∣self merciful, saying, Good Sir stop, I think∣ing he call'd after me, hold him, stop him; do what I could, his Horse leayt upon us: at which time (by what means I know not we all came Headlong to the ground; I ex¦pected now nothing but Death, but recove∣ring, and finding my Adversary upon the run, I could have hang'd my self to think I should be accounted a Man, and yet wan the Courage answerable: however, I soon overtook him, made my self Master of his Wealth, and so sent him packing. Whilst I was framing a Lye to tell my Comrades how Daliantly I behav'd my self in this Encounter, they were all on a suddain at my Elbow, applauding my Courage for run∣ning away at the sound of Good Sir be merci∣ful, and several other Ieers; I should ne¦ver have stopt their mouths, had I not show'd 'um what I took from him, which was very considerable. About twilight w met with another prize, but different from the before-mention'd; for we four meeting with five Men, and bidding them Stand, they stoutly resisted, which put us hard to't  one of our Company being Wounded, yet we overcame 'em, driving them into a Wood I at that time learning to search with such
care, that not a penny or anything valuable could be kept from me; with these Booties we repair'd to our Inn, where our Host calls lustily for Sack, which the Drawer doubles in the Bar; the Hostler must be one of the Company too, who expects a snack, which we dare not deny, lest he betray us: their with what we are oblig'd to give the Ser∣vants, and offer'd up our Sacrifices to the Landlady for some small favours receiv'd, we find in conclusion, we rob for them and not for our selves; which I perceiving, and having now some Experience, I resolv'd to set up for my self. CHAP. VI. He gets a Farmers Daughter with Child, and Robs her Father of all his Gold, &c. SCouring the Road, I met with a Young Maid with a Milk-Pail on her Head, observing her to be more than ordinary handsome, I fell into some Discourse with her: As she was opening a Gate to Milk her Cows, I follow'd, dismounting, ty'd my Horse to a Hedge, begging her Excuse for my rudeness; I at last sate down by her, and after many powerful perswasions, tend∣ing
to Love affairs, she suffer'd me to crop her Dirgin-Fruit: We then grew some∣thing more familiar, but the burthen of the Song was, I had undone her, which I leave to any reasonable person to judge; we con∣cluded she should go home, and at night I was to come to her Fathers House, pretend∣ing I was a stranger on that Road, and had lost my way, desiring a Lodging for that Night: all things perform'd accordingly, her Father gave the Entertainment for that Night, which was spent in sweet Embraces with his Daughter, contrary to the good Old Mans expectation. When the morn∣ing appear'd, I was put to my Shifts how to contrive a longer stay, at length, with the Daughters Advice, I was to pretend In∣disposition of Body, and not able to Travel, which I did, and was desired by the old Folks to stay as long as I pleas'd: but fie on ill Luck, the next night discover'd the Intreague. The Daughter and I staying up till the rest were in Bed, and being too imprudently hasty in the Kitchin, stumbled against two Barrels, pil'd one upon ano∣ther, so that they fell; the Old Man not be∣ing asleep, imagining Thieves had broke in, so that before we could get dis-engag'd, he took us napping, by the light of some all Fire left in the Chimney: I desired
him to be silent, and not spread his Daugh∣ters disgrace, for in a few days I would Marry her: I stayed afterwards about some three days to colour the matter, but 'twas chiefly to know where her Fathers treasure lay, which I so cunningly sifted from the Daughter, that I soon had it in my possession, and so marcht off incogni∣to. CHAP. VII. He lights of a Female Robber in Mans Habit, he goes to her House, and agrees to Rob with her. THus abruptly taking my leave, of the Farmer and his kind Daughter, I rid a long time, meeting with nothing worthy of observation; being weary, I struck in∣to an Inn, where refreshing my self, and the Evening approaching, I mounted, and so put on; when passing by a small Coppice, in a bottom between two hills, a Gentle∣man (as I supposed) started out upon me, saying, Stand, and deliver; With that I drew a Pistol and fir'd at him, he doing the same by me, and so till we had discharg'd two at each other; which last Shots happening o
our Horses heads, they became so unruly, that we were forc'd to alight and draw our Swords, when my adversary making a di∣rect thrust, I put it by, clos'd with him, and, upon the hug, threw him with much facility: I wonder'd much at it (which I need not have done, since his nature (as af∣terward I understood) was so prone to it;) Sir, said I, this will teach you hereafter to be∣ware on whom you set; With that, unbutton∣ing his Doublet to find if there was any Gold quilted therein, I wonder'd to see so large a pair of Breasts, and much whiter than any Mans: at length going to search his Breeches, and proffering to remove his Shirt from between his leggs, he suddenly cry'd out (striving to lay his hand there) I pray Sir be civil: imagining that some choice treasure lay there obscured, I pull'd up his Shirt (alias Smock) and found my self not much mistaken: this sight surpriz'd me, but after a little pause, I unbound her, and taking her up in my arms, Pardon me, most Couragious Amazon, says I, for thus rudely using you, 'twas nothing but ignorance in me; and since I find so much courage in a Woman, for your sake I shall ever retain a good esteem for the worst of Females. She told me the place was not proper for Complements, but if I would follow her she would retaliate my
kindness: I soon agréed, and being led tho∣rough many obscure passages, we came to a Wood, in the midst whereof stood a house; at our approach, the Servants were all in a hurry who should first obey Mrs. Virago's commands, but wonder'd to see St. Gorge, and his trusty Esquire on foot, for our Hor∣ were kill'd; where after Supper, Bottles and Pipes supplying the place of the Dish∣es, she laid her self open to me, having be∣fore made my self acquainted with her greatest secret. CHAP. VIII. He commits some Robberies, is taken and put in∣to Newgate, is Transported, but makes his Escape. THere were in this place three Sisters, whereof my Virago was one, they ha∣ving arriv'd to a ripe age, were all Marri∣ed to Shop-keepers, whose insiped Noddles not brooking those Heroick Spirits, was the occasion of many fallings out, at last these three Sisters, having provided Fur∣niture accordingly, and putting on Mens Cloaths, unanimously agreed to Intitle themselves Squires of the Pad, Robbing
with what advantage they cou'd, & so take their fate: this course had they follow'd for above three years, when my late adventure brought me to their House, and I being mightily pleas'd with their Company, I a∣greed to stay and Rob with them for some time: After a great many Contrivances, this we agreed on, one of the Sisters was to be in Mans Apparel, the other two in Womens, and so to Ride double as Men & their Wives to prevent suspicion: so ha∣ving got Pillions, Safeguards and short Swords for the Famales, we set forwards: Vpon the Rove about five that Evening, o∣vertook us four Gentlemen, coming close up to us, our two subtil Gypsies show'd great fear of being Rob'd, speaking with∣al so loud, that one of the Gentlemen hear∣ing, rid up to us, bidding her not be afraid, for they were Londoners, riding out for their pleasure; & that they would venture their Lives in our defence: and Ride before to stand between us & danger: I was glad to hear they'd lead the way, for now our work was half done: my Brother, as I called him, coming up close to me, I gave him directions that at the foot of such a Dill, he should out with his short Truncheon, and make sure work with one, at which in∣stant I would be sure to do the same by a∣nother;
we watcht our opportunity so ex∣actly, that we soon accomplisht our design, for accordingly at the foot of the Hill with our Truncheons discharged upon two of their heads, they came tumbling to the ground, (the other two being a pretty way before knowing nothing of it) Our Women, dismounting as swift as Lightning, soon made them incapable of rising again, whilst we, setting Spurs to our Horses, soon over∣took the other two who was before, who much admired to see our Swords and Pi∣stols in hands ready for Execution, howe∣ver we soon put them out of their doubt, for compelling them to deliver, we dismounted them, and cutting their Girts and Bridles, we conveyed them to a secret place, putting the Horses into a field, the Men we Gagg'd, bound their hands, and so drove 'um into a Wood, our Females having serv'd the two other in the same manner; Having a booty answerable to our desire, we mounted, and returned to our old Quarters: With them I continued a considerable time, living in all manner of Debauchery, so that being satiated with excess I resol∣ved to leave them, which I soon did, by pre∣tending a little private business abroad, & so Rode clear away: But I soon repented it, for attempting to Rob a Gentleman, there
came immediately five or six more to his rescue, so that do what I could, I was ta∣ken, clapt up in Newgate, at my Tryal the Evedence being clear, I was only order'd for Transportation: In our passage we suf∣fered Shipwrack, but as the Proverb goes, He that's born to be Hang'd shall ne'r be Drow∣ned, so I escap't tho' many others perished; When getting ashore I was soon out of reach of my Guardian, and now am I put to my Shifts once again, which shall be re∣lated in a Second Part, according as this finds acceptance in the World: Vale. Thus being Banisht from my Native Land, The Second part shall let you understand, The grand Intreagues I us'd beyond the Main, Till I return'd to England back again. FINIS.
