H2797 99830473 34925
A Comfortable Corroborative Cordial: OR, A Sovereign Antidote against, And Preservative from, the Horrours & Harms of DEATH: Affording a Direction how to Live and Die, so as to be fortified and fenced against the grearest fears and sharpest sense of that KING of TERROURS. Represented in some Observations made upon Rev. 14.13. Upon occasion of the late Death and Burial of Mrs. REBECCAH JACKLER Late Wife of Mr. John Jackler of Kings-Lynn in Norfolk, Woollen-Draper; who deceased Octob. 5. and was buried Octob. 7. 1671. By John Horn, Sometime Preacher of Gods Word in Lynn-Alhallows in the same Town. Useful to be considered by all men living in this state of Mortality: Because there is no man living but must certainly Die. Let me die the death of the righteous: and let my last end be like to his. Numb. 23.10. For, The righteous hath hope in his Death. Prov. 14.32. Quanta est felicitaes eorum! quam immensa latitia, qui, nimirum. tripl ei gaudie. De recerdatione transacta virtutis. De exhi∣bitione pro entis quies. De certa expectatione sutura consum∣mationis, exultant! Bern, Serm. 2. in festo omnium San∣ctorum. LONDON. Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, and N. Thompson, for B. Southwood at the Star next to Serjeants-Inn in Chancery-lane. 1672.
To the READER. Reader, SEeing it is a thing generally known & acknowledg∣ed, whereof none can plead igno∣rance, that it is appointed for men once to die: (for the living know that they must die, Eccles. 9.5.) And seeing the time of death
is generally to men most un∣certain, and the Word of God assures, that after Death there will be a Judgment, in which every man must give an account of himself to God, and receive according to the things done in the Body whe∣ther good or evil, Heb. 9.27. 2 Cor. 5.10. Seeing also fur∣ther, that the same infallible word of the living God, who hath given us life and breath, and all things, and hath us and our breath in his hands, declares to us that He of his great mercy hath devised and made a way, though not to escape this bodily Death, yet whereby we may stand in the
Judgment and receive the doom and Sentence of an e∣verlasting and most blessed life: which way if it be neglected, there will insue an everlasting state of wo and misery. It must needs follow, that it is of greatest moment and con∣cernment to All to enquire after, and set their heart to that way and device, making it their greatest work and bu∣siness, whatever else is negle∣cted, that they may lay hold on that eternal life, and avoid that misery. Yea, and foras∣much as the time of this uncer∣tain life is the whole of the time allotted for our preparing for the Judgment, it behoves
every man to take heed of mi∣spending it, and to be careful to redeem it, and diligently improve it, to make sure of Happiness in Eternity, not pro∣crastinating to seek after God: nor presuming upon Gods pa∣tience and longer continuance in the Land of the living. Which things being considered it must needs be by all thought and acknowledged, that Di∣scourses of this nature are al∣ways seasonable, and if any thing well done, worthy acce∣ptance. Discourses, I say, upon such a Subject as I here propound to present thee with, namely, such as shew the Happiness to be en∣joyed
notwithstanding Death; and the way how we may be brought to the enjoyment thereof, and to be secured against the Fears of Death: or what harms or mischiefs will otherwise be occasioned by it to us. I cannot, I confess, commend the wor∣thiness of my performance up∣on so serious and weighty a Subject which deserves a far larger and more pressing Trea∣tise, and hath also obtained it by some more Reverend and Learned hands. What I here present was not in the least intended in my first consideration of it, or writing upon it for the
Press, onely to satisfie the de∣sire of a loving Friend con∣cerned mainly in the occasion of its consideration, I have in∣deavoured to make it publick. And such as it is commend it to Gods blessing, and thy perusal. Praying it may be both for my own and thy future and eternal benefit, and resting a servant to thee and all men, for Jesus sake. John Horn. February 8. 1671/2.
A Comfortable Corroborative Cordial: Or, A Sovereign Antidote against, and Preservative from, the Horrours and Harms of DEATH. Rev. 14.13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord from henceforth, Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow them. OUr Lord Jesus Christ ha∣ving (after many o∣ther things of great concernment to his Churches) shewed by his Angel to his servant John, in the twelfth Chapter, the oppositi∣ons of the Dragon (or Devil and Sathan) first in the Roman Pagan Empire against Christ and his Church, and his dejecti∣on
or casting down from Heaven (from his state of being worshipped as a Deity) and after that in his stirring up a flood of er∣rours and heresies to carry away the Church with, and how God preserved her against them. And in the thirteenth Chapter, the troubles and persecutions that Sathan would further raise against his Church by a two-fold Antichristian persecuting power called Beasts, setting up and managing a corrupt Worship, and persecuting its refusers. In this Chapter shews him divers things tending to animate his servants in their constancy against them. As to say, 1. Vers. 1. He shewed him the Lamb, (Christ himself) standing (safe and unmoved for all his enemies) upon mount Sion (where God had set him as King, Psal. 2.5. a place which cannot be moved, but stands fast for ever, Psal. 125.1. and 11.4.) and with him (in the same sure state) an hundred four∣ty four thousand (the number of the seal∣ed in Chap. 7.) having his Fathers name (not the Beasts, either Authority or Do∣ctrine) written in their foreheads (as o∣penly and boldly avowed yet by them) 2. Vers. 2. And made him hear a voice from heaven as the voice of many waters, (as loud, evident and certain, as if many peoples, nations, and languages compared
to many waters, Isa. 17:12. and Rev. 17.15. had attested the things spoken as eye-witnesses thereof) and as the voice of a great thunder (signifying their boldness in Christ, and dreadfulness to their enemies) and a voice of harpers harping with harps. (as rejoycing in their victory over their enemies, as was the custome in Israel to so∣lemnize their Victories with musical instru∣ments; as in Exod. 15.20. 1 Sam. 18 6. 2 Chron. 20.28) 3. Vers. 3. And they sung a new song (as such songs of praises upon escapes of dangers, and upon victories are stiled, Psal. 40.3. and 98.1) before the Throne and before the four living creatures (was badly translated Beasts, that is in short, before God and his Church) And no man could learn that song but the hundred fourty and four thousand which were redeemed from the earth (either from the love of earthly things through the efficacy of Gods grace eviden∣ced in the blood of Christ; or also taken from the earth by Death, Peculiar services, sufferings, and successes against Gods ene∣mies have their peculiar joyes not common to others. Then shewing, 4. Vers. 3. What ones these redeemed ones were, he adds: These are they that were not defiled with women (with the Con∣gregations
and Assemblies of corrupt Teach∣ers, Idolaters, and their corruptions in Do∣ctrine and Worship, compared to women or harlots, Prov. 9.13. and 14.1. Rev. 17.5. for they are virgins (chast and single to Christ his Faith and Worship) these follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth (that is, they cleave in all things to Christ, and his word, and commands, and are not moved therefrom by any false pretences of the false Prophet or two-horned Beast, and his false and lying miracles; nor by the greatness and dreadfulness of the seven headed and ten-horned Beast, and their contrary commands) for these were redeemed (powerfully through the grace of God believed by them, brought out unto Christ) from among men (from the idolatrous and wicked world, to be ho∣ly to God) being the first fruits (most de∣sirable and pleasing, Mic. 7.1.) to God and to the Lamb. 5. Vers. 4. And in their mouth was found no guile (they were upright and orthodox Christians, not dissembling with men to a∣void persecutions) for they are without fault before the Throne of God. (Nathaniels or Israelites indeed in whom there is no guile, believers in Christ, and walkers after his Spirit, and so in the light as God is in the light directing and strengthning them, and
therefore there is no condemnation to them, but the blood of Christ cleansing them from all sin they have fellowship with God, Rom. 8.1. 1 John 1.7. The trusters in God, and unmovable as mount Sion, Psal. 125.1. But let none imagine that Christ died onely for these and such like, because called redeem∣ed ones, but mind that he adds 6. Vers 4. I saw another Angel flying in the midst of heaven (most openly) having the Everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell on (not yet redeemed from) the earth, and to every nation, kindred, tongue, and peo∣ple. As the Angels sometime appeared clo∣thed in linen like the Priests in the Temple, as in Dan. 10.5. Rev, 15.6. So the holy Priesthood or Gospel Preachers may be here denoted by Angels, and here is Gospel preached to others besides those redeemed ones, even to all people; but there is no Gospel for any for whom Christ died not, and for whom in him no help or salvation: therefore Christs death is not to be limited to, or measured by, such expressions as those in the foregoing verses, or that in Chap. 5.9. The sum of the Gospel to be preached, is that in 1 Tim. 2.4, 5, 6. that God wills that all men be saved and come to the knowledge of the Truth: for there is one God and one Mediatour of God and men, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransome for all, a testimony, (or this is the testimony) in due times; whereunto the Apostle saith, He was ordained a Preacher and Apostle, &c. vers. 7. the Everlasting Gospel, and therefore Gospel in all ages as well as then. Other ex∣pressions of the sum of the Gospel, see in 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, 4. 1 Tim. 1.15. The being re∣deemed from the earth and from among men is a further business, at least an effectu∣al product of the grace of God believed in mens hearts and consciences, as is fore-hint∣ed; but this Angel in Preaching the Gospel said with a loud voice, (what the whole Go∣spel loudly speaks to be the duty of all men, viz. 7. Vers. 7. Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, (not unlike that in Matth. 3.8, 10. Acts 17.30, 31. though it may here have some speci∣al eye at the ruine of Babylon presently pre∣dicted) and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters; (expressions like those which the A∣postle saith was the sum or end of their preaching, in Acts 14.15. but after this fol∣lows) 8. Vers. 8. And another Angel followed, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen (the dou∣bling expression implies its certainty and
speediness, and the joy of Gods holy ones at it, Gen. 41.32. Rev. 18.20.) that great city (the opposite to Jerusalem the holy Ci∣ty or true Church of God) because she made all nations drink of the wine of her for∣nications. (Babylon is the then ruling City over the kings of the earth, Rev. 17.18. which was Rome, and so denotes that idolatrous Church, called the Whore for her being cor∣rupted from Christ, and the sincere Faith and worship of him, forsaking her fidelity to him to follow after and prostitute her self to the Kings of the earth, seeking and lo∣ving their favour, riches, gifts, honour, defence &c. and yet (as Harlots use to do with their Paramours Jud. 16.6, 20.) ordering and ruling them as she lists, pretending that she is the Lady and Queen of Heaven; that onely Ca∣tholick Church from whom they must re∣ceive all their Faith, Worship and Religion, and it may be noted that her downfal, and so of all Idolatry, Heresie and false worship, either is and will be the effect (not of Se∣ditions and Rebellions, but) of the sincere and bold Preaching the Gospel of Christ with its instructions by holy living; or Angel-like persons, not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord, Zech. 4.6.) or will otherwise joyn, and follow after it. 9. Vers. 9, 10, 11. After these, Christ
shewed him a third Angel that followed, and warned of the danger of worshipping the Beast (especially after the Gospel preached and the fall of Babylon denounced) saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast or his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever. And they have no rest day nor night who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name. A dreadful Sentence that might awaken all to enquire what this Beast and his Image, Mark and Name are, and what the worship thus threatened, and carefully avoid all things thereof. I shall onely here say, it's the preferring some other powers above Christ, and so is the same in substance with that. Cursed is the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and his heart departeth from the Lord Jer. 17.5. but that that time will be sad, is signified in the following exclamation, whether of the Angel or Evangelist, which saith, 10 Vers 12. Here is the patience of the
Saints. here at this time most eminently tri∣ed and exercised. Here are they (emphati∣cally) that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus, and forsake them not for the Beast Worship; but then to hearten unto those sufferings though to death, he addes in the Text. Ver. 14. And I heard a voice from hea∣ven, saying, Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, &c. from the following whereof so immediately upon the former intimation, we may note Christs great care of his Church; as when he formerly told his Disci∣ples of weeping and mourning, he presently tells them too of what might support them, and bear up their sorrowful hearts from sink∣ing: When he tells them he must leave them, he tells them also, that he would see them again, and not leave them comfortless, or as Orphans; and that upon his seeing them again, their hearts should rejoyce, and their joy should no man take from them; and that in him they should have peace, who had also overcome the world, Joh. 14.18. & 16.20, 21, 22, 23. And when the Lord speaks of the like sad things with these by the Pro∣phet Isaiah; That all the beasts would come to devour, his watchmen being blind, and the shepherds void of understanding; so that the righteous perish, no man regarding it, and mer∣ciful
men are taken away from the evil: Yet then also for encouraging the hearts of his suffering servants, he proclaims like things with these here, even the sweet and excellent state of those righteous & merciful men, when so taken away and perished from among men, that is, when Dead: He shall enter into peace, they shall lie in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness; while he threatens judgment to the seed of the sorceress, the seed of the a∣dulterer, and of the whore, Isa. 56.9, 10. & 57.1, 2, 3. Though our Lord leads his fol∣lowers ino afflictions because he sees them needful and useful for them, yet he would not have them faint under their afflictions, to deprive themselves of the good intended by them. His Word and Gospel occasion trou∣bles to them from the world, while they are thereby drawn out of the world, and are led to testifie of him to, and against the wick∣edness of the world: but he provides com∣forts and supports for them by the same word, by, and for which they suffer, that they might be inabled patiently to endure the things which they must suffer. Yea, and we may further note from this Voice and Proclamation of the blessed state of the dead that die in the Lord, following so immediately after that acclamation, Here is the patience of the Saints; That the con∣sideration
of the happy state of the dead in Christ, is an excellent motive to a patient continuance in well-doing, though suffering for it unto death: Rejoycing in hope first, we may be patient in tribulation, Rom. 12.12. Did we expect still a continuance of evils in Death, and that it would make us still un∣happy and miserable; and that Death is the end and recompence of an holy life from the world, it would exceedingly damp and take off the courage of men from exerci∣sing patience, and continuing to keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus: But being rooted and grounded in the Faith, and not moved from the hope of the Gospel, we may be there through strengthned to all long suffering, and patience with joyfulness, Col. 1.11.23. The words themselves are a command∣ment, and we have thereabout, 1. The person acquainted with it, I, the holy Apostle or Pen-man of these Visions: Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his servants the Pro∣phets, Amos 3.7. The secret of the Lord is with those that fear him, &c. Psal. 25.14. 2. The way of his perceiving or receiving it; and that was by the ear, at least the ear of his Spirit. I heard. God speaks once and twice, and man regards it not, or per∣ceives
it not, Job 33.14. But blessed are the ears of his Disciples, for they hear, &c. Matth. 13.16. 3. The way of its being conveyed to him, and that was by a voice: Sound or voice are the proper ways of conveying things to the ear, and by the ear to the mind; and a voice is but an articulate sound. There may be voice where there is no hearing, as above is signified in Job 33.14, &c. And as is said of the Levites wife when dead, Judg. 19.25. and of the Shunammits son, 2 King. 4.31. But there can be no hearing without some sound or voice. 4. We have the place whence it came from heaven. Which being the place of Gods most glorious Residence, and Manifestation of himself; and where our Lord Jesus Christ the holy and just one, is on the Throne of Majesty; and where only holy An∣gels, and the spirits of just men have place: But no evil Angel, Satan being cast out thence, nor no unclean thing may be admit∣ted to enter: We may be sure no voice comes from thence, but what is holy and true, and such as is worthy to be received with all acceptation, being supremely and originally the voice of God, and of our Lord Jesus, though it might be instrumentally ut∣tered by some holy Angel. And so the
Command here, was a Command of God and Christ. 5. We have the person to whom it was directed; and that was to the Apostle him∣self: I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me. He heard divers voices in and from heaven not directed to him, as may be seen Chap. 5.2, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Voices di∣rected to Christ, some to God, as Chap. 16.5. 7. & Chap. 19.1.5, 6, 7. Some to the people of God, Chap 18.4. but this was directed to this Saint John himself; where∣in we have, 6. The matter of the Voice, the Com∣mand it self; and therein, 1. The Act commanded him, and that was to write; Saying to me, Write. And this was an exercise that God employed divers of his holy Servants in, but is not univer∣sally the work and business of all his Ser∣vants, or of those that are accepted of him: as all are not Apostles, nor all Prophets, nor all Teachers, &c. 1 Cor. 12, 28, 29, 30. so neither are, or have all his Servants been ei∣ther Pen-men of Holy Scriptures, or of other Divine Matters; but as the same Spi∣rit distributes his sundry Gifts variously, so hath he given commands to some to speak, to others to write the heavenly Truths. But neither the one nor the other so generally as
the hearing of them; this was an honour put upon his Servants according as he pleased for others usefulness. Jeremiah was employed to speak, and Baruch to write the words from his mouth. Jer. 36.17, 18 Moses did both write and speak to the people the words of the Law, and Commands of God, and of the Song he was to put into the peo∣ples mouths, Deut. 31.9, 19, 22, 24, 30. Yea, this Gift of Writing is an excellent Gift of God, a way of conveying his Truths, and of his great works and doings which he him∣self hath made use of; as he wrote the Ten Commandments with his own hand or finger, Exod. 31.18. & 32.16. & 34.1. Deut. 10 1, 2 4. and many of his holy Prophets, and the Evangelists, and Apostles, divers of them were employed in this Exercise, whose Writing he owns also as his own, and there∣fore saith, Have not I written to thee excel∣lent things, Prov. 22.20. And I have written to them the great things of my Law, Hos. 8.12. And it may be minded, yea, and must be acknowledged, that in some respects this way of conveying over knowledge unto men, hath the preheminence in divers re∣spects above that of speech; both as 1. It may be preserved a longer time what is this way imparted; when as the voice of words pass away into the air, after they
are uttered: and so knowledge may be, and hath been transmitted this way to after ages and generations, long after those that have uttered those truths by words of mouth are dead and gone. And this use of Writing, or end of Gods making use of it, or com∣manding it to be used, is expresly signified by himself; for not onely did Moses write the Law, and deliver it to the Priests, as a means to acquaint with it, and with the works of God therein mentioned, those that had not known them, even the children to be born, commanding them to that pur∣pose at the end of every seven years to read it to all the people, men, women, and chil∣dren, and the strangers within their gates, Deut. 31.10, 11, 12, 13. but also God ordered Moses to write the Song menti∣oned in the same Chapter, that it might be a witness for him against the children of Is∣rael, that it might not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed, vers. 19.21. And the Lord bade Isaiah go write it on a Table, and note it in a Book, that it might be for the time to come (or for the latter day) even for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious people, &c. Isa. 30.8.9. See also Psal. 102.18. 2. This way the knowledge of things, and of Gods Works and Words, may be
made known to many more then they can by any ones audible voice be declared to, as in all these Nations we have this way the declarations of those things brought to us that were done in Israel and Judah; and the words spoken in those places are this way brought to our cognizance; yea, by this way things spoken in secret, yea, or when we can have no opportunity to speak our minds to any body, what we would speak may be conveyed abroad, and made publick; and things spoken in the ear (as divers of our Saviours Parables) may be published all over the World. Yea, and 3. This is a more safe and certain way of conveyance of knowledge. Words may be mistaken and misrelated by those that hear, and would relate them: many things in that way may be, and often have been, ad∣ded, omitted, or altered. But what it writ∣ten remains fixed, and may without addition, omission, or alteration be read and transcri∣bed. Thence it is said, I have written to thee excellent things, that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; and that thou mayest answer the words of truth to those that send to thee, Prov. 22.20, 21. Bless we God for so excellent and useful a gift, and for the great good things made known to us thereby, and take we heed of
abusing, or being harmed by it; for as God ordered it for great good and profit to men, so Sathan who can create nothing himself but lyes, abuses, and leads his followers to abuse this (as all other gifts of God) to Gods dishonour, and mens destruction: and scarce any so much as this while it is made use of to propagate and keep on foot all manner of lyes and mischievous devices: as is too evident. But now, as every Act must have its ob∣ject or matter about which it is exercised, so this writing must be of something to be written. And indeed the thing that God commanded to be written, is generally something, both true, as it is said, That which was written was upright, even words of truth, Eccles. 12.10. As also the Lord or∣dering the things concerning the New Jeru∣salem to be written, addes this as a reason; For these words are faithful and true, Rev. 21.5. And also of weight and usefulness for the generations and people to whom they are ordered, and for whose sake written; and so it is said, Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our in∣struction, that we through patience and com∣fort of the Scriptures might have hope, Rom. 15.4. and they were written for our admoni∣tion, 1 Cor. 10.11. and write the vision, and
make it plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it. That he may be encouraged and strengthend to run with patience the race set before him, Habak. 2.2. And so here is, 2. The matter to be written, some faith∣ful and useful matter to be preserved for the benefit of after ages. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, &c. Wherein there is, 1. A heavenly Oracle, Doctrine, or As∣sertion, viz. That the Dead that dye in the Lord are henceforth blessed. 2. A Confirmation of this Assertion or Doctrine. And that both, 1. By Authority or Testimony; the highest, greatest, and most indispu∣table, Yea, saith the Spirit. 2. By Proof, or Demonstration, or Reason alledged; and that also is two-fold, viz. 1. That they may rest from their la∣bours. 2. And their works do follow them, or follow with them. I shall endeavour to consider them briefly in this order, with some Application. 1. The Doctrine commanded to be writ∣ten, and accordingly written, is, That the Dead that dye in the Lord henceforth are
blessed, or are henceforth blessed. Wherein we have, 1. The subject of the Assertion, or that whereabout it is; and that is, The Dead. 2. A qualification of this Subject, ren∣dring it the proper Subject asserted of; and that is, That dye in the Lord. 3. The thing asserted or these; and that is, That they are blessed. 4. The time from whence either the Sub∣ject asserted of, or the thing asserted of them commenceth; for it may be either way construed: either the dead that dye in the Lord henceforth, and so it's a more special limitation of the Subject asserted of; or, the Dead that dye in the Lord (generally or whensoever) are henceforth blessed. 1. The Subject is the Dead, not the Li∣ving. And this term (the Dead) is spoken of variously in the Scriptures, according to a various way of dying; as there are that are dead in sins and trespasses, but they are not blessed, & therefore not here meant, Eph. 2.1. & 4.18. And there are that are dead to sin, and ought so to reckon themselves, 1 Pet. 2.24. Rom. 6.11. And dead to the Law, for seeking righteousness thereby, and having their hope and confidence therefrom, Gal. 2.19, 20. And these are in a sense blessed, or in the way to it. And there are
that are dead in the body, and as to natural life; as Abraham is dead, and the Pro∣phets be dead, Joh. 8.52. And that is the sense of the words here. Thence note. Note 1. That bodily Death and Blessed∣ness may be consistent; men that dye, and are dead, may be blessed: Not onely those that are dead to the Law by the Body of Christ delivered from the curse of that, and from being under it as the Covenant of Life; or that are dead to sin, or rather persons not onely dead in those considerations, but also that are bodily dead, may be happy, in a very good, safe, and desirable condition; so as that their state may worthily be com∣mended as very excellent: They may have their sins forgiven and blotted out, and they that are in that condition are blessed, Psal. 32.12. They may have the favour of God, and be accepted and beloved of him, and they that are so, are blessed, Prov. 8.34, 35. and (which includes both the former) they may have God to be their God, and to own them as his people, as it is said of Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Jacob long after they were dead and buried; I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Ex∣od. 3.6.15. And blessed are the people whose God is the Lord, Psal. 144.15. And forgive∣ness of sins, and the favour of God are both
implied to be the portion of those Souls seen in vision under the Altar, even the Souls of those that had been slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony that they held, in that there were white Robes given to every one of them, as a token both of their free and full acquittance from sin, and their being owned of God as righteous ones, and also of their being highly honoured and fa∣voured of God, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. And this not a little takes off the dread∣fulness of this bodily Death, that it may consist with Blessedness; and that it is not of it self able to hinder and deprive us there∣of: Men may be happy notwithstanding its power and force. That's the dreadful Death, that men cannot be happy in, or under such as the death in Sin, the spiritual death of the Soul under the guilt and power of sin committed and continued in; and therefore that is threatened as a very sad evil to be shunned. To be carnally minded, or the minding of the flesh is death, Rom. 8.6. a state not to be continued in where it is, nor by any means to be run into where men are delivered therefrom: As also, The second Death, the separation of the Soul, or of the whole man rather from God in Soul and Body for ever; the everlasting fire or lake burning with fire and brimstone, the
portion of the Devil and his Angels, Matth. 25.41. Rev. 20.14. This is a sad and dreadful state indeed, namely this of the se∣cond Death: While men are spiritually dead in sin, their sins are imputed, and they have no fellowship with God; but yet while alive in the body, they are in a possi∣bility of being called and made alive to God, to him that's joyned to all the living there is hope, Eccles. 9.6. But in the se∣cond Death is nothing but misery without hope of remedy or redemption; This, this is the Death then with all diligence to be shunned, and therefore care is to be taken to awake out of sin also by repentance; for death in sin continued in, brings the second Death inevitably upon men. But as for this bodily Death, that's not so dreadful in it self; men may do well for all that: and the reason is, because Christ hath died for us, and is risen again. This death indeed, as it was in its first threatning, and as upon our desert incurred by us in the Fall of our first Parents, deprived us of all Blessedness, and would inevitably have done so for ever, had not God provided a deliverer; and deliver∣ance from it, had not he graciously devised a device that his banished might not be expel∣led for ever from him, 2 Sam. 14.14. But blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath
raised up an Horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David, that by him we might be saved from our enemies; that hath given his onely begotten Son to be the pro∣pitiation for our sins that we might live through him, Luk. 1.68, 69, 70. 1 Joh. 4.9.10. And blessed be the Son of God that willing∣ly took upon himself in compliance with his Fathers will to suffer and die for us, that we through his stripes might be healed of that deadly wound wherewith in our listning to the Serpent, we were wounded by him, he having givn himself the ransome for all, and tasted Death by the grace of God, for every man; hath abolished or taken away the destructive power of this Death; and destroyed through his Death, him that had the power of it, that is the Devil; and be∣ing raised again from the dead he hath ob∣tained even all redemption of all mankind from out this Death, so as none of them shall finally perish therein, but be all raised out thereof: for as by man (Adam) came death: even by man (even the man Christ Jesus) comes the resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all die: so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Tim. 2.6. Heb. 2.9. 2 Cor. 5.14. 2 Tim. 1.10. Heb. 9.2. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. He is the resurrection and the life, and through him there is an open passage now
made through this death, and all the prece∣dents, concomitants and consequences of it to life and immortality, even to eternal life, in which is, and stands the onely true blessed∣ness. In Christ there is given us (even  mankind generally considered) eternal life, 1 Joh. 5.11. in him the righteousness of God is for, or unto all, Rom. 3.22. and the free gift unto all men for the justification of life, Rom. 5 18. In him is forgiveness of sins, and plenteousness of Redemption through his blood, Psal. 130.4.5. Coll. 1.14. and therefore by means of him men may be brought back to God, and enjoy him, his favour, and Kingdom notwithstanding this death, yea in the very state of it, and while actually dead they may be blessed. Bless we God for this gracious Device and doing of his for us, in, and by Christ; and bless we Christ Jesus our Lord, that he hath so acted and wrought through his Cross for us; and imbrace we the glad tidings of it with all acceptation and thankfulness. 2. But yet, In that the Holy Spirit stopt not there at Blessed are the Dead, but adds a restrictive, distinctive qualification, saying, The Dead that die in the Lord. Learn we thence. Note, Secondly, That though this bodily death & blessedness may stand & be together,
yet all that die this Death or are dead in it are not blessed. No, we cannot say so, there be many that dye, and are dead in the Body, that shall never meet with bles∣sedness, though blessedness may be met with notwithstanding this death. We read of two men that dyed this Death, the one blessed and the other cursed; the Rich man, and Lazarus: Lazarus was blessed and happy, being carried of the Angels into A∣brahams bosom; but the Rich man was most miserably wretched, being carried into Hell, and there grievously tormented; without so much relief or hope of possibility of find∣ing so much relief, as might amount to or be resembled by a drop of water to cool his tongue, Luke 16.19.25, 26. and we find mention of a multitude, nay, of diverse Prin∣ces with their multitudes gone down into the Pit of destruction in their uncircumcisedness, Ezek. 32.18.30, 31. and our Saviour tells us of Gods killing the body and casting into Hell. Luke 12 5. and that the Gate is wide and the Way broad that leads to Destruction, and that many go in thereat, Matth. 7.13. for the many dye in their sins, and that's a sad dying, and is mentioned as such by our Saviour, when he saith to the Jews, I go my way and ye shall seek me, and dye in your sins, whither I go (and that was to heaven
to his Father) ye cannot come. Ye are of this world, I am not of this world. I said therefore that ye shall dye in your sins, for if ye believe not that I am He, ye shall dye in your sins, Joh 8.21, 24. And indeed that's the onely thing that makes any mise∣rable that are dead: that they dyed in their sins, and their sins lie down with them in the dust, as is said, Job 20.11. For where sin is continued in and not repented of, there it is not pardoned; and where sin is not pardoned, men are not blessed, but cursed. But this proceeds not from the force of the first or bodily death, but from the wilfulness and carelesness of men, while they be here alive; in neglecting Christ and the grace in him, and the salvation tendered to them; in that when He by his wisdom calls men to himself, and offers to make them wise and to save them; as is abundant∣ly signifyed in Prov. 81.4, 5. and 9.1.4.5. Matth. 23.37. yea, and counsels them to what is good, and reproves their contrary courses, and neglects or rejections of his Counsels, and waits upon them with long-suffering, yet they refuse and sleight all his love and good will, and harden their hearts against all means and methods in inlarge∣ments and chastisements tending to their good: as is signified Prov. 1.22, 23, 24,
25.29, 30. Psal. 81.9, 10, 11, 12, &c. Matth. 23.37. Joh. 5.39, 40, &c. It is true that Christ dyed for all, even while sinners; for the ungodly and enemies, and thereby hath ransomed them from under the first Judgement, and from the lordship of Sathan into his own power and dispose, as is signified, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Rom. 5.18. and 14.9. yea, and hath obtained into him∣self all fulness of grace and blessing: So as in him all the Families of the earth are blessed; that is, abundantly provided for of all things tending to, and sufficient to render them blessed in the participation thereof; so as he is represented as a full and large feast prepared for all people, Isa. 25.6. being the Salvation prepared of God before the face of (or over against the needs of) all people, Luke 2.31. as a like phrase signifies and is equivalently rendered in Gen. 2.18. and having wrought a perfect righte∣ousness which is for, unto all, Rev. 3.22. But yet men cannot receive the benefit of all this, but in receiving, submitting to, and obeying: even as the Feast prepared pro∣fited not those that were invited to it and refused to come; nay they refusing it, and therein sleighting the love of him that made it and called them to it, provoked new an∣ger and wrath to their destruction, Matth.
22.4.7. Luke 14, 16, 17.24. the Salvati∣on neglected, is a healing medicine refu∣sed and not taken, which leaves the mise∣rable, like persons desperately diseased, in that case, to die of their Disease without re∣medy or escape. Heb. 2.1, 3. the righte∣ousness for all comes upon all that believe; and therefore it being through unbelief re∣fused, is like the Weeding garment not put on, which neither clothes nor warms the person refusing it, nor makes him comely and lovely; but being not on a man, the mans nakedness and unhandsomness, together with the refusal of the Charity shewed and proffered in preparing it for, and offering it to him, lays the person open to be ex∣pelled (though come into Gods house) and to be cast out into outer darkness, Rom. 3.22. Matth. 22.10, 11, 12, 13. the Life Eternal given us in Christ is so given in and with him, that he that hath him, he only hath and enjoys it; and he that rejects and hath not Him, hath not it, 1 Joh. 5.11, 12. To the enjoyment of Blessedness then, there must be a receiving and obedience to Christ, the Fountain and treasury of it; otherwise, though men perish not in the first Death, they will and must in the second: for the soul that sinneth (that still and perpetually or impenitently sinneth) though it die not
for the Fathers iniquity, nor have its teeth set on edge, because its Father Adam eat the forbidden sowre grape, and so the son shall not bear the fathers iniquity; that pro∣verb before mentioned with reference to the second and Eternal Death, shall not take place, yet for its own sinning it shall die, Ezek. 18.2, 3, 4.19, 20. Jer. 31.29, 30. The dealings of God here are somewhat answerable to his dealings with Israel, when having brought them all out of Egypt (not leaving Man nor mothers Child, nor any Hoof there) yet He afterward destroyed them that believed not, for their unbelief and rebellious sinning and going on to sin against him in the Wilderness, Jude 5. Heb. 3.17, 18. even so here, it's not the first Death and Judgment detains any; but yet Christ ha∣ving bought all into his dispose from perish∣ing in that, will afterward judge to Eter∣nal Death those that believe or obey not. It is not any want of merit or worthiness in Christs Death, or exclusion of them from being of its object, nor want of fulness or readiness in him for saving them; but this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light Joh. 3.19. Onely Death, this bodi∣ly Death puts an end to the time of Gods patient waiting for their coming to Christ,
closing with his Light and Love, and re∣penting of their sins, and finding mercy with him. All the time God continues mens lives here, there is a possibility of escaping the Wrath to come: For God is patient towards us not willing any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. Yea, his goodness and forbearance is inviting and leading men to repentance, Rom. 2.4. and is to be accounted Salvation, 2 Pet. 3 15. Even Jezabel while Christ spared her he gave her space to repent, though she repented not, Rev. 2.21. yea, and when he threatens to cast her into a Bed, and them that commit adultery with her, even into great tribulati∣on, yet it is with this Proviso mentioned, Except they repent of their deeds, vers. 22. so slow is God to anger, and so lothe to ex∣clude men from bliss and happiness, and so ready to shew mercy and to forgive, and so agreeable are Gods dealings to his Word and Oath, wherein he saith, and sweares to it, that as He lives he hath no pleasure (none at all secret or revealed) in the Death of the wicked, but rather that he turn and live, Ezech. 33 11. To him that is joyned to all the living there is hope, Eccles. 9.4. And Christ Dyed for all, that they that live (while yet they live) should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that Dyed for
them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. But now when Death seizes on a man and cuts him off, then the door is shut upon him, and should he now stand without and knock, it is too late; the answer from within is, I know you not: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity; No opening then, nor any ad∣mission, Luke 13.25, 26, 27. the Feast sleight∣ed shall not then be tasted of for ever by them, Luke 14.24. thence the Gulf is for ever fixed so that there is no coming of a∣ny from Heaven to help them: nor no go∣ing from their state of Misery to a state of Salvation, Luke 16.26. in the Grave whi∣ther we go there is no work, nor device: no knowledge or wisdom, for the helpfulness of any that have here neglected Gods work and device declared to them, and the know∣ledge and wisdom here offered them, Eccles. 9.10. Now is the accepted time; now is the day of Salvation, now is the day for men to hear in, and to work the works of God in; but if this be sleighted, and men harden their hearts now, and will not hear Gods voice, the night comes and will come upon them wherein no man can work; after which there will be no more day, except an ever∣lasting Judgment upon them. And there∣fore in the state of Death, they that dye in their sins are so far from being happy and
blessed, that they are far more wretched then, then before; for though they are not blessed while here, because their sins are not blotted out, yet there is a possibility they may be so, and there is yet such a mercy held forth to them as obtainable by them; for if the wicked man will turn from all his sins that he hath committed and keep all Gods statutes, and do that which is law∣ful and right, if he will listen to and be∣lieve on Christ Jesus, and not walk any longer after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, there shall be no longer any Condemnation to him, He stall surely live, he shall not dye; namely, the second Death, Rom. 8 1. Ezek. 18.21. all his transgressions that he hath committed they shall not be mentioned to him, &c. vers. 22. But when dead in his sins, then there is no more hope or pos∣sibility of being happy; He who was mise∣rable before under a possibility of mercy, is now endlesly and remedilesly miserable without that possibility. Oh! therefore how doth it behove every one now to strive to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. to do what his hands find him to do with all his might, for seeking mercy and favour with God, seeking the Lord while he may be found, and calling upon him while he is nigh at hand, Isa. 55.6. Eccles. 9.10.
while it is yet said, or called to day, not hard∣ning the heart but hearkening to Gods voice, Psal. 95.7.8. Heb. 3.7, 8, 15. making haste and not delaying to keep Gods Command∣ments, Psal 119.59, 60. hasting to escape (as the Angels said to Lot when they brought him and his Family out of Sodom, Gen. 19.17.) as for our lives or souls not looking back, staying or lingring in all the Plain of this World, but escape to the mountain of the Lord left we be consumed, giving di∣ligence to know, win and be found in Christ Jesus: and being brought in to him, to abide in him and be faithful to him to the Death, and then no danger of being miserable for ever: For Blessed are they that dye in the Lord from henceforth. And so we come to the Sub∣stance of the Words, and their plain and full import. viz. That Note 3. All they that Dye in the Lord are Blessed from henceforth; where we shall enquire and shew 1. Who is meant here by the Lord. 2. What it is to Dye in the Lord, or who they are that may be said so to dye. 3. Wherein they are blessed, or what and whence that blessedness is, that is asserted of them.
4. What is the meaning of that ad∣ditional word, henceforth, and what it may import. 1. By the Lord here is without all doubt meant Jesus Christ, for He is Lord of All, Acts 10.36. for though there are that are called Lords, many, yet to us (saith the Apostle) there is but one Lord, Jesus Christ by whom are all things and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. and we find like phrases as this, expresly mention him, as He in whom the believers on him dye; thus in 1 Cor. 15.18. they are fallen asleep in Christ. And in 1 Thes. 4.14.16. Them that sleep is Jesus will God bring with him, and the Dead in Christ shall rise first. He then is here meant by the Lord, yet not so as to exclude but include the Father and Holy Spirit, who are in and upon him; and He may well be stiled the Lord: For, 1. As God, the Word with God in the beginning who was God, so all things were made by him, and He was and is by that right and stile as one with the Father (who made all things by him) and with the ho∣ly Spirit (by whom or which he gave them their Formes, Virtues, and Beings) the Lord of All, Joh. 1.1, 2. Col. 1.16, 17. Heb. 1.2, 3.
2. As man also taken into unity of person with the eternal word he must needs be, and so was and is Lord; the Manhood by that assumption into that personal union being advanced into interest in and communion with him in that his Dignity and Authori∣ty. And so the Angel that came to declare to the Shepherds his Nativity called him, while he lay in the Manger, Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10.11. so the Evangelists speak of him too in his state of Ministery and service very often, as the Lord appointed seventy, Luke 10.1. the Apostles said unto the Lord, Lord incrase our Faith, Luke 17.5. and himself bid the man out of whom he cast a Legion of Devils, Go and shew how great things the Lord hath done for thee. Mark. 5.19. yea, and even in his dead state as to his Body, the Angels sent to declare his Resurrection, call him Lord, as to his Body laid in the Sepulchre, saying, Come see the place where the Lord lay, Matth. 28.6. But especially, 3. As Mediatour and Immanuel in his exalted and glorified state, he is made of God the Father, and so declared to be Lord and Christ, as the fruit and reward of his Obedience and Sufferings to Death, the Death of the Cross. And as to his actu∣al possessing in the nature of Man the Throne
of Majesty, and having thereon all Au∣thority and Power instated on and exerci∣sed by him. To this end Christ both Dyed, Rose and revived (or lived again) that he might be Lord of (or as the word . ra∣ther signifieth that he might Lord it, or ex∣ercise Dominion over) the quick and dead, Rom. 14.9. and because he humbled him∣self, and became obedient to the Death, the death of the Cross, for this cause God hath highly exalted him and given him a Name above every name, That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bowe both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things un∣der the earth: and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. who hath put all things under his feet, and made Angels, Authorities and Powers sub∣ject unto him. Yea indeed, over men he is worthily Lord by way of Purchase and right of Redemption, having given himself a Ransome for all, 1 Tim 2.6. whence the false Teachers are charged with denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. And he dyed (it's said) for all that they (who∣ever they be of mankind) that live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him who dyed for them and rose again, 2 Cor.
5.15. Live to him, namely, as Servants to their proper Lord to whom they must give an account for all things. He is Lord over the Devils and evil Spirits by way of Con∣quest, having Conquered and overcome them, spoiled them and led them Captive in Triumph, and so hath power to do his pleasure with them, Col 2.15. And the good Angels willingly submit themselves to him as given to him of God with all other things in Heaven, Earth, under the earth, and in the Seas; and as to one whom God hath exalted to be over them, and bids to Worship him; yea, and they judge him most worthy of this Power and Dignity, be∣cause of his unparalleld acts for us and Con∣quest over Death, and Hell, and Devils by his Death and Sufferings, ascribing blessing, honour, glory and power to him, Heb. 1.6. with Psal. 97.7. Rev. 5.11.12, 13. He then is the Lord in whom whosoever dieth is blessed But 2. What's that dying in the Lord! For it is implyed here that some do dye in the Lord, and that there is a dying in the Lord. But what's that! Indeed we may say in a sense there is a dying in the Lord, and in a sense there is no dying in him. In this sense there is no dying in Christ, that is, He is not the Subject of this Dying; as in
Christ, and in him, sometimes signifie in him as the subject of the thing spoken of, as when it is said, in him we are Compleat, Col. 2.10. in him is no sin, 1 Joh. 2.5. in this sense there is no Death or dying in him. He once dyed for sin, the just for us un∣just, but he dyeth no more, Death hath no more dominion over him, Rom. 6.9, 10. He was dead but is alive, and lives for evermore, Amen, Rev. 1.18. The song of the Saints is and shall be (as our Deceased friend and Sister on her Death-bed noted) Worthy is the Lamb (not that is, but) that was slain to open the Book, &c. He now is neither dying nor dead, Rev 5.9. it is true the A∣postle said, they bare about in their body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10. but that's to be understood either of the suffer∣ings occasioned by the constraining operati∣ons of his love in dying for them believed by them, the dying that Christs love led them to endure for him and his Names sake, and that to be the sense, the next words may argue, in which he saith, We that live are alway delivered unto Death for Jesus sake, vers. 11. so as the dying of Jesus is the dying for Jesus sake; or else the dying of Jesus is the dying of those that are his Members, what is done to them being ta∣ken by him as done to himself, as is said
Matth. 25.40.45. Zech. 2.8. Acts 9.4. But otherwise he dies not, in himself he di∣eth not, nor may any such thing be imagi∣ned to be here implyed where the speech is of others dying in him; concerning whom also neither may we understand that they dye in him as to their state in him, or so as in the things which are properly of him, as such a like Phrase sometimes signifies, as when it is said, Ye are light in the Lord; that is, in what ye have in him, in his per∣son, or in what ye have derived from him, and have or are after him as found in him, Ephes. 5.8. and ye are wise in Christ, 1 Cor. 4.10. they that dye in him in such a sense are not blessed, but wretched; if any dye as to what they are in him, or derive from him; such as Crucifie Christ again to them∣selves, and that dye as to their dependance on him; Faith, Hope, and Rejoycing in him, or the like. Nor can it be said that men dye by or as coming unto or into him, or being in him as to their state God-ward, and in their spirits; but men live in and by him. He conveys not Death but Life unto men in their coming to and being in him; as is said, In the way of righteousness is Life, and in the path way thereof there is no Death, Prov. 12.28. Death, as it is the wages of sin, though suffered and sustained
by Christ, yet it is not met with in and from Christ as a proper consequent of him or of Faith in him, but Life: He that hath the Son hath life, 1 Joh 5.12. who dyed that we might live in and by him, 1 Joh. 4.9, 10. And yet there is a dying in the Lord, that is, of those that are in the Lord, and that in the view and beholding of him as the effect or operation of him beheld and believed on. As to say, There is a Dying to our Selves, the World, and Sin; a letting go our Confidence, rejoycing in, or resting on our own wis∣dom, righteousness, the flesh or fleshly priviledges, and expectations of life from our keeping of or conformity to the Law of Moses, or the like; as in this sense the Apostle saith, I through the law am dead to the law that I may live to God: I am crucifyed with Christ, yet I live, not I, but Christ liveth in me, &c. Gal. 2.19, 20, and ye brethren, are dead to the law by the Bo∣dy of Christ, namely by it as Crucified for you, believed in by you, Rom. 7.4. and so God forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the World is crucified to me and I to the World, Gal. 6.14. and what things were advantage to me those I counted loss for Christ, Phil. 3.7. and reckon your
selves dead to sin, &c. Rom. 6.11. And this kind of Dying may be taken in here inclusive∣ly as that that foreruns and makes way for this dying in the Lord, and they are bles∣ed that in such sense Dye in or through the Lord, or the knowledge of him: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him, 2. Tim. 2.11. But that which is properly meant here is, that those that are in Christ may dye as to the bodily death, the being in Christ and the Bodily death are consistent; other∣wise Dying and blessedness could not con∣sist together, as we shewed they do: for there is no blessedness out of Christ. And that a bodily in Christ may stand together with bodily death is further clear, in that as Christ e not to prevent and keep men from bodily death by his dying, but to obtain a resurrection out of it; so neither doth men ing in Christ prevent or annull  the deriving life from Christ is not such  deriving life as puts by the Body from dying: For it is not derived upon the Body, but from (and so after) its Death. It is appointed for men once to Dye, and that appointment was made after the promise of Christ and of his defeating the Devils Plot, the bruising his head, and therefore is consistent with it. Christ can
can and will defeat Sathans plot for keep∣ing man out everlastingly from God though they dye as to the Body, Heb. 9.27. with Gen. 3.15, 16. Christ indeed being belie∣ved on, gives forth his divine Spirit and life for quickening our spirit and expelling Death out of that, raising it up to a lively hope in God; but it expels not Death out of the body till the Resurrection of the dead. The body is still dead (under the Sentence of and in the way to Death) because of sin (that yet remains in it) but the Spirit or inward man, is life for righteousness, Rom. 8.10. thence, we see wise men dye, Psal. 49.11. and as was mentioned before, A∣braham is dead, and Moses  the Pro∣phets are dead, in respect of  outward man; though they were brought into and li∣ved and abode in Christ, and  must o∣thers fare also. And this God orders for divers good causes, as I have shewed in  Balaams wish, as to keep us always lo and humble in our selves; and dependan on God and mindful of our latter end; and so more heedful to the instructions of wis∣dome; and that God and Christ might be glorified in raising us up from the Dead. But now to dye in the Lord in this sense signifies and hath in it,
1. A continuance in Christ, even in the Faith and Obedience of him till Death and in Death, so as that we lay down our lives or give up our breath, holding fast the Faith and grace of Christ, as it is said of the Patriarchs, that they all dyed in the Faith, so as retaining and not going out from the Faith; when their spirits left and went out of their bodies, yet they went not out from Christ, from believing and hoping in him, Heb. 11.13. And there may be further in it 2. A spending and laying down the Bo∣dily life in an exercise of Faith and Hope in Christ and walking in the Spirit, vertues and service of Christ, so as that the dying is in a sense the effect and product to the Flesh of believing and walking in him, as the Apostles that so walked in Christ, as that they spent themselves, and strength, and life as it were in the flames of his love to them, and zeal for him thence springing, being offered up as a Sacrifice as it were, upon the sacrifice and service of the Faith, Phil. 2.17. offered (or pouered out as a drink-offering, as the word signifies) in 2 Tim. 4.6. and in some cases and times (as those before mentioned under the cruelties of the Beast and false Prophet) it takes in 3. A Dying in the Cause of Christ, and
for his sake as Martyrs put to Death for bearing witness and testimony to him, as those beheaded for the witness of Christ, and the Word of God, and for not worshipping the Beast, &c. Rev. 6.9. and 20.4. We may put them together and say, that when men are, and continue in the Faith of Christ, and so in the love and vertues of Christ too, and in death, Rev. 2.10 and by the force of that they have in and from Christ, lay down or spend out their lives either in serving, or suffering for Christ; then may they be said to dye in the Lord: and all that so dye, dye in the Lord. But yet fur∣ther, they that in any such sense dye in the Lord, may be said also in another sense (which pertains to, and is the immediate spring of their blessedness) to dye in him. viz. 4. In the love of the Lord; as being the objects of his favourable acceptance, and so enclosed as it were in his arms: in his vertues as being encompassed about with the vertues of his Sufferings and Sacri∣fice, and so in his Covenant and Promises; and thence They, all they that so Dye, in what way soever, as to the outward way of dying they dye: whether by a fair Death on their Beds, or by any violent Death in∣flicted on them, whether by a more easie,
or more sharp and painful death; yea, though they dye of Poverty, or are full of Sores, as Lazarus, yet they are Blessed; though in the sight of men they seem most miserable, yet they are in a happy state and condition. Which we are nextly 3. To enquire into, and shew what that Blessedeess is, and how they are bles∣sed; we may say, Blessedness stands in ex∣emption or freedom from what's evil and harmful: and in having interest in and en∣joyment of good to content and satisfacti∣on; and they that dye in the Lord are in such a state even while dead; and needs they must be so. For, 1. In Christ there is all that may free, exempt or deliver a man from evil; and there is all that may do good, and make content and satisfied, and so all that may make one both privatively and positively Blessed. 1. In him is freedom and deliverance from evil not onely for himself, but so as it may be for the freeing of others, not onely sin hath no dominion over, or place in him (though he was made sin, and bare our sins for us, yet having dyed for it, and being raised again, in him is no sin, no sin now, on, or imputed to him) but also there is freedom from it for us, forgiveness of
it, and justification from it as is said. Be it known to you that in this man is preach∣ed to you forgiveness of sins, Acts 13.38. And, there is forgiveness with thee that thou mayest be feared, Psal. 130.4. yea, and not onely is he clean from it, but with him is cleansing too; He hath made a pur∣gation of our sins, Heb. 1.3. opened a foun∣tain for washing and cleansing us, Zech. 13.1. and in both respects he is the Saviour from sin, both as to the imputation, and as to the pollution of it. And where sin is taken away, or removed, evil of Wrath and Punishment hath no place. While sin was imputed to, and laid upon Christ, he was also obnoxious to the curse, and wrath, that was the Wages of it: And while God imputes sin, and it is not washed off a man, punishment, and evil of wrath may befal him; but as in him there is forgive∣ness of, and cleansing from sin, so in him is deliverance from wrath too, either as to misery inflicted on the Creature, or as to the hiding of Gods face, or withdrawing his favour from it, being justified from his Blood, how much more saved from wrath! both Positive and Privative; Positive of e∣vil, and Privative of good, Rom. 5.9. and then, as there is none hath power over him in the least, so in him there is that infinite
wisdome and power, by which he is All suf∣ficient to save us from them; and order their enmities as he sees good: so as he can suffer them to act forth their malice, and yet secure those against whom it's act∣ed, so as it shall have no evil influence upon them; yea, all enemies spiritual and corpo∣ral are at his beck and will, to do to, or with them as he pleases, and he can let out or restrain their wrath; inflict punishments by them, or save from, or deliver out of the troubles they occasion, as he pleases, Psal. 76.10. 2. In him also is all fulness of good wherewith he may do us good, and con∣tent, and satisfie us; for all the fulness of the God-head dwells bodily in him, and in him we are compleat, Col. 2.9, 10. It hath pleased all fulness to (or it hath pleased the Father, that all Fulness should) dwell in him, Col 1.19. the Father is in him, with all the fulness of his love and favour, He is enough to satisfie the Soul for ever, and produce any good to it that he pleases. In him is the fulness of the holy Spirit, and of all his glorious Power, Wisdom, Love, Sweetness and Comfort; and with all its most enabling and enriching vertues, so as he can baptise with it, us, and whom he pleaseth, Isa. 42.1. Mat. 3.11. Joh. 1.33.
and 7.37, 38, 39. His are all Riches and precious treasures; all things in Heaven and Earth are his, Riches and Honour are with him, yea, durable Riches and Righte∣ousness; his Fruit is better then gold, yea then fine gold, and his revenue better then choice silver, Prov. 8.18, 19. Length of days are in his right hand (even Immortality and Eternal Life) and in his left hand Riches and Honour. His ways are ways of plea∣santness and all his paths are peace. He is a tree of life to them that lay hold on him, and happy therefore is every one that retains him, Prov. 3.15, 16, 17, 18. Happy in∣deed, For 2. Whosoever comes into him, is, and abides in him, is interested in all that is his, and that is in him and comes to the participation of the benefit thereof; they that are made in him through the grace of God, to them he is made of God, Wis∣dom, Righteousness, Holiness and Redempti∣on, 1 Cor. 1.30. They have him to be theirs, 1 Joh. 5.12. yea, and in him they have the Father also, being and continu∣ing in the Son, they are in the Father al∣so, 1 Joh. 2 24. In God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thes. 1.1. & 2 Thes. 1.1. and as they are both in Father, and Son, so they have both, 2 Joh. 9. And how can
they that have such a portion and Inheri∣tance, but be happy? 1. Privatively Happy, so as to be ex∣empted from all that is evil; from sin, the Root of all evil, so it is not imputed to to them, In him all that believe are justi∣fied from all things which they could not be ju∣stified by the law of Moses, Acts 13.9. in him we have redemption through his Blood the for∣giveness of sins, Eph. 1.7. Col. 1.14 so as to be sanctified & cleansed from sin, so as it shall not have dominion over those that believe in (and so are, and abide in him) Rom 6.14. He that abideth in him sinneth not, 1 Joh. 3.6. and then there is no Condemnation to them that are in him, that walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.1. And so there is no evil in their Portion, there shall no evil happen to the just, as they are that are in, and abide in Christ, Prov. 12.21. All things work together for good to them, Rom. 8.28. and so there is no Death to them, nothing of misery, or separation from God, which is the death of the Soul, nothing of destruction, they shall not perish, Joh. 3.16. True it is, that they may have, and actu∣ally have Enemies against them, within, and without; but Christ is to them a place of sure Defence against them, and preserves
their Souls; Their place of defence is on high, a place of the munition of rocks, Isa. 33.16. and they dwell safely, so as they may be also quiet from the fear of evil, Prov. 1.33. being and dwelling in him who is the most High, and in his secret place they dwell, under the shadow and Prote∣ction of the Almighty, saying of him, Who is the Lord? He is my rock and my for∣tress, my God in whom I will trust, surely He will deliver them from the snare of the Fowler, and from the truly noisome Pesti∣lence. He will cover them with his feathers, and under his wings shall they trust, his truth shall be their shield and buckler, so as they shall not be afraid of the terrour by night, nor of the arrow that flyeth by day. Yea dwelling in the Lord, as in their refuge, and having him, the most High, for their habitation there shall no evil befal them, nor any Plague come nigh their dwelling, Psal. 91.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10. 2. Positively happy, in the enjoyment of, and interest (at least) in all that's good for as the Lord is a strong house or house of defence to them that are in him, Psal. 31.2. and 71.3, so he is also to them a house of feasting or sacrifices, Prov. 9.1, 2, 3. and they that trust in him and under the shadow of his wings shall abundantly be satisfied with
the fatness of his house; and he will make them drink of the rivers of his pleasures, Psal. 36.7, 8, 9. He is to them a fountain of life and living waters, both quickning, purify∣ing and satisfing them. He is to them a sun; and shield, and will give them grace and glory and no good thing will he withhold from them that are upright with him, Psal. 84.11. in him they have, and from him derive that heavenly wisdom, that brings with it to them, Riches, and Honour, and Life, in him they have, and from him re∣ceive that holy Spirit whose fruit is Love, Joy, Peace, and in a word, all Goodness; Righteousness and Truth, Gal. 5.22. Joh 7.38, 39. and 4.14. Ephs. 5 8. yea, in him they have the Adoption of Sons, and are honoured with that near relation to God, where through they become his Heirs joynt-heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.17. And if the Lord being their shepherd they shall not want, Psal. 23.1. How shall they want then, God being their Father, Christ their Bro∣ther, and they joynt-heirs with him? these are the fearers of the Lord that are bles∣sed, and the very fear of the Lord is such a Blessing to them as tendeth to life, so as they shall abide satisfied with it, and shall not be visited of evil, Psal. 112.1. Prov. 19.23. Well may it be said of every such
one, as is said of Asher, whose name sig∣nified Blessed, that his bread or portion is fat, Gen. 49.20. or as of Nepthali, that he is, and shall be satisfied with favour, Deut. 33.23. and of them all as is said of Israel, Happy art thou, O Israel, saved by the Lord, the Eternal God is thy refuge, or mansions, and underneath thee (even when thou fallest lowest) are the everlasting arms, who is like unto thee! who hast the Lord for the shield of thy help and whose sword is thy excellency, &c. Deut. 33.17.29. Object. If it be said, This is indeed the portion of them that are in Chirst, while alive here: but here we are to speak of those that are Dead dying in Christ; I answer: 1. This is the Portion of men in Christ at all times, whether alive or dead, as to the Body or Flesh; yea, it's rather their Portion that Dye in Christ, then of others; for if men be in Christ when they live here, and before they dye turn out from him, and so dye not in him, they loose and for∣feit all this Blessedness; for Blessedness is so the Portion of Christ (who onely hath purchased and obtained it into himself by his onely perfect, and most acceptable righ∣teousness)
that though he have it not for himself onely, but for us, yet there is no interest in it, nor enjoyment of it to be had out of, or apart from him; that being also true, that he that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life, 1 Joh. 5.11, 12. He therefore that trans∣gresseth and abideth not in the Doctrine of Christ, hath not God, and so not life; for God there answers to Father and Son in the next Clause, which Son is the life, and hath the life given of God to us in himself, 2 Joh. 9. The just shall live by Faith; but if (he or) any man draw back my Soul shall have no pleasure in him: Nay he that draws back, draws back to perditi∣on, Heb. 37.38, 39. so as to loose all this Portion, and his Soul in the loss of it. But while any man is in Christ alive or dead, he is in a full and most accomplisht treasu∣ry of all bliss and happiness; and in the dispose and favour of one perfectly Faith∣ful, to communicate and give forth of his fulness according to his Promises; all the Promises of God are in him; yea, and A∣men. And he that is in him, is in him an heir of them, and abiding in him, shall not fail to inherit them, though they as to the body dye, 2 Cor. 1.20. Gal 3.29.: For
2. Death, this bodily death, doth not make any alteration as to mens being in him, it is not the going of the Soul out of the Body, that is, its going out of Christ, they that dye in the Lord, are in the Lord in the time and act of his dying, laying down their lives, or breathing out their Spirits in the Faith and in the Spirit of him; they are yet in him inclosed in his Arms, in his favour, and love, and Covenant with him, whence he is still, even in Death, as we noted before, stiled their God, for though Dead men, and as to bodily life, yet they live to him, and in respect of their spirits see no Death, Prov. 12.28. Joh. 8.51. their hearts shall live for ever, Psal. 22.26. this Death is called a sleep; they that sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him, 1 Thes. 4.14. And as the bodily sleep makes no al∣teration in relation or Covenant-engage∣ments: no more doth the bodily Death in relation to God and Christ, and interest in the Covenant and Promises of his blessing; a Child is the Fathers Child as well when a∣sleep as when awake, and is nevertheless an Heir to an Estate given by deed of gift, or by the Fathers Will and Testament. Nor is a Wife the less the Wife, and in the marriage-covenant when she lies fast asleep in her Husbands bosom, then when she is most
awake and active; and therefore is in as happy a condition (if happy in her Marriage) then, as at other times; yea, we may say of the man asleep in Christ, or (which is all one) Dead in the Lord, that his state is better then before, as we shall shew God willing, in what follows; for as the Dead that dye in the Lord are blessed both privatively as they are exempted from, & secured against evil: and positively, as they are interested in Christ, & in all, the good that is in him, and to be communicated by him: So also they are 3. Comparatively Blessed, more blessed in divers respects then divers others, or then themselves in former times. 1. Comparatively to other men they be happy, whether they be 1. Those that Dye, and are dead out of the Lord, they are happy in respect of them howsoever they dye; it may be in the appearance of men sinners that dye in their sins are happier in their Death then they, as having no bands in their death, as is said, Ps. 73.4 they may lye and dye in stately Rooms, and soft Beds, encompassed about with their Friends and Kindred, feel little pain, dispose of great estates to their Children & friends; they may possibly express no fear of Hell, but hope they shall go to heaven, Mat. 7.22, 23. They may, when dead, have costly Funerals, & state∣ly
Monuments, &c. when as those that dye in Christ may dye grievous Deaths in the sight of men, of sharp Diseases, full of Sores and Boyles, in Prisons, Dungeons, yea, on Racks or Gibbets, as it is said of those Saints of whom the world was not worthy; that they were some Tortured, others Stoned, others Sawn asunder, others slain with the Sword; that they were desti∣tute (of succour, namely, Friends, means of helpfulness, and the like) Afflicted, Torment∣ed, Heb. 11.37, 38. and yet for all this great difference, as to the way and outward manner of Dying; Yea, though we add also, that they being tempted may cry out, as forsaken of God (as our Lord Jesus on the Cross) yet these that dye in the Lord are infinitely Blessed above the other; nay, rather, Blessed, and not at all the other, let them dye as desirably otherwise they can, yea, though also they, when Dead, have their Names cryed up of men, as if they were Worthy, Gallant, Honourable persons; and those that dye in the Lord, be accounted (as our Lord was by the Pha∣risees, Matth. 27.62, 63) as Deceivers; or (as the Papists called divers of our Eng∣lish martyrs) stinking martyrs, mad men, Hereticks, &c. Yet these latter, they that dye in the Lord, are far happier then the other.
We may compare those two men∣tioned in Luke 16.19. the Rich man and Lazarus, they both dyed. But oh how great a difference to appear∣ance in their dying! the one in a Rich state, and therefore no doubt but had or might have Friends, and Physicians about him, and want no Attendance; and after Death had a Burial; which we find not said of the poor Lazarus, he might dye of his Sores, and in some ditch, and his body might be exposed to the Birds or Beasts of prey (as those Saints mentioned in Psal. 79.2, 3, 4.) But yet the differerce in the goodness of their state when dead, was far more for the advantage on Lazarus side, then the goodness of the way of their out∣ward dying was on the Rich man's side: For after Death the poor Lazarus was carried of Angels into Abraham's bosome, and was comforted and refreshed with everlasting Consolations, not to be lost again: When the Rich man was in Hell, tormented without ease, or end; not having either possibility of escape from thence, or of enjoying there so much as one drop of Water to cool the tip of his tongue. Who would choose to dye as the Rich man, with such a state after death, rather then as the poor man, or any of the most cruelly Martyred
good man, having the poor man's after-state? who would not rather go through any difficult and dirty way from a Prison, to a Throne, then to slide down from some stately, Throne, or off some pleasant Hill bestrawed with sweetest Flowers in his de∣scent; or attended also with the most me∣lodious Musick into a dark Dungeon, to lie and rot there in the midst of noisome stenches, pinch'd and pin'd away with Fa∣mine, or made a prey to venemous Snakes and Serpents. The righteous hath hope his Death, but the wicked is driven away in his wickedness, Prov. 14.32. and the hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, and be as the gi∣ving up of the ghost, Job 18.13, 14. and 11.20. but the hope of the righteous shall be gladness, Prov. 10.28. 2. Those that live in the greatest pomp and splendor in the world, injoying the greatest fulness of Riches, Honour, and Glory; or the most delightful continuing pleasures, for these in the midst of their enjoyments are in a state of incertainty. Their Riches are uncertain riches, they may take them wings and fly away, the Thief may steal them, or the Moth and rust cor∣rupt them: Their Honours like Hamans may end upon a Gallows, or as Ahithophels in a Halter; and all their pleasures in a mo∣ment
vanish, and they may come with Crae∣sus the Lydian King, to learn the uncer∣tainty of all things here by sad Experience, falling into the hand and Power of their Enemies; The pleasures of sin are but for a season, and the reproches of Christ are far greater Riches, than all the treasures of Egypt, or of the World, Heb. 11.25, 26. The Wealthiest and most Honoured persons here must dye, and then they shall carry nothing away with them, nor their pomp and glory descend after them, Psal. 49.17. though while they live they bless their souls and men praise them as doing well for themselves; yet when Death comes, then all their felicity in these enjoyments vanish like pleasant dreams when one awaketh, and ing out of Christ, they go to the generation of their Fathers, and shall never see light, Psal. 49.18, 19. yea, then how are they brought into desolation as in a moment, and utterly consumed with terrours, Psal. 73.19. then begin their miseries never to end, when the miseries of the others, and all their griefs and sorrows are at an end, never more to return, and then end the world∣lings Joys for ever; when the dead in Christ have more increase of Joy, or enter into those Joys that never shall end. And though it's true, that the prosperous sinner
living yet at ease and in fulness, is in a pos∣sibility of Repentance, and so in a far bet∣ter state, then he that dyes in his sins, and is dead out of Christ: Yet considering what snares there are in such injoyments, and how hard it is for a Rich man to enter into Gods Kingdom, and how usually the prosperity of fools (that is, evil men, for all such are very fools in Gods reckoning, whose judgment is according to truth) destroy them; that they are persons stand∣ing high, but in slippery places, and are in very great danger of being every hour cast from their heigth into destruction, Psal. 73.18. and considering on the other hand, that the man dead in Christ, is out of all danger of any miscarriage, in present pos∣session in their spirits, of that presence of Christ, where is that fulness of Joy which infinitely transcends all the injoyments of this world how great soever, and that they are sure, and certain of Eternal Happiness for ever; their state must needs be conclu∣ded infinitely better then the others. Yea, on that account also Blessed. 2. Comparatively to themselves, while living in the world, more blessed now, than then, as the Apostle implies when he saith, that though living in the Flesh, he had this fruit of his labour, that he lived to Christ,
viz. to the magnifying of him: Yet he had a desire to depart, and to be with Christ as a thing to him far better, Phil. 122, 23. for now they are absolutely bles∣sed and happy though not yet fully and su∣perlatively in the highest and greatest pos∣session of Happiness and Glory; the Re∣surrection of the Body must be waited for, for that when Body and Soul reunited, shall be glorified, and all the Saints compleatly brought together, shall receive the full of the Glory promised, and have to each ones particular injoyment the accession of the glory of all the rest with them. And if Cicero an Heathen Orator, could fancy a wonderful Happiness in the deceas∣ed Moralists, enjoying the fellowship of each others Souls O proeclarum illum diem, &c. so as to cry out, O that gallant day! When shall I go to the Council and Company of Souls, &c. What may the Christian judge of the re∣vealed and assured Society of happy, re∣newed and raised persons, together with Christ for ever? But now they are ab∣solutely Blessed, their happiness hangs no
longer upon any Condition that may possi∣bly fail in, as before it did upon an If ye continue. And though that If was of no great burthen so as to imply so much dan∣ger as to fill them with disquieting fears to hinder their rejoycing in assured hope, ha∣ving so many ingagements to abide, and so great incouragements in Christ to trust in him for his delivering them from all evil, & preserving them to his heavenly kingdom: Yet there is both a possibility yet remaining, of their sailing, and other Considerations also; as of their possibility and danger of sinning and dishonouring Christ, their be∣ing exposed to griefs, pains, temptations, and the like; from which they shall then be for ever freed, that add a Preheminence to the state of their Death, as also that they shall be so at home with the Lord, as before they were not, nor could be; as is implied 2 Cor. 5.8. Philip. 1.23. indeed as to usefulness to others they are not in so good a state, they perish from among the Children of men, Psal. 12.1 Isa. 57.1. They have no more opportunity of doing good to, or receiving good from them; they they are as to that, in a place and state of silence, whence its wisdom to be doing good to all while alive, and we have thereto opportunity, and to let our hand do what is
finds to do with all our diligence to that purpose, because in the Grave whither we go, there is no Work which we can doe, nor nothing we can devise for them, as for that cause, Saint Paul was in a strait, and knew not whether to choose Death or Life, because for him to continue in the Flesh would be better for his Brethren, Philip. 1.22, 24. but yet in respect of the Saints state of freedom from evils both of Sin and Suffering and enjoyment of the Lord, they are much better then in the state of this Life; as much better, as it's better for a poor Pilgrim and Forreiner exposed to va∣riety of vexations and hazzards, to be at home in his own Countrey, & in some safe & quiet possession of a settled comfortable con∣dition, or for a poor tossed weather-beaten Seaman to be safely harboured in the Port he is bound for; and that may be also one rea∣son of the addition of the other word Hence∣forth. And so we come to the next Inquiry, 4. What is this Henceforth? or why is that added? Were they not blessed be∣fore? Surely yes, Ye are the Blessed of the Lord (saith the Holy Ghost to persons yet or then alive, that feared the Lord) you, and your Children, Psal. 115.13, 15. and blessed is the man (whether alive or dead as to the body) that trusteth in the Lord or that
keepeth his Commandments, Psal. 34.8. and 112.1. But this word Henceforth, may be two ways referred, as was signified before; namely, either 1. To the word Blessed, the thing asserted of those that dye in the Lord, as if they that dye at any time in the Lord are thenceforth Blessed, even from the time of their Death, and then it is not said so to imply, they were not in a blessed way before, or in the way to Blessedness; But to imply that blessedness may rather, or more properly from that time be stiled theirs, as more actually and absolutely the subjects of it, they were rather but in the way to it before then injoyers of it, though being upright and perfect in the way they had the Bles∣sing of God with and upon them, and were blessed therein; but yet, as we said before, there was an If upon them, If they conti∣nue to the end, Col. 1.23. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and not be moved away from the hope of the Gospel. He that endures to the end shall be saved, Matth. 24.13. be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10. but if the righteous man (how long soever he hath been righteous, and how near so∣ever to the prize he be come) turn from his righteousness and commit iniquity he shall dye.
Ezek. 33.13, 18. There were some of the Israelites that held out till they were close by the borders of Canaan, till the Forti∣eth year of their March, and till they had seen the Conquest over the Amorites, and yet then committing Fornication with the Daughters of Moab, and eating the Sacri∣fices of the Dead, they perished and went not over Jordan; To admonish us, that though there is no fear or danger to the diligent and circumspect; yet it's dange∣rous at any time to grow remiss because a possibility at any time of a miscarriage till the field be wonne, the warfare be accom∣plished. And therefore our Saviour saith to his Disciples, Take heed least at any time (how near soever you be come to the Gaol) your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day come upon you unawares, for as a snare shall it come upon all those that dwell upon the face of the earth, watch ye there∣fore, and pray always, that ye may be ac∣counted worthy to escape all these things, and to stand before the Son of man, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. Sometimes a Ship that hath escaped the dangers of the Sea, may through carelesness sink and be lost at the entrance into the Harbour; but when in the Har∣bour then it's safe. It is so however here,
after Death there is no miscarriage. Hence∣forth (saith the Apostle, when ready to be offered up, and his departure was at hand) is laid up for me the crown of righ∣teousness, 2 Tim. 4.8. then their state is fixed; no passing or falling from Paradise again; when that's attained, no going thence to the place of Torment, Luke 16.26. Yea, they are thenceforth not onely more absolutely and assuredly blessed, but also, more fully as to attainment being then at home with Christ, as we said before, from the time of their Death and before the Resurrection. Though the fulness of their Blessedness is not till then, yet both a more full enjoyment is had from the time of their death then before (they go not to Purgatory then surely, for then after death their case would be sadder then before) and also a certainty of the enjoyment of that fulness in the time thereof. It is laid up in a sure and safe Custody to be given forth by a most faithful and righteous hand, yea, the word there in 2 Tim. 4.8. rendred, laid up, is the same that's used of Death and Judg∣ment in Heb. 9.27. and there translated, Appointed, so as we may say, that it is not more certainly Decreed that men Dye once and come to Judgement, then it is,
that they who finish their Course in the Lord and keep the Faith, shall receive the full and final reward of the Crown of Righteousness. 2. Or else the word (Henceforth) may have a peculiar respect to the times before mentioned, and to the Subject those that Dye in the Lord, with reference to the times in the rage of the Beast; when the greatest exercise shall be of the Saints pati∣ence, when their patience shall be admi∣rable patience indeed, and they that then abide will be eminently and to purpose keepers of Gods Commandments, and of the Faith of Jesus; from that time Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord, not as if they that indeed Dye in the Lord be∣fore! were not Blessed, but to signifie ei∣ther, 1. The great miseries that will attend those times through the oppression of An∣tichrist, that it will be a wonderful peril∣lous and calamitous time, so that it will be a great mercy to be well gone out of it, so as but to be and Dye in the Lord; yea, the sooner the better, like that in Eccles. 4.13 where the Wiseman considering the oppressions done under the Sun, and behold∣ing the tears of the oppressed, and that they had no Comforter, that on the oppressours side is
Power, but the oppressed have no Comforter; He praised the Dead that were already dead more then the living which were yet alive. This sense of the words suits well also with that reading, or Translation of the word that some judge the righter here, viz. that dye in the Lord speedily. And this may al∣so be so, because of what results from those Calamities. viz. 2. The great difficulty of holding fast the Faith and profession of it, and dan∣ger of falling from it that will then be, as our Saviour saith, When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Luke 18.8. truely in a sense, at other times men may dye in the Lord, that is, in an external Profession and acknowledg∣ment of him according to truth, crying, Lord, Lord, and yet not be blessed, not enter the Kingdom, being not indeed and heartily doers of Gods will; but it may be signified that Henceforth, from the time of the Beasts sore Rage, and the sad Persecutions thence ensuing, none shall be able to make a right profession of the Faith, so as to persevere to Death in it, but such as be indeed Saints and persons indued with singular patience, real and hearty keepers of Gods Commandments, and therefore all that dye in the profes∣sion
of the Faith then really Blessed and Happy. Or else also, 3: To signifie a more eminent degree of Blessedness to be the portion of those that then shall hold out so as to Dye in the Lord, a blessedness proportionable to that very sad wo and misery threatened to to the Beast-worshippers, vers. 9, 10, 11. after the Preaching of the Everlasting Go∣spel and downfal of Babylon declared, as those Beast-worshippers shall drink of the wine of the Wrath of God, poured out with∣out mixture into the Cup of his Indignati∣on, and shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the holy An∣gels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. And they have no rest day nor night. A most dreadful Sentence, able to deter any one from Worshipping him: On the other side here is a like excellent manner of Blessedness signified to be the portion of those that dye in the Lord, to allure the Servants of God, or any of the People to whom the Gospel is Preached to the worship of God, and constancy to Christ, against the Beast; that they that dye in the Lord shall upon their Death be blessed with a witness, more abundantly blessed, as the word Blessed, sometimes seems
to signifie; as in Rev. 20.6. for as it's an aggravation of sin when it is against light and warning, and brings the greater and severer judgment; whereas the times of ig∣noran God winks at, Acts 17.30, 31. Heb. 23; & 10.20, 29. So it's an aug∣mentation of Virtue to be good in the worst of times, and to cleave to God and Christ against the greatest discouragements and oppositions; and they that so do, shall receive the greater blessedness as their re∣ward. But we shall have occasion to Consider wherein they may be said to be more chief∣ly blessed, in speaking to the other part of the Text, viz. 2. The Confirmation of this truth asser∣ted, which is twofold, 1. By Authority. 2. By Argument and Evidence. 1. By Authority; The testimony of au∣thentick Witnesses is a good evidence of any matter of fact asserted, or of any mat∣ter whereof they have sufficient cognisance. Now here we have the Authority and Testimony of one that is as good as, yea better then ten thousand, even the Spirit, which is the Truth: Yea, saith the Spi∣rit.
By the Spirit, is meant the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Truth; for He is Emphatical∣ly The Spirit; and is divers times so cal∣led in this Book, as in Rev. 2. and 3. He is so called seven times, viz. in the close of every Epistle where it is said, Let him that hath an ear hear what the Spirit saith to the Churches. And in Chap 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And that he is a sufficient Witness to any thing he Saith and Testifies to, is evident in that 1. He is perfect in understanding and knowledge, being the Spirit of Wisdome, Ʋnderstanding, Counsel and Knowledge, Isa. 11.2. He that searcheth all things even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. There∣fore He cannot erre or mistake. And then 2. He the Spirit of Truth, Joh. 14.16, 17. yea, The truth; and therefore it is He that beareth witness to Christ and the things of him, 1 Joh. 5, 6. therefore he neither will nor can lie; for he is one with the Father, and with the Son, one God. And God cannot lie, deceive or falsifie; wic∣kedness and falshood are an abomination to him and to his lips, Prov. 8.7, 8. there∣fore every one that hath an ear may well hear, as he is bid, what he saith. And
he saith to this Assertion, Yea; did men onely say it, it might be questioned, and if they say otherwise now, it is no matter. All men are too prone to lie; but the Holy Spirit is to be firmely believed, because what ever he saith is pure and true. Now he in testifying of Christ in the Gospel witnesses nothing but Life to be in Christ, and to be the portion of those that believe in him, that the believer in him shall not perish whatever death come upon him, or what∣ever trouble; but shall have everlasting life; yea, in a sort he hath it, for he that hath the Son hath life, saith the Record which God gives us of his Son, 1 Joh. 5.11, 12. and in testifying of such as are righteous men and merciful, taken away and perish∣ing from among men in such an evil day when all the Beasts come to devour, he saith they enter into peace, and rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprighteousness, Isa. 56.9. & 57.1.2. that testimony the Holy Ghost that spake in the Prophets (and particularlarly in Isaiah, Acts 28.25) beareth. 2. By Demonstration, Argument and Evidence, evidencing in what they are bles∣sed, viz. That they may rest from their la∣bours and their works do follow them. Where∣in are two particulars.
First, that they may Rest from their Labours. Secondly, And their Works do follow them, or, follow with them. Wherein is implied, Note 1. That they that dye in the Lord (and especially from the time of the Beasts rage, and the great exercise of the Saints patience) have Labours and Services, that in the time of their life they are imployed in, indeed all things are full of Labour, man cannot utter it, Eccles. 1.8. and the Saints have their portion of Labours more especially in or in more especial manner of labours. There is a man whose Labour is in Wisdom, and in Knowledge, and E∣quity, Eccles. 2.21. and in such things the Saints and holy men do labour too, they labour in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. But here the word used, signifies a toilsome la∣bour; yea, as some note of it, a painful, wearisome, spending labour: Yea, some∣times variety of Tribulations, Calamities, and Crosses; so as sometimes to threaten Death. And so we find the word Labour often joyned with Toil, or words of Af∣fliction, as in Gen. 5.19. the Work and Toil of our hands, are joyned together, as Work and Labour here; and toyl of the hands may well answer to labour here, in
Gen. 31.42. Jacob saith, God hath seen my affliction and the labour of my hands; when he speaks of that troublesome labour, in which the Drought by day consumed him, and the Frost by night, and the sleep de∣parted from his eyes, vers. 40. And the like is used of the rigorous and afflictive Service and Labour which the Israelites were put to in Egypt, when they were made to grone under their Burthens, so as their lives were bitter with hard bondage in morter and brick, and in all manner of service in the field; when all their Service that they served was with rigour, Exod. 1.13, 14. with 2.24. Of this Moses in∣structs them to say, the Lord looked on our affliction, and on our labour and oppres∣sion, Deut. 26.7. and in Psal. 90.10. it's joyned with sorrows when it is said of men, that if by reason of strength we attain to fourscore years, yet then is our strength la∣bour and sorrow; where Labour cannot so properly signifie work and service, for a∣las then men are past that; but rather toil, and exercise as Solomon joyns together, Labour and vexation of heart, Eccles. 2.22. and Jeremiah complains. Wherefore came I out of the womb to see Labour and sorrow? Jer 20.18. And that which we read in the Text, Trouble, is in the Margin, accord∣ing
to the Hebrew, Labour, Job 5.7. And surely, especially in times of great Persecution, there is labour and sorrow more abundantly to exercise them, as both in Jeremiah's, and the time here spoken of. Yea, labour and business is generally, with exercise, grief, and trouble, the por∣tion here of them that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. 3.12. both in respect of civil and outward concerns for the bo∣dy; weaknesses, infirmities, sickness, pain: and in respect of the labours, griefs, and travails of the Soul for themselves and o∣thers; (temptations also from Sathan, per∣secutions from men, and much care and exercise of spirit) that they might obtain the grace and favour of God, with Christ and be found in him, and serve their ge∣neration according to his will. In which sense also, 2. Labour first goes before and then Eating, Rest or Reward follows after; no injoyment of the blessed state of Rest, but for the labourers, 1 Cor. 9.10. The hus∣bandman first labouring must be partaker of the fruits, 2 Tim. 2.6. Six days shalt thou labour, goes before the seventh is the Sal∣bath of the Lord thy God; the rest appointed by him, namely, for thee to rest in, Exod. 20.9.10. there is Labour that we may be found in
Christ, or be accepted of him whether pre∣sent or absent, 2 Cor. 5.9. and labour in the Lord to be performed and undergone 1 Cor. 15.58. Through much affliction we must enter the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. Service to God, and sufferings to be un∣dergone both for and from God; and the will of God in all to be done before we receive the Promise, the recompense of re∣ward, Heb. 10.35, 36. yea, and there must be faithfulness in this too to the Death, else no blessedness; they that endure temptation, and patiently continue in well doing, are the blessed that shall have Everlasting life, & receive the crown & king∣dom, Luke 22.28, 29, 30. Jam. 1.12. Rom. 2.7. But then it is spoken out plainly, that 3. They that endure and are faithful to the Death (and especially in such sad times of tryal) so as to dye in the Lord, they are blessed in this, that they Rest from their Labours God is a merciful & righteous God, and he hath prepared, and there remains a rest for his people, Heb. 4.9. He that would have a Sabbath or day of rest for Servants and Cattel now, one in every seven days, that they might rest, Deut 5.14. He will certainly give rest to his wearied, tired, toild People, Chil∣dren and Servants that have laboured and
had no rest here. He calls us to himself to give us rest for our Souls, and to give us rest too with himself from our Labours, Matth. 11.28, 29. and his rest is glori∣ous, Isa. 11.10 Rest from their sorrow and fear and hard Bondage wherein they were made to serve, saith Isaiah 14.3. Rest with the Apostles, when they that are at rest and ease here shall be disquiet∣ed, even the Inhabitants of Babylon and the Persecutors, 2 Thes. 1.5, 6, 7. with Jer. 50.34. then shall they receive their sad things in tribulation, that now trouble Sion, when the Beast-worshippers shall have no rest day nor night, then shall Christs faithful worshippers have perfect and per∣petual rest with Christ, Rev. 14.11, 13. yea, they that dye in the Lord thenceforth shall be herein especially blessed, as their labours and troubles thenceforth are great∣er and sharper, their dangers, fears, and griefs more abundant, now they shall be eased of them all, and by how much their Sufferings were sharper, and their Labour more toilsome and grievous, by so much will their Rest be more sweet and welcome, and the greater the blessing. Death in general puts an end to the ex∣ercises of this life, as well as to its enjoy∣ments to men whether they be good or bad,
as they be properly the exercises of this life, though not always as to the kind in general; they that joy in God here shall joy much more then, as to their spirits; and they that fear and grieve in their con∣sciences for fear of Hell here; dying in their sins shall much more fear, and feel horrour in their Consciences then. But as to bodily Pains, and the Fears and Labours of this Life and pertaining thereto, Death puts an end to them, both to good and bad; but yet not so to the Wicked as to give them rest, or make them therein bles∣sed, they being reserved by it as in a Pri∣son unto far worse miseries afterward; and tormented at the present with restless∣ness and fears or horror not having Christ to be their rest: But they that dye in the Lord are generally at rest. And as to be out of and at rest from greater sorrows and sufferings is more desirable, welcome, and beneficial, then to be out of smaller: so they that from that time dye in the Lord, shall be in their resting from their labours more happy and blessed then others. But all that dye in the Lord, in the proper sense before explicated, enter into this rest: for they are at home in Gods presence, and his presence will give them rest, Philip. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.8. Exod. 33.14. then the Soul
shall have rest in its Husbands house, as was prayed for, for Ruth, Ruth 2.9. then the Body rests in the dust from its Pains Weaknesses, and Afflictions, and Labours Job 3.13, 17. & 17.16. and the spirit en¦ters more fully into peace, Isa. 57.2. and it is said to these Souls, That they must rest a little while till the time of their Brethrens sufferings also be accomplished, Rev. 6.11. Yea the whole man, though parted asun∣der Soul from Body, rests in safety not hearing any more the voice of the oppressour, nor assaulted by the tempter, Job 3.18. & 11.18. the small and the great rest there, and the Servant is free from his Master, Job 3.19. Yea, the end of the Adversi∣ty and Affliction they have here, is, that they may rest then from it till the pit be digged for the ungodly, Psal. 94.12, 13. They rest from their Labours. 2. And their works follow them, or, fol∣low with them. These Works are something distinct from their Labours; their Labours had Pain, Sorrow, and soil, like to the Labour of a Woman in Travail, that hath sorrow because her hour is come, Joh. 16 21. and their toil and pain proceeds partly from their own infirmity, partly from the bondage to corruption under which the whole Creation
grones, the Curse upon the Earth, Gen. 5.29. Rom. 8 20, 21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. partly from the Badness, Wickedness, and Oppressiveness of the World, and ma∣lice of Sathan, Gal. 1.4. Exod. 1.13, 14. Rev. 2.10. But their works are as the fruits of those Labours, the Man-child brought forth as it were, the things done by them in the body, the fruits or works meet for repentance, 2 Cor. 5.10. Philip. 1.22. Matth. 3.8. with Acts 26.20. and these they have (with all their strength and courage to endure the labour attend∣ing them) from Jesus Christ, that root of David, in whom they are ingraffed, root∣ed, and grow, Rev. 22.16. Col. 2.7. He is the green Fir-tree from whom all their fruits are found, Hos. 14.8. the true Vine of whom they are Branches, and from whom (they abiding in him and his Word in them) they derived such sap and juice, vertue and spirit as made them bring forth much good fruit, so as the Father (the good Husbandman) is therein glorified, Joh. 15.1, 4, 5, 8. being and trusting in him, and making him their hope, they were like trees planted by the waters side, bringing forth their fruit in season, Jer. 15, 7, 8. though we are justified by Faith without the works of the Law, yet we are justi∣fied
too by Works and not by Faith only, Gal. 2.16. Jam. 2.24. not by a Faith with∣out works, but by a Faith that worketh by Love, Gal. 5.6. the believing, in which we receive the forgiveness of sins and are justified to life, is not a bare speculation of, or assent to, the Opinion or Doctrine of Truth resting in the brain; nor so far one∣ly affecting the Heart as to ease it of, and quiet it from, its griefs and fears; but it is such a believing as is to the saving of the Soul, Heb. 10.39. even to the saving it from the power of sin and Sathan, as well as in other respects. Such a perswasion of the truth of Gods testimony, and so that Jesus is the Son of God and Saviour of the World, and that all that the Pro∣phets and Apostles have delivered concern∣ing him, and the grace in and by him is true; as wherein the heart is so affected with him, and drawn to him, as that it saith of him, He is my rock, and my for∣tress, my God in whom I will trust: So as it comes to him for all direction and gui∣dance, Grace and blessing, and yield up it self to him, to obey and follow him in a confident expectation therein of meeting with his promised Salvation and Blessing. And where with the heart a man so belie∣veth it is to righteousness, and will not be
barren & destitute of the fruits of righteous∣ness; or of the works of righteousness, piety, charity, & all goodness, Heb. 11.13. Psal. 91 2. Joh. 6.35, 37. Rom. 10.9, 10 2 Pet. 1.9, 10, 11. And these works, in Death and when dead follow them, or follow with them, so as they shall be rewarded of God, for God is not unrighteous to forget their work and labour of love, Heb. 6.10. nei∣ther labour nor work shall be forgotten, their labour shall not be in vain in the Lord who tells their wandrings, puts their tears in his Bottle, and keeps account of them in his Book, 1 Cor. 15.58. Psal. 56.8. and their work shall be rewarded, Jer. 31.16. And that 1. In some sort at the time of thier de∣parture hence, and in their separated state, in that they have in their Consciences the joy and comfort of their Works, and com∣fortable assurance of further reward in the day of the glorious Appearance of the Lord Jesus; their works are now estima∣ted of God and laid up in his treasures: laid up, as it were, with them, and to∣gether with them to be brought forth to open view in the day of Christs glorious appearing. And the Reward is also laid up, reserved and unalterably appointed for them; as was before noted from 2 Tim. 4.8.
so that they not onely have hope in their Death, but also after their Death there is a Separation of them from others according to their Works; so as that whereas others are cast into Prison; and reserved, as it were, in Chains of Darkness against the Judgment of the great Day, the wicked is reserved to the day of Destruction, and they shall be brought forth to the day of Wrath, when the Heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against him, and his way shall be declared to his face and he shall be repayed what he hath done. Job 21.30, 31. & 20.27. these that dye in the Lord are at rest and safe for e∣ver quiet from the fear of evil, being out of the reach henceforth of Sathan and all his instruments, and whatsoever may trou∣ble or disquiet them; they that can kill the Body, and it may be have killed theirs, have no more now that they can do to them, their sorrow and sighing is for e∣ver past; and they are comforted in Pa∣radise and in Abrahams bosome while others are tormented, Luke 16.25. for they are in Paradise with Christ, as Christ said to the Malefactor that confessed him, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise, Luke 23 43 Their Soul or Spirit dies not (as some hold) with the Body, but returns to
God, into whose hands they commit it, as they pray him to receive it, so he doth receive it too, Eccles. 12.7. Psal. 31.5. & 49 15. Acts 7.59. Philip. 1.23. Yea, they may be understood to be those that stand with the Lamb upon mount Sion, and that sing the new song with the me∣lody of Harps unto God, which no man else can learn, they being in a more full and proper sense redeemed from the Earth and from among men then any yet here living, and as to those that suffer and dye in the Lord from henceforth; from the time of the Beasts rage when there will be the most remarkable time of the Saints patience, at the time (probably) when the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit slays the Witnesses which is his last act, his part∣ing blow, the ending part of his Rage, Chap. 11.7. (which Chapter takes in all the time from the first to the last) that singing with Harps may denote their special trium∣phant Blessedness; which agrees with what is said in Chap. 7. where there is the same number of the Sealed; and where it is said, that they that came out of great (or as the words may be rendered the great) tribulation were arayed in white robes, having washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb; where the
white Robes doubtless are emblems of some Great Priestly or Kingly dignity, as is implied in Chap. 3.4.5. such as is men∣tioned Chap. 5.10. & 20.6. and as is im∣plied in what follows, when it is said, There∣fore are they before the Throne of God night and day in his Temple (as the Beast-wor∣shippers are tormented and have no rest day nor night, Chap. 18.11) and he that sit∣teth on the Throne dwelleth among them, they shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, or any heat; for the Lamb who is in the midst of them shall feed them, and shall lead them to the Fountains of living waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Chap. 7.13, 17. Let me add this upon this quotation that it may appear that those Learned and Re∣verend men that appointed that seventh Chapter or part of it, to be read on the day dedicated to the Memory of All Saints, surely understood those things to be ap∣plicable to the Deceased Saints that dyed in the Lord: But yet their great and proper reward is, 2. Fully at the day of the Appearing again of the Lord Jesus, at that day the Crown of Righteousness henceforth from the time of Departure laid up, shall be given to all
that love and look for that his Appear∣ance, 2 Tim. 4.8. The Son of man our Lord Jesus shall then when he comes in the glory of his Father with all his holy An∣gels, reward every man according to his works, Matth. 16 27. Rev. 22.12. and then their Reward shall be great and glorious indeed, and gloriously manifested; for then them that sleep in him will God bring with him, the Dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Thes. 4.14, 16. not in mortal bodies to labour and travail again, but their mortal then shall put on immortality, and their corruptible shall put on incorruption, and what was sown in dishonour shall rise in glory, and what in weakness shall rise in power: and what was sown a natural body shall rise a spiritu∣al body, fashioned into the likeness of Christs glorious body, 1 Cor. 15.43, 44, 53. Phil. 3.21. and then they shall have no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying nor pain, for all those former things shall be wholly past, Rev. 21.4. no nor shall they have any thing of errour, ignorance, or cor∣ruption, nor of fear or grief in their mind, or inward man, but they shall then know as they are known, and see face to face, and be made like to Christ seeing him as he is. 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. 1 Joh. 3.2. Then they shall appear in glory with Christ, Col. 3.
3, 4. having fellowship with him, and him ever amongst and with them, and God i and with him, 1 Cor. 1.9. 2 Thes. 2.14 & 1 Thes. 4.16. Rev. 21.3. injoying the new Heavens and the new Earth wherei dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.14. and the new Jerusalems glory which comes down from out of heaven, having the glory of God and her light like to a stone most precious, like a Jasper stone clear as Chrystal, Rev. 21.10, 11. eating and drinking with Christ at his Table in his Kingdom, Luke 22.29, 30. injoying the incorruptible Inheritance that is undefiled and fadeth not away, 1 Pet. 1 4. and the incorruptible Crown of Life, Righteousness and Glory which he hath pro∣mised to them that love him, 1 Cor. 9.25. 2 Tim. 4.8. James 1.12. even the King∣dome and glory of God and of Christ, where∣in they shall have the fulness of joy and plea∣sures for evermore at his right hand; and see his face and have his Name in their foreheads, and have an everlasting happy day without any night the Lord himself and the Lamb being their everlasting Light, and they shall reign for ever and ever, Matth. 25.35. Dan. 7.27. 1 Pet. 5.10 Psal. 16.11. & 36.8, 9, 10. Isa. 60.19, 20. Rev. 22.3, 4, 5. Which thing I onely here mention, ha∣ving
more particularly spoken something to them in my Book called Balaam's wish. O Happy, happy, and thrice happy porti∣on of those that be so dead! So much for the Explication and open∣ing of the words. Let us now Apply it briefly. Application. 1. ANd first, it tends wonderfully to commend and magnifie the Lord Jesus to us, who makes those that are in him even so happy in Death; He being the Root and well-spring of all the Happiness and Blessedness injoyed, or injoyable by the Saints and holy ones either in this Life or in and after Death; or at and after the Resurrection of the Dead: Well may we then joyn our assent to that Song of or in the kingdom, that Song of the Elders (mentioned by our Deceased Sister on her Death-bed) and say, [Thou art worthy to open the Book, and unloose the Seals of it; for thou wast slain and hast Redeemed us to God by thy Blood, &c] as also to that of the Angels that follows, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdome and strength and honour, and glory, and blessing, Rev. 5.9, 12. magnifying also the Riches of the love and grace of God, even the Father in appointing and giving him forth to us, and so filling him through Death and Suf∣ferings, with all his own unspeakable ful∣ness, that he might be the Authour of such Blessedness to us; and so we may also joyn our assent to that of every Creature in Hea∣ven and Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that is in them, saying, Blessing, Honour, Glory and Power be to him that sitteth upon the Throne and to the Lamb for ever and ever, Rev. 5.13. and to that of the innumerable number out of all Nations, Kindreds, Peo∣ples and Tongues standing before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and having Palms in their hands, viz. Salvation to our God which sit∣teth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, Chap. 7.9.10. 2. To commend and set forth the excel∣lency and desireableness of the state of those that are in Christ Jesus and abide in him, that they however despised and abused of men, are the happiest men in the world, their portion better than any other mens, the Heritage of Jacob to be preferred before
all the enjoyments of the great Princes of the Earth, Isa. 58.14. So as it may well be said, the righteous (they that are in Christ Jesus, walking not after the Flesh but after the Spirit) are more excellent then their neighbours, Prov. 12.26. however Poor, Meane, Illiterate, Afflicted and De∣spised the Righteous be; And however Rich, Learned, Honoured, or otherwise adorned and qualified their neighbours, that be not righteous, are. Yea, well it may be said, Happy art thou O Israel, a People saved by the Lord the shield of their help, and sword of their Excellency; thine ene∣mies shall be found lyars to thee, and thou shalt tread upon (as despising) their high place, Deut. 33.29. O Lord of hosts: bles∣sed is the man that putteth his trust in thee, Psal. 84.12: Blessed at all times, blessed in Life, more blessed in Death, but most blessed in and after the Resurrection of the Dead. 3. To commend Piety and Godliness, and the exercise thereof to us, which hath the Promise of all this great blessedness, both of the life that now is, and that that is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. & 6.6. 4. To condemn the blind judgment and practice of the world, that sleight, hate, and persecute these things, accounting those
that are and that dye in Christ (especially in a way of persecution) to be unhappy and their portion despicable; which things I onely mention: But besides
5. It directs us whither to flee for shel∣ter and refuge against the fears, and feelings, horrours, and harms of Death the King of Terrours, namely to Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath both abolished or destroyed its destructive power by his Death, and de∣stroyed him that had the power of it, the Devil, 2 Tim. 1.10. Heb. 2.14. and also hath the keys of Hell and Death, Power, and full Authority over it, and over the dead, having dyed, rose and revived that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living, Rom. 14.19. as he hath that sharp Sickle in his hand, so he can cut off with it high or low, rich or poor; and he can keep it off or back during his pleasure, and or∣der the state of it, and the persons in it as seems good in his sight. And in him there is deliverance from the horrour and harms of it; as he is the forgiver of the sins, both that occasioned it, and that might render it as an inlet into a worser state then it sim∣ply of it self containeth, and hath both Authority (and proclaims himself ready graciously to do it) even both to raise out of it, and in the interim to secure from harm and mischiefs by it; yea, and to make it greatly useful and advantagious to us, to make the day of it better then the day wherein we were born, Eccles. 7.1. a Chamber of ease, rest and safety to us from the evils either fore-afflicting us, or further threatening, and abiding the yet dwellers on the Earth, or abiders in the land of the li∣ving, Isa. 26.20. & 57.2. an outlet to our cares, fears, labours and temptations to sin, or toils by such temptations; and an inlet, safe Port, or entrance into peace, and security the end of our exile and banish∣ment, and beginning of our actual admis∣sion in our spirits into our Fathers presence, and glorious fruition of our blessed Saviour that wonderful one, the unparall'd lover of our Souls; and Paragon and Pattern of all divine and heavenly vertue and excellency; the Lamb that had mercy on us, and dyed, rose again and lives for ever for us, the Lord Jesus. He is that Sun that shining into our hearts the light of the knowledge of him∣self, and of the glory of God in him; and being believingly beheld by us, will drive out and expel all that darkness of our ig∣norance and errour that in the night of our unbelief obscures our minds and fills us with frightful fears of Death and its con∣sequents, and chases away all those mists
and vapours arising out of the muddines, of our hearts, to the sadding us at the thoughts of its approches; and by his warming influences (as streaming forth by his Holy Spirit in the Gospel the beams of his love and favour in the forgiveness of our sins, and interesting us in his Righ∣teousness, and precious promises of bles∣sing and everlasting Life and Happness, and so the lively hope of his Salvation and Glory to be injoyed by us) he can and will so chear and comfort us, as to make the grim visage of Death amiable to us, and the passage through it very desirable. Philip. 1.21, 22, 23. yea and give us hope and joy in Death, as the best hour that ever came upon us. And he is that (and such a) shield too, that encompassing us about with his favour and defence, inter∣posing himself between us and our enemies, even Death and all its train and power, secures us against their fiercest assaults and sharpest darts, being the Death of Death, the Destruction of the Grave and Hell, Hos. 13.14. we being in him, and incompassed about with his arms of love, nothing shall be able to approch us to hurt or harm us. He is such a Fountain of living waters that whosoever drinks of him (receiving his Doctrine into his heart, and retaining and
keeping it there) shall not die of thirst; Such a Heavenly Medicine (being Gods Salvation or saving health) that whosoever takes him down and tastes the sweetness of his Love, and Grace, and keeps it, or the relish of it upon his palace, shall not taste Death, Joh. 4.14. & 8.51, 52. Yea, those Waters he gives, and the Medicine he af∣fords, will spring up and effect in the re∣ceiver and taker down thereof, Life in Death, even Eternal Life. The Tree of Life that was in the first Paradise, and which being eaten of, would have preserved the life of Man for ever is lost, and there is no recovering it again, Gen. 3.22, 23, 24. Nor can all the Physicians in the world find out or compose a Medicine that can keep us from Dying. But our Lord Jesus Christ, and his heavenly Wisdome and Do∣ctrine is that Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God; that Sovereign An∣tidote of Gods own finding out, making, and propounding, which being eaten and taken down, will secure us against all the Poison of the old Serpent; the evil of this natural Death, and carry us safely through it, and bring us certainly out of it to im∣mortality and eternal Life, Prov. 3.18. Rev. 22.2, 3, 14. He will both make the Soul live and be happy in Death and raise
up the Body to an immortal state of bliss, Isa 55.3. Joh. 11.25, 26. 2 Cor. 4.14. In vain do men weary themselves and spend their Estates to find out a Philoso∣phers stone that may turn all things into Gold. Here is that true Elixir that will turn all to Good; and as he hath recon∣ciled all things in himself that are in Hea∣ven, and that are in Earth, Col. 1.20. so will he reconcile all things to us, and make them ours and for us, destroying that in all things, and all those things and persons that are inflexibly against us. Thence the Apostle saith, We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them that are his called according to purpose, Rom. 8.28. and all things are yours (for your use, service or benefit) whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and you are Christs, and Christ is Gods. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Death is in the Believers Inventory as a parcel of his Goods, as one of his Servants or Friends; yea, and all things too that shall follow after it: For all the ways or paths of the Lord are mercy and truth to them that keep his testimonies and his Cove∣nants, Psal. 25.10. There shall no evil
happen to the just, Prov. 12.21. He that keepeth the Commandments shall feel no evil thing. Eccles. 8.5. O infinitely precious Jewel and Pearl of great price, the Bread which came down from heaven, which whoso eats of, shall live for ever, Joh. 6.50, 51. But yet the being of this Refuge doth not of it self simply secure us against the hurts of Death, they that neglect it shall perish without escape, however good, safe, and sure a Defence it is, and affords. Heb. 2.3. Death will do them this hurt (as we have forenoted) that it will shut them out from all ways and passages to the after-life; it will cut off all further opportuni∣ties of seeking for safety in, or injoying safety by or from this refuge. This Anti∣dote will not preserve from fears or harms of Death, unless both taken and kept with∣in our hearts. This Elixir will not turn all to gold or good, unless injoyed by us or duly applyed. This Sun will not shine on us to expel our darkness, and refresh and chear us, unless we be and walk in the light and virtue of it; nor this Shield de∣fend and secure us against Deaths harmful darts, no nor from (what is indeed the Dreadful thing) the second Death, unless it be about us, and we, as it were, with∣in its compass; no, nor will any thing or
person else do it besides him: For God the Father is in him, and not to be ap∣proched to, or his favour injoyed, but in and by him, Joh. 14.6, 7. Nor is the Spi∣rit but upon him, or any other ways to be injoyed, then by turning at his Reproofs to believe in and obey him, Prov. 1.23. Joh. 14.15, 16, 17. Acts 5.32. neither is there Salvation in any other Name beside, his that was Crucified for us and Dyed for our sins, and Rose again for our justi∣fication, under heaven, whereby we may be saved. Acts 4.11.12. The Law and its deeds cannot justifie and save us; for by it is the knowledge, not the forgiveness of sins, Rom. 3.20. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, it is onely righteousness delivers from death, Prov. 11.4. nor will our works or righteousness that are not of the Faith of him profit us, Isa. 57.12. Philip. 3.8, 9. for they that are of the works of the Law are also under the curse, Gal. 3.10, 11, 12. and works of our own devising are of no worth with God, Matth. 15, 9.10. Nay, Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, cannot save us, because not Crucified for us; nor have they that Name into which we may be Baptized for the Remission of our sins and receipt of the Holy Ghost, to renew and regenerate us, and so by con∣sequence,
not any other man. 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. the wise Virgins Oyl will not relieve the foolish Virgins that have none of their own, Matth. 25.8, 9. The just shall live by his, not another mans faith, Hab. 2.4. and therefore there is (as we have also shewed before) an absolure necessity of our being in Christ, that we may have this blessedness by him in and after Death. Unless we be in Christ Jesus, He is not made to us of God, as to our enjoyment thereof, wisdom, righteousness, sanctificati∣on, and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30. The Ark saved none from perishing by the Flood, but those that were in it; nor will Christ save from the second Death or, give blessing in this to any out of him, He that hath not the Son hath not Life, though that Life be given us in him that it might in receiving him be received with him. 1 Joh 5.11, 12. The Feast, though prepared and invited to, satisfied not its refusers; but they were excluded and cut off from all they had beside, for refusing it, Luke 14.24. Matth. 22.4, 7. yea, and being come into, he must be abide in too, so as to Death and in Death, else we yet perish. He that draws back, Gods Soul will have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. A Castle though never so strong will
not secure from the potent and vigilant e∣nemy, him that either comes not into it, or after he hath been in it, upon any terms forsakes it. And this is useful further, 6. To invite and provoke us all with all earnestness and diligence to betake our selves to Christ this refuge, and being in him, to abide in him; to live and dye in him, and by no means neglect or for∣sake him. Enter into this rock and hide our selves in the dust of the earth, even in the dust of his Death, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, Isa. 2.10. Psal. 22.14. Death will come upon us sooner or later, that cannot be avoided, nothing more certain; yea, it may come suddenly upon the youngest and strongest of us; for nothing more uncertain then the time of its coming, for surely every man in his best state is altogether vanity, Psal. 39.5. and though of it self it will not hurt us, nor shall we perish in it, but be raised up again from thence: Yet our re∣taining our sins, and refusing or neglecting to be washed and renewed, and so to be partakers of Gods Salvation, that will ex∣pose us to, and pull upon as a second Death; yea, and this Death will put an end to all possibility of escaping that, and be an entrance into that dreadful Prison,
in which the Debter and Malefactor will be kept safe till the great Assises, and then the Execution of the Eternal Judgment will succeed. Now is the accepted time; now the time of escape, and this the way to es∣cape; to be found in Christ. O then how doth it behove and concern every man to look about him, and give diligence with the Apostle, to win Christ, and be found in him, not having our own righteousness, but that which is by the Faith of him. Object. But may some say, Can we make our selves in Christ? can we enter into him as we will? can any come to Christ except the Father that sent him, draw him? Is it not of God that any man is in Christ Jesus and not of himself? why then do you call upon us to this, as if in our power? Answ. We do not suppose that any man can of himself come to, or make him∣self in Christ Jesus. Nor do we call upon any to do so of himself; they that make Salvation and Damnation the most absolute∣ly matters of meer Destiny; doe not they also (yea who more) call upon men to get into Christ; labour to be found in Christ; And yet they tell men, that onely
a certain number that must come and be irresistably brought into him, can pos∣sibly come into him. Others (say some of them) are as much necessitated to pe∣rish through the defects of Gods actings, or his non-actings, as those that must come are necessitated to live through his effects; witness Dr. K. answer to Mr. Goodwin. These indeed are harsh Taskmasters like Pharaoh, that required the tale of Brick, but gave them not materials necessary for their performance; Nay, worse then he, for there was Straw to be had for their seek∣ing it and gathering it; onely they had not time enough to do that and fulfil their tale of Brick too. But these tell them there is no sufficient Grace for them; not be∣cause the grace in Christ is not sufficient, but because it is not for them. So another known Authour that I forbear to name, and yet these say too, men must be con∣demned for not coming to Christ and belie∣ving in him. But to the Objection I say, Both that the way into Christ is open for all (Psal. 100.1, 4.) and that it is the work of God to make a man in Christ, and it is a work he is ready and desirous to work; and to that purpose he calls men to Christ in and by his voice in his Gospel, in and with
which he is both preventing men with grace bringing Salvation, and is drawing them and taking off the yoke from their jaws, and laying meat before them, that they might come to him, Hos. 11.4. Tit. 2.11. and in their yielding up to him he works there∣by in them, and brings them into him, and makes them in him Doth not wisdome cry! doth not understanding put forth her voice, Prov. 8.1. Can that be denyed? and to whom? she cryeth without, and utters her voice in the streets, she crieth in the chief places of concourses, in the opening of the gates, coming in at the doors, and in the city she uttereth her voice, Turn ye at my reproofs, Prov. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. & 8, 2, 3. To you, O men (saith she) I call, and my voice is to the sons of men, indefinitely; yea, to the simple, and those that have no understanding, vers. 4. and Chap. 94. she bids Look to me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, Isa. 45.22. The migh∣ty God, the Lord calls and hath called the earth from the rising of the Sun to the go∣ing down of the same, Psal. 50.1. And what saith Wisdom, or the Lord by her, O ye simple, understand wisdom, and ye fools be ye of an understanding heart, Prov. 8.5. She saith not, Make your selves wise and understanding, but as one onely able
and furnished for doing it, she bids them onely be made so by her, and to that pur∣pose, Hear and receive her instruction, &c. vers. 6.10, 32, 33. as elsewhere, Be ye converted. Acts 3.21. Be ye reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. and divers the like. And by her Voice and Instruction (which is origi∣nally Gods Voice and Instruction, the Fa∣ther is drawing men to Christ, and every one that hears and learns of the Father cometh unto him) Joh. 6.44, 45. there he is putting forth his hand, and that not an empty or idle hand, but operative and graciously bountiful, as knowing our weak∣ness and poverty, Prov. 1.24. Isa. 65.2. and thence calls to us to give our hands to him; yield our selves to, and comply with him, by the help of his hand to enter into his Sanctuary and serve him; as Hezekiah said, 2 Chron. 30.8. comparing the mar∣ginal (which is after the Hebrew) read∣ing with the Text. And thence the Pro∣phet complains, There is none that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee, Isa. 64.7. as implying Gods nighness and preventing us with strength; but mans laziness and stubbornness in refusing to use the Talent given, or put forth the strength afforded, putting his hand into his bosom, and re∣fusing to pull it out, and give or yield it to
in complyance with the Lord. The same nighness of God to us and his graciousness is implyed in our Saviours saying, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, If any man hear my voice and open to me, I will come in to him, &c. Rev. 3.20. And in the A∣postles exhorting not to receive the grace of God in vain, because he saith, in an ac∣cepted time have I heard thee, in the day of salvation I have succoured thee, now is the accepted time, now is the day of salva∣tion. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. thence God faults mens wills, Ye will not come to me, saith Christ, that ye might have life. Joh. 5.40. and Why will ye dye. Ezek. 33.11. and I would have gathered, but ye would not, Matth. 23.37. Now which shall we be∣lieve, God, or man? God lays fault on mans will, for their wilfulness when he pre∣vents them, and is at hand to help them, that they might come to Christ; and men, too many, lay the fault on Gods will, and say in effect, God will not, and meerly be∣cause he will not give them grace that they might; the Lord puts the fault in men, and saith their destruction is of themselves, Hos. 23.9. and men put the fault in God, and say in effect, their destruction is of him, as it is said, The foolishness of a man per∣verts his way, and then his heart frets a∣gainst the Lord, Prov. 19.3. The sloth∣ful man saith, There is a Lion in the way, I shall be slain in the streets, Prov. 22.13. not because there is much danger in∣deed, but as an excuse for his sloth, he ingages his heart to some corrupt interest, and then saith for excuse, I have married a wife, I cannot come. Luk. 14.20. It is true the Apostle saith, It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth; but of God that sheweth mercy, Rom 9.16. and the same have I said in this that I have here said; but he saith not, it is not to him that willeth, nor to him that runneth in the strength and incouragement given of God in his mercy; for that would cross what our Saviour in effect saith in Matth. 7  7, 8. when he saith, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you: for every one that asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. Enq. But what shall or must I do then that God may bring me into Christ, and make him to me, Wisdom, Righ∣teousness, &c.
Answer. Comply with his Calls and Counsels turning at his Reproofs. Prov. 1.23. & 4.10. Hear, and thy soul shall live. Isa. 55.3. He bids repent and believe the Gospel. Mark 1.15. And I say so too, repent of these vain excuses and put them away, repent of minding other things and neglecting the Gospel, and Gods salvation therein, that God having given Christ for thee and holding him forth to thee; and Christ having giving himself for thee (for it was for all men. 1 Tim. 2.6.) and made peace and atonement through his Blood, and being filled with all the fulness of God, and calling thee by his Gospel, and standing ready upon thy compliance to help and save thee, to pardon thee and give thee his holy Spirit, admit thee into his favour and protection, and make an ever∣lasting Covenant with thee; yet thou let∣test him stand without knocking, and dost not take him into thee, nor yield thy hand to him to be taken in to him, but runnest away from God thy Saviour after lying va∣nities; after the World, and the Flesh, and the Devil; after pride and Covetousness, and the like; labourest for the bread that perisheth, and refusest to seek and labour in listening to, and following thy Saviour, for that bread that endureth to everlasting
life that he would give thee. Repent of this thy carriage, and so also of seeking Gods favour by any works or ways of thine own or other mens proposing, and not by and in listening to him. Repent of these and all other like things, and believe and obey the Gospel. But be sure it be the Gospel thou believest, not what any (though an Angel) saith contrary to or beside the Gospel. Gal. 1.6, 9. Not those doctrines of men, That God hath rejected the most men absolutely before they were born, and is not willing they should be saved, contrary to 1 Tim. 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. that Christ Dyed not for all, but only an Elect number, contrary to 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Tim. 2 6. Heb. 2.9. 1 Joh. 2, 2. and the like do∣ctrines, and so all such as deny the Person, Satisfaction, Resurrection or Mediation of Christ, his Personal appearance, the Resur∣rection of the Dead, the last Judgment, and the like. Repent, and believe the Gospel. If thou sayest, How canst thou believe? Is not Faith the gift of God? I answer. Yes; and he gives it in a sober and diligent hearing of his Word, not wilfully closing the eye and stopping the ear, and hardening the heart against him, Rom. 10.17. Gal. 3.2. In∣cline thine ear then and hearken unto him,
Hear and thy soul shall live. Isa. 55.3. yea, while it is said, (or called) to day, if thou wilt hear his voice, harden not thy heart, and thou shalt hear and live, onely obey in hearing as he enables thee and is in the power of his light and truth by his Spirit working in thee to will and to do of good pleasure. Work thou out in his working thine own salvation with fear and trembling, Philip. 2.12, 13. doing all things without murmuring or disputing. vers. 14. putting away and not wilfully retaining what he reproves, and yielding thy self to God to fol∣low his counsels and instructions; waiting up∣on him is his wayes, and looking to him and calling upon him as he enables thee for his help; and thou shalt be saved. Be but willing to this, Consent and Obey; and though thou hast been, or hitherto art as bad as one of the Rulers of Sodom, or as the people of Gomorrha, thou shalt eat the fruit of the land, the promised land. Thy scarlet sins shall be white like snow, and thy crimson sins like wooll, Isa. 1.10, 18, 19. Be but as industrious in minding and following after the Gospel and after God and Christ as drawing, instructing, and strengthening thee, as thou hast been, and others are for the World, and for their corrupt desires and lusts, and thou mayest lay hold on
Eternal life, Prov. 2.1, 5. 1 Tim. 6.11, 12. This is the sum of the instructions given by the Apostle James, when having affirmed that every good gift, and every perfect giving, comes from above, from the Father of Lights with whom there is no variableness or shadow of turning, and that of his own will begat he them by the word of truth, that they might be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures. He adds and infers, Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath, and laying apart all filthi∣ness and superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness the ingraffed word which is able to save our souls; but be ye doers of the word and not hearers onely, James 1.17, 18, 21, 22. But then it is to be minded too, that ha∣ving begun to doe thus, it in neccesary to go on and to continue in so doing; abid∣ing in Christ, minding and believing the Gospel, and obeying it and him in and by it; and exercising our selves to believe on him, and following after him that we may know him more and more, and so be more rooted and grounded in and uni∣ted with him, walking in him according to our receipt of him, and taking heed of what might turn us out of the way of under∣standing. As of
1. High-mindedness, as if we were rich enough, and knew and had attained enough already. Prov 16.18. 2. Sloth, and what principles tend to that, and to high mindedness, Such as That, that if we have once believed aright we can∣not, whatever we may do, totally and fi∣nally miscarry, Prov. 19.15. 1 Cor. 10.12. 3. Taking offence at either Gods ways and providences, Psal. 73.2, 3, 12, 13, 14. Or at those that fear God, so as to break Communion with them, lest forsaking the Assemblies and sitting alone we grow hard∣ned through the deceitfulness of sin, and for want of right exhortation and provo∣cation to cleave to God, withdraw from him through an evil heart of unbelief. Heb. 3.12, 13. & 10, 24, 26, 29. or else we fall into the snares of such as would seduce us: against which things the minding and de∣lighting in Gods Law will secure us, Psal. 119.165. and hereto also it's good and needful to pluck out the right eye where it offends and cast it from us; for in fellow∣ship and unity with the fearers of God, God doth command his blessing and life for evermore, Psal 133.13.4. Eccles. 4.9.10, 11. Take heed too
4. Of the Love of the World and of the things in the world, and of whatsoever do∣ctrine or practice may corrupt us from the simplicity in and single cleaving to Christ Je∣sus, 1 Joh. 2.15, 18. 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. I enlarge not to these things, nor add any other lest I be volumnious. 7. Whereas we may be tempted to grow Weary, by reason of the many Afflicti∣ons, Troubles, Temptations, and Toilsom∣ness to the Flesh that we may meet with in the way of God and of godliness, and especially in times and cases of Persecutions; here it also incouragement to patience, not only because Christ hath faithfully promised to be with his followers in their sufferings and services to help them, as is said, Isa. 41.10, 13, 14 and that in the taking courage and not cowardly desponding and laying down our resolutions and endeavours to walk with God, but waiting upon him, he will strengthen our hearts, Psal. 27.14. & 31.24. Yea, and is faithful and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the temptation give an issue that we may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.13. but also from this here pro∣posed after the mention of the patience and constancy of the Saints in faith and obedi∣ence. viz. The Blessed state of the dead
that dye in the Lord, that they then rest from their Labours, and shall receive a good Reward, Hold we fast therefore the profession of the Faith without wavering; knowing that we shall have such a Rest and Recompence; and that we have need of patience, that after we have done the will of God we may receive the Promise And yet a little while and He that shall come will come and will not tarry. Heb. 10.23, 35, 36, 37. let us not for want of a little longer hold∣ing on our way, and induring Affliction, loose so sweet a Rest and so wondrous a Blessedness as is in Christ Jesus set before us. Remember we, and be warned by Sauls example, who for want of a little more patience, an hour or two longer tar∣rying for Samuel, lost his Kingdom, 1 Sam. 10 8. & 13.8, 9, 10, 12, 13. Behold we and learn of the Husbandman, who waiteth for the precious fruits of the earth and hath long patience for it until be receive the for∣mer and the latter rain; and be we also patient in seeking and waiting for the bles∣sing of Heaven: stablish we our hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, James 5.7, 8. O that our eye may be so upon the blessed and glorious Rest to be injoyed by us at Night, as that we may in∣dure the heat, and burthen of the Day, or
of that little small part of it that yet remains 8. And then here is a motive and In∣couragement too, to diligence in the work and service of the Lord, and an Admoni∣tion to take heed of loytering and idleness, or of doing badly; because our works fol∣low us. Our Wealth will not follow us, nor any Places or Dignities, mens Honours shall not descend with them, onely their Works that they may be disposed of, and in the great day receive Rewards ful∣ly according thereunto; let us then give diligence in good works to the full assu∣rance of hope to the end, and not be sloth∣ful, but followers of those who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, seeing God is not unrighteous to forget any work or labour of love shewed unto his Name. Heb 6.9, 10, 11, 12. The sleep of the la∣bouring man is sweet whether he eat little or much. Eccles. 5.12. let us labour and be industrious in the work of the Lord and then whether we have much or little in this world, we shall have a sweet comfort∣able rest and sleep when we go out of it un∣to God; for he will so satiate the weary Soul, and replenish every sorrowful Soul, as that when it awakes it shall be able to say with Jeremiah, My sleep was sweet
unto me, Jer. 31.25, 26. to this end let us look diligently to our Lord Jesus, cleave closely to him, and abide in the believing views and remembrance of him, who as He gave himself for us that he might re∣deem us from all iniquity, and purifie to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. so he also is the root from whence we may derive all grace and virtue, to make us fruitful, Rev 22.16. Avoid we the counsel of the ungodly, the way of sinners, and the seat of the scornes, and exercise, our selves diligently day and night in the Law of the Lord, the Gospel of our Salvation, that so we may be as the Trees of the Lord full of Sap, even filled with the fruits of Righteousness that are by him. Psal. 1.2, 3. & 104.16. Be we always stedfast, unmovable, from the hope of the Gospel and ways of Righteousness, abounding in the work of the Lord, foras∣much as we know that our labour shall not be in vain in the Lord, our works shall follow us to be gloriously rewarded by him, when we shall Rest from the pain, labour and exercise attending them, 1 Cor. 15.58. 9. Lastly, it affords Comfort also to us in behalf of such as Dye in the Lord, that we may not immoderately Mourn for them
as those that have no hope. 1 Thes. 4.16, 17. Death takes them not away so as they perish from their Hope, they shall Rise again, yea, God will bring them with Christ, and they shall Rise First, as is there said; in the mean time they are at Rest, and their good works are not lost, but follow with them and they are Bles∣sed. Comfort we our selves, and one ano∣ther with these words, yea, Comfort we our selves in behalf of this our Sister deceased, with them, whose Decease occasioned (as She also before it requested it) our Consi∣deration of these words. Truely though she had here Weaknesses and Infirmities common to humane fallen nature, and was not without all such defile∣ments as spring from Passions, and lesser sins, for which God was pleased also to chasten her for ours, and others admoni∣tion, yet we may through the grace of God afforded to and received by her, not doubt to say, That she was a good Wo∣man, and God humbling her by his cor∣rections and chastisements did her much good in the latter end, and she shewed good proof of her profiting thereby, her heart being much taken with, and set for the knowledge of God and Christ in his Gospel,
as we might in some good measure perceive in that she was very attentive to it, and desirous to have her Children (though but Mother in-law to them) mindful thereof also, walking soberly and harmlesly; as also in both her former Lying-in, when she had a very weak time (so as there was little hope of recovery for a great while) she gave very good proof and evidence of her Faith and Patience, so as to sing in her very great Weakness to God and his praises. And in this last Lying-in, whereof she dyed (as in all her languishings and great weaknesses before it) she behaved herself with so good hope in God, and desires of being dissolved and being with him; and with divers such Christian and gracious speeches and demeanours, as gives us good hope comfortably to judge her one of those Dead that have dyed in the Lord; and therefore to be Blessed, as being at Rest from all her Labours, Weaknesses, Languishings and whatever Toyls, Trou∣bles or Temptations she here encountred with, and that what good fruits are Works she brought forth and acted, (as she was not without such) follow with her into Gods presence, so as that, through Christ and his Blood washing both her and them, she shall receive for them a good Reward
in the Kingdom and Inheritance to be re∣vealed. Bless we God, That there is such a way made for us to be made good, and to ob∣tain through Christ so good hope for our selves and others, that we may live and dye in the Lord and be ever Blessed: And Bless we him for the good wrought in her and the good hope she expressed in Christ and God, and that we have concerning her: And let it be our great care so to believe on and abide in Christ, that we li∣ving in and unto him while we are here, may also Dye in him and injoy the Bles∣sing here pronounced by this Voice from Heaven that said, Write, Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labours, and their Works do follow them. Blessed be God.
Epitaphium in Amicam suam Dam. REBECCAM JACKLER. IMbecille fuit corpus, quod terra repostum Jam tenet in gremio non temeranda suo. Mens fuit & variis curis obnoxia, quare Hospitio fragili fessa domum petiit; Quam proprio nostrum miserescens sanguine Christus Omnibus aptavit, constituitq bonis. Et nunc quam foelix! cui nec jam corpus onustum Morbis, nec curis mens agitata suis. Mens etenim athereas per Christum ascensa cathedras Omnibus impetibus libera tuta manet. Gaudia percipiens ibi talia, qualia nullus, Quantumcunque sciens, hic habitans capiat. Queis & ei everso Christo veniente sepulchro Aeterno socius foedere corpus erit.
An Epitaph Upon his Deceased Friend Mrs. R. J. WEak was the Body which within its womb The consecrated ground doth now intomb. Her mind expos'd to cares, lothing at last So bad a lodging to that Home made hast, Which Christ through his own Blood of grace prepared And gives to all good men as their reward. And now how well in mind and body she This from Diseases, That from cares being free! Her mind the heavenly Seats through Christ her guide Ascended, free from passions doth abide. Such joys injoying, as none here below However knowing, perfectly can know. Wherein when Christ hath quite or'e-turn'd the Grave It shall its Body partner ever have.
