L3088 13659859 101091
A SPEECH Made by The Lord Lowden To the LORDS in the upper House of PARLIAMENT in Scotland, the 20 of Septemb. Anno 1641. Concerning, The Restoration of the Electoriall Family. compass rose W E S London Printed 1641.
A SPEECH Made by The Lord Lovvden. My Lords, THe great difference between the two Kingdomes England and Scotland, through the great Mercies of God being now appeased, and an act of ob∣livion past of all by-gone deeds since the last troubles, we may with cheerefulnesse and thankfulnesse, not only settle all things here at home, which by reason of the want of the benefit of ordinary Judicature, are now out of order, with all duty and affection, but likewise to consider of, and assist his Majesty in such matters & enterprizes, as he shall be pleased to propound unto us. Now first for the difference, give mee leave to say somewhat of them; and (indeed) in speaking some∣what of them, I may hold my peace, and say nothing at all, for the truth is, there was no difference betweene the two Kingdomes, there were troubles, and feares on
either side, but consider, it was not through the default of the two Kingdomes, that were like to have produ∣ced such miserable effects, and calamities, as were threatned, but it was the fault of malignant men, who by their wicked actions, and improvident Counsels, strived (in what in them lay) to sowe the seeds of dis∣cord and dissention betwixt his Royall Majesty, and his good subjects of both Kingdomes: If then these cala∣mities, threatned and feared, were by ill instruments wrought and caused, and that now by the goodnesse of the Almighty wisedome of his Royall Majestie, and prudent endeavours of the Honourable Assemblies of both Kingdomes, both the cause and the causers are re∣moved and averted, what cause is there, or can there be imagined to be, that either Kingdome or any particu∣lar member of either, can be otherwise then really uni∣ted in more tender and hearty affection one towards another then ever they were? For our Kingdome of Scotland, however the great Impostures of these trou∣bles scattered false rumours and reports both in the eares of his Majesty, and many of his loyall and good subjects, that wee should ayme altogether at our owne ends, and that all our pretences were to insinuate both into the hearts and estates of the subjects of England, yet I hope it hath now fully appeared to his Majesty, and the Honourable Assembly of that Kingdome, and all other his loving subjects that will not be wilfully or maliciously blind, that we sought only our owne peace both in Church and State at home, and not the least prejudice (much lesse the ruine) of our brethren of Eng∣land. For the truth of this I dare boldly say, I may call the Northern Counties to witnesse where our Armie
lay, that they cannot say that our souldiers used them as enemies, but as friends; and that where such an Armie lay so long time, there was never so little harme done to a Country, and that little which was done (I hope) sa∣tisfaction is or shall be suddainly made. And I hope none of his Majesties good Subjects in England, will take it to be any dishonour in granting us that sum of money the Parliament did towards our great losses and charges, which have appeared to be more then double the sum granted, but a friendly demonstration of one Nation to another, we are brethren not enemies, and by ill instruments were forced both into the field, ha∣ving no cause of malice one towards another, let mis∣chiefe then fall on neither Nations, but on those instru∣ments; let them be made exemplary, that were the cau∣fers of such calamities, and great let the honour be to his Majesty, and the wise prudent assembly of both Kingdoms that have applyed themselves to faire things, and composed the quarrell without shedding of blood, and even from a state gasping, have restored both King∣domes to their former unity, peace, and concord, and disbanded the Armies upon resonable conditions. Since then there is such and unity betweene both King∣domes, and that the Armies are both united in true hearty affection one towards another, how considera∣ble may these Armies make us abroad? If God shall blesse us, then certainly those Armies that were late∣ly ready to offend one another, may shew a capabilities with unity of hearts, and well designed may effect great matters, and may by unity of counsell raise both King∣domes to as good estimation, and as great honour in the world as ever. And how can they be better designed
then to restore the Electorical Families to their former inheritance? can there be a better cause then the truth of God? can there be a cause wherein we can be more intressed, then to assist his Royall Majesties dearest and onely Sister, and her royall issue, to obtaine their law∣full and rightfull Inheritance, out of which they have beene so long time unjustly divested? doubtlesse there cannot. Now to the intrest of the cause, let us adde his Royall Majesties proposition, which make all compleat. Let us therefore proceed to the perfecting of so religi∣ous so lawfully, and so laudable a worke as this, and no doubt but our brethren of England will be as forward as we being intressed alike in the cause as we are, I shall here not unfitly make mention of a homely Story. I have read of an Emperour in Turky, that hearing there was civill wars in England, had a designe to taken the ad∣vantage of the same, and invaded that Kingdome, but an English man being in some favour and estimation with the Emperor, and wishing well to his native Coun∣try, caused a cupple of mastiffe Dogs to be set together by the eares before the Emperour; and as they were fighting, caused a beare to be put to them, which the Dogs perceiving, left fighting, and fell both upon the Beare, which the Empetour taking notice of the English man, told him he had caused that to be done, to shew him the condition of his Country-men, who though they would fall out among themselves, yet they would take part each with other against an enemy. And there∣fore though they were at variance amongst themselves, yet it would be little advantage to his his intended un∣dertaking-upon, which the Emperour changed his re∣solution touching that designe.
If then this were the nature of Englishmen, unto whom we now by the Almighties Providence are uni∣ted, under one King, one Nation, and one Island, I doubt not but the same remaines, and that though wee were lately ready to offend each other, yet being now united in more tender and hearty affection one to∣wards another, then ever wee were, wee shall hold and maintaine such a good correspondencie amongst our selves, that shall nor onely bring both Nations to a condition of prosperity at home, but make us formi∣dable to our enemies abroad. FINIS.
