L3366 14923375 102946
The LOYAL SCOT; An Excellent New SONG. To an Excellent New SCOTCH Tune. BRead of Geud! I think the Nation's mad, And nene but Knaves and Perjur'd Loons do rule the Roast; And for an Honest Karl ne Living's to be had; Why sure the Deel is Landed on the English Coast. I ha' ne'r been here sin' Forty Three, And now thro' Scotland gang to'l see our Gracious King; But Wunds a Geud, instead of Mirth and Mery Glee, I find aud Sniveling Presbyter is coming in. [2] For they talk of Horrid Popish Plots, and Heav'n knows what, When all the wiser world knows well what they'd be at; For with sike like Sanctity the Geudest King They did to Death and Ruine bring. When on the Civil Broils they first did enter in, (As well ye ken) with Popery they did begin; And with Liberty and Publick Geud was muckle din, When the Deel a bit they meant the Thing. [3] That Machine of Monstrous Policy, I mean old S—for Loyalty so fam'd; The voice of all the Geudly Rabble Mobile, The falsest Loon that ever Envy destin'd Damn'd. Heav'n sure never meant so sou a Thing, But to inform the World where Villany did dwell: And sike a Traytor both to Commonwealth and KING The muckle Deel did surely never hatch in Hell. [4] For, like Roman Cataline, to gain his Pious Ends▪ He pimps for all the Loose Rebellious Fops in Toon; And with Treats and Treason daily crams his City-Friends, From the Link-man to the Scarlet-Goon. And with high Debauchery they carry on the Cause, And Geudly Reformation is the Sham pretence; And Religiously defie Divine and Humane Laws, With Obedience to their Rightful Prince. [5] Then a SPEAKER to this Grand Cabal, Old Envy Tony seated at the Head o'th' Board, His Learn'd Oration for Rebellion makes to All, Applauded and approv'd by ev'ry Factious Lord, Cully Jemmy then they Vote for KING, Whom Curse confound for being sike a senseless Loon; Can they who did their Lawful Lord to th' Scaffold bring Be just to him that has no Title to a Croon. [6] But they find he is Blockhead fitted for their Use, A FOOL by Nature, and a KNAVE by Custom grown; A Gay-Fop-Monarch, whom the Rabble may abuse; And their business done, will soon Unthrone. But Jemmy swears and vows, gan he can get the Croon, He by the Laws of Forty Ene wou'd guided be; And Prophane Lawn-sleeves and Surplices again must down▪ Then hey for our Old Presbytery. [7] B—a States-man would be thought, And reason geud that he shou'd bear that Rev'rend Name Since he was one of them that first began the PLOT, How the King might Banter, and Three Kingdoms Sham. All the Male-Contents His Noble Grace To this Rehearsal did invite, to hear and see But whilst he wittily contriv'd it but a Farce, The busier Noddles turn'd it into Tragedy. [8] And now each Actor does begin to play his Part, And too so well he cons his Geer, and takes his Cue, Till they learn to play the Rebel so by rote of heart, That the Fictitious Story seems as true. And now, without controll, they apprehend and hang; And with the Nation all is Gospel that they Swear; Then Bonny Jockey prethee back to Scotland gang, For a Loyal Lad's in danger here. LONDON: Printed for ALEXANDER BANKS, Anno Domini, MDCLXXXII.
