L801 13213117 98515
The famous Trauellour Vincent le Blanc of Marseilles.
THE WORLD SURVEYED: Or, The FAMOUS VOYAGES & TRAVAILES OF Vincent le Blanc, or WHITE, of Marseilles: Who from the Age of Fourteen years, to Threescore and Eighteen, Travelled through most parts of the World. Viz. The East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, Guinny, and through all Africa. From the Cape of good Hope into Alexandria, by the Territories of Mono∣motapa, of Preste John and Aegypt, into the Mediterra∣nean Isles, and through the principal Provinces of EƲROPE. Containing a more exact Description of several parts of the World, then hath hitherto been done by any other Authour. The whole work enriched, with many Authentick Histories. Originally written in French, and faithfully rendred into English by F. B. Gent. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter, near the Middle-Temple Gate in Fleet-street, 1660.
TO THE Most worthy of all Honour, PETER BROOK OF MEIRE, In the County of CHESTER, Esq. MY Name being to appear in publick with this Translation in an age that flourishes with Pens, and Criticks; conscious of my disad∣vantage, I apprehended a Patron necessary; whose Name in the Front, like a Princes stamp upon Lead, might give authority and make it cur∣rant coyne. In my low condition I have often heard your Name glorious for worth and goodness, which made me hope though far transplanted, and obscure, you would grant me priviledge to claim a Title in your favour, and let the Reader opening this Book, see it is something be∣longs to you; it will I am confident keep him modest, and prevent his discharges at my defects. The Authour I dare say will, for gravity, novelty, and variety be accep∣table to your conversation: for though divers have set forth accounts of this nature, I have not met with any, in my opinion, of such credit as this. Le Blanc was a traveller from his infancy to his grave, 64. years surveying the Master-piece of his maker: was a person of capacity, judgement, and integrity; one
seems as it were framed and designed to be sent forth, and to bring home a perfect discovery, and the truth of things fables and vanity have so much abused. You will finde him a person of morall and religious principles; one who kept select company; one, who in all parts he arrived at, took not his information at the shore or Suburbs, but either for occasion or curiosity, visited the intestines and supreme, whence he might the better look below, and round about him. I do ingeniously acknowledge I have injured him in the rudenesse of translation; which, next to my want of faculty, I beseech you attribute to the haste was pressed up∣on me, for I had no more dayes allowed to translate it, then would sufficiently have served to transcribe it: and it was the first piece I ever attempted. As it is, I peti∣tion you would afford our aged Traveller to take up a rest∣ing room at last in your study, and me the honour to be owned. Your most humble, and most respectfull Servant, FRANCIS BROOKE.
THE AUTHOURS PREFACE. I Cannot look but with admiration, upon the stu∣pidity of such as are not confirmed in a due belief of divine Providence, since all mundane effects shew daily such sensible testimonies, and especially humane Actions, wherein this wise guide directing all things to their end, is sufficiently apparent, though si∣lently, yet forcibly compelling all things. There ap∣pears testimony enough in my particular, that from my first entrance into the world, have been assisted by this divine wisdome and goodnesse to my 78. year, my instant age, so as I can give most reall assurance. I have been sensible of supernatural effects in my continual pe∣regrinations through such diverse parts, and so remote from inhabitable Land for above sixty four years, in such several dangers, both by Sea and Land, amongst people so discrepant in Religion, Laws, Manners, Language, and course of living, through all by divine provi∣dence preserved healthful, and secure, with the blessing at last to produce something that may be beneficial to my country and posterity. For having ever had an obsti∣nate Propension to travail, when I was scarce advanced out of my Infancy, and of judgement, neither for dis∣course, nor election; I felt though secret, such vigorous motions, that I had not power to resist them: So as
without considering why, or for what end, like a man forlorn, I threw my selfe into this course of pererra∣tion; which afterward, invited by affaires, and unspeak∣able content, I embraced with design and resolution: Nor needs it be much admired, since well considered, our life is but a continual voyage, without rest or assu∣red home, till we arrive at the end, where in a sempiternall state, our Soveraigne felicity in∣habits.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS. CHap. 1. The Authours imbarking for Alexandria, and his shipwrack. page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Towns of Tripoli, and Damas, with the relation of a Murder. p. 4. Chap. 3. Of the deserts of Arabia, of Spirits, or Apparitions there, of the Sea of Sodome, of the Hills of Sina and Oreb, and the three Arabia's. p. 7. Chap. 4. Of the town of Medina, and the false Prophet. Maho∣mets successors. p. 12. Chap. 5. How Mahomet compos'd his Alcoran, his victories, and of the rarities and ceremonies of Meka. p. 14. Chap. 6. Of Arabia Felix, of Prince Sequemir, Governour of Cas∣sia, and other commodities of Sabaea. p. 17. Chap. 7. Of the state of Sequemir, Prince of the Happy. Arabia. Of his Salsidas, and of the Califf of Bagdet. p. 20. Chap. 8. Of Babylon, the Red Sea, Homerites, Aden, a strong Town, and famous Haven, Cameran, and other places in the Red Sea. p. 22. Chap. 9. Of Dalasci, a Town belonging to the grand Neguz, of the Isle of Socotora, with a description of a prodigious tempest. p. 25. Chap. 10. Of the Island and Kingdom of Ormus, of the King and his Government, of the trade there, and of his several Con∣quests. p. 29. Chap. 11. Of Persia, her Confines and Provinces. Of Babylon, and the Lake of pitch. p. 31. Chap. 12. Of the Town of Tauris, Sumachia, Bachat, Casbin, and some of the chiefest places of Persia. p. 34. Chap. 13, Of the Kings of Persia, their power, pleasures. Of the Sophi, Hali, and some Sects of Religious Persians, of the ancient Mages, and other Officers of the kingdom. p. 37. Chap. 14. Of the East-Indies, the conquest of them, Sects and Re∣ligion of the East, and other particulars of the country. p. 41. Chap. 15. Of Diu, her State and Forts, and the neighbouring
countries of Cambayette, of the fidelity of the Indian Censals, and of the marvellous ebbing and flowing of the Sea▪ p. 43. Chap. 16. Of Deli, Malabar, of Goa, the Capital town of India. p. 49. Chap. 17. Of Baticola, Decan, Amadiva, and of the kingdom of Cananor. p. 54. Chap. 18. Of the kingdom, and Samorin of Calicut, of the Natives of that country, and of their horrible superstitions. p. 57. Chap. 19. Of the kingdome of Cochin, the goodnesse of the soyle, customes of the Inhabitants, with a strange history of certain French Pyrats. p. 89. Chap. 20. Of the Isle of Zeilan where they fish for pearles, and charm certain great fishes; an Idoll of a Monkeys tooth, An Isle deserted for the infestation of Spirits, and of the Isles Mal∣dives. p. 67. Chap. 21. Of the kingdom of Bisnegar, or Narsingue, of the King, his Bramins or Priests, of Meliapar, where (they say) reposes the bo∣dy of Saint Thomas the Apostle, with a strange History of a Bear. p. 72. Chap. 22. Of the kingdom of Bengala, and Ternassery, of Musk, some rare remarks of the River Ganges. Of the Torrid Zone, and the conversion of a yong Prince, Idolater to Christianisme. p. 80. Chap. 23. Of the Isles of Archipelagus, of Saint Lawrence, of the Island of Sumatra, of Elephants, and other particulars. p. 90. Chap. 24. Of the Isle of Java, of the Inhabitants, their conditions, and of the riches of the Country. p. 96. Chap. 25. Of the kingdomes of Malaca and Syam, with a prodigi∣ous History of Serpents. p. 102. Chap. 26. Of the kingdom of Martaban, marvellous strength of Macaraou, or the flowing of the sea; particularities of Pegu. p. 106. Chap. 27. Of the kingdom of Pegu, of a bloody war for a white Elephant, of Crocodiles, and the nature of Elephants. p. 112. Chap. 28. Continuation of Pegu, of the Government and Policy, of superstitions and Magicians. p. 120. Chap. 29. Of the Idols in Pegu, bloody sacrifices, Exorcismes, strange Communions. p. 125. Chap. 30. The Peguans diet, their military exercises, their medi∣cinable drugges, their Summer. p. 131. Chap. 31. The election of the King of Pegu, their Officers, the Ho∣mages and presents of the subjects to their new Prince. p. 133. Chap. 32. Of the Justice and Policy with the Peguans, their sacri∣fices, and horrible dances; A lamentable History of two young Princes. p. 139. Chap. 33. Of Abdiare and Vilep, Towns of Pegu, Fismans, Apes, Ʋnicorns, and other Animals. Fotoque an Idoll with three heads. p. 148.
Chap. 34. Of the kingdom of Casubi, their Religion. p. 154. Chap. 35. Of Macharana, the hunting of Tygars, and other wild beasts, a history of the Rhinocerot, of the Escurial. The esteem they have for the French there. p. 158. Chap. 36. Of Transiana, the valour of their women. p. 163. Chap. 37. Of the kingdom of Tazatay, and the phylosophy of the In∣dians. p. 169. Chap. 38. Of Tartary, frightful deserts, fierce dogs, a strange hi∣story of two lovers, the Empire of the Tartars, and their Religion. p. 163. Chap. 39. The Authours return with a summary of Asia. p. 182. The Contents of the Second Part. CHap. 1. A general Description of Africa. p. 177. Chap. 2. A Description of the Isle of Saint Lawrence, with the conditions of the people. p. 182. Chap. 3. The customes of the Inhabitants of Belugara, or Monopo∣tapa. Salubrious winds venting from a . p. 186. Chap. 4. The country of Monbaze, Melinde, and Quiloa, the nature of the Inhabitants, and the respect they bear their Prince. p. 188. Chap. 5. Of Mozambique, the nature of the Inhabitants. Cefala. Mines of gold in Ophir. Belugara. p. 191. Chap. 6. Of Monopotapa, the Princes estates, and Government, his way of living, and the singularity of his country. p. 193. Chap. 7. The History and strange adventure of Prince Alfondie. Another of the Amours of Princesse Abederame. p. 204. Chap. 8. The Authours voyage into Ethiope: A Description of Preste Johns Dominions, with the quality of his people. p. 211. Chap. 9. Of the town of Bagamidri, and the coronation of their Kings. p. 218. Chap. 10. Of the Mansion of Preste John, and his Justice. A Hi∣story upon this subject. p. 220. Chap. 11. Magnificence of the Negus and his military Officers. p. 223. Chap. 12. The victory of the Negus over the Goragues. His en∣trance into Barua. 227. Chap. 13. The manner of service at the Negus's table, the receipt of the Portuguese Embassador. p. 229. Chap. 14. Of the kingdom and policy of Mongibir, of the mountain Amara, where the Abyssin Princes are, p. 233. Chap. 15. Of the town of Barua, Bagamidri, and other stories of Sorcerers. p. 247. Chap. 16. Of the Queen of Saba, and the kingdome of Cara∣man. p. 251. Chap. 17. Gf some particular towns in Ethiope, visited by the Authour in his peregrination. p. 256.
Chap. 18. A prodigious History of a young Abissin Prince, by name Joel, by enchantment transformed into an Ape. p. 261. Chap. 19. Of the Desert Beniermi, and the Towns, Dangala, Ma∣chida, Georgia, &c. p. 271. Chap. 20. Of Grand Caire, of Balm of Egypt, of Nile, of Croco∣diles, and the particulars of Egypt. p. 274. Chap. 21. Of the town of Alexandria, the Isle of Malta, and the Authors return to Marseils. p. 281. Chap. 22. The Authours voyage to the kingdom of Morocca, he is taken by the Spaniards, an accident befell the Authour at Ara∣che, the battel of Sebastian King of Portugal. p. 286. Chap. 23. Of the kingdomes of Marocca and Fez. p. 297. The Contents of the third Part. THe Authours voyage to Constantinople. p. 305. The Authours voyage into Italy. p. 313. The Authours voyage to Guinea. p. 320. Chap. 1. The Authours voyage in the West-Indies, the description, length, and distances of America. p. 327. Chap. 2. The Authours Departure, particulars of Demingo. p. 331. Chap. 3. A violent tempest, the Isle of Cuba and Hispaniola, the cu∣stomes of the Inhabitants, and their Kings. p. 334. Chap. 4. Of the coasts of New-Spain, of the torrid Zone, and winds which blow there. p. 340. Chap. 5. Of South and North America, the Qualities, and Disco∣very. p. 344. Chap. 6. Of Canada or New-France. p. 349. Chap. 7. Of Virginia, and Florida, Fountains of youth, dangerous love. p. 352. Chap. 8. Of Mexico: the nature of the Inhabitants, their Kings, sacrifices, &c. p. 356. Chap. 9. The Mexican year, their Paradise, Infernal, and their Dances. p. 362. Chap. 10. Burning mountains, the conquest of Mexico, and some particular trees. p. 365. Chap. 11. Of New-Spain, the Provinces thereof, and of Peru. p. 370. Chap. 12. Of certain Fountains, Lakes, Rivers, &c. in this country. p. 377. Chap. 13. The Mines of the new world. p. 382. Chap. 14. Of Peru, of the Kings or Incas, and of the country of Chila. p. 387. Chap. 15. Of the streight of Magellan. p. 392. Chap. 16. Of Brasil, the Conquest of it, and of the Brasilians, &c. p. 395. Chap. 17. The Isle of S. Thomas, according to a Description made to the Athour, by Sieur de la Courbe, and Cassis. p. 404.
Books Printed for John Starkey at the sign of the Miter, near the Middle-Temple Gate in Fleet-street. Books in Divinity. MAster Thomas Hall's Practical and Polemical Commenta∣ry, or, Exposition upon the third and fourth Chapters of the latter Epistle of Saint Paul to Timothy, wherein the Text is explained, some controversies discussed, sundry cases of Con∣science are cleared, many common Places are succinctly handled, and divers useful, and seasonable observations raised. Fol. Mr. Thomas Halls Homesus Enervatus, or a Confutation of the Millenarian opinion, plainly shewing that Christ will not Reign with the Saints for 1000. years on Earth, with a Word to our fifth Monarchy men, in Octavo. Mr. Thomas Halls Apologia pro Ministerio Evangelico, in quâ planè & plenè ostenditur ejus necessitas, dignitas, Efficacia & Ʋti∣litas; in Octavo. Mr. Richard Baxters Directions, and Perswasions to a sound Conversion, for prevention of that deceit and Damnation of Souls; and of those scandals, heresies, and desperate Apostasies, that are the consequents of a counterfeit or superficial Change, this being the second Part of the Call to the Ʋnconverted, in Oct. Mr. Richard Baxter of saving Faith, that it is not only Gradu∣ally, but Specifically dictinct from all common Faith, being a Treatise in answer to Mr. Barlow of Oxford, in Quarto. Dr. Thomas Goodwin, Opuscula Theologica, in Octavo. Mr. Thomas Gataker, Gods Eye on his Israel; being an Expo∣sition on Numbers 23.21. in Quarto. Mr. Thomas Gataker, de Justificatione, & de Dipthongis, in 120. Mr. William Cartwright of Oxford, his Sermon of the Passion of Christ, in Octavo. Mr. Thomas Warrens Justification justified, or a Treatise of Ju∣stification by Faith, in Octavo. Mr. Thomas Coopers Art of Giving, or a Guide to Charity, in Octavo. Mr. John Philips Christian Alphabet, Containing Grounds of Knowledge unto Salvation, in twelves. Mr. Adam Harsnets Gods Summons into a general Repentance, in twelves. Mr. Thomas Hooker of New-England, his Miscelanies, contain∣ing five excellent Treatises in Divinity, in twelves. Mr. Richard Sedgwick. The Synopsis of Christianity, in an Exposition of the Commandements, Lords Prayer, and the Creed, in Octavo.
Books of History and Humanity. LEtters of Affaires, Love, and Courtship, written to several Persons of Honour and Quality, by the Exquisite Pen of Mon∣sieur de Voiture, Englished by J. D. in Octavo. Mr. Walter Montague, his Shepherds Paradise, a Comedy pri∣vately acted before the late King Charles, by the Queens Maje∣sty, and her Ladies of Honour, whose names are prefixt, in Octavo. Mr. Thomas Halls Phaetons Folly, being a Translation of the se∣cond Book of Ovids Metamorphosis, Paraphrastically and Gram∣matically; with an Essay on Ovid de Tristibus, in Octavo. Mr. Agricola Carpentars Magical Description of the soul, in Oct. M. John Hayes Compleat Tradesman, or a Guide for the true Stating of Interest, at Six per Cent. per. Annum, with other use∣ful Tables, in twelves. A Relation of the Life of the Famous Christina, Queen of Sweden, whereunto is added her Genius, Translated out of French, by J. H. in Quarto. France no friend to England, or the Resentments of the French, upon the successe of the English, as it is expressed in a Remon∣strance to the King of France, upon the surrendring of Dunkirke into the hands of the English, wherein much of the private Trans∣actions between Cardinal Mazarine, and the late Protector, Oliver, are discovered; Translated out of French, in Quarto. Mr. Henry Peachams Truth of Time, Revealed, in twelves. Aminta, the Famous Pastoral, written in Italian, by Signior Torquato Tasso, and translated into English Verse by John Dancer; together with divers Ingenious Poems, in Octavo. Guillims Display of Heraldry, the fourth Edition, unto which is added three hundred new Coats, in Folio. The History of the English and Scotch Presbytery, wherein is discovered their Designes and Practises for the subversion and go∣vernment in Church and State, the second Edition, in Octavo. Law-Books. JUdge Owens Reports, in Folio. Juge Hattons Reports, in Folio. Judge Bridgmans Reports, in Folio. Sir James Leys Reports, in Folio. Grounds of the Lawes of England, in Octavo. The Terms of the Law, in Octavo. Hernes Law of Conveyances, in Octavo. Abridgement of Doctor and Student, in Octavo. Perkins Treatise of the Law of England, in Octavo. Shepherd of Corporations, in Octavo. The Lay-mans Lawer, in Octavo. Cum multis aliis.
THE FIRST PART OF THE TRAVAILES OF VINCENT le BLANC. CHAP. I. The Authors embarking for Alexandria, and his shipwrack. I Was not fully arrived at my fourteenth year of age, when seeing a vessell making ready for Alexandria, and the Grand Caire, impulsed by that noble ambition to view the world, I resolved to embark with the Company, though secretly, and without the privity of my dearest parents. Of this vessel, called our Lady of Victory, one Robert Pontoine a Merchant, and my Father Raphael le Blanc were owners, which so delightfully took the affections of my infancy, that I spent the better part of my time aboard her. I often beg'd my Fathers consent for the voyage; but he, as a person experienced in such affairs, foreseeing the hardship and dangers my tender age was to encounter, still denied me. Notwithstanding I persisted in
my resolution to go in what sort soever; and though I received some severities from my mother on this occasion, yet with a sute of apparell and some linnens I had provided, I took my way one morning towards Civitad about five leagues distant from Marse∣ills. But my mother reflecting on some words I had let fall (that they should never see me more) sent some to overtake me, who with fair words perswaded me home again. At last she perceiving my resolution peremptory, and that I watched all op∣portunities to escape; without acquainting my Father, who would never have consented, she gave me leave: so as delivering me some moneys, and recommending me to one Baptist Cote a Merchant of integrity, she acquainted not the Captain, who was my Godfa∣ther, because she would not have him know she was privy to my voyage. Then I privately went aboard in the Victory, and dealt with the Pilot Augustine Battaillon to conceale me; which for the affection I had to travaile, and the respect he had to my Father he performed. Alexan∣dria. Caire.Thus leaving Marseilles, we set saile for Alexandria, where with favourable winds in few dayes we safely arrived: and from thence at the Grand Caire, of which place I shall say little, untill my return from my great Orientall voyage, when I travailed thorough Africa; because by reason of my green years, I was not then able to make those remarks, I shall hereafter discourse of: but shall satisfie my self for the present to tell you, that having staid there by the space of eight whole moneths, and then our Master having loaden his ship in Alexandria, with drugs of all sorts, spices,His return and ship∣wrack in Candia. and other Indian commodities, was bound homewards: we sailed happily for some few dayes towards the coast of the Isle of Candia; where we first felt the miseries, for the most part, ac∣company sea voyages: we unfortunately lost our rudder, which being a principal member of the vessel was a most dangerous acci∣dent, and forced us to shore to mend it. Both our Merchants and Seamen on a festivall day coming ashore to make merry, they were so surprized with the beauties and subtleties of the Island Curtizans, that they not onely exhausted all their money but sold their commodities to undervalews to satisfie their pleasures, which some of them were glutted with to the losse of their lives: and having thus spent near two moneths, we put to sea for France, and two or three dayes had a prosperous winde, which on a sudden turned to the North-East, and imme∣diately to a furious violent North-wind, that drove us up∣on the coast of Turluru,Turluru Isle Canee. an Island near Canee, which is a Haven, and Town in Candia, where we cast anchor to ride out the tempestuous weather. Here another sad accident befell us, by the malice of some of our Merchants, and Seamen, who reduced to great neces∣sitie by reason of their immoderate and vain expenses in
Candia, resolved upon a desperate course, by sinking the ship to satisfie all their Creditors at a cast,A maici∣ous ship∣wrack. and sliding the Anchor on one side betwixt two waters, in lesse than a quarter of an hour our ship struck on ground; and they having prepared the cock∣boat for their refuge, about eleven at night got into it, leaving some thirty of us behind them to the mercy of the waters, of which our ship was already full; thus we were reduced to the very brink of despair, nothing but confused cryes and groanes amongst us, accompanied with prayers to God,Just pu∣nishment of the persidious. whose just Judgement left not unpunished the Authours of their own, and of our unexpected shipwrack, for their boat being overturned within a hundred paces of the ship, they were all drowned in an instant. And it is worth observation that the greatest part of our company were reprobate persons, and absolute Atheists, for some of our Marriners seeing themselves in this imminent danger, their vessel being filled with water, secured some cans of wine which they pour down their throats, amongst the rest one Honora∣tus a Marseillian, put on his best apparell, and with some French coin threw himself into the Sea: those rascals endeavoured to pre∣vent him, inviting him to drink, saying 'twas better to dye full than empty, but the poor creature not able to swim sunk im∣mediately, his body was within few dayes cast upon the shore, the Clark of the ship stript him, took his clothes and money, and buried him, since being sent into France to be impowered, by the Merchants to receive four or five thousand Zequines, which the goods and commodities saved from shipwrack were sold for, he carried the news to Honoratus widow, but I doubt whether he restored her his goods as he told us he did. This while the greatest part of us perished on the shallowes; for of sixty five persons that we were in all, but five escaped, whereof (praised be God) I was one; and every man shifting for himself;The Au∣thor pre∣served. by the help of a planck I got to shore, after I had been fifteen hours in the wa∣ter, and thus I saved my self, together with the Clerk of the vessel. After rest and victuals had a little recovered us, and our Se∣cretary returned to the sea side, to view the remaines of the wrack: the Consul of the French Nation, residing in a Town in Canee, eight leagues distant, upon notice repaired with speed to us with twenty Souldiers, to preserve what was saved, who took good order to see the commodities dryed, and restored to the right owners: having taken his due fees, and leaving our Secretary with the Souldiers in charge with the goods, he took me home to his house, and provided me clothes after the Greek fashion and other necessaries that I wanted: I stayed six or seven months with the Consul, who gave me noble and free entertain∣ment for my Fathers sake, whose friend and acquaintance he
was expecting some ship bound for Jerusalem, for I had vowed a pilgrimage to the holy Sepulcher to give God thanks for my pre∣servation in the last great danger. At the seven moneths end, here arrived a Venetian ship bound for Jerusalem, the Master of the ship a Marseillian, by name Guil∣lem de Cassis, who stood amazed at sight of me, saying he had at∣tended at my Funeral at Marseilles, and that my Parents heard I was cast away with the rest of the company, and that they bore my loss heavier then that of the ship, wherein my Father had halfe share, (as I shewed before that) which losse broak my fathers partner, Robert Pontoine, and forced him to live privately at home, then I agreed with William Cassis, who was to bring me to Hierusalem, and the Consul advanced me a hundred Zequines towards my journy, advising me to keep my money private. CHAP. II. Of the Townes of Tripoli and Damas, with the relation of a Murther. LEaving Canee in the moneth of August, wee steered out course towards Syria, a famous and renowned countrey, by the Hebrews called Aram, since Halad, and Sabal, formerly of great extent, and conteined the Provinces of Comagene, Caele∣syria, Phenicia, Palestina or Judea, Mesopotamia, and one part of Arabia, and others. In the time of our Holy Warres, it reached from the Tigris, unto Egypt, from Cilicia or Caramania, unto the red sea, for∣merly Antioche,Antioche. was the chief town in Caelesyria. The first place we landed at was Tripoli in Syria, where Monsieur Toureau a Mar∣seillian, most generously entertained us. Libanus.Upon the Mount Libanus two leagues distant from Tripoli, you may see snow all seasons of the year, you may find the Manna, or Celestial dew,Manna. which I often walking the fields, took for snow, untill tasting it, I found it sweet as sugar, and undeceived my self: when the natives perceived me gather any, they would say, Naza∣rini coul sacor va la Tayhon which signifies, Christian eat of the Manna, for 'tis good. Chrysor∣rhoas.The river Chrysorrhoas, famous for her waters rises out of Li∣banus, and runnes through Damas, there rises also another river called Magora, and loses her self in Tripoli: In this mount is the Prophet Josua's tombe visited by Christian pilgrims, and by Turks; I have heard from the Inhabitants and labourers of the Mountain, that Vines bear there twice a year, to which I give little credit.
From Tripoli we travelled to Aman, three dayes journey thence:Aman. this Town was formerly called Emitus, by the Arabians Camahale, by the Turks Amcus, and by the Indians Amsa, 'tis a Country of Mulberries, and silke wormes, full of Gardens, and most excellent fruits. The Town is peopled with Grecians, Turkes, Mores, Armeni∣ans and Jewes; it is very ruinous, nothing left entire, save the Mar∣ket, & exchange for Indian, Arabian, Aegyptian, French, Italian, En∣glish, Dutch Merchants; they trade there in Cottons, Silkes, Linnens, Carpits, Woollens, and Pot-Ashes; the land is very fruitfull in all sort of fruit, Corne, wines and Oyles. From thence 3. days journey to Aleppo, some time Hierapolis,Aleppo. a Town of the same, and greater trade then Tripoli, amongst others in jewells, spices, and perfumes; my Camarade having learnt here what he looked for, we went to Damas,Damas. the Capitall Towne of all Syria. She is one of the fairest, and greatest Traders in the Coun∣trey, remarkeable cheifely for delightfull scituation, healthfull ayre, fruitfull Soyle, abundance of waters, fruites, and of all sorts of commodities necessary to livelihood; her vast treasures, trade, and number of souldiers, her faire Structures, many sword & knife-cuttlers, & other expert Artists in steele, who give a delicate tem∣per with muske and Amber-greese. There I saw a Marseillian Cut∣ler who spent near a hundred Zequins in forging one blade,A Fench Cutler. which was by many admired: I met him ten yeares after at Paris, he told me he sold the same blade to Collo Dornano for three hundered crownes. Damas is scituate in a faire plaine, her soyle well wa∣tered and fruitfull, with plenty of Gardens, and Orchards round about her, she is surrounded with two mountains,Amon and Sahanir, Moun∣ains: the one called Amon, the other Sahanir; There are many grots and caves, (as 'tis said) formerly inhabited by the Christians in time of persecution, there is one can contain 4000. persons,Grots of persecuted Christians. and without doubt are fairer and larger than those at present to be seen at Saragosa in Si∣cily: towards the East there is a lake 7. or 8. leagues about, through which run two sweet streams, the one called Aman or Amma,Aman and Pharphar Rivers. which runs by the foot of the wall, towards the South, the other Farfar, and threds through the middle of the Town; she is also adorned with many fountains, the water being brought by pipes from Chrysoran. The houses are built of the Moresco modell, with galleries, do almost cover the whole streets, as at Aleppo. The Town is strong, and begirt with good ditches, well flank'd and man'd in time of war. A Bassa, or Governour, keeps it for the Turk, who hath a strong life-guard of horse: The Suburbs are greater, and more populous than the Town.Silkes. There are twenty thousand Mulberry planters for the trade of silk, and an infinite number of cutlers and other Artists in steel and iron. On the East there stands a Tower where you may yet see the Flour de luces, the arms of France; which must have been set there, when the French were Lords of the Holy land: there in a little enclosure is
to be seen Zacharies tomb,Zacharies Tomb Father to St. John Baptist: a place of great veneration, the Mahometans themselves celebrating the feast day with solemn rejoycings,St. Pauls Imprison∣ment. they yet shew the place where S. Paul persecuting Christians fell from his horse, and the place of his im∣prisonment, and where he was let down in a basket. They shew you the place, where 'tis said Cain killed his Brother Abel. There is an Alablaster mine affords them great store of fair vessels, and other peices. From thence commonly are set forth the Caravans, or land convoys for Medina and Meca, and to many other places of Arabia, and the east. The Towne is farr fairer without then within, by reason of the commodious scituation and beautifull aspect, but the streets are not so well contrived; the Market place, or Baiar is ample, and faire built with Piatzza's, as at Bolonia, most of the houses in Town are served with fountains, derived from Chrysorrhoas, the graffs are planted with Mulbery trees. There is a Citadell said to be built by a Florentine Renegado, who then commanded it. While we staid at Damas, one day walking the Market place, we saw an Executioner (surrounded with a great crowd of people) upon a tall horse,A fatall Execution. and dragging a Malefactor (tyed with a rope) by the leggs to the place of Execu∣tion; and enquiring the reason of this Justice, we were told he was a Christian, and had killed a judge of the Country: This poore sufferer, as we since understood, by attestations, and let∣ters, he carried about him in a box, was a Frenchman, and born in Saintonge, his name was Roubie, returning from Jerusalem, where he received the Cross from the hands of the Patriarch; and passing thorough this Town, met a judge, who according to the in∣solent custome of the sworne enemies to Christians with one blow struck Roubie at his feet; which for the present he seemed to take very patiently, dissembling the affront, with resolution nevertheless when opportunity should serve, cruelly to revenge it, he absented himself for three whole yeares, and in that time having perfected himselfe in the Turkish Language, disguised in the habit of a Dervis,A Dervis. a sort of Religious, in great esteeme amongst them, he weares a Cimitere by his side, and a dagger hanging at his girdle, to see the commands of their Prophet Nabi, strictly observed this supposed Dervis begirt with his hanger, returned to Damas, and assisted dayly (in Court) the judge his enemy, whose diligence to justice was held a good Omen; this he practised for three whole years and more, not omitting one audience in all that time, dayly expecting an opportunity to revenge himselfe. Upon a time hear∣ing the judge give Sentence against an Orphan, who was sued for some inheritance, suddenly stept up to him, and with a mortall wound on the forehead laid him dead at his feete, took his place, and said that the judgement newly pronounced against the Or∣phan was unjust, and that it was fit to repeate the Evidence
which without the least interruption, in respect to the suppose Dervis, was immediately done by Councill on both sides,Armin. and a Herauld openly declared, that he thought it Justice the Orphan should enjoy one moity of the land in question; this was spoken to the satisfaction of the Auditory, but especially of the Dervis, who gave his opinion and approbation in few words, and at the same instant, judgement was pronounced to the great content of those were cast by the former sentence: his body was carried home to his house, and the Murtherer highly commended for his great act of Justice. Reubie satisfied in his revenge, by degrees retired himself to Tri∣poli, where by misfortune being reproached by a certain coun∣trey-man of his, who had seen him in the habit; he inconsiderately confest it, and the reason that moved him so to do: and some Turks hearing of it, they presently caused him to be apprehended; and upon search found uncircumcised, he was brought back to Dama, where he was thus arraigned, and executed, and his body cast to the dogs, to be devoured. Not farre from Damas, and the Jordan springs is the town of Philippa, whence the woman was,Dan Cae∣sarea. that our Saviour cur'd of the flux, Belinas, sometime Dan, Paneas, or Caesarea, it lyes not far from Libanus, and between her and Gallilean, or Tiberiade Sea is a great vale, where is a Lake swell'd with the snow, that falls from the Mount Libanus, through this Lake runs the Jordan, and is called Es-mal-maron, formerly the waters of Merac; there did Joshuah overthrow the Kings of Chananee, the Lake is in Summer almost drye, and from thence unto Jope, is a very fruitful country called Charon. Towards the Tiberiade Sea there is another vale very hollow, between two hills, where the Sun is hardly ever seen. This hill rises not far from the Sea side, and reaches to Sidon or Sayette, and of the other side they both reach the Arabian hills, near Damas, and there lyes the Country formerly called Palmyrena. CHAP. III. Of the Deserts of Arabia, of Spirits, or Apparitions there, of the Sea of Sodome, of the Hills of Sina and Oreb, and the three Arabia's. AFter some few dayes stay we left Damas,Benin Ma∣charib fo Misor. and passed through Benin, from thence we came to Macharaib, or Macherib, and Masarib three dayes journey from Damas: 'tis a small town
of Palestina,, not very pleasant, formerly called Misor, one of the Levies Cities, sometime belonging to King Balsan, near the torrent of Arnon in the tribe of Reuben.The Tor∣rent Arnor. At our arrivall there, having discharged our Chioas, or guide, which cost us six Duckets a man; my companion Cassis took a little boy for his guide, and brought me first to a fair house in the Turkish quarter, and inha∣bited by a Turk; instead of going to the place inhabited by Chri∣stians; which I not a little wondred at, because the difference in Religion breeds a discrepance between them and us; as I was entring the house, a Turkish Dame, well fashioned, with a child in her armes, briskly asked me in the Syriack tongue, Achibi, Naza∣rini che senti achelect, Christian what do you here, I streight made answer, Mnaar Jenesay ana cardas amisi antina, that my Camarade was within to speak with some body, but she with indignation thrust me out of the Porch; young as I was, I had the wit to present her with a pair of corall pendants, which she liked well, and said in her language, Thou art a good lad, but the other is a knave that gave me nothing; and as I was retiring my self, she cour∣teously invited me in, where I saw my companion take some small things out of his bagge, which he presented to several wo∣men who had every one of them a sucking child at their brest, they wore rings in their ears of twice hand compasse, richly set with Diamonds and Pearls, every one of them made choice of some Venetian curiosity, which though of small value, they set great esteem upon: as we were thus entertaining these Ladies, in came a grave Moore, Counpayniors brother, who upon notice that two strangers were entered his house, came presently home, fir'd with jealousie, a passion most of them are infected with, as was easily seen in the rage and distraction of his countenance: but after he perceived his brother, he ran to his embraces, with many caresses took me by the hand,Morets en∣tertain∣ment. in French said we were most welcome; and told us he was the Renegado Murat called Silvester, compelled thereto by force, but resolved to leave Turkisme, and become a Christian again, as we were: after many complements, invited us to eat: then a cloth of leather delicately dressed, being spread upon the ground, they brought in boyled mutton, rice, and their mel∣ted butter called Manteque, we made a good dinner, drinking Ragui their common drink, composed of water, figges, and Dates, and is a sort of strong water, for wine they have not any. At dinner I seriously observed the Renegado Murat, a man of graceful personage, well proportioned, and taller by the head then my fellow-traveller, and nothing like him; and I observed women with what content they listened to our manner of dis∣course. At dinner the two brothers discoursed of their affaires, and de∣sign in Arabick, conceiving I understood them not, but during my eight moneths residence at the Grand Caire, I had learnt
enough to understand their discourse; and heard my fellow relate this shipwrack, and the manner thereof; and that he came to crave his assistance to recover his losses; the Renegado told him, that in few dayes he should take a journey for Meka, and that he could procure him so many Cherafs, or Duckets by the month, and at his returne from that voyage he would give him a summe of money, if he returned not himselfe home with him: to this my camarade made answar, he had undertaken to conduct me to Jeru∣salem, and that it would be a shame to him to leave me so young; the Renegado replyed, that I should go along with them, and that he would furnish me with a Camell for the journey, and that coming back we should see Jerusalem. All this I understood,Wine sold by Apo∣thecaries. and though not pleased to see my intention crossed, yet I durst not take the least notice, for feare they should put some trick upon me, considering they might leave me behind, or sell me, or exchange me for some peeces of wine, which in those Countreys is both rare and deare, sold onely by the Apothecaries for the sick, or by Christian Merchants. Thus I heard them advise how to be rid of me; but at last pittying my tender age, they resolved to know my will, and then my Camarade freely spoke his bro∣thers intention, and that in that journey we should see the great Desart, the Mount Sinai and Oreb, the Townes of Medina, La Meyur, and many other remarkable places, and that returning we should see Jerusalem; I shewed my selfe most willing to what they should resolve, finding no other way to save my selfe, and up∣on my fellowes promise coming back to shew me the place I so much desired. Thus resolved, they provided six fat sheep, prize two ducats,Provisions for the de∣serts. together with other meat, which they boyled in a great chaldron, till the flesh came from the bones, then put flesh only, with a good proportion of salt butter in the same Chaldron, and fryed it well, and potted it up for our journey. This we loaded upon two Cammells, with store of onyons, bisket, three large bottells of strong water, with others full of fresh water, and other necessaries, and my camarade and self had a camell betwixt us. Having staid eight dayes at Macherib, we set forth with the Caravane,Caravane. compo∣sed of great numbers of Merchants, and of above twenty thou∣sand camells, loaden with all sorts of wares and commodities, reaching two leagues in length. The Captain of the Town ac∣companied us with five hundered horse unto the desert, but fur∣ther he could not go, by reason of the heat of the sands,Burning sands. Want of water. that burne their horses hoofes, and founder them: and besides in the desert there is extreme scarcity of water, which we carried along with us in leather vessells, to make use of in the desert of Ara∣bia, where very scarcely any fresh is found. We crost a part of the Holy Land, leaving Jerusalem on the right hand, with a very sensible regret, to be within a dayes journey of that place, and
not to see the City. The nights we rested in our Tents, which we pitched with ease, fastning wooden poles thorough the mid∣dle with ropes, which by the helpe of pegs struck into the ground susteined the rest; drawing towards the south, into some vales in search of fresh water, we perceived upon an eminent peece of land the ruines of some Towns, and a little lower a Lake, called Sodom and Gomorra,Dead sea of Sodome. or the Dead Sea, anciently called the Lake Asphaltite, which to this day doth witness the just judgement of God, we tasted some of this water, which, although very brac∣kish, yet refresht us for the present. From thence, after seven or eight houres rest, we took our way thorough the Desert, marching in rank and file, following a Ju∣rabi,Jurabi a Guide u∣ses the Compass. who undertook to guide the Caravane, making use of the Seamans compass. Upon our March we were from hand to hand advertised, that some one of our company was missing, that strayed from the rest, 'twas the companion of an Arabian Merchant, very sad for the losse of his freind;Sad acci∣dents in the deserts. part of the Caravane made an halt, and foure Moores were sent in quest of him, and a reward of a hun∣dered duckets was in hand paid them, but they brought back no tidings of him; and 'tis uncertain whether he was swallowed up in the sands, or whether he met his death by any other misfortune, as it often happens, by the relation of a Merchant then in our company, who told us that two yeares before (travelling the same journey) a camarade of his going a little aside from the company about his necessary oc∣casions,Appariti∣ons in the deserts. saw three men, who called him by his name, and one of them to his thinking favoured very much his compa∣nion, and as he was about to follow them, his reall companion cal∣led him to come back to his company, and the strength of his voice, found himselfe deceived by the others, and thus was saved. And all Travailers in these parts hold that in the Deserts there are many such fantasms and goblins seen, that strive to seduce the Travellers, and cause them to perish with hun∣ger and despaire: having travelled fifteen dayes thorough the Desert, drawing still towards Medina, we were seized with a great drowth, whereupon the word was given for hand to hand through the company, that some whose Camells were not hard loaden, should go seek out fresh-water, amongst others I and my compani∣on offered our selves, three score of us then drew out, who waited for us not farr off, ready to assist us upon the least notice or signall given; we were guarded by a strong Troope, assign∣ed us by the Captaine,Arabian Robbers. to defend us against the Arabian theeves, who have no other livelihoods then the robberies they commit upon the Caravannes; we came unto the side of a little sandy hill, where we found great store of little trees, called Salicor, of which they make their pot ashes for glas∣ses:
a little further we discovered an Indian cane with a flagge at the end of it, which is the sign they put upon a spring in those parts; and groaping with our hands in the sand, we found a great piece of Camels leather, that stopt the mouth of a well: we drew up some water to drink our selves, and some to carry back to our Camarades, which we thought pretty good, though very salt and brackish: a piece of money was given to him that first found out the well, and having stayed there, some ten houres at least, we went back towards our company, with whom we joyned, and distributed our water among them: That night we rested near a hill, and left our lodging an hour before day, en∣tring into very white sands, and so small, that the dust troubled us very much. We had then entred the stony Arabia, and the desert, and proceeding in our way, we came to the foot of Mount Sina,Montsina called Lurle or Tur. called by the Arabians, Lurle, or Tur, so famous in the Holy Scrip∣ture, Exod. 19. being the place where God gave the law to Moses, and is therefore to this day called Gods Mountain, and joyned to Oreb, now called Saint Catherines Mount, because 'tis believed that Saint Catherines shryne reposes there, The Arabians pay,Oreb cal∣led Saint Cather-mount. great reverence to Mount Sina, and do not suffer beasts to feed thereon: They yet remark the Rock Moses miraculously drew water out of, Exod. 17. but there is none there for the present, although there be plenty in several other places of the Hill, for both the Priests Caloires, and Mahometans, that inhabit the hill, have several good springs. Some hold Sina and Oreb to be two Hills, others hold them to be but one, divided onely in two Copps, Sina on the East, and Oreb on the West, and is not so eminent as the former; at the foot of this Hill Justinian the Emperor founded a Monastery called Saint Catherines, possessed by the Caloires, Monks of the order of Saint Basil, as those are at Mount Athos, or Mount Santo in Greece; this Mountain abounds in herbage and pasture. The three Arabia's are commonly called Petrea, Deserta,The three Arabia's, the desert, the stony, and the happy. and Faelix, this is properly Petrea, or the stony Arabia, through which the children of Israel went into the land of Promise: thus called, not from the stones or rocks, but from Petra, a very ancient town, since called Herac, or Arach, which was the chief town of that di∣vision of Arabia, also called by some Nabathea; in this Arabia were the several countries or Provinces of Amalec, Edom, Moab, and Madian, containing several deserts, as that of Sin, Sur, Cedat, & Cadez, and others, it begins near the Jordan, and ends South∣ward towards the desert Arabia, with great hills interposed, and the desert of Benascali, of great extent; where for the benefit of passengers, are wells built with bones of dead men and beasts, for want of stones. The desert Arabia hath great want of wa∣ter, and is called by some Estreiemin, by others Soball, the Sara∣sens call it Barraab, it contains Meka and Medina.
The happy Arabia towards Ader is called Ayman; The stony hath been peopled with Sarasens or Aragenes, the spring of Maho∣metanisme: The desert is chiefly possessed by robbers, cut-throats, and rogues; The happy called Sabea, part of it is subject to the Turk, part of it to the Sophy of Persia, the rest hath Kings, and particular Lords, and Masters. The stony is surrounded with great hills, and is well stored with water, having West-ward Egypt, and the other two Arabia's, Northward, Judaea and Syria, and from Syria, through the stony the chiefest part of the desert, is least on the left hand. This de∣sert hath vast wildernesses utterly uninhabited, except in few pla∣ces where there are small rivers;Mka Medina. Metar. Alcoran. and hath onely the towns of Me∣dina and Meka, and the Castle of Metar where some say Mahomet writ his Alcoran, the great desert of Benhali, or Benaseali, of which I late spoke of runnes quite through her, is twelve dayes journey over, covered with white sand, and small as dust: The happy called by the Arabians Rahahac, is divided from the de∣sert at the Haven Ziden,Zidem, a Haven. and hath very fair Provinces, as Aden, Agias, and others, unto the Isles of Maera, and Mazira, towards the Cape Rosolgate. CHAP. IV. Of the town of Medina, and the false Prophet, Mahomets successors. FRom Mount Sina, we came in few dayes to a little hill, where there stands a Village called Jusoreh, inhabited allmost by Jews onely,Jsoreh. and a well of the best water can be drunk: those Jews hide their secret parts, with a linnen cloth, and are naked for the rest of their bodies: they are naturally crafty and malici∣ous,Jewes hieves. much given to stealing, which is esteemed a vertue amongst them. They once cunningly stole my Camarades Cassock which he wore; one amongst them feigning himself mad, begged an almes of him, and seeing he had a Cassock of good fine cloth, mali∣ciously threw abundance of vermine which he had in a basket upon his clothes, and forced my companion to strip himself of Cassock,A cheat. Doublet, and all, to shake off the vermine; the rest of the Jewes gave their seeming assistance, correcting the pretended mad-man, or cheat, whilst he run away with coat, and doublet; which my fellow never after heard of; but it made us merry in the rest of our journey. At length having travelled five and forty dayes travail from Ma∣charib, without much rest, but on Frydaies, which is the Maho∣metans Sabbath: we approached near Medinat al Nabi, or the Prophets City,Medinat. al. Nabi. and there stopt the Caravane, every one pitching
his tent: 'twas a delight to behold our company, that seemed a numerous Army rank't in order round about a well, in the midst of divers Date trees. We arrived at Medina, formerly Jesrab,Jesrab. a Town of the desert Arabia, where Mahomet died and was buri∣ed; he was born at Jetrib, or Meka; in this town there are very good waters, for which cause it is well peopled: There my Ca∣marade put a base cheat upon his brother; telling him that if he would intrust him with certain commodities, he would go trade with them at Ziden (a Haven in the red sea, near to Meka) where were arrived some ships from the India's, as he understood by some Abyssins he met in pilgrimage at Mount Sina,Cassis de∣ceived his brother. the Renegado Murat believed him, and bought six Camels at Medina, and load∣ed them with several commodities, which he committed to his brother Cassis, and to account for them at his return: but instead of going to the place, he pretended to his brother, he turned his course towards the happy Arabia, Zibit, Aden, Ormus,Zibit, Aden, Ormus. from thence through Persia, to the East India's and to the Preste Johns coun∣trey, and to other places as you shall hear. Some have said, that either at Medina or Meka,Descripti∣on of Me∣dina. was Ma∣homets tombe all of iron, suspended in the ayre with a load∣stone; but I have heard for certain, that the false Prophet died at Medina, and is there buried, where to this day his tombe is frequently visited by Mahometan pilgrims,Mahomets tombe. from all parts of the world; as the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, is visited by Christi∣ans: thither go the Caravanes, from Aleppo, Damas,Caravan of Aleppo. Dumas and Grand-Cair. and the grand Cair, and from other places: there meet sometimes, above forty or fifty thousand persons, and as many Camels, with some guards of souldiers. This tombe is built of white marble, with the tombs of Ebubeker, Ali, Omar, and Ottman, Califfs, and Mahomets suc∣cessors, and every one a book lying by them of their lives,Books of the lives and Sects of Maho∣mets suc∣cessours. and their Sect or opinion, which are very discrepant: there are also a great number of Lamps alwayes lighted; we were desirous to be informed by Murats means, whether the monument had ever been held up in the ayre, we were answered by an Alfaquis, or Turkish Priest, that formerly Mahomets body had there reposed; but that since the Angels had translated his body before God, to assist him at his great Judgement; and told us many other fop∣peries, that occasioned Murat to ask why that tombe was built, to which we received some frivolous answer: the tombe is three steps or thereabouts in ground, the steps are white marble; and the Turks believe to this day, that the Tombe hangs in the ayre, and wonder very much, when we tell them we have seen the contrary.
CHAP. V. How Mahomet composed his Alcoran, his victories, and of the rarities and ceremonies of Meka. Surazins: Saraca, or Elfarabk.THe people of this Country were called Saracenes, since Sa∣razins from a town called Saraco, or rather from Elfarack, which in their language signifies, to live by robbery; as all the in∣habitants there have ever been great thieves and robbers, as well as the chiefest part of the desert, Arabians, and Africanian Arabians are at present.Mahomets birth. The Impostor-Prophet Mahomet was born amongst them at Itrarib, or Jetrib; a small village now called Meka, or near unto it. He derived his Pedegree from Ismael, from his youth in∣venting his false law; being a subtle, crafty, undertaking person; he took advantage of the discontents of some Sarazins, that were not paid their pay by the Grecian Emperour Heraclius his officers, and made use of them to run over that Empire, with such success from the beginning, that he undertook greater things; which the easier to compasse,Mahomets law. he gave them a newer Law, compiled with a mixture of their old one, making them believe 'twas revealed and inspired into him from above: but which in truth he had forged and composed himself, by the help of some Christian Apostates, a∣mong others of two Christians, sword-cutlers, and slaves then in Meka,Alcoran. and very ignorant fellowes, and thus fill'd his Alcoran full of fopperies and Impertinencies, which he published by the sword; and by force of of arms, forced all persons he could to receive it. Three principal means he made use of, to establish his Sect: First of all Sorceries, impostures, and deceits; Secondly, of a liberty of conscience, sensuality, and licentiousnesse. Thirdly, and lastly, of the force of arms.Medina taken by Mahomet. Medina was the first town he reduced, and there was proclaimed King by his Captains and Officers. Ebube∣ker, Ali, Omar, Ottman: and the others that succeeded him, were called Califfs, afterwards he sent them to conquer Asia and Afri∣ca, and in few years they reduced both those parts wholly to their obedience, setting up their law which hath there continued ever since; for they and their successors have founded the greatest Em∣pires in the world, and so continue at this day, as the Turk, the Per∣sian, the great Mogull, the Tartar, the Jerez, and Moracko, and infinite more Kings in Africa and Asia, the East India's, and the adjacent Isles: from this cursed Doctrine are sprouted forth ma∣ny diverse Sects. We left Medina and came to Meka another town of the desert Arabia, in the two and twentieth degree, and by reason of the im∣purity of the ayr, there is scarce any more then these two townes
in the whole country: it is two dayes journey from Medina, pret∣ty large, of the quantity of Roan, or twice as big as Marseils, 'tis surrounded with great and steep hills, which serves her for de∣fence, and makes the accesse difficult, there are abundance of Mer∣chants, and very rich, having upon the 23. of May yearly, a fa∣mous Fair which they call their Jubile. To facilitate the passage from the plain there are four avenues cut through the Mountain, easie to be maintained; near unto the Town is the Hill called Jubara,Iubara Abrahams Moun∣tains, Marabouts sacrifica∣tors. where 'tis believed Abraham would have sacrificed his Son Isaac, and in a certain place there, the Marabouts immolate at this time; there the pilgrims offer sheep, and distribute the flesh and offalls to the poor, who are very numerous, and give them water to drink, they devour those entrails half raw, impatient to stay the dressing of them; they make holes in the sand and bake them therein; this Abrahams Mountain is a league and a half di∣stant from the Town, and near it is scituate a village of a hundred and fifty houses or thereabouts, with a Mosquee or Temple, fre∣quently called Meka stately, high, and built upon pillars; those dayes they sacrifice, they let water run through pipes at the por∣tall, wherewith they wash their feet, there are no springs in those parts, water being brought from other places, and is extream scarce and dear, and the least quantity you can drink will cost you an estere, and sometimes a crown. The Turks ascending this Hill throw stones in three places, where are great heaps; and this (they say) they do to spite the Devil, because he endeavoured in those three places to divert Abraham from his sacrifice; for (they say) that the Devil appeared to Isaac ascending the hill, and said to him, that his Father would sacrifice him; Isaac made no reply, and the Devil tempting Isaac the second time, he threw a stone at him; and from hence begun this custom of the pilgrims, from thence by a little descent the pilgrims come to the Mosquee or Temple, a league distant, or thereabouts, from the top of the Hill, their heads bowed down, and their armes acrosse,Mahome∣tan cere∣monies. the Cherifs deputy casts a paile of water upon their heads, wetting them from top to toe, which they hold a purification or expiation of their sins, pronouncing these words, Ala rahmani Ala ila, which signifies, God purifie thee, next they proceed to prayers in the Mosquee or Temple, which are onely made at the time (they call) Zilaite, which is upon the three and twentieth of May; and at the same time without changing their clothes they pray standing, with a great modesty; and when they keep their fasts they neither eat nor drink by day, but they eat all the next night. The Mosca or Temple of Meka is a masse of stones built round, and much like St. Sophya at Constantinople, you ascend unto it fifteen or sixteen steps, without and round about it are built fair piazza's, or galleries, where the Merchants keep their Exchange, and expose to sale their drugs, perfumes, jewels, and
severall other sorts of commodities; in this Town is vented the richnesse of the India's, and Merchants flock hither from all parts of the world; they come to unlade at Ziden a Haven in the red Sea, twelve leagues distant from Meka: the road between Ziden and Meka is very full of Merchants, they carry their mer∣chandizes upon Camels, some bound for Syria, others for Egypt, and from thence for Europe. The Christians are not admitted into the Mosque, they view it onely through the gate in disguise, you are not sooner entred but you see Mahomets Tomb upon your left hand in the middle of his two Sons in law; to visit it you descend three or four steps, yet 'tis generally believed the Tomb is empty, for their Marabouts say that the Angels translated his body into heaven: at the end of that side there is as 'twere a little turret richly adorned, where the treasure belonging to the Soudan or Governour of the Town is kept. A little further within stands an altar without any figure, and at each side are twelve bookes sumptuously bound, all the pillars are hung with rich tapestry, very faire, and of lively colours, but without the figure or image of any animall. the Town is Go∣verned by a Sultan, or Cherif, he is their Head both in Temporall and Spirituall Affaires, and held in great esteeme amongst them, for he gives absolution to all that visit the Mosque, the sacrifice ended, he uses a certain washing, in lieu of Baptisme: The Mosque is most gorgeously adorn'd, and hung with tapistry with∣out any Imagary worke, you descend unto it eighteen or twenty steps, and it is larger in compass then the Colisee at Rome; Ma∣hometans esteeme the Town Sacred, as well in respect of the ex∣cellent things (they say) were there revealed unto their impostor Prophet, as for the magnificent Temple dedicated to his name; which they imagine built by the Angells, visited by Adam, translated into the sixth Heaven during the deluge, to preserve it from the waters, and since reedified by Abraham, by the Modell of the former sent from Heaven; they give great reverence thereunto, and also to a stone called Alkible, or Aliete, which they adore, and relate a thousand fables of it. The Cherif, or Sultan, Governour of Meka stiles himselfe Alaman Alhascemi, which sig∣nifies the Prince, descended from Hascem, Great Great Grandfa∣ther to Mahomet; formerly he was subject to the Soudan of Aegypt, and now to the Turk, but in such manner as he retains a great Au∣thority; nor doth the Turke stile himself King, or Lord of Meka, but her humble Subject, he is called also Emir, that is, Prince. The Cherif is said to be of Mahomets race, he presented, and acknowledged Selinus to be the Turkish Emperour, when he had conquered Egypt, and abolished the Empire of Mamelus, and Selinus, returned him a great respect, and made him the same present, of a silken sheet large enough to spread over the Prophets
house; a present the Soldans used yearly to make: they are there much vext with the continuall rovings and robberies of the A∣rabians. Among the greatest rarities we saw in this Town, were two pearls the Sultane wore in her ears; the three I since saw at Lisboe, which paid off sixteen thousand ducates of the Gabelle, were not like them, for these go beyond them both in bignesse and beauty. I saw also in the Sultans Seraglio an Unicorn, as since I have seen others in the India's, and at the Escuriall: I know many miscre∣ants, that doubt whether the world hath such a beast, but besides those, I have read many grave Authors that witnesse the same, and Bartheme sayes he hath seen one in the very same Town of Meka, I shall say something more of it in my treaty of Pegu and Canarane. CHAP. VI. Of Arabia Felix, of Prince Sequemir Gover∣nour, of Cassia, and other commodities of Sabaea. WE left Meka after a short stay there, and as I thought my companion would have struck into the road for Ziden to∣wards the red Sea, as he pretended to his Brother Murat, and my self, I wondered he left the chiefest part of his company bound for Ziden, and that with the other part he took his way towards Zibit, in the happy Arabia; I asked him why he altered his re∣solution, and laughing, he made me this answer,Cassis his treachery. that the com∣modities he carried along with him were not his brothers, as I imagined, but his own, and that since his brother had denied Jesus Christ he deserved them not, and thought it fitter to make them his own, and resolved to see the world at his charge and ex∣penses. From thence I gathered my companions inclinations, since thus perfidiously he used his Brother who had trusted him; yet for fear he should play me some trick, I dissembled, in hopes, that by the grace of God I should be delivered from him, and safe∣ly accomplish my intended journey. Thus we took our way for Zibit, accompanied with severall Christians, and other Merchants, we Inn'd the first night at a little village called Ferragous, where we were but ill ac∣commodated: the next day we came to Outor a Castle,Ferragous. Outor. no∣ted by some travellers, not far remote from the red Sea.
A draw well at Outor.There is a deep well whence they draw water, with a wheel turned round by a yoke of Bulls, the water was sharp and hard, but nothing brackish, necessity made us like it: at two leagues from Outor we left the most part of our company, they took the right hand the ready way to Ziden, and we followed our tract for the Happy Arabia, and reached a Town called Gaza, and thence to Zibit. Arabia the happy.Thus we left the desert to enter the Happy Arabia, which is a Peninsula between the red and the Persick Sea, scituate un∣der the Tropick Cancer; her length is from the Soltania of Sanna towards the red Sea, unto Agior towards the Persick gulf, or the Elcatif Sea, so called by the Arabians, I have often travelled there for trade sake, and have visited most of her Towns; this Arabia is of large extent, divided into fair Pro∣vinces and Kingdoms. Zibit. Alibenali.We arrived at Zibit, a Town of Soltania, in the Company of a Jewish Merchant, native of Alibenali, a great Province of Arabia, and married at Zibit, he lodg'd us in his own house, finding he could make a gain of us, accompanying us where ever we would go, carrying with him on horse-back things to refresh us, being a man versed in the customs of the Countrey: and some reason he had to be kind to us, for I am sure my camarade was so to his wife; she advised her husband to be thus fa∣miliarly assistant to us, and he offered me a Daughter of his in marriage, beleeving my Camarade to be my Fa∣ther. Zibit is five leagues from the red sea, there is a Haven where ships are laden and unladen, and from this place commodities are transported from the India's, to Ziden, Suez, and other places. From Ziden we went to Aden, from thence thorough all the Provinces of Arabia, trading, and visiting the chiefest and fairest Townes and King∣domes. Although there be but one great Prince (named Sequemir or Sechemir) chief Commander of the fairest Provinces of the Happy Arabia, yet there are severall Lords that acknow∣ledge, some the Persian, others the Turke. The King of Bacharin, or Bescharin, the nearest to Persia, was not many yeares since subdued by the Sophy; and was likely to have given Lawes unto Elcatif, had not the Inhabitants of Erit, and other Neighbours opposed him, with a considerable Army composed of the people of Massa or Maffa, Fartac, Masca∣lat, Amazarit, Jurmalamam, Gubelaemam, Machyra, or Macyra, Suza, and others. This army had for their General the Sultan of Sanna, that com∣manded the Van, the Sultan of Elcatif the rear, and gave a no∣table blow to the Persian, with whom since they have
made a peace, and have thus preserved themselves. The Solta∣nia of Tabubari, is not now governed by the Sechemir,Black sand. but by the Turk that subdued it, in the last warre against the Persian; this countries sand is very different from that I have seen in other places, being as black as a coale, and not so troublesome to travel∣lers, being something heavier and firmer; upon this coun∣tries hills you find great store of Frankincense, of Storax,Frankin∣sence. Storax Benjamin. and Beni∣amin, growing upon trees, and other sweet gummes, and persons are purposely appointed to gather them: all this country is pro∣perly called Sabaea,Sabea. so famous in ancient times. There growes great store of Olive trees, Myrrhe, Aloes,Aloes. Ladanum. Cinamon: Cassia. Cin∣namon, and Cassia trees in abundance, Falcons, Sparhawkes, and other birds feede thereupon; and an innumerable company of flies bred out of the corruption of the Cassia, causes so great an inconvenience, as the Arabians are forced to burne part of it, and in some other places they gather it not, because being remote from the sea, the Portage would stand them in more then the va∣lue of the Commodity, though in many great Towns they use much of it; where by reason of their greate heats they distill, or melt the juice out of the canes, and drink it. I observed that the inhabitants of Arcora, Ara, Teza, Samacara, and of other Townes and places, delighted much in this kinde of drinke, which not only refreshed them, but loosened them also; and in the Townes of Andrivara, Lagi and Dante, it is the ordinary drinke used the summer time; The fruite of this tree being ripe, hath an unsa∣vory sweet tast, Apes and Squirells flock to it to feed;Mazari. Chicali. and a∣nother beast called Masari (those of Fez call it Chicali) not much unlike a Fox, a beast that unburies the dead, to feed upon their carcasses; they creepe up the trees, shake down the fruit, and make a great spoyle, it is that sweetnesse that engenders those flyes we have already mentioned, which were no small trouble to us passing by. This Arabia is full of faire great Townes, whether by reason of Traffick, Merchants come from all parts, as are Taesa, Cana, Asigni, and Kada, where is kept the Sequemirs principall Maga∣zine, or store house. The chiefest haven,Pecher, a Haven. and the nearest to this side of the Countrey is Pecher, in the Soltania of Fartac, whi∣ther those of Bangale, Baticala, Dabul, Cambaye and Malabar, bring their commodities to Bartar, for Aromatick Drugges, which in that Countrey are most excellent; but the Jewes that inhabit those places are such cheates, they sophisticate all that comes tho∣rough their hands: it is a particular trade to gather the Frankin∣sence, Storax, Benjamin and Mastick; that harvest is got in July, during the dog-dayes. for then the trees are in their perfect ripe∣nesse; they gather some in other seasons, but by a different man∣ner, making an incision in the tree towards spring; from those holes runs forth a licquor, or gumme, which thickens of it selfe,
and is of a reddish colour, but not so strong nor good as the o∣ther, nor of so great a value; the gumme that issues from the young trees is whiter then that is gathered from the old ones, they have Myrrhe trees too, but what of that is brought in to our parts,Myrrhe. is compounded and falsified: all the Myrrhe that the King∣dom of Ciussimi or Elcatif affords, is for the Sequemirs own use, being the most perfect, and the purest; what the Prince uses not, he sells, and is therefore called Sequemir Pure, and is sold at Na∣ban, Quesibi, Naziri, Carmon, Liva-Orba, Lanua-Orba, Costague, Manabon, Batan, Caybir, Jague, Aloron, and in other places in the furthest parts of Arabia, in the kingdom of Anna, through which runs the river,Cosan, or Cosara River. Cosan, or Cosara, very swift, and loses her self in the Persick sea, near the mouth of Euphrates. CHAP. VII. Of the state of Sequemir Prince of the Happy Arabia, of his Salsidas, and of the Califf of Bagdet. His state▪SEquemir whom we have spoken of, is supreme Lord of almost the whole Arabia Felix, and is called Sequemir, as you may say, Holy Lord, for his goodnesse and clemency, because he puts none to death, except prisoners of warre: but when a per∣son hath committed a crime, he keeps him fetter'd in prison during life, without debarring him from the sight of the Sunne, saying that God hath liberally distributed that light to all persons without exception; there have been twenty thousand prisoners in irons at one and the same time. His Court is stately and magni∣ficent, he hath a great number of men devoted to his service, who freely offer up their lives for him at his command, believing they go streight to heaven, dying for their Prince. They relate of a Turkish Emperour returning home from the Persick war through this country, desired the sight of the Prince Sequemir, and of his Salsidas,Salsidas devotes: or Saldridas, for so his devotes were called; having visited him in his towne of Samacara, capital of that country; after many Caresses, and a Princely entertainment, he desired the sight of his Salsidas, and a proof of that great love and fidelity they bore unto their Prince: Sequemir called some of them in, and only spoke these words Amissi Barou, and instantly four of them threw themselves out of the window, and more of them attempting it, were hindred by the Grand Seignior, satisfied with the proof he had already made, which he held so admira∣ble,
that he demanded twelve of them to take back into his Country, which the Sequemir willingly granted; and being asked whether they would have as great an affection for a new Master, and if they would as willingly dye for him, as for their old Lord; one of them made answer to the Turk: if our Prince commands us to dye for thee, we are from this very instant ready to obey him: The Turk told them, in time he should have need of them, and that he would preserve them, and esteem them his best friends; and taking them away with him, he maintained them handsomely, and near his person; but after the death of the Tur∣kish Emperour, they all returned back to their old Master, esteeming it the greatest happinesse and safety to be near unto that Prince. They accompany him yearly to Meka,Romadan. upon the three and twentieth of May, to celebrate their great feast of Ro∣madan. Sequemir wears alwayes a sheeps-skin before and behind, in imitation of Saint John Baptist, who is there in great respect and honour; he travels a foot with his whole Court,S. John Baptist▪ yet his Courtiers go as they please, carrying their wives and other trains, upon able and good horses. This King is Lord of the Soltania's of Fertac, Siligni, Defar, and other places, he was once Master of the entire happy Arabia; but the Turk, and the Persian, have got several Provinces from him; his chief residence is at Almacarama, or, Samacara, a town very strong and impregnable, scituate upon the top of a high hill, but two wayes leading unto it, and those craggy, and easily maintained against the foe; the town is big, and well peopled, and full of Nobility and Gentry: there he keeps his treasure, and his women; this Prince cannot be made King, but by the consent of the Califf of Bagdet, likewise as the Prince of Mefra, in pursuance of an ancient Law, for that Califf, though at pre∣sent, retaines nothing but the bare name, yet keeps his ancient and undoubted right, to elect and confirm the Kings of Assyria, Ara∣bia, and others; and Soliman himself passing through Babylon, for form-sake was installed by his hand. Next unto the Sequemir, are severall Officers, as the Gouvera, Armicahir, Almiracher, the Cayet, the Sidibir, the Admimia, the Bosoldar, Amiseriech, the Tababait, and several others; the Tacay Pacou is Master of the house.
CHAP. VIII. Of Babylon, the red sea, Homerites, Aden, a strong Town, and famous Haven, Cameran, and other places in the red sea. WE travel'd stil through Arabia, from town to town, vent∣ing and trucking our commodities, with an earnest desire to reach Persia; all the towns of Arabia are fair ones and yield a great revenue to the Sequemir; between Zidem and Zibit there are several, and well peopled, and from thence to Aden many more; Zibit is not so near Aden, as by some shee is said to be, as they relate Dalatia in Aethiopia,Dalata. to be opposite to Meka, and they stand three hundred leagues asunder. This Arabia joynes to Persia Northward, and the way thither lyes through Taeza Sanna, Soufar, Erit, Almacara, and other towns, Almacara stands upon a hill but Eastward upon Gaza, a bigge town, and well inhabited where there is weekly a Fair or Market kept by night, by reason of the heats, and there all sorts of Mer∣chandizes are exposed to sale, perfumes especially. The Nobility of the Country affect much to eat Ambar, Musk, and other sweets: the Soudan of Aden, subject to Sequemir, spends yearly six thousand Duccats therein, for his self, wife, and family, their kitchins may be taken for perfumers shops so sweet and odoriferous. The Red Seas coast towards Aden, is thick of good towns, and well traded; and among the Merchants are many thieves, which you must have a care on; you see the towns called Ahra, Dami∣can, Coubita, Erit, Aridan, Magora, Rabon, Salta, and others; with many villages subjects to the Sequemir, who commands six Soltania's, or kingdomes, all fill'd with good towns: upon the Sea side grow store of reeds or Canes, which in time make little Islands, rendring the landing difficult; and from thence the He∣brewes call that Sea Souf, which signifies a reed. Debir.Caravanes come to a town called Albir or Debir, and there load their wares they carry unto Babylon; as we found several travelling thither; I intreated one of them to furnish me with as many Maps of the chiefest cities he could conveniently; for I was very desirous of them, and amongst the rest he procured me the Mappe of Babylon, or Bagdet, printed upon a Cotton, which Mappe is made in a kinde of ceremony, when the Sequemir re∣ceives his Crown and blessing from the Califf of Bagdet, as the most ancient of Meka, and to instruct him in his way; they deli∣neate Samacara, from whence he sets forth for Babylon, he goes through Byr, then in twelve dayes reaches Falouchia, in a flat
boat, from thence to Babylon, in one day more. As we were making sale of our commodities with intention to visit the East India's, amongst other things we got some pieces of Velvet, which we had in exchange for our wares: I shall by the way advise those who intend to make the voyage of Arabia,Trade in Arabia. to store themselves with great horse bits; for that is a commodity goes off there at a good rate, you may make your own price, not exceeding ten Duccats a piece. Thus we travelled through Sanna, passing through many fine towns, as Adimar, one of the fairest of all Arabia, with intention to passe over into the Isle of Cameran, where were three Portugais vessels bound for Calicut; but we had so ill a passage,Cameran Isle. that we alter∣ed our resolutions, and sailed the coast of Avisa, then to Mount Bacour, where we sold our Camels, upon condition they should carry our goods in to Aden, within two leagues of that place. The Red Sea from Suez to the Cape Cardafu, is in the eighteenth degree, in length four hundred leagues, and in breadth fifty;Red sea. is navigable, but not without great danger, especially by night; because 'tis full of shelvy rocks, reeds, and Isles; and by day (be∣sides the common Pilot) they have a man placed upon the Mast to discover, and direct the ship: from Cameran, 'tis not so dange∣rous; but we were forced to make this voyage by land, to escape the dangers at Sea: the water to my thinking, was of the co∣lour of other Sea-water, both in her Superficies and bottom; the name of red onely excepted, which was given her by allusion to the name of King Erithreus, who named it so;King Eri∣threus. or because of the sands, which in some places are of a reddish colour: The Moors call it Babar Corzum, which signifies an inclosed sea, the havens upon it are at Babel-Mandel, which is in the twelfth degree, 'tis called by some the sea of Meka; Arabia upon the red sea side, was formerly inhabited by several people,Sabeans, Homerites. principally the Sa∣baeans, since called the Homerites; they received the Christian Faith in the dayes of the Emperour Constantius; and some will have it, that rather from thence then Aethiopia, came Queen Saba, and since Queen Candaces Eunuch. At the end of this Sea in the Streights of Babel-Mandel, is the town and Haven of Aden,Aden. called by those of that countrey Adedoun, a town of the greatest fame in all the East, and one of the strongest of Arabia, and of greatest importance▪ by reason of the trade and concourse of all the Nations of the In∣dies, Persia, Tartary, Arabia, Aethiopia, and the Levant: she was formerly subject to Sequemir, since conquered by the Por∣tugais, and now in the possession of the Turk; on the land side stands that famous Mountaine Albacoure, or Dartzira;Abacoure or Bacoure. which must be travell'd over to reach hither; the passage is streight, and difficult, defended by two strong Castles on each side of the way one; from the top of the hill you discover
Aden, standing in a large plain; her Haven is great and good, butting upon the Cape Gardafu; the Town is grown famous since the Portugais set footing in the East Indies. for the Mer∣chants leaving the red sea, for feare of the Portugais rest here in their journy to the Indies, whereas before they went through∣out, without landing here. Here are unladen, from the Indies and other places, the Spices,The trade of Aden. Aloes, Brasil, Pearles, and pretious stones, Myrobo∣lan, Safron, Wax, Steel, Sugars, Rice, Purcelaines, Lin∣nens, Quick-silver, Vermillions, Cottons, Silks, Scarlets, Chamlets, Musk, Amber, Beniamin, Storax, Azure, and other Commodities vented in several places. Spices, and the trade from time to time.Here time out of mind, were the Spices landed, and from hence by the red sea, and the Nile, transported into Alexandria: formerly (they say) that the Soudan Governour of this place, was so puissant, as to send an Army of thirty thousand horse, and forty thousand Cammels to assist the Soudan of Egypt against the Christians; and waged ordinary warre, besides against the Abys∣sins:Aden how fortified. Aden is well walled, and fortified with several Castles on the East side; on the North stands Bacoure, which divides her from the Happy Arabia, and on all other sides she is incom∣past with the sea; Westward the sea, enters the land so far through a gulf, that you would think the Mountaigne were an Island; the Haven is Eastward, and large, scituate un∣der the foot of the Hill; coming from Arabia, you would take the towne to stand upon the top of the hill, whereas it stands in a plain almost surrounded with the Sea, guard∣ed by a strong Block-house in a little Isle adjacent, that defends the Towne and the mouth of the Haven, as by the side of the Hill there are severall Forts, that com∣mand those passages; The opposite to Aden of this side of the Isle, and streight of Babel-Mandel is in Aethiopia, sub∣ject (most of it) to the grand Neguz, with a creek of Sea, and a fair Haven, and the Cape called Foubical, or Guardu∣fu, anciently the Promontory called Aromata: from one side to the other, the streight is forty thousand paces over, and in the midst stands this little Island, in length some two leagues; the mouth is very dangerous to enter at low water, by reason of Shelves, Rocks, and Reeds, and a number of Isles, of different bignesse, some of them inhabited, some not; wee travelled most of them, and the chiefest I saw was Cameran,Cameran. near the coast of Arabia, in the fifteenth de∣gree of Elevation, fifteene miles round, or thereabouts; she hath plenty of fresh water, and her Haven is of the con∣tinent side but two leagues off, or thereabouts; the Town is small, but increases dayly, subject to the Sequemir, and inhabi∣ted by Moores.
On the other side, in Aethiopia, is Dalascia, or Dalaca,Dalascia. a faire Town, inhabited by an Idolatrous King, tributary to the King of the Abyssins, since the conquest that Alexander the Preste John made of it, which hath ever since obeyed his Lawes, together with Rocca, or Eroca, where there is a faire Haven, in∣habited by Christians, Abyssins; very good people, they weep for joy, to see any Christians of these parts, they call them Roma∣tas, or Roume, make very much of them, and distribute what they have amongst them, according to the charitable practise of the Primitive Church: They have a little higher, another faire Isle, called Mesua, or Mezuan, peopled with Christians, where there is a good Haven,Mezua. that saves many good ships from ship∣wrack, sayling in this dangerous sea: a little above Mesua is another Isle called Ibrani on Aethiopia side, where there is a good Haven, and most of the Inhabitants fishermen:Ibrani. Camera. be∣yond that is the Isle of Camera, subject to the Preste John, she hath two Havens, one southward, the other eastward, hath good water, and a good well, two hundered paces from the Sea, in an orchard, called Magodu, or Magot, con∣teyning twenty or thirty houses, and every house a boate, ready to take the water to fish, which is their onely liveli∣hood. CHAP. IX. Of Dalascia Town, belonging to the Grand Neguz, of the Isle of Socotora, with a description of a prodigi∣ous tempest. THe Caravans that come from the Abyssins Countrey,Suachan. are imbarked at Dalascia, or Dalaca, or at the Isle of Suachen belonging to the Grand Neguz, and bound from thence for the Holy Land; most of these places are inhabited by Chri∣stians. Suachen is an Island in the eighteenth degree of latitude, drawing from east to south; within a bow shoote off the Con∣tinent. Dalascia belongs to the Neguz, governed by a Ma∣hometan, tributary to him, and allowes liberty of consci∣ence. They have fair Churches, their Priests marrying as the Grecians do, who are subordinate to the Abuma, or Patriark of Ethiopia.
The air is exceeding benign, and productive of all excellent fruits, as oranges, citrons, melons, figs, raisins, there are good store of cattle,Camelots. especially those great goats, of whose hair Camelots fine as any silk are made, which hair is very long, white, soft, and delicate, whereof they make stuffs so fine they look like white linnen, which they traffick in, and sell at dear rates. They have here likewise the finest and best Lacca of the world, pro∣duced from minute insects like Bees, which feed on a red gum that issues out of a tree like a cherry tree, which the more pur∣gative it is, the finer and more delicate they render the Lacca.Lacca. There are some who practice no other trade than to take it imme∣diately upon the production, and laying it upon little Tables cleanse it, then put it up in small pots of various colours, not a∣bove half an ounce in a pot, which by reason of the excellency they sell dear, and call it Laca d' Alaca, whereof the most excel∣lent colours are made for Limners. Of this is likewise made Spanish hard wax.Spanish wax. The Island abounds in cattle, pasturage, fish of all sorts, pure spring waters, which make their gardens flourish. They have also of the best ginger, notwithstanding not much e∣steemed,Ginger. by reason that for the too much moysture 'twill not last long. Here is likewise great store of the wood called Santall, red,Santall. white, and citron colour, store of Ebony, and the most ex∣quisite Rose wood, also another sort of wood called Sorba, much like Brasill, but makes a very deep dye: also an herb called Laga∣rozo, that in perfect ripenesse makes a most excellent crimson, and being put in cotton cloth, the more 'tis washed the more lively it becomes. The Inhabitants of this Island are great Libertines, partly Moors, partly Christians, each living according to his custome, without either confusion or disorder. The Mahometan Prince is gracious, obliges much his Subjects, wears the Turkish fashions, with many rich jewels, and is honourably attended. Dalascia Asses.Those of the Continent speak of this Town by way of pro∣verb, Sarbayt Dalca, which signifies, Dalascian Asses, because of those beasts they have the best in the world, which do them mar∣vellous good service, and are better to travel the deserts than any other beasts they have: In Persia I have known them sold at a hun∣dred duckets a piece, and more, because they are good travellers, and of little expense, they will go thirty miles a day without any wearinesse. Caymans or Croco∣dile.The King's Father that ruled this Countrey in the time of my travels there, had a fish of a marvellous bignesse, which he cal∣led Caymans, (Caymans is a kind of Lezard, or Crocodile, in the Indies) he kept this fish in a Pond near the Sea side, and delight∣ed much to feed him with his own hand, the fish being very man∣suete, he bred it of a young one, but 'twas grown so large 'twould come out of the water alone, three hundred paces on land.
As we were sailing in the Arabick Sea,A strange dispute and a tempest ensuing. in company of many Merchants of several Nations, and Religions, there arose a dispute touching the diversity of Religions, one holding (as our Deists and Atheists this day do) that all Religions were indifferent and sufficient, and that all persons acknowledging a God should infal∣libly be saved: mis-calling the Christians, and blaming them, for having good opinions of themselves, and bad of others, to whom a Christian discreetly and learnedly replyed, shewing the purity of our religion, and that a Christian dying in mortal sin would be damned as well as Turk or Infidel; at this the Masters mate offe∣red presumptuously to perswade us that we were all abused, and that Duma governed the Universe,Duma the Peguans false. god. Lucifer. another acknowledged no o∣ther divinity but nature, to this our Abyssin presently replyed that Duma had been a servant to the great and onely God, but thorough pride, from an angel of light was cast into the depth of hell, where he remains a fiend, and hath no power but by Gods permission: after many other discourses as we were sailing towards Guardufu the weather grew very cloudy, and we perceived far enough from us a thing like unto a thick black smoak dropt into the Sea:Strange tempest. one of our company, a Grecian of the Isle of Chio, drew his sword, and having said a Prayer or two, and made the sign of the crosse, left not hacking and hewing upon the hatches, until he had cut out three or four pieces, which action set the company a laugh∣ing, yet we perceived it to dissipate, and remove that smoak from the ship: the horrible thunder and lightning which presently fol∣lowed, strook us all with terrour; for my part I prayed heartily, and the tempest so hugely encreased, that nothing but lamen∣tations and groans were heard among us; bidding adieu to this world: some were maimed; for this Monster or whirling smoak, run in the shape of a baloon from rope to rope, and up the masts of the ship, exceeding swiftly, surrounded with a sparkling fire, making a most hideous noyse that astonisht us all, and tore and mangled the sailes into a thousand pieces: some Indian Gentlemen defended themselves from this terrible thing, with their cime∣ters, running up and down, and bearing one another down; many were killed and hurt, some hid themselves under hatches; others like madmen threw themselves into the water: our poor Chri∣stian received a great blow upon the head, and all in a gore of blood, and upon his knees read St. Johns Gospel, and immedi∣ately the Spirit vanished, having haunted us an hour and a half: we were all ready to yield up the Ghost, my companion was so bruised, that he wore his arm in a scarf for two months after, with a bruise black as pitch, we all testified our asto∣nishment by our silence, gazing upon one another, struck with amazement to see so many dead corps lye of all sides of us: at length by Gods permission we landed, for which mercy we yielded our humble thanks; we could not find the man that
held there was neither God nor Devil, our Masters mate was strucken lame of a leg and thigh, which remained black many dayes after, yet without sense of the least pain: amongst the rest a young man of our company told me, he was in great fear du∣ring the tempest, because of his guilty conscience: that venting his commodities in a certain Town we had made some short stay in, a Moorish dame under pretence of buying musk, and pre∣tending she would shew it her husband, left a pearl of extra∣ordinary bignesse with him in pawn, she immediately returned asking the price of the whole parcell; which was five duckets at the lowest, she took him at his word, and bade him follow her home for his money, which he did, and there she detained, and treated him for three dayes together:Amorous dames. Thus those Country Ladies seek their servants, and especially strangers, of whom they are very amorous. Socotora.Near the Cape Guardufu is the Isle Socotora, famous for amber-greece, and gum called Dragons blood, and for the plant that produces aloes, which is there the best of the world. This Island was discovered by Fernand Bereyta, a Portuguese, and Aristotle sayes that Alexander conquered this Isle, in his return from the India's, and peopled it with Grecians, pur∣posely to plant aloes. Before Portugall had here any Interest, the Indians trade both of spices and other precious commodities, came from Malaca by Ormus, and Aden, and from thence by Caravanes to the Leuante, some by the Persick Sea, Balsera, and the mouth of Euphrates, thence through Armenia into Trebisonde, by the Majorka sea into Tartaria, or by Damas, Barut, or Aleppo, where the Venetians, the Genovais, and the Catalonians fetched them, others by the red Sea, the Grand Caire, and Alexandria, as we have already said, others by the rivers Indus and Oxus, from thence thorough Caspia into our Western regions, but they have taken another road round Africa, which is kept to this very day.
CHAP. X. Of the Island and Kingdom of Ormus, of the King, and his Government, of the trade there, and of his severall Conquests. HAving sayled thorough the Arabick Gulfe, and those Coasts, we returned to Aden, where we spent some dayes, trading and exchanging our commodies, then we embarked our selves for Ormus,Ormus. to pay custome for some Persian horses we had shipt with us, because they pay no tax thorough the cheifest part of the Indies, taking a Cartaco, or passe, which the severall Governors upon demand, are bound to give. Thus sayling from Aden, by the Coast of Arabia, and the Cape Taratque, Rosolgate and Monca∣don, or Moalandaon, unto the mouth of the Persick Gulfe, or the Streight of Bazora, at length we arrived at Ormus, The name of a Town, an Island, and Kingdome, winding to and fro in∣to the Continent of Persia and Arabia: In Ormus we lodged with a Portuguais, who took state upon him, his man still carry∣ing after him a guilt sword, and a dagger, with a silver cup to drink in, scorning to touch anothers, yet nevertheless he kept an Inn com∣mon to all passengers. The Town of Ormus is scituate in an Isle, in the 26 or 27th. degree, 9 miles distant from Persia, thirty from Arabia, the Isle is between 35 and 40 miles compass, wholly barren; the Town is faire, and hath a strong Fort, begirt with high walls, and eight turrets, in the forme of Castles, one halfe of the Town is incompast with the sea, and hath foure large cisterns, or con∣duits of fresh water, brought in pipes from the Continent. The In∣habitants are some Christians, some Mahometans, and others Ido∣laters: There Reigned a Potent King here for 300 yeares, since this state was established. 'Twas in the Raigne of Ceyfadin,Ceyfadin. Albuquer∣que. that Alphonsus Albuquerque, reduced both the King and Country to the obedience of the King of Portugall, and ever since the Kings of Ormus, were tributary to that King, who yet meddles not with his Lawes and Rights: the native King hath vast Revenues, both in the Island, and in the Continent of Persia and Arabia. He is one∣ly sworne to keepe league and fidelity with Portugall, and the Vice-Roy acknowledges him, honours him,King of Ormus. and visits him fre∣quently in his Palace: The Isle onely at this day payes tribute to the Portugais. The King lives most splendidly and magnificently a∣mongst his Subjects. The confines of his State towards the north, are the Kingdom of Dori, toward Persia, and reaches unto the Cape of Rosolgate, at
the very Gulph, from thence unto the Cape Moncadon, contain∣ing the Isles called Gedri,Gedri. from a great river, that runs into ano∣ther named Dale, that separates Persia from Carmania, or Chirma∣nia. In the Gulph, is Baharen,Baharen. an Isle famous for the fishing of the rarest and most pretious Oriental pearls, where the Portugais have a Factor: the Inhabitants of Ormus are very voluptuous, walking the streets, they have carryed after them a Cuppe or Box full of Araca, a dainty, very delicious, and much used amongst the Indians.Areca. They have little Cabans in the Sea covered with boughs and leaves, where they refresh, and shelter themselves against the wind, Abrazador,Abrazador. so named by the Portugais, which blowes in the af∣ternoon. This wind is so subtle, and stirres up so small a dust, that it choaks people; and if a stranger be ignorant of the custom of the countrey, he is in very great danger; the people are cour∣teous, and ready to advertize strangers. Their greatest incon∣venience is the scarcity of fresh water, which they fetch nine or ten mile out of the firm land: They have two or three wells nearer at hand, five or six miles from the town, in a place called Terrabaguen. The Isle hath two good Havens, one in the East, the other in the West, the others are not secure. There is near the Town a sulpher Myne, and a little salt-hill, of the like good∣nesse to that of Cardonne in Catalonia, from which they draw great profit; it is used in many places, and the Prince receives a Gabel out of it; in the town of Ormus there is a Mart of all com∣modities, from the Indies, Persia, Arabia, and Aethiopia, in which places the Indians trade, as well as Persians, Levantins, Turkes, Abyssins, Venetians, Portugais, and others; the Caravane or Ca∣sile, arrives here twice a year by land from Aleppo,Alep. the first in April, the second in September. Trade from O∣mus.From Aleppo they travell through Babylon to Balsora, guarded by the Janissaries, from thence to Ormus. They travel seven or eight thousand in a company, at Aleppo there are English, French, and Venetian Consuls. From hence they trade in spices, perfumes, pearles, precious stones, Carpets, Silks, Chamlets, horses, conserves, and several sorts of sweet meats. King of Ormus.We came hither opportunely, to see the Creation or Election of their new King, which is performed with many ceremonies, to which the Viceroy of Portugal contributes great summes, for the Honour and State of his Master. A Prince of the Royal Maho∣metan Blood is elected and sworne to maintain his kingdom, un∣der the King of Portugals obedience; and although all his Lands and Lordships are scituate in the Continent of Persia and Arabia, where no Christian can reach them, yet neverthelesse the King is sworne to this Fealty and obedience by the Viceroy, that delivers him his Scepter in the Fort, and accompanies him with a great
train, and magnificence into his Royal Palace, where having made his submission and obeysance, takes his leave, and returns unto his Citadell. This King amongst other things, is sworne never to hold a great Assembly, without giving notice to the Viceroy, and thus they live peacefully, and keep a good correspondence;Ormus re∣gained by the Per∣sian. some yeares since the King of Persia, by the help of the English and Hollander, hath regained Ormus, and reduced it to his obe∣dience as formerly. CHAP. XI. Of Persia, her confines, and provinces: Of Babylon, and the Lake of Pitch. LEaving Ormus we resolved to travel through all Persia,Persia, and her bounds. before we begun our East-Indian voyage, as we first had designed. 'Twas occasioned by a Merchant I have already spoken of: having travelled to and fro, through very many towns and countries of Persia; I could not so exactly remark the dayes journies, nor the distances, order, or proceed of the voy∣age, by reason of my youth; I will content my self to discover a view of the country, as faithfully, and exactly as my memory will serve. And first I will affirm, that Persia, called Azemia, Azimir, and Farsi, is a vast Empire extending from the confines of Turky to∣wards Armenia betwixt the River Tigris, and the Persick or Elcatiff Sea. The Caspien, or the Bachu, the Indian,Cymits of Persia. and the river Chesel an∣ciently Jaxartes. Westward 'tis bounded by the Turkish Empire, Eastward it lyes upon the kingdome of Samarcant, the Empire of the Grand Mogul, and Cambaye, Northward upon the Caspian Sea, Southward upon the great Indian Sea, towards the desert Carma∣nia, and Guzarate. This Empire containes many great Provinces, or rather kingdomes; and a great number of fair, and flourishing Towns and Cities, having ever continued famous since the first settlement under the Grand Cyrus two thousand two hundred years since, untill it was possessed by the Grecians and Parthians; and since she returned unto the natural Persians, about the year of Grace two hundred, they kept it many ages, untill about foure hundred years since, the Sarasins and Mahometans obtained it, and have kept it ever since, by many changes, and diverse races of Kings, and Lords, Arabians Sarasins, Parthians, Turks, and na∣tural Persians, and by the last settlement of the Sophyes not many yeares since. The chiefest Provinces are Sequel pech, formerly Susiania,The Pro∣vinces of Persia. Chir∣mania, or Carmania, Struan, or Media, Corozan, Zagathay, or Hir∣cania,
and the Bactriane, Jex, or Parthia, Guzerat, or Gedrosia. then Arac, Podel, Iselbas, Sigestan, Sablestan, Chabul, Candahar, and others. RiversThe chiefest rivers are the Euphrates or Aforat, the Tigris, Araxes, or Arasse, Oxus, and others. Euphrates hath upon her banks many fair towns, as Babylon, where inhabit a great number of Christians, as likewise at Mazestan, Ast∣mosia, Artasara, Tunisse perbent, and elsewhere, who freely ex∣ercise their religion being tributary to the Prince. North∣ward are the famous town of Giett, six days journy from Solstania, Saban, Comer, Cozan, Egex, Jelli, Sengan, Maluchia, Scio, Mesen, Ere. Towns of Persia.Then towards the Persick gulph stands Guerdi upon the river Bindinimar, or Bindamach, and going up the river, you discover Marous, Viegan, Maain, Sana; in Media, are Tauris, Rip, Sidan, Estrana, Barbariben; Bacchat, Madranelli, Samachi, and others; then the Royal townes of Soltania, Espahan, Casbin, Siras, with∣out reckoning many other towns upon the river Benmir,Benmir. called by the Russes Bragadet, where they trade much in cloth of gold, sil∣ver, and silk. Thither they repair from all parts of the world for that trade, as from the Indies, Aethiopia, Arabia, Aegypt, Turkie, Tar∣tary, and other countries which yields a great profit to the Sophy of Persia. Babylon.We ran through most of these towns, making but short stayes, but better profit of our small commodities. Babylon, or Bagdet, so famous, and formerly the eye and marvail of all the Eastern towns, scituate upon the great Euphrates, Erat, and Aforat, which was fif∣ty miles about; there is nothing remaining at this day of that anci∣ent town but the ruines, since a total destruction given her by the Sarazens about 900. years since, and instead of her, upon the other side of the Euphrates, some four leagues distant, upon the cur∣rent of the Tigris and Euphrates, is built the town of Bagded,Bagded. or at this day the new Babylon, whither the remains of the ancient were transported into a town formerly named Seleucia by the Ca∣liff Almanzor, or Elmantzur; It lyes Northward upon Armenia, Westward upon the desert Arabia, upon the happy Southward, and Eastward upon Persia, the Tigris washes her walls; upon the other side is a pleasant village, with a bridge of boats rising and fal∣ling, with the flow, and ebbe; in this Burrough is the Fair kept, and here inhabit most of the Merchants, who trade freely; The town is large, and full of Merchants, well rounded both with walls, & gardens and Arable land. There was a strong Castle well provi∣ded with Artillery; where a Bassa then Lieutenant General for the Turk lived, but since the Persian regained it of the Turk, having ever been subject to the Persian, untill it was reduced by Soliman the magnicent, who caused himself to be crown'd King by the Califf, (living there at this present day) but without any power, retaining the name onely, and some rights to receive, and crown the Empe∣rours
of Assyria; There goes from this town monethly, Caravane, to all parts of the world: In lieu of floats, they transport their commodities down the river upon goat skins blown, then they load the skins upon Camels, for service again at need: They say that the tower of Babel so much spoken of, stood in a plain, some two leagues off that she was three thousand paces about, and that her foundation is onely at this day seen upon a hill cove∣red with her ruines: a Merchant that had seen the place related unto me, that the Tower was built with a clay or earth, so strong∣ly cimented, that endeavouring to take up a piece, he could not; and that there was a bed or course of that earth first laid, then another of reeds platted like a matte, not at all decayed, but strong, beyond imagination. He told me he had passed over the lake of pitch, proceeding from a great precipice,Pitch or Bitume. which they trade withall into diverse places; and that the great town of Nineve, and the walls of Babylon were built with this Bitumen, they burn of it in Holland instead of Turf, for it casts a great light: this lake or river of pitch is between Babylon, and another town cal∣led Nane; whence springs this pitch distilling out of a rock in seve∣ral clefts, and so plentifully, especially at the full of the Moon, that it is both strange and terrible; from thence those springs disgorge themselves into this lake of their own composing, Marriners thereabouts make use of it to calk their ships. The inhabitants believe it to be Hels mouth. 'Tis the Bitumen, or soft sulphurous mould so much spoken of by the ancients: which they made use of, and do to this very day, instead of chalk. I remember I have seen the like in Albema, a Region in the Indies, which the Inhabitants and neighbours thereunto burn in Torches, which yields so black, thick, and ill-sented a smoak, that the very birds flying over, are giddyed therewith, and fall down dead. In Cuba, an Isle in the West-Indies, is such pitch, towards the Cape Magdalen, in the country of Aute, and Province of Apalihen, which Bituminous li∣quor flows upon the water with such a stink, that often ships lost in their road, by means of the sent, retrive their way. Euphrates and Tigris incorporate near Babylon, and both run into the Persick sea near Balsora,Balsora. a town of great trade, fifteen miles distant from the main sea. The Town of Bagded or Babylon, is divided into four quarters,Bagded. Precincts, or Wards, and in time of war or troubles the four States or Councels, withdraw themselves into their respective limits; and call their Councels, and he that hath best advised, makes it out to the Councel, that his advice is most necessary and useful, injoyes royal liberty of freedom, without paying taxe, as∣sessement, or imposition, what lands soever he be possessed of. He is much esteemed and respected by the Prince, being ever af∣ter freely admitted unto the general Councel, which is held an∣nually for the kingdomes good and welfare. This is also an obser∣vation
as in many townes in Persia, which inclines the people very much to the study of Astronomy, divination, and all sorts or kinds of Philosophy that may make them wise, and prudent, and understanding; they are much given to vertues, chastity only ex∣cepted; being a large and lascivious people, the women in these countries are the fairest, and the sweetest in the whole world, which verifies the Proverb, a Persian woman, and horse. CHAP. XII. Of the Town of Tauris, Sumachia, Bachat, Casbin, and some of the chiefest places of Persia, FRom Babylon we passed through all the other towns of Persia, the chiefest whereof I will only mention,Tauris or Tabris, formerly Terva, or Gerva. as Tauris in Media, a great town, and full of Merchants; some take her for the ancient Ecbatanes, a Royal town belonging to the primitive Kings of Me∣dia; it hath been several times taken, and retaken by the Turks and Persians; untill 'twas strongly maintained by the Persian, since the last battailes given by the Persian to the Turk, she was lost when the King of Persia assisted Prince Zagathay;Zagathy. which occasioned the revolt of a good part of his country contrived by his eldest son. This King to recover his country,Xabas, or Abas and Mirza. and to ensnare his son, devised a stratagem, which was to report himself dead, and caused his ob∣sequies publickly to be celebrated; concealing himself in the place his treasure was kept in, hither his abused Son streight repaired, was seized on, and ended his dayes in prison; after this, the King with a great Army went to regain what he had lost of his dominions, as Sequetpee, Aremnia, the towns of Siras, and divers o∣thers upon the Euphrates, Tigris, and Araxes. The town of Tau∣ris hath been several times burnt and plundered, in the several con∣quests she yielded unto: she may be very near as great as London: The Prince receives yearly great revenues, by trade, as well as from the Inhabitants, for they are all tributary, as also all artificers are acccording to their faculties and callings: The Merchants that on∣ly passe through the town without making any stay, pay for their commodities at the rate of five per centum for toll or custome, or the rights of passage; and if they are minded to stay in town, they pay ten per centum: but notwithstanding the height of the cu∣stome, thither resort very many Merchants, with all sorts of wares, from all places, as it were in spight; they come from the Indies, Afri∣ca,Trade of Tauris. Aethiopia, Baldec, Mosul, Cremesol, Cambalec, Melusia, Vaouta, De∣cherin, Saltamach, Chelmodate, Cotestan, and from other parts of the world, which brings an inestimable treasure to the Sophy. Besides,
the many other towns that pay the like gabels and customs, as Giac, Soltania, Jaban, Comer, Casera, Erget, all very rich Towns:Principall Towns of Persia. Then towards Cusistan, the great City of Guerd upon the River Bin∣damar, Virgan, Marout, Asana, with Nain, all iunumerably peopled, Sidan, Reib, Estrana, Barbarihen, Samachir, and in other parts Maluchia, Sengan, Sio, Meson, Ere, and many more, the Country being five hundred leagues over from Babylon, to Corozan, and from the Persick to the Caspian Sea, all inhabited by people civilized, yet most of them Mahometans of the Sect of Hali. A little above Tauris drawing towards the North,Derbent. and the bounds of Media stands Arbena, or Derbent, which they say was built and so named by Alexander the Great, formerly called the Port of Caucase, or Iberia, because it is a strait of land, or nar∣row passage, between the Caspian Sea and the hills, which hindred the Scythians entry upon Media, since she is called Temircapi, or Iron gate, and Derbent, which signifies a Strait and there be many Iron gates, with a strong garrison, to stop the Northern peoples passage, as the Circassians, Albanians, Tartars, and others. Beneath Derbent stands Sumachia,Sumachia. Bacchat. a rich Town and full of gentry; then Bachat, or Bacha, another Town of great com∣merce upon the Caspian Sea, and a most famous one being the nursery of the fairest women of all Persia, and the Persian dames do far excell in beauty, sweetnesse, graces, and are more taking than any Ladies in that part of the world; and they have a proverb in Persia, that he that hath a mind to see a fair and handsom wo∣man must go to Bachat. They are visited from all parts, for they are of amiable com∣plexions, and there is a certain place in the Town called Gezem∣pee,Gezempee. whither most of the Curtizans do retire, and are frequently visited by strangers. The Jewes that inhabit this Town, do carefully take up all the poor girles that have in any measure re∣ceived natures favour, they cloath them richly, and lodge them in a large street near to that quarter called Machif:Machif. which signifies a stews, and make a great benefit of them, they are all sumptuously lodged, apparelled like Princesses: and although they are poor yet they find friends that provide for them, you spy them at the windows as at Rome, their keeping open houses gives a free access unto all persons to trade with them, yet for the most part they are married to rogues, or mean conditioned people, as Porters, Car-men, Butchers, or Hangmen, who often interrupt your entertainments or conversation with their rudenesse; shewing them∣selves to be masters:Marseilian Curtizan. there I saw a Marseillian dame named Louysa Campane, brought hither by her husband to keep a house, she be∣came so haughty and proud of her gallantry, that a certain Mer∣chant desirous to buy her favour at ten crowns price, she threw it him out at the window very scornfully, and yet was not of the ablest to live amongst them; neverthelesse she maintained
her husband in silks and satins, who was but a poor Seaman ugly and ill behaved, but it is rare if this sort of women become not most miserable at last, by reason of their vaste and conti∣nuall expenses, they will thorough vanity give a crown or two at a time, to a beggar in the street: This Marseillian had lived five or six years, in a great heighth in Tauris, where by her trade she had got above a thousand crowns, which through her pride and vanity she wholly consumed, being banisht the Town for bra∣ving and giving a box on the ear to a Lord that kept her for a time since she retired to Bachat. Bezap or Bezouart.There are many more fair Towns in Persia, as Spahan, Casbin, Siras, Royall Towns; at Spahan is kept one of the Sophy's Courts, well peopled and rich, there are made many silke stuffs, and is plenty of a certain stone called Besouart, (which they say) goats breed in their stomacks: The Turky-stone mine is not far from thence, 'tis a very amorous Town, both men and women thinking of nothing but their pleasures, and coolness during the heats: fruit is there very plentiful, & most excellent of all sorts. casbin and Siras.Casbin is another big and Royal Town, well inhabited; then there is Siras the most delicious, and most pleasing of all Persia, which affords you fair gardens, fountains, and other refreshments during the great heats, there are many stately and good horses, some imagine this Town to be built upon the ruines of old Per∣sepolis, the City-royal of the ancient Persian Monarchs, scituate near the Araxes, now called Bradamir, and not far from thence are to this day seen the admirable ruines of that famous pallace of the Persian Kings, which Alexander caused to be burnt to please his Thais,Thais A∣lexanders Cutizan. of Siras more hereafter. Going on our Journey we went from place to place without keeping a streight rode, to put off our commodities at a better rate, drawing right upon the Cusistan; of that side we found all the keyes or passages of Persia, bad and difficult, for which reason the Turk effected not his design in those parts, we found it a strange Countrey, and all that part of Persia but a vaste solitude unpeopled, and very dangerous travelling: The Mountains were inhabited by harbarous or insolent per∣sons, then we met with great fens or bogs very deep, and forrests impenetrable, which renders the passages so uncertain and arduous, that the merchants have much ado to find them, although they are well guided, and have often travelled them; when you have met with the guide that undertakes to conduct from one kingdom to another, he must give account to the Belierbeit, or Go∣vernour, what persons he carries out of his dominions, for you may not return into the same country, without producing good license and discharge, with a certificate or note of the places you have tra∣velled; which is a laudable order of the Princes, for having such a care both of strangers and of his own Subjects, that he wills and
endeavours their free and secure trading in all his Territories. We went towards Vacharin to enter upon Tartary, and raught unto the Province of Samarcant,Samarcant. where is a Town bears the same name, famous, for having been the seat of Tamberland the Great, so much mentioned in our Histories these two or three hundered yeares. We being sensible of the hardship and inconveniencies in tra∣velling further this way, besides the best experienced Merchants disswaded us from it; for we discovered that that Countrey coyne was not of any value, being neither gold nor silver, but of some other base metall, and some of the barke of trees, as Marke Pole remarkes of Tartarye, Li. 2. Cap. 18. we turned back again into Persia, from thence by great dayes journey to the happy Ara∣bia and Ormus; we now had associated our selves to a jolly com∣pany of Merchants, and my companion privately acquainted me he had resolved to see the east Indies, and that if I were unwilling to take so long a journey, he would recommend me to some French Merchant at Ormus, that should safely reconduct me into Europe. I willingly resolved to go along with him, or whither else he would, but not to leave him: this resolution taken, we came back thorough many Towns of Persia, as Sorismell,Sorismell Sinderate. twelve leagues thence Sinderate, upon the river Adalout, where we were lodged at a Renegades, that gave us good entertainment, his house was built halfe upon the water: the Armenian Merchant that de∣sired to go thorough Pegu to buy rubies, resolved Cassis to passe thorough Indostan, we advised together to regain our way, and to escape the excises, or payments, are paid towards Samarcant, and Corozan; we had much recreation in this voyage. CHAP. XIII. Of the Kings of Persia, their Power, pleasures, of the Sophy, Hali, and of some Sects of Religious Pericans, of the antient Mages, and other Officers of the Kingdome. THe King of Persia is one of the greatest, and most Powerfull Princes of the World, as well in the extent of Territory,The Pow∣erful state of the Kings of Persia. treasure and riches, as in number of men of warr; he can ordi∣narily set forth a hundered thousand Cavalry, and of infantry foure score thousand. The state of his Court is most ample and Magnificant: his people warlike, with a great number of gene∣rous
Nobility; the King is served, and attended by the greatest Lords of the Land.Delica∣cies. He is Cheif, or Head of the Religion, or his Church, throughout his whole Empire, and leades a very lascivious and voluptuous life, keepes many women Royally clad; he uses the most exquisite perfumes, not in his apparrell and furniture only, but also in his meate; he weares Jewells, of an inestima∣ble value; and he hath leave to marry as many wives as he pleases, as the Grand Seignior hath; He keepes Seleris,Seleris. persons well qualified, whose duties are to travell thorough the whole Empire, to see and chuse the fairest and rarest women, having leave to en∣ter all places,Women chosen. nay their very bed-chambers, to view them, in what postures they please, but chiefely to know whether they snore, or stir much in their sleepe, or whether they sleepe quietly, and ha∣ving made choice of them, as they ought to be qualified, they carry them in a littar to the Princes service, and their parents are much honoured and esteemed. When the King hath seen them, and hath chosen which please him most, he presents the others to the greatest Lords and favourites of his Court; which are much happier then those remain with the Prince, for so great store he hath of them, that few of them have the Honour to enjoy his Person; they are kept, or guarded by Eunuches, as they are in Turky: Those are most in his favour the King takes of∣ten a hunting with him:Hunting. they are not seen of any, although they can see others; he goes a hunting, as to the Wars, his men carry severall sorts of Armes, as bowes and arrowes, cymiters, axes, marching in rank, carefully guarding their Kings Person, whom they adore as a God. Their Military discipline is very exact, and they suffer much in their exercises, they eate nothing untill their chase be ended, then they drive heards of savage beasts before the Concubines litters, to recreate, and delight them, killing those the Ladies have most minde unto, sometimes they cause of them to be taken alive, and restore liberty to the rest; this Countrey is fuller of great and pleasant Forrests,Forrests. then all the rest of the east. Sophy sig∣nifies wise.The Prince is called Sophy, rather for his Religion then for any other reason, he maintains the Law of Hali, son in Law to Mahomet, and therefore weares a woolen cap, and a red turban flock't with white, from whence he is called Sophy, which signifies a red flock't cap, and Caselbas signi∣fies read head, although some would have it an Arabick word, and to signifie a man purer in Religion then the rest. They differ in Religion from the Turks: that follow the feast of Hamar, another of Mahomets disciples, and successor, which occasions mortall hatred, and continuall Warre betwixt them. Hali.The Persians Hali was by Mahomet chosen Calife, and hi successor after his death: but was supplanted by Ebu∣beker,
Homar,Hamar. and Otman, from whence this Sect was divided. Hali was buried at Cufa,Cufa. not far from Bagded, this place is much esteemed by the Mahometans, and the Turkish Emperours are crowned by the Calife, near unto his tomb called Massadali or ra∣ther house of Ali; The Turks hold the Persians hereticks, and the Persians have the same opinion of the Turks, the one follow∣ing their Prophet Hali's interpretation upon the Alcoran, the other following Hamars. The Persians since the destruction of their Kings and Califes, were governed by the Sophy's of the race of Ismael:Ismael. Sophy. This Ismael pretends himself descended from Hali, by a prophet named So∣phy, and since they retain the title of Sophy. In their Sect they have many orders,Sorts of religious orders amongst the Turks. Sacar. among others one called Sacar, people using great austerities, and abstinencies, and are ex∣ceeding indigent: they carry about the barren places, and the Forest vessels of water, which in charity they distribute unto the passengers, in the name of Hali, without exacting any thing there∣fore, onely taking what is freely given them. There is another order called Jcorma,Icorma. consisting of pilgrims, they are cloathed in a long Cassock, bare-foot, and bare-legged, begirt with rich girdles, hung round with silver bells, and are cal∣led Jonabam, which means, Religion of love. There are others called Calenden as among the Turks, those vow chastity, and have places appointed for their prayers called Tachie,Calender: or Tachiat, upon their gate these words are written, Caeda, Normac, Dilersin Cousionge Al cachercuir, which signifies, who ever enters here, must preserve virginity, and for this purpose they are rung with silver rings to prevent carnal copulation: Next are the Deruis,Deruis cut-throats. they wear rich rings in their ears, are clothed in sheep skins; and wear hangers, with which they cut and mangle themselves, when they feel the emotions of the flesh, having eaten of a certain herb, that renders them frantick and furious; then they cure themselves with Nicotiane. Some of them dye of those wounds,Nicotiane. which they place in the number of their Saints. These Deruis are rogues and thieves, kill all they meet upon the road, that are not of their re∣ligion, thinking they do their Prophet good service; they ask an almes in the name of Hali, saying Ferdaxtiay, Malday Chinaila,Some say that Amu∣rath was killed by a Tribullian soldier, guised in∣habit of a Deruis. Eli, this order hath not been in so great esteem amongst the Turks, since Amurath was killed by one of them, and that they endevour∣ed to murther Bajazeth the second, and in Persia the Sophy. One of them killed a Bassa at Babylon in the voyd place called Sambacarayma which signifies a place of liberty, and was not pro∣secuted because he was esteemed the Minister of God; one of them disguised, killed a Judge at Damas, as I have before related. There is another Sect called Durmisar,Durmisar. and they are sooth-sayers,
and casters of nativities, they are called Durmisarnari which signi∣fies Prophets, and Fortune-tellers, they deal with the devil, and the eldest of them are esteemed Saints, the younger obey them as their Charif, or high Priest. They are abominable Hypocrites, and make strange faces: some of them are very skilful in Astronomy, others learned in the countries lawes; and others great Preachers; they talk extravagantly in their Sermons, and speak predictions, which sometimes come to passe: much credit is given to them by the vulgar, as also of those of the best note; nay if the Sophy him∣self happens to passe by the place they are preaching in, he steps with all his house to hear him; they have a house in Bagdet, near the Royal Palace: they seem to be remainder of the ancient Chaldeans, or Persian Mages so famous. Amongst the Persians there is a sort of people called Erade,Erade. which are wrestlers, they are often exposed to wild beasts, armed with shining leather, liquo∣red, and very slippy, hard to be taken hold of: there are others called Pluviander,Pluvian∣der. armed in another fashion, these people are welcome to the King from what place soever they come, be they but strong and valiant; they are exercised in publick Schools, and great use made of them in war, the strongest amongst them com∣mands the rest,Barcas. and is called Barcas: and some of them will carry ten men upon their arms like kids, and they will strangle a man with grasping, their strength is such: others are like the Arabian Salsidas that will obey their King to death it self,Salsidas. hold their King a God, and think their chiefest happinesse and salvation depends upon the execution of his command; and hold it unlawful (the King only excepted, and their General) to be subjected to the power of any man: There are Aussares persons still attending up∣on the King; like unto Xerxes his immortals. Amicabir.In the Sophy's Court there are many places or offices as Amicabir, or Captain General, who keeps a great Court, leads on, and drawes the Army into battalia, appoints the Governours to towns and pla∣ces, and fils up several offices, using the publick treasure as he needs. There is next the Naibessan, or Nabassan, as Lord Treasurer of the Kings Exchequer,Nabassan. his place is next unto the Amicabir, and hath a good number of Cavalry under his command. Next there is the Estodar or Ostader,Ostader. who guards the Palace, and finds persons capa∣ble for the Royal Army. There is likewise L' Amirachor, or Ami∣racher,Amirachor. who is Master of the horse, hath charge of all the horse, and other cattle of carriage belonging to the Army. The Caidsidibir or Field-Master,Caidsidibir. and he manages or orders the battle. CassanderThe Cassandera Pay-Master general, receives the Kings revenues to pay off the Army. The Amiseralif, takes a care of the Sophyes armes: the Testacane or Master of the Wardrobe: then the Zebedare Farassin, Tabucaina, and other Commanders, they march in great pomp and order. There are four sorts of troops, severally paid,
viz. the Cachias persons slightly armed, all gentry, and very active, the Athesia's that wear a Cymeter only, the Caraniza or Arch∣ers armed with bowes and arrowes, and Cymeters, the Ageleps,Ageleps Archilep in Pegu. or renegats, which are slaves, Armenians, Russians, Guserates, and of other nations; all warlike and stout men, keeping good order, never breaking their ranks. CHAP. XIV. Of the East Indies, the conquest of them, Sects, and Religion of the East, and other particulars of the country. HAving travel'd the chiefest part of Persia and Arabia back∣ward and forward, we returned to Aden, from thence to Or∣mus, to fall into the East-India road, according to our first intenti∣on. At Aden we agreed upon't, and embarked our selves with our commodities, and sailed along the coast of the Indian Sea, as far as Carmania, Deserta Rasigut, and Guzerate, passing through the Cape Jacobo, Guadel, and others, we landed at Cambay at Diu, neare the mouth of the great Indus. But before I treat of that country, for a clearer intelligence of the worthiest remarkes we made in that great journey, I say that the East-Indies have bin dis∣covered time out of mind, since Alexanders conquests, and of his successors, the several Kings of Syria, Assyria, and Aegypt, and by the Romans; and in these latter ages, by the Mahometans means,Inhabi∣tants of Genua. trading in our Western parts, amongst the Venetians and Genoe∣ses, and others: but they have been further discovered and inha∣bited by the Portuguais, since they found out a new way thither through Africa, in the time of Prince Henry of Portugal, brother to King Edward, who through his rare insight into the Mathema∣ticks, first caused a Navigation to be made, unto the Capes of Non, and Boyador; where the French having conquered the Canaries, had already been, since that Alfonsus the fifth his Nephew conti∣nued his discovery unto the Cape Verd and Guinny, and other Kings since have reached to Conge, Maniconge, Angolal, unto the Cape of good hope, discovered by the Grand Vasque of Gama 1497. few years after the new world in the West, had been found out by Christopher Columbus: from hence the way is open into the whole East-Indies, by Cephala, Mozambick, Quiloa, Monbase,Places in the Indies. the coasts of Aben, Arabia, Carmania, Cambaye, Malabar, Coromandel, Harsnique, Bengal, Aracan, Pegu, Sian, Malaca, Camboye, Champa, Cochinchine, and China, the furthest part of the East, together with the innume∣rable Islands, opposite to these coasts, as S. Helena, S. Laurence, Soco∣tora, Maldives, Quilan, Sumatre, Jave, Bandan, Moluques, the Phillip∣pines,
and the rest of the Antchidel sea, or Archipelago, of S. Laza∣rus, unto Japan. The Por∣tugais conquests in the East.The Portugais made themselves Masters of it, under the famous Albukerke of Goa, 1510. and since of Matacha, Diu, Ormus, and other places where they establisht their Empire, trade, and the Christian faith, finding the wayes easie and short, by their knowledge of se∣veral currants of the seas, and annual or constant winds that sit for six or seven moneths together in one point, and as long in another, when they change, as in the West-Indies; the Eastern winds pre∣dominate, through the torrid Zone, between the Tropicks: and notwithstanding this exact knowledge and practice of the Eastern, and Southern Seas, these two ages past, many shipwracks have hap∣ned; many ships, men, and great treasures cast away, all which the earth stript off, the sea solely inherits; neverthelesse 'tis a miracle of providence, that a handful of men with small means, have bin able to establish themselves, in those vast Indies, to resist and overcome the oppositions of the richest, and the most puissant Kings of the world, and that their example hath since drawne to their mitution the English, Dutch, and French; who trade therein great numbers. In a word, the Portugais, in matter of commerce, dealt not only with the Indians, Idolaters, & Sarasins, but also with the Mameluckes and Turks, from whom they got their richest trade; they have got the superiority likewise in the spiritual, against all Sects, long since broached by the Gentiles, Mahometans, Jews, and the Nestorians, Christians, and do daily root out and extirpate those Sects and false religions, not without much danger, and trouble; but they take the greatest paines with the least successe against the Mahometans for their liberty, and sensuality, hinders much the progresse of our religion; although they find great difficulty in the obstinacy of the Jews, and little lesse in the foolish, horrible, and senselesse su∣perstitions of the Idolaters, backt by long custom, and more by the ambition, covetousnesse, and presumption of their Bramins, Jogues, Talipoyes, Manigrepes, Bonses, and other of their Priests, and religi∣ous of their belief, from hence is gather'd a plentiful and glorious harvest, by the travels and labours of many regulars, and seminaries of Goa, Malaco, Machat, and other places: The Franciscans were the first labourers in this vine-yard,Christia∣nise in the Indies. in the year 1500. or rather sooner, and the first Bishop setled at Goa, was of that order, in the year 1541. S. Francis Xaverius was since there, who preached through all those countries, and Isles, unto Japan, and China, where he died in the year 1552. and therefore was called the Apostle of the Indies, his order continues their mission thither stil, where they gain an infinite num∣ber to Christianisme. At Magor, Pegu, Sian, China, Japan, Jaso, and other places, the Colledge of S. Paul at Goa, being their chiefest Se∣minarie, where the Archbishop inhabits; who is Primate and Patri∣arch of the Indies, having under him the Bishops of Cochin, Mala∣ca, and Macao. The Viceroy rules the temporal affaires, and all
Governours, Captains, and Governments of Africa, and the East-Indies, are at his disposal. CHAP. XV. Of Diu, her state and Forts, and the neighbour∣ing Countryes of Cambayette, of the fidelity of the Indian Sensalls, and of the marvelous ebbing and flowing of the Sea. LEt us return to our voyage, and arrivall at Diu, which I shall treat more fully of here, as of Cambaye, Goa, Cochin, Calicut, and others, having seen them often since. Diu is a little neat Town, scituate in an Isle joyning unto the Continent of the King∣dom of Cambaye, whereof it is a part; there have the Portuguais a Fort, or Castle inexpugnable, no man being permitted entrance there, without a Cartaco, or passe from the Vice-Roy, and the ships pay Custom, if they are small vessells they may enter into Cambayette, which is the Haven of the Town. The Isle of Diu is by the Indians, called Marmayrdina, 60. miles from the mouth of the Gulf of Cambaye, and 100. from the Royall Town of Cam∣baye, she joyns almost to the Continent, in the 23th. degree and a half of elevation, it abounds in cattell, vast trade, used by all the Indian Nations: for the abundance of all sorts of Commodities, which are there to be bought and sold, as Gold, Silver, Spices, Me∣dicinal drugs, Brasil, Jewels, Pearles, Perfumes, Amber, Musk, Mastick, Cloves, Safron, Corrall, Brass, Lead, Mercury, Vermilli∣on, and Lacca; the Town is as big as Marseills, little lesse then Goa; there are many fair Churches. The Hospitall is large, rich, and very well provided. The West Indians traffick here, come in a shorter time, and with more surety, thorough the sea of Sur, then by the Cape of Good Hope a very dangerous passage, occa∣sioned by the great winds, and frequent tempests, as you shall hear hereafter. The Portuguais having taken this Town out of the hand of Badurius, King of Cambaye, at their first settlemen there. The Town of Diu was built by a King of Guzerate, and Cam∣baye, constituted Governour there of a Melique, As or Tas, that made the Haven, made himselfe Soveraign, and was guarded by Turks; since, in the yeare 1508. the Natives, assisted by Campson, Soldan of Aegypt, fell upon the Portuguais, defeated them, and stormed Diu severall times so fiercely, that it occasioned, Nonio A∣cugna the Vice-roy, in the year 1535, to build a strong Fort, with the consent of King Badurius, which they maintained against the Tartars and Mogors; the strength and importance of the place, drawing both hatred and envy from the Indians, The King
of Cambaye, and other neighbouring Kings, indeavoured to reco∣ver it by meer strength, but all in vain; for the gallant op∣position and defence of the Portugall, hath kept them masters of it to this day. The Indians had some reason for what they did, for from thence depended the whole Trade of the Kingdom, and adjacent Coun∣treyes; and the Portuguais keep all that Countrey in subjection; from Diu to Goa, and the Cape Comarin, 270. leagues in length. The chiefest part of the East is furnished with commodities from hence, a place very rich, well peopled, and full of good Townes, and of great trade. In the adjacent parts, to Diu, upon the Continent, are the Kingdomes of Circan, and Reytenbura, where stands the Royall Town of Ardanat, then Campanell, capitall Town of Cambaye stands beyond the River Indus, and the Townes of Albiran, Casdar, Masura, Sudustan, Abedit; all great Townes rich, and well traded, and inhabited by many Mer∣chants, Gentills, Mores, Jewes, and Christians, in this Town Malefactors are put to death by poyson only, and not by the sword. Beyond the River Araba stand many fair Townes, viz. Sava∣dir, Barca, Bermen, Patenisir, a fair haven, where divers of the rarest,Batinisir and her Carpets. and richest Carpets of the World are made in silke, and fi∣gured, which are transported to Bengale, Malaco, and Pegu, and o∣ther places; there are also made Calicoes, stained of divers colours, which is the chiefest and ordinary cloathing the Natives use, and there is brought of it into all parts of the world. Halfe a dayes journey from Batenisir stands Diu, upon a creek of land, separate by a river from the Continent; there are paid great Customes upon all sorts of commodities, which brings in a great profit to the Inhabitants, the King of Spain having the least share in it, and what he hath imployed to the maintenance of the Garrisons, most of those payments fall to the Officers and re∣ceivers shares, who agree very well with the Vice-Roy: The King is often of a mind to quit the Countrey, but his Councill is not of the same opinion, the Countrey being too considera∣ble to their Prince, for strength and reputation; and besides 'twould indanger the losse of Christianity, that is so hopeful∣ly rooted in those parts, for the Turkes assault them often, and took and sack't the Castle of Diu twice, and had reduced the rest of the Town,Diu as∣saulted by the Tuk. but for the help of three ships that came into their assistance from Cochin, that preserved the rest, and beat the Turks out of what they had already got. The Portuguais, in defence of them and the Nations, have built two strong Forts, the one in the sea, the other that commands all passages by Land; but the Natives having often fallen upon them, to their own losse, are now the Spaniards good friends, according unto Articles and Agreements made between them.
The Inhabitants of Cambaye are strict observers of many super∣stitious customs, they will not eat with a Christian although they visit them often; if you touch their meat they think themselves pol∣luted, and this they have from the Guzerates, in which they are more rigidly superstitious than the Jews themselves. Those of any quality eat upon silken carpets diversly colour'd, and to preserve their silks serve the dishes upon green leaves, they are temperate in their diet, and drink of severall sorts of li∣quors, and they mingle some Areca to them all,Areca a fruit com∣mon in the Indies. a fruit very com∣mon in the India's, it is also held very wholesom, preserves them and cures them of several diseases: it preserves the teeth strange∣ly, for the Inhabitants are never troubled with any pains or aches in them; women are there in very great esteem, especially the great Ladies, who never stir out of their houses: some de∣light themselves never to see day light, and are served all by candle light. The whole Countrey is inhabited by Gentills, and Guzerates; The justest, the most reasonable and religious of the East, accor∣ding to the ancient Pythagorean rule, they never feed upon any living Creature whatever: their chiefest food is rice, white and black, milk, cheese, garden stuffe, and the like; they do wrong to no persons, nay they spare the bloud and lives of their mor∣tallest enemies; the Countrey towards Rasigut produces great store of Turkey stones, of Storax, Cornelians red and white. This Kingdom extends it self towards South-east, and the Sea Southward, Westward it buts upon Guzerate, Eastward are the lands of Mandao, and Paleucate, and Northward it reaches unto Sangan, Dulcinde, and the Territories of the Grand Mogull: Through this kingdom runs the famous River of Indus, called Indus Inder, or Schind, and hath given her name to the whole Countrey, and chiefly to Indostan, and other neighbouring Coun∣tries; which make up the India citerior, her head springs forth of the Mountain Caucasus Paropamisus, called at this day Nau∣gracot and Ʋssonte, and taking her course thorough many great Kingdoms, is swel'd by many great Rivers, that lose themselves in her, and at last discharges her self into the Indian Sea at two several mouths near unto the Town of Cambaye. Cambaye is a large and flourishing Town,Cambaye Town. seated upon a River called by the Inhabitants Amondoua, and separates the Provinces of Guzerate and Cambaye, both making one Kingdom: This Town stands a league from the Sea, and about the same distance from the River Indus, which affords her a haven in two places, the chiefest is in a corner of the Town Northward, and is so nar∣row that in case of necessity the ships may be chained in the har∣bour, the ships come and go with the ebbe and flow, and are often very numerous, and 'tis to be noted that the tides are weakest at the full of the Moon, which is wonderfull,A miracu∣lous tide; and contrary
to ours, the reason thereof is not yet found out by any Natu∣ralist. The same happens in Pegu, as we shall speak of here∣after. This Town is one of the richest of the Orient, built very stately at the Italian model, and the passages leading to her strengthened by many forts. The Portuguais have often endea∣voured to possesse themselves of it, being plentifully furnisht with all things necessary to mankind; and here are most excel∣lent fruits: Here Diu provides her self with what she wants at home, Cambaye and she being Confederates: she produces the best Turbith, Galanga, Nardus, Assa foetida, and other drugs, is rich in silks, cottons, rice, and all sorts of seeds, and abounds in precious stones and Jewels;The King at this time is tri∣butary to the Grand Mogull. The Prince that governs is a Maho∣metan, gives liberty of conscience to all his Subjects, to the Chri∣stians, Jews, Idolaters, his guard consists of 2000. horse, and 3000 foot, armed with bows and cimeters. He keeps fifty Elephants taught to reverence him dayly, and are sumptuously trapped and caparisoned, upon dayes of pub∣lick shews or festivals, their stable well and neatly furnished, painted, and well set forth, and are fed in silver vessels, and their grooms or Governours dresse them with great respect and humility, without ever offering any rudenesse; they are animals approaching very near to reason, and want speech onely to ex∣presse themselves;Prodigi∣ous food. they understand the language of the Country, and do very readily conceive what is taught them: The Prince feeds upon venemous Creatures, which he hath ever so used himself to, that he is become venemous himself, and a fly stinging of him immediately dies: he presently killed all the women that ever lay with him, infecting them with his breath, so that he had change daily. The furniture within their houses is rich, which they have from the Portuguais, they ride in littars, and are great Lovers of Musick; their houses are sumptuously dressed at Diu, and Ormus, many of them beautified and enriched, with Calcedoni∣ans, Turkey-stones, Amarists, Topases, and other jewels. At Lymadura a village within three miles of the Town there is a mine of Calcedonians, whence they have of three sorts of them, white, red, and mingled, called Bazayora, Merchants from divers places furnish themselves with many of them, they saile with their ships into Nogar, a Port not far from the Mine, the commodities laded from this Town are transported into divers parts of the world, to Ormus, Ziden, Meka; others are transported through the mouth of Euphrates unto Bazora, Babylon, Byr, Aleppo, and Damas. The imported commodities from Meka, are scarlets, velvets, fine woollen cloaths Iron ware, Amsian which is a drug like unto Opium, which the Indians frequently take, chiefly in their Armies,
it makes the Souldiers valiant and furious, fighting to the last drop of bloud: and is therefore a rich commodity, the Assa foetida, Turbith, Agathes, and other jewels are brought from Diu, where there are many Goldsmiths and Jewellers, thither the Merchants bring them to have them cut into several figures. Silks, purslanes, sendals, velvets, ivory, brasile, mirabolans, confections, and preserves, of all sorts, spices, and all sorts of gro∣cery come from China, and from other places of the Levant: The Town affords you of the best Borrax in the world: Trade is very faithfully carried on there, for the Factors and Retalers are per∣sons of quality, and good reputation; and are as carefull in vent∣ing and preserving other persons wares, as if they were their own proper goods; they are also obliged to furnish the Merchants with dwelling houses, and ware-houses, diet,Women bought and sold. and oftentimes with di∣vers sorts of commodities: the houses are large and pleasant, where you are provided with women of all ages for your use, you buy them at certain rates, and sell them again when you have made use of them, if you like them not, you may choose the wholsomest and the most agreeable to your humour: all things necessary to livelihood maybe made your own at cheap rates, and you live there with much liberty, without great incoveniences; if you discharge the customs rated upon merchandizes, nothing more is exacted, and all strangers live with the same freedom and liberty as the Na∣tives, do, making open profession of their own Religions. Ivory is in very great esteem in this place,Ivory: and the neigh∣bouring Countries, and very much is consumed; Ladies of the best note wear bracelets of several fashions made thereof, and at the death of any friend or alliance they break them in many pieces, which is the greatest expression of sadnesse among their sex; as the shaving of beard close is to the men, and when their time of mourning is over, they make themselves new bracelets. The Town of Cambaye is much of the bignesse of Roan, or ra∣ther bigger, besides the Suburbs, and not much unlike unto the Grand Caire, only that she is much lesse,Children sold by Parents. the inhabitants call her Byr, Armadouar, Parents that are overcharged with children sell those they have supernumerary. Here I will relate you an accident that happened to my Cama∣rade at Cambaye; Having spent some dayes there trading,An acci∣dent. he met a Countreyman of his born at Xaintonge, who feigned himself a Merchant, and a great dealer, but proved at last an impostor. This counterfeit, under the pretense of trading, stole from my Camarade a pack of wares worth 300. crowns, which by the op∣portunity of a Caravane bound for Ormus, there he imbarked himself to preserve his theft, timely notice being given my Compa∣nion, he pursued him in another ship, together with another Mer∣chant, who had formerly been the like served in a greater conse∣quence.
This diligence was a little rash, for I was immediately advised by our host, a rich broker or merchant, that my camarade had taken his journey in vain, having not with him a roll of his goods stoln, nor the Viceroy's Cartaco; I streight resolved to follow him with the papers and passe-port he stood in need of: Cassis overtook this venturer at Ormus, where he debauched at his charge, and for want of the list of wares nothing could be proved against him. The cheat put my companion to his wits, denying whatever was alledged against him, with an injurious insolence. The Judge or Al∣cade, to whom my friend had addressed himself for justice and sa∣tisfactiō, weighing the others confidence with the slender evidence my friend could bring against him, and having received a feeling in the case, was ready to commit our friends to prison for barrettors, and impostors, had I not come to town three dayes after with com∣fortable news, I shewed my self in Court, and giving information of the whole truth, my testimony and evidence was taken in the presence of the Alcade, and a Portugais Gentleman, named Seig∣nior Jacomo de Mendez, purposely sent by the Viceroy; he gave me charge to take great care of my self, telling me that if I were found a liar it concerned my life, being sworn, imposing my hand upon a Crosse held out to me upon the end of a Vare, or wand; I gave up my evidence at large, and informed the Judicature, that in the stoln pack there was a memorial of what was therein contain∣ed, besides I particularly named the chiefest goods therein, which Cassis had wholly forgotten. Then I produced the Cartaco, and other notes, that witnessed the discharging of the excises and customes, as by advice received from our host Josepho Groyna, who witnessed the same: The cheat being examined in my sight whether he knew me or no, he begun his own defense injuring and abusing me, striving to break my evidence by multiplicity of words, with a strange boldnesse, or rather impudence practised by such persons, saying he had taken no exact account of his commodities, pretending him∣self a Gentleman and not used thereunto; his many words availed him little, for I pressing the pack might be opened, my evidence proved true, and the roll compared to my book of accounts, found answerable all was verified, and the miserable man having not a word left in his own excuse, was convicted, and condemned to the Galleys during life. Thus we found justice, and recovered our commodities with little losse, and returning thanks to Seignior Mendez we came back to Cam∣baye: This I have related to the faithfulnesse and integrity of our Landlord; and really their sincerity and integrity is such, that the Justices esteem their words and writings to equal sacred things; and when a Merchant happens to die, leaving his goods in one of these persons hands, they are very faithfully restored to his heir, or next of kindred.
From Diu and Cambaye, unto the Cape Comorin, by the Coast of Malabar, it is some 300 leagues sayle: and neer to Cambaye is the Kingdome of Jogues. CHAP. XVI. Of Deli, Malabar, of Goa, the capitall Town of India. NEer to Cambaye we fell into the Kingdom of Deli, and Decan;Deli-De∣can. they say that 300. yeares since, Sanosaradin King of Deli, con∣quered Decan, Canary, Bellagatte, Concam, Goa,Sano sara∣radin. and all the Coun∣treyes reaching unto Comori, but since, under his severall Successors, those Countreys were divided, and allotted to severall Captains, that have possessed themselves thereof, acknowledging (for forme sake only) the King of Deli; Idalcan was at Goa, since Nysama∣luco, and the Negatana, and many neighbouring Countreys are subjected to the Great Mogull; who this last age hath conquered the chiefest part of the east Indies, and threatens hard to the rest. Malabar lies upon the Westerne Coaste, from Goa to Comori, as eastward on the other side lies Coromandell, where are the King∣domes of Bisnagar, or Narsingue, Orixa, Menduo, and seve∣rall others, from Ormus to Goa it is 500. leagues, or therea∣bouts. We sailed all along this Coaste, and we arrived at Goa, an Isle and Towne of Malabar, as faire, rich, and stately a Town, as is this day in the east, being as a key to the India's, in the sixteenth degree of elevation, devided from the Continent by a large River,Malabar Mandova. Goa Guari, Rivers. called Mandova, as big as the Euphrates, and by another little River na∣med Guari, from whence the Towne took her name, formerly be∣longing to the Kingdom of Narsingue, since unto Decan, or Dealcan, and since 'twas conquered by the Portugall, under Alphonsus Al∣bukerke, of the Moore Sabaco, Generall unto the King of Decan, in the yeare 1500. she hath eastward, and northward, the Coun∣trey of Decan, westward the great sea, and southward the King∣dom of Mangalor, subject to the King of Narsingue. The Insularies, or Inhabitants, having ever been well addicted to trading, they are people stout and haughty. There is a great con∣course of all the Indians, a Haven at the village called Bonastariu,Bnactaru. with a block house, that commands the entrance of it, though it be strong of it selfe: They have severall other good Ports, as at Danda, Alinga, Banda, Amolapole, and Puntadasall, then old Goa,
Rama, Guisantole, and Amadina, each having her particular river: on the continent side, there are many Towns and Plantations, most of them Mahometans and Idolaters, kept in by the Portugais, they have stately ship-timber. They are pretty well awed for the pre∣sent, since they were punisht for a treacherous conspiracy, which by the assistance of some neighbouring Countries, they intended to have put in execution, but was by Gods permission discover∣ed by the Barbarians, inhabitants of Paleacate, and although they were 100 Gentills for one Christian, and had almost gained the Fort, yet they were gallantly repulsed by Don Garcias Acugna, Go∣vernour of the Fort, he very liberally rewarded those that gave him so timely advice, distributing the Kings Treasure amongst them; and since those freindly neighbours of Paleacate, injoyed the same freedomes and Priviledges with the Portugais, they were made subsidy and customes-free; and so strict an alliance and unity contracted between them that many of them since are baptized, turned Christians, and do frequently enter-marry: the Plotters were most of them put to death, the rest banish't, and their goods confiscated. Isle of Goa.The Isle of Goa is some 15 or 16 miles about, the Inhabitants are strong, and able bodyed, almost of an olive colour: The Town is infinitely rich, and the great street very full of goldsmiths, that have their shops well stored with gold, silver, and Jew∣ells. Idolatry. Dinary.The Gentills had a most magnificent Temple built of stone, in a little Island neere to Goa, called Dinary, where they adored the Devill that appeared to them in diverse most terrible and hor∣rid shapes. The Portugais seeing this diabolicall profanation, demolish't the Temple and the Idols, without leaving the least marke behind them, and with the stones they fortified the Town, and built ma∣ny fair houses, which bred a great malice and hatred amongst the Idolaters. The Temple was built of a black stone, and their Pa∣godes, or Idolls, were most horribly shaped. When the Portu∣gais managed that great Warr against Samorin of Calicut, it was then in their power to demolish this Temple. But the respect they bore to an Image of our blessed Lady, Mo∣ther of God,The Vir∣gin Mary Honoured by the Indians. made them spare it for that time: They call the Blessed Virgin Sannacarin, which signifies a bird, and hold she is the spirit of God; they give great honour to the holy Crosse, and say that at the founding of the Town, a perfect one was found in the ground. The Inhabitants live very deliciously, feed much upon Areca, and are carried in rich Sedans by their slaves, and the inhabitants have liberty of conscience. Having been often at Goa, amongst other things I admi∣red the great commerce, the richest good order and admi∣nistration
of Justice, and above all, a most admirable govern∣ment in an Hospital, which is very rich, where notwithstanding are great number of sick, and maim'd, from the Armies: The Viceroy and Archbishop contribute liberally thereunto; the Portugais prove themselves, of an affable, and compassionate na∣ture, although the Indians hold them rough and uncharitable, because they possesse much of their land. This Hospital is the fairest, and the most accomplisht, in all ne∣cessaries I know in the world; and I dare affirm that neither that of the Holy Ghost at Rome, nor the infirmary of Malta, although they are served in plate in both those places, do equall her in riches, good orders, and services: that are farre better observed and tended, then you can expect to be in your own house, as I often was a witnesse of, visiting the French that were there sick: the Fathers of the society have the keeping of it, and are very charitable therein; It is built upon a River, founded by the Kings of Portugal; besides the charity and gifts of the Nobility, which are great; they have for the most part a Factor at Cambaye; a Country plentiful in all sorts of grain, who makes their provision at the cheapest rates: there a great number of slaves, that are employed in all inferiour offices; and are also made use of in the other Indian Hospitals, and other Monasteries. Perfumes are daily burnt, to prevent infection, and to lessen the unwholesome sents that would otherwise very much offend: they use very fine linnen, and wine of Dates is their onely drinke, and is full as delicious as that of Grapes: the Portugais are very voluptuous; and great sensualists and are served in Purcelain,Purcelains which will not hold poyson. This Country is much infected with the great pox, and with another infection called Mordesin,Mordesin. diseases Scorbus. that begins with vo∣miting, and pains in the head, and is infectious. There is ano∣ther disease very common amongst the natives called Scorbus, and other diseases proceed from the enchantments of bad women; They are no sooner sick, but are carried to the Hospital, where remedies are presently used for their recovery: they are lodged in well-furnished and pleasant chambers, and have very fine gardens. The Churches of Goa are fair and well adorned, the Windores of Mother of pearl, very curiously carved. At Pegu they are made of Tortoise shells of diverse colours, and are the fairest of the world; the Lanthornes belonging to the Hospital, are made of the shell of a fish, a kind of Mother of pearl. They burn nothing but wax in the Churches, nor little else in the town, it is so well provided therewith. This town being some eight thousand paces about, may be of the bignesse of Roan or Avignon, built, and tyled, as the fashion is in Europe; Goa is an Archbishops See, and hath four Bishopricks depending to her, and her jurisdiction reaches unto Mosambick.
Churches at Goa.There are many magnificent Churches, and Monasteries, of Je∣suites, Franciscans, Austin Friars discalceate, and many Nunneries of Virgins, and penitents. There is great commerce of all wares and merchandise, of slaves especially, both males and females; 'tis but a peccadillie, for a Master to lye with his slave, but if she proves with child, the law enfranchises her, and she may go whither she pleases. The waters are good and well tasted, and although the tyde goes up beyond the town, yet there remaines not the least brack∣ishnesse in the water, the best is fetched halfe a mile from the town, from a place called Banquenin, which is sold. The Por∣tugais are richly clad, with breeches like Sea-men, very rich but∣tons, coats, and Cassocks, pretty short, and broad hats; they have their Parasols carried by them, with bottles full of Colos, and other pleasing drinks, and they weare very rich swords; and in a word, they are very vain and proud, as the Prophet speaks them, Pocos y Locos. The Haven is very good, onely there is a shelf of sand, as at Larack in Fez, they have an inquisition, or Court of Parliament, which is their Judicature; The Viceroy is removed every third year. The profit there accrues to the Governours and officers, and little comes to the King, that depends much upon his Ar∣mies; besides the pay of three thousand officers. The Isle is mountainous, sandy, and reddish, yet very fertile, being well water'd with many springs, and rivers: of this red earth or clay, are made many sorts of cups and vases white, some gray, others red, and as clear and fine as glasse, as Bolarmeni. They have two crops a year, of Rice and French Wheat, and it is green all the year long: this land is scituate under the Tro∣pick Cancer, near to the Equinoctial. There grow many Date-trees, and ships come daily into the Haven, laden with Cocos, and other commodities vented in the town. The ships stay at the barre or mouth of the Haven wanting wa∣ter to bring them up: They hold it two miles from the town to the mouth of the river, where are two strong Block-houses or Forts, to defend the ships that sayle in the middle. Then a league higher there is another called Pangari, where dwells the Captain Major, that grants the Cartacoes to trade, both within, and with out: but since many have written of the Judicature, Government, Nobility, souldiers; the manner of life of both the Sexes of this town, as well Portugais, as Indians, I will say no more; I will onely relate a sad accident happened to some poor French-men, that had stolne a ship laden with pepper, but having suffered shipwrack some twelve leagues from Goa upon a shelve of sand, the ship was taken and saved,A sad fate of Pirats. belonging to a Portugal Merchant of Goa, the poor men arraigned, and condemned to be hanged,
for the Pyracy committed, as well as for their murdering the Captain; the chief of these Malefactors was called Raymondin; they were assisted at the time of their suffering by some good Fa∣thers of the Church of the five wounds of our Saviour, near to the publick place of execution; and the fathers of our Ladies of Mercy cloathed them all in white according to their custom with white caps, and a crosse in their hands; they died very couragi∣ously and penitently, fully contrite and sorry for their sin and shame; some were hanged at Saint Katherines key, others in the Corne-Market. Six of them were hanged there, whereof the youngest broak two ropes, and fell down from the Gibbet; the good father that assisted at his death, obtained his pardon, and caused him to be taken back to the prison, he turned Franciscan, to the great contentment of the whole order, and was visited by all the Nobility of the town: he was born at Diepe, his name Ra∣telin, and fell into Raymondins company with no intention to Py∣racy, but to see the world; and thus God gave him grace mira∣culously to escape. I remember that being in Provence, a young man borne at Au∣bayne, was upon suspicion of a certain crime cast in prison,Provence a Province in France. Aubaynea town in France. and ar∣raigned at Aubayne, and being convicted thereof, was condemned to be hanged; he broak two new halters, and fell without the least harm from the Gallows to the ground; which accident cau∣sed the multitude to cry out for pardon, for the poor man, which was immediately granted him, but miserable, as he was ignorant of his own happinesse, he ended his life by the Gibbet for some de∣testable crime by him committed in another place. A Sicilian Gentleman was accused by thirty false witnesses to have intended the sale of Messina to the Turk,A miracu∣lous dis∣covery of innocence. and sentenced for that offence to be hanged, and his children to be decapited, pro∣testing his own innocency upon the ladder, the Rope breaking, they tyed another to him newer and stronger, which broak also, the people saved him, and his proces was reviewed, the false wit∣nesses examined, condemned, and executed, the wronged Inno∣cent with his children undertook a pilgrimage to our Lady of Loretto, where I saw him. At Goa as also at the other townes in the Portugais possession, the Merchants may trade with great security, with leave from the Viceroy or Deputy, and paying the rights and customes, other∣wise their goods are confiscated.
CHAP. XVII. Of Baticola, Decan, Amadiva, and of the Kingdome of Cananor. Barcelor.FRom Goa unto Comorin, which is properly the Coast of Mala∣bar, are many Forts belonging to the Portugais, as at Onor, which is distant 14. degrees, at Barcelor, 13. degrees, called by the Indians Barcelan, at Mangalor 12. at Mosiri or Cananor, 2. at Cran∣ganor 10. the natives call it Cagnanora, then at Cochin 8. degrees di∣stant, and at Coulan which is called Cosmans, and at other places. Baticola.From Goa we came to Baticola which is a kingdom, the town is large, rich, and plenteous in all commodities, scituate upon a pleasant and deep river, which yields her accesse easie; the haven is a quarter of a league distant, for the most part full of vessels, that yield great commerce. The Inhabitants are partly Gentiles, partly Mahometans, but much civilized; of complection between fair and brown, of good statures, and dispositions, both Sexes. The town is invironed with many good Barroughs, that reach unto Decan, some five leagues off; the town is strongly wall'd, and frequen∣ted by Jewes, who drive a great trade, and inhabited by all nati∣ons: she is tributary to the King of Marsingue, they are carried in littars by Cammels, of horses they have very few, we served our selves sometimes with oxen, which they harnise, and ride, they eat bread made of Rice, which is more savory then wheaten, there grows no grain, but the Country beares most excellent fruit, their drink is wine of dates. About 3. Musket shot from the town, there is an Isle named Amadiva, which hath a large haven, on the continent side, inha∣bited by Moores, and abounding in pastures, and cattle. The inha∣bitants are the Portugaises mortal, and irreconcilable enemies, but their Island being small, not above 8. leagues about; they are not capable to trouble them. The town is rich, and is called Centacola, subject to the King of Baticola: there are some Jews amongst them that may easily be distinguisht by the complexion, the Moores be tawny, the Jews clearer: women use waters and other washes that make them very beautiful, and they are held the prettiest of all the East, the fairest are Jews, and they very chaste, and strangers can only obtain to visit them, in certain assemblies of fair girles; but they go meanly clad, contrary to the customes of all other towns: they sing certain songs like K. Davids Psalms, grace∣fully pronouncing their words, and mingling instrumental musick with their vocal; and thus they entertain their gallants. They re∣fuse no present is made them, but if you offer none, they are never
a whit displeased: The doores of those places of Assemblies are alwayes open, there they keep their Synagogues, every one professes his Religion at liberty; in the middle of this Isle is a Lake, called Vecharin, which breeds good store of fish of seve∣rall sorts, but causes the ayre to be a little unwholesome to those are not accustomed to the Clymate; from thence fish is transpor∣ted into diverse places, for a sort of good lasting fish. They have great store of poultry, which they feed with grosse rice, called Je∣racoly. Baticola hath lost much of her trade since the Portuguais took Goa: for according to the Chafa's, or the Clark of the Customes ac∣count the Revenew is half diminished, which keeps the Princes far in the Continent, for fear of being surprised by the Portugais, who wage open warr with them, exacting great ransomes for the liberty of the prisoners they take; neverthelesse the Portugais trade much amongst them, endeavouring to draw them to an alliance; but they are not so soon driven out of their fears and jealousies; those of Baticola say they formerly inhabited Sian; in this King∣dome is the Town of Onor, that furnishes all the Countrey with rice. From Baticola we came to Cananor Mosiri, a great Town un∣walled, under the subjection of a particular King, where the Por∣tugais have two Forts, and is inhabited by many new Christians, who observe the rules and precepts of our Religion stricter then the old ones: the Portugais have built about their Fort many dwellings for Merchants and others, which make up a Burrough, called Cananon, where they trade securely, and when the Indians have a mind to trade with them, they must have the Vice-Roy of Goa's Cartaco; yet the Portuguais never kept so good intelli∣gence with the Natives, as to prevent many dissentions and dis∣orders, as is often seen in other places, as at Pegu and Calicut, which occasioned the ruine of the Castle, and the death of ma∣ny Christians, which the Portugais have since sufficiently reven∣ged; for they are of a very cruell nature, and revengefull, for which reason they maintain a fleet well armed at sea, to resist those of Portugall, who wage a warr against the Indians, not alwayes to their success. It happened on a time to Don Alanso De Comera, to pursue with two men of warr a Mahometan Frigate, richly laden, and bound from some part of the India's, for Gaza, a sea Town in Arabia. There were many families, with the goods they had ga∣thered in many years abode there, making homewards, ac∣cidentally falling into the hands of this Portugais, they hois∣ed saile, and thinking themselves too weak, offered a com∣position, to the value of two hundred duckats; Don Alon∣so eager and covetous of the prey, which he held himself sure of, gave her a broad side, with many great shots,Presump∣tion of the Portugais. and
boarded her, she, reduced to desperation, put her self in a posture of defence, and resolved to sell both life and liberty at a deare rate, and the very women spared them not, so their Alonso got nothing but blowes, but lost an eye, and many of his men, and thus was forced to retreate, and the Frigat by a favourable wind got away without any losse: this shewes the damage pre∣sumption brings with it, and that the Portugais are not unjust∣ly accused of vanity and folly, which often costs them deare, and makes them hated by the Indians, as it hapned to them at Calicut, where the peoples rage was so raised against them, that in an instant they demolished them a fair Castle, not leaving one stone upon another, and whoever could present the King with any of the ruines, was rewarded, which hath caused the spilling of much blood amongst them: The King of Coulan hath often be∣sieged their Forts, but after long Warres they now enjoy a peace. The strength of Cananor.The King of Cananor is very potent, and elected out of the Prin∣ces of the blood, as at Ormus: He can send 100000. men into the field, armed with targets and swords, they wear red bonnets turned up on one side, and go almost naked, the third part of them are Naires,Naires are Gentle∣men. or Gentlemen, very resolute and valiant; they weare red hats, and are not niggards of their lives in their Princes ser∣vice. The Portugais have a strong Castle on the side of the Town, and another on the sea side, both well provided with Amunition and Artillery, and have done them good service, having often been assaulted by the Naires, very gallant Persons; Many of them are since Baptized, and grown so devout, that if they hear the Ave Maria bell, though they are in their Coaches, or Litters, they are set on ground, and say certain prayers on both their knees. At Cananor they have a quarry of a stone, called Azazimit which is much esteemed amongst the Indians, and hath many ver∣tues,A most ad∣mirable medicine. it cures feavers, stops fluxes, and causes digestion, and is a preservative against poyson: they use it in their cures against the pox, and it is very neere as Soveraigne, as that famous Eastern wine, that if a man be so rotten as to fall in peeces, yet bathed therein for one month, he will infallibly be cured. This Countrey produces Myraboian-Citterns,, a most ex∣cellent fruit, and very common amongst them: their leaves are like unto our prune leaves, they preserve of them, and use them often;Ebony. there growes the tree of Ebony, which growes to the bignesse of an olive tree, the leaves like unto sage, but as smooth as Mastick leaves, and the blossomes like white roses; the wood is black, and very hard when 'tis dry and seasoned:Areca. they have great store of trees that bear Areca, those of Malaca, call it Faoufell, the Portugais Araguerou,
in other places 'tis called Pinan, the leafe is of the bignesse of a palm leafe, the stalk is full of strings, which are very usefull, the nut or fruit is huskt up, when the husk pills off, the nut hangs upon the tree of an orange colour, and is very juycy and savoury, and the vertue of Succory, cold and dry; and hath another quality astringent, the shell or nut is not of the bignesse of the other palm fruit; but lesse, as the peach, and ovale, nothing like a nutmeg, being mingled with white and red streaks, and of this fruit the Areca is made, excellent against the tooth-ach, they have abundance of other palm-trees that bear Dates. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Kingdom, and Samorin of Calicut, of the Natives of that Countrey, and of their horrible superstitions. FRom Cananor to Calicut, in the 9. degree, although the an∣cients hold it in the 2. Before our arrivall three upon a Sun∣day morning, drawing towards the East, before Sun rising, we heard a Marriner cry out, Jasan, Jasan, Malabar, but we were not so near it as he thought, for they were the mountains of Calicut, which are discovered afar off, for we put into the haven not till night. Calicut is a great Town, one of the fairest, richest,Calicut. and of the greatest commerce of all the India's: some will have it anciently called Barygaze, yet the Mores hold she hath been built many years since, and that six hundred years agone, Asarama Perimel, was Emperour of Malabar, and the Natives reckon upon the years since his reign, which is their most famous Callander: He kept his Court at Coulan, where was the chiefest trade of spices,Samorin. and gave the Countrey of Calicut to the Arabians, who frequen∣ted it very much for commerce; they made this King a Mahome∣tan, who went through devotion to end his dayes at Meka, distributing his estate to divers Lords, leaving them the Title of Kings, as of Cananor, Coulan, and others. Calicut fell unto a Ne∣phew of his named Samorin, which signifies soveraign Emperour over all the rest, in temporall affairs, as he of Coulan was chief in Spiritualls, surnamed Cobritin, viz. high Pontife of the Bra∣mins. Samorin built this Town, the Metropolitan of Calicut, in∣habited by the Meres, where was the greatest trade of groceries, since removed by the Portugais to Cochin.
The Prince is an Idolater at this present, although the Town be peopled by all Religions, Gentils, Mahometans, Jewes, and Christians. The building is very good, though the houses are very low, because they stand upon an ill foundation, the Sea water ap∣pearing if you dig but a little depth, yet they have by art and in∣dustry raised the Temples, and Pallaces, whereof there are four Royal ones, inhabited by the Kings wives, and concubines; there stands one of them without the Town, fair to the sight, and high. Their Temples are so too, and built round, the first of that form I saw in those parts; they adore the Devil, and put his picture upon their coin, in most horrid postures: They put two Demons embra∣cing, with cloven or cocks feet at one side, on the other a certain Character, which signifies, think upon this people. The King is impiously devout, and every Wednesday performs a most strange adoration of Satan; he is pictured sitting in a chair, with a Crown upon his head, in the middle of many little Devils, most strangely and terribly represented; after the King hath offered him incenses, he prostrates himself on the ground in sign of submission, then begins his prophane prayers, then he stretches himself at length upon a rich carpet, leaning his head upon his left arm, thus he dines, inviting the Devil to his repast; four Bramins assist him in this impious sacrifice, and hearken very attentively to the discourse, or Sermon, the King makes during his dinner; representing to them the service they owe to their Idol, they answer him not in words at that time, but give him Betel and Areca mingled together, which he drinks with∣out touching the cup, according to their superstitious custom: because that day his mouth is sacred, and filled with the praises of Sathan; when he hath ended his repast, the meat he leaves is carried into a garden near at hand to be devoured by Crows, that there expect it, in so great numbers, that they hardly get two bits a piece. Calicut I conceive is as big as Millan, but not so well built nor ordered. The Strangers and Merchants are upon their arrivall put (to a great inconvenience) to buy houses to dwell in, which troubled us very much, being forced at our depar∣ture to leave it for half it cost us: you buy women for your service, and put them off again, but not without some losse. The Port is a pretty way distant from the Town; there is but one channell; which the ships cannot reach by a mile and a half, by reason of the shelves of sand, and therefore they use flat bottoms, which do great services upon the Ri∣ver: The King keeps a frigate or pinnace called Jonques,Jonque. for his pleasure, which he treats the Ladies in, as the Venetians do in their Gondola's,Gondola. all the houses in the Towne are covered with palm-leaves, the Kings onely excepted that are tyled; be∣cause no private person may have means to fortifie himself.
the town is very subject to fires; and therefore the houses are built farre asunder. 'Tis surrounded with pleasant fields and pastures, but they never eat beef; they are so superstitious, esteem∣ing them holy and sacred cattle, that their Dume hath appointed them to cultivate the land onely, which makes them hard to be bought and sold; this superstition is only publickly observed, for some of the Bramins treated us with beef, who borrowed a christi∣an Cook, and entertained us with a whole calf, the head and intrals stewed, and the rest rosted as we use: He feasted us because one of the company had cured him of a certain disease, and refused any reward, and thus they do like the Turkes, who abstain from wine in publick, but drink it privately: neverthelesse these Bra∣mins have the devil pictured open mouthed, red, and flaming, ready to devoure, the law-breaker, and when they have offend∣ed, the sacrifice to him a white cock: which is derived from a ve∣ry ancient and superstitious Idolotry of the Pagan, who offered a white cock to Hercules, to the night, to Aesculapius, and to Annu∣bis: thus the devil renews these old superstitions, and appears vi∣sibly unto them, some believing him to be God, some a creature of Gods, some hold him good, others bad, these serve and adore him, for fear he should do them harm. Not far from Calicut, is an ancient Temple or Bagode, which they call Dumana, where there is a general pardon to be gained, certain dayes of the year, they have fifteen dayes of liberty, and freedom, which time the thieves, and banisht persons, may appear with safety to sacrifice; the Temple is built in a Marsh, held up by great pillars, with many trees of diverse sorts growing about it, each pilgrim chuseth himself one for his rest, and to hang his cloaths in. There are many burning lamps which the pilgrims offer up to be purified of their sins: The Bramins say prayers aloud, and sprinkle them with water, in expiation of their crimes; and after this ablution, they present themselves to the Idol, and adore it: from thence they return to their trees, having provided their lamps with oyle and wick to burn at night; 'Tis pleasant to see so much light. The next morning they bathe themselves all toge∣ther in a Lake, men, women, boys, and girles, without the least shame of their nakednesse; then dresse themselves in their best clothes, and return to the sacrifices, which ended, the Bramin makes them a short Sermon clothed in a white surplice, reaching down to the kneees, and bare-foot, the legs rounded with bands wrought, and hung round with silver bels, and standing thus be∣fore the picture of the devil, represented gaping, ready to swallow the spectators crowned, and with sparkling eyes; Thus the Bramin begins his sacrifice, casting himself upon the ground murmuring something, and beats himself so furiously, that he seems enra∣ged; then he turnes himselfe to the people (who are very at∣tentive,
shewing them the Devil, at which sight they begin to howle and cry for mercy with so furious and horrid a noyse, as Gods thunder could scarce be heard. Next he takes a white cock, and wrings off his head, and mingles his blood with water, which he sprinkles upon the multitude, who retire as contented as if they had gained an Empire. In the mid-way they meet a man of good presence, but distracted, with the devils picture about his neck, and clothed in a white Tunick or Albe. At the head of the people, the devils picture is carried by eight devotes clothed in cotton robes, followed by four Bramins, and many others, fran∣tick-like, running, leaping, singing, and dancing before the de∣vil: stabbing themselves into the faces and arms; and he is esteem∣ed the holyest, that hath given himself the deepest wounds, of which many dye, when they come before the distracted per∣son who is exposed upon theatre; they stand still to fulfill the ceremony of the sacrifice; and having burnt some perfumes, the Choourt or Bramin sprinkles him, with the bloud and wa∣ter, the people offer him their charities, and dedicating their clothes and lampes to him, they enter the Temple at another gate, leave their Idol in the place they found him, and thus they end their Idolatrous procession. From thence they go to dinner, which they sprinkle with the same water; and feeding up∣on the Vyands, they sacrificed, and of others they brought thither, the sacrifice is ended. These Bramins, and other religious, never eat any thing that hath received life in publick; although we eat flesh with them in private, they keep company with none but their fellowes. They wear white Turbants, Cotton gownes that reach to their heeles, red shooes; under this they wear a long linnen cloth or towel, that goes twice or thrice round about them, a fine girdle, long haire, their eares bored, and pearles hang∣ing at them: they wear next to their flesh certain strings, the badge of their order, which are given them with great ce∣remony; there are of them of several sorts, some of them go to the warres with the Naires, others trade, and are rich Merchants, and they are generally peaceable, and meek natured. The King himself is of the order, wearing the string in a scarf, they are much esteemed throughout the Indies, and some of them are very able Physicians. When they affirm any thing to be a truth, they lay their hand upon their string, or upon their Cabaye, or gown. The Portugais did live pretty peaceably amongst them, but the Moores have set them together by the eares. Some of the Moores are permitted to weare the Aspa∣gates, or habit of of the Bramins, but 'tis to favourites on∣ly, that such leave is given. When they eat they strip them∣selves stark naked, they tye a cloth only to hide their privie
members; the women affect to have their noses bor'd wirh wy∣ars, either silver or gold. There is another sort of Bramins in Surate, Guzerate and Cambayes, not so austere, and are under the obedience of the Grand Mogull. Those delight to eat flower of Mandel that comes from Brasil, and live very abstemiously. CHAP. XIX. Of the Kingdome of Cochin, the goodnesse of the soyle, customes of the Inhabitants, with a strange History of certain French Pyrates. FRom Calicut we went to Cochin, about the eighth degree,Cochin. and twelve leagues from Calicut. This kingdome is confederate with Calicut, professing the same religion, the town is scituate in a sweet and temperate ayre, the country abounds in cattle and fruit,Pepper of all sorts. grain is scarce but is plentifully supplyed from Cambaye. Pepper growes there of three sorts, of the long excellent conserves are made: throughout the coast of Malabar, which reaches from Goa to Comori, grows the white and black pepper. The Ginger where∣of much is confected for their use in all seasons, is called Aliah, in the Malaicke tongue. The Portugueses are in good esteem at Cochin, the King being their friend and allye, Since Triumpara shewed himself constant∣to them, against Calicut; since, when the Kings of Cochin have never broken their promises, whatever made to them; but have in∣violably kept their Articles, viz. to give unto the King of Portu∣gal a tribute of twelve pearles,Miticale weight of a crown and a half. of the weight of a Miticale a piece, which is about a crown and a halfe. The Portugais do chiefly trade in pepper, which they trans∣port to all parts of the world; that which they transport into Arabia, Suria, Persia, Babylon, and other places along those coasts, is farre better then that they carry into Portugal, because much of its strength and vertue is lost, in the long navigation; and the price falling, they put off the worst, and often most of it green, which neverthelesse the Portuguese carry into Spain. Besides, they load their vessels with refuse, and never bagge any of it; whereas the Mores, that are bound for the red sea, the Persick Gulph, and other parts of the Levant, give a good price for it, and therefore deserve the best.
The Pepper tree doth not resemble any tree I ever saw grow∣ing in Europe: 'Tis a faire and great tree, the leafe pretty long, and large, full of strings, she beares her fruit as our vines do grapes, or rather like the Provence wilde grape, in abundance. I have seen of severall sorts, one which the West Indians, at Carthagene, and Caramel, call Jerac, which signifies white, and laid in the sun becomes as black as the other, and though a little different, yet hath great vertue, and is like a young beane, but something lon∣ger: the grain is inclosed in a little cod, as the beane: This sort of tree beares no leaves, the others, which are the ordinary sort, beare many both long and large. They use it much to heate them, and put it in their pottage; resting my self one day over a store∣house which was full, I never felt the like heate. The other druggs, made in the Territories of Cochin, are sold to the Portugais only. But to save their pay they passe merchan∣dizes in exchanga; 'Tis true that every buyer payes some small earnest, for if their dealing were discovered, their goods would be wholly confiscated to the King, and sometime the very ships themselves. When the Portugais have bought at certain rates, if the Mores offer more, the former bargain is void: which to pre∣vent, the King orders certain punishments to keep them in awe. The Prince, though not very potent, yet can draw three-score thou∣sand men into the field. Cochins scituation:The Town of Cochin is built upon a faire river, a mile remote from the sea. There is another place called Cochin, joyning to the sea, which belonging to the Portugueses, there are many Chri∣stians, who to enjoy the priviledges of the City, and to be exemp∣ted from payments, are married there, all other Christians pay foure Per Cent. at both the Cochins, which are a mile distant one from the other. severall Christians at Cochin.There are many Christians married, of severall Nations and Sects, as Italians, English, French, Germans, Christians of the Girdle of St. Thomas, who passe for Portuguesses, and are all Merchants. The commodities pay severall customes, as for the sugars brought from Bengalo, the strangers pay eight Per Cent. those married upon the place are freed. There are many Amu∣chies Gentlemen, wearing swords and bucklers, who upon all oc∣casions expose themselves gallantly to death, for the safety of their Prince.Women are com∣mon. Their wives are in common, and the Natives lend them one another; when they enter any house they leave their swords and bucklers at the doore, and no man dare enter while a∣nother is within. All ships bound for Portugall are prepared for Sea in the moneths of December and January, from thence they sayle to Coulan, 72 miles from Colchin, where they have a noble Fort in the Territories of the King of Coulan, from thence to the Cape Co∣mori, unto the lower part of Chiloa, or Chilao, about 200. miles.
near wholly converted by the Fathers of the society of St. Paul at Goa, who have built many fair Churches; they had made a greater progresse in Calicut, had they not been hindred by the malice of the Moors, mortall enemies to the Christians, since they caused the Cittadell built by the Portuguais to be demo∣lished. The Harbour at new Cochin is very large, but very rocky. The Town is full of fair Churches, Monasteries, Hospitalls, and Colledges. The River that waters the soyle is pleasant and large, and helps to make up a good haven, where ships ride safe. On the North is a pretty Isle where the Bishops pallace is of most stately edifice; and although many Gentiles inhabit there, yet nothing but Christianity is practised amongst them, and who ever will idolatrize must remove to old Cochin, which stands upon the River, joyned with a long row of houses like a Suburb. There is great commerce from all parts of the Indies. The greatest inconvenience to the vessels is, that sometimes they must lie three or four months or more, at the mouth of the River, because the entrance is filled with sand, that choakes her passage, which happens from May to September, when fall great raines, which raise a Sea wind called by the West-Indians Touma∣caut,Toumacaui a western wind in force to∣wards Po∣tereau and Peru. Jenibaron. which by the help of the flouds, blows and bears down those shelves of sand, which do dissipate, and are spent in the sea. Thus 'tis almost with all Towns that stand upon Rivers, as I observed at Jenibaron, in the harbour of the Isle of St. Laurence, which carries after this manner all the sand into the Sea, and then hath one of the surest havens in the world. But before I leave the coast of Cochin and Malabar,Portuguais go from Cohin into Portugall. you must know that the fleet of Portugall once laden at Cochin, doth not return to Goa, but sailes strait for Portugall, passing through Mal∣diue; and all the Armado's, Fleets, and other vessels whatsoever, that come from the South and the Western parts of Goa, at 36. leagues from thence, are at their journeys end; having reached the Cape of Ramos, where in sign of joy they pitch their flags and standarts, and draw forth their whole artillery, as being safe and free from Pirates, because in that nook is divided the coast of Malabar, from the kingdom of Tacara or Dealcan. The like re∣joycements make the Fleets that come from the North-side, when they reach an Isle thirty six miles from Goa, called Quemada. Don Sancho Sapatero,A strange History of a Portu∣guais Cap∣tain, and certain French Pi∣rates. a Portuguese Captain met not with the like successe; who as I have since heard, being arrived at the Isle, fired some guns in sign of joy, and set a plume of feathers upon his mast: a certain Captain and Pirate born at Rochelle, named Boudard, having cast Anchor at Cananor, laid wait for a hulk laden with pepper, then at Cochin, expecting fair weather to put out to Sea for Portugall, meeting with another ship bound for
Achez for lading, was advertized of Don Sancho's passing here, which occasioned the Rocheller to expect him with all security, pretending to be a Merchant of that Countrey, and at his first meeting with Sapatero he gave him a broad-side, killed five of his marriners, and burnt his plume, which so terrified the Captain that his courage being lost, he took down his colours, and craving his life offered the Rocheller what he had in his ship.An un∣heard of curtesie from the hand of a Pyrate. Here the Ro∣cheller came off magnanimously, for having power to enslave him and his, and to seize his ship, he contented himself seeing the list of goods, to take one of the ships laden with certain pieces of cannon and ammunition out of the other ships, releasing Capt. Sancho, with the rest of his company, which much revived him, and the more, be∣cause the prize of those commodities belonged to certain Jewish Portuguese Merchants, he thought to bear no losse himself, since Boudart took nothing out of his ship but two pieces of cannon, and some ammunition, with a present of some of the Country rarities. But he was much deceived, for arrived at Goa he was called in que∣stion, and the loss appearing to have proceeded through his slen∣der forecast and small courage, he being far stronger than his ene∣mies; it was ordered that the three ships should equally partake in the losse, since they were all preserved from Lisboe, and he for the fault he had carelesly committed was forbidden ever to wear fea∣ther, under pain of forfeiting a 1000. Croysades, which struck the poor man with such regret, that he fell desperately sick, and cast himself into the Hospitall,Punish∣ment of the wick∣ed. yielding willingly to death for the shamefull losse he had sustained: he was sufficiently revenged by the unhappy end miserable Boudart at length met withall, who swolne with prosperities and with abun∣dance of ill gotten wealth, partly of those three Portuguais ships, and of another vessel bound from Cambaye to Malaca, laden with gold, silver, and precious stones, and other rich commo∣dities, as he returned towards the Cape of Good Hope, with intention to spend the remainder of his life in his own Coun∣trey in pleasure and content, he met with so terrible a tem∣pest, that although he was a most expert Sea-man he could not long resist, receiving small assistance from his Company, most of them being lost in former sights, and many lying sick of the Scorbus, a cruell Sea distemper, and finding himself too weak to make any longer resistance, having for three dayes withstood the tempest, and wearied with lading the water that almost sunk his ship, he was forced at last to save himself in ano∣ther bark, with those few half-dead Camarades, leaving his other ship with all his pirac'd riches to the mercy of the water, which in a moment sunk before his face. Nor was this the worst, his bark meet∣ing with as bad successe, for having discovered the coast of Brasile towards the Cape St. Austen, and Fernamboue, he was forced to leave this last vessel, that sprung a leak 15. miles from Fernamboue,
make use of skill and strength to save himself in the cock-boat, and come ashore, with some 20. persons, to a sugar plantation be∣longing to some Portuguese, who beholding the arrivall of these miserable shipwracks, and moved to compassion, with the naturall affection they bear unto the French, helped them to drag their boat on shore, where they kindly entertained them, and furnisht them with victuals and cloaths, and the poor men after a while helped them in the Sugar-works, which is there made up in great abundance, and also be sold at so cheap a rate that a quartern is worth but a Crusado, which doth not amount to two pence a pound, and all the Sugar that comes into these parts from Madera, is made in America. Thus our Cap∣tain having refresht himself and his company by a quarters re∣sidence in this place, with many boards and planks the Sea had cast upon the shore, he resolved to build himself a little boat for his return into France, wherein he was assisted by the Master of the Sugar-work and his servants, and having finished and perfected it, and stored it with all necessaries; espe∣cially with meal of Mandoe, sugars, flesh, and salt-fish, with fruit and Potato's, a great dainty in those parts, which have the taste of a chesnut, and with roots of Casha and other refreshments;Cassia. They imbarked themselves aboard this small vessel, with millions of thanks, for the curtesies received, with many promises and pro∣testations to requite their charities; for these honest men gave their very sheets to make them sailes, for which they were but ill rewarded. They left the Cape St. Austen, otherwise called Lieneo, because all that coast is white, and sailed hap∣pily within the sight of Fernamboue, where riding the French road they met with a small ship returning from Spain, laden with apparell, linnen, and woollen, oyles, and wines bearing towards Brasile; amongst the rest were five Portugese women,The Pirts perfidious∣nesse. who with their whole fortunes were returning unto their hus∣bands at the Sugar-work in the Cape St. Austen, the same that had so kindly entertained these Pyrates. Here the most unfor∣tunate Captain committed one of the most horrid acts can be imagined, for drawing near to the ship, under pretense of giving the women an account of their husbands, he seized the vessell, and forced most of the passengers to leap into the Sea, where they perisht: The rest together with the five women he retained prisoners: three whereof they imme∣diately exchanged with the Salvages for certain refreshing Com∣modities,Antropo∣phayes. and those barbarous people killed one of them before their faces, to feed on, the other two were since ransomed by their husbands, not above six leagues from thence, wondring at the cruell ingratitude of this Pirate and his followers they had so much obliged. Meanwhile the perfidious Captain drew towards the two
other women, he saved for his unlawfull and sensuall uses, they begged mercy for nine more Portugueses, who otherwise had sha∣red in the generall fate, but at length God shewed his just indignation against this savage Monster, casting him with a sud∣den tempest towards the Cape of Good Hope, and Dargagullas, and forced him to run a shore against his will at Mozambick, an Isle and Fort belonging to Portugall, on the Coast of Affrica, and whereas his ship was ready to enter the Harbour, a Frigate of Warr demanded what she was, The women couragiously from the Hatches replyed they came from Spain, and seeing two ships of Warr more make up to them, they grew more confident, giving them notice to board them boldly, which they did accordingly, and requiring the Captain to come before the Governour, he went, though trembling for fear, with three of his Camarades. This while the Merchants that remained in the ship animated with this assistance of their freinds, cryed out, that the Vessell, and all the Merchandise therein belonged to them; The Captains Compli∣ces made answer, they claimed no share therein, upon condition they might be set on shore, which was immediately promised them: and being landed, the women and all, they began their just com∣plaints, and required justice of the Governour for the wrong they had sustained; the Governour immediately seised them, and was sending them to Goa, that the Viceroy might understand their Crimes. But the women pleaded their own cause so well, that the Go∣vernour with his Counsell having well examined the matter, condemned the Captain, and three of his chiefest men to be hang∣ed, and their bodies burnt: The sentence was suddenly execu∣ted, and at their death they confest, not this crime alone, but many, more enormous, they had committed. After this, the women wel satisfied, reembarked themselves with their goods, and returned happily to their husbands at Brasil. The rest of these Pirates were sent to Goa to be executed, but arriving there sick, by hard usage and grief, at the intreaty of the Fathers of the Society, they were put into the Hospital, where they staid three moneths before they recovered their healths; Then they were sent to prison, from whence they were carried in a boate to the place they had robbed, Don Sancho Sapatero, where their right hands were cut off, and brought back to Goa, hanged, and burnt: behold the shamefull and just end of those miserable Pi∣rates, which may serve for example to all those that take such un∣just, and dangerous course of life. Now returning to Malabar and Coromandell, I will relate a∣mongst others the Wonder of those two Coasts, so different, that being divided by the long Mountains of Gates, one to the West, the other to the East, they have contrary seasons, for in that that reaches from Cambaye to Comori, they have their winter
from Aprill to September, with rains, tempests, thunders and windes,Marvel∣lous sea∣sons in the same pa∣rallells. and the same time in the other appeares a summer, most plea∣sant and benign, and in the other moneths the contrary, and this contrariety in the same degree and elevation, which is a wonder puzles all Astronomers and naturall Philosophers. CHAP. XX. Of the Isle of Zeilan, where they fish for pearles, and charme certain great fishes, an Idole of a Monkeyes tooth, an Isle deserted for the intestation of spirits, and of the Isles Maldives. LEaving the Coast of Malabar, and the Cape Comori, that dis∣cover the Isle Malaberi, or Zeilan, and Geilan, one of the best in all India, extending from North to South. Southward lies the Cape Berebeli, or Berbert, opposite to Comori; on an other side lies the Coast of Coromandell, divided from the other by a Gulfe: South-west lie the Maldives, Northward the Gulfe Ben∣gala, and the Indian and Sumatian sea Eastward, The Inhabi∣tants call her Tenarisin, well peopled, hath many great Towns, faire and navigable rivers, large and safe harbours; this Isle yeilds such plenty both of riches and pleasures, that the Inha∣bitants grow very grosse and corpulent, and as if their bellies were blown up. The aire is temperate, the soyle fruitfull in all things, and chief∣ly in wood, cinamon,Cinamon. called Esquisde, the best and finest of the East: it abounds also in pepper, ginger, and nutmeggs; they ga∣ther the cinnamon in March and Aprill, which cleaves with much ease, then lay it a fortnight a sunning, which increases it's strength and vertue; They gather it but every second year, be∣cause the bark of one yeares growth is little worth, yet they di∣still it with certain juices, and Ladies use them with the water to make them smell sweet, mingled with orange flowers, and other perfumes. This tree is of the height and shape of a laurell tree, bearing kernells, or berries, the trunk or body is longer and streighter, the leafe larger, and fuller of strings, hath no smell at all, and full ripe, and ready to pill, the leaves fall, which tast and smell like the barke, but without any vertue. This cinnamon, or barke, newly pilled, hath no tast, more then any other common wood, but laid in the Sun fifteen dayes, gets so great a
a strength, that it is impossible to eat above the bignesse of a good pea, such is the heat and vigour. I have seen of this spice at Zei∣lan onely, and in another country of the West-Indies, 26. degrees off this side the lyne, called Cheit, where the Inhabitants burn more, then eat of it; they use it in their sacrifices, and to burn their treasure in. The Arabians call the Cinamon Quirsa, the Persians Darchini, the Zeilaners Cardo, in Malabar 'tis called Camea, and by the Malayans Caysmon. That country abounds in most excellent fruits, pasture, and all sorts of beasts, in Elephants, and all sorts of fowl, which are very cheap.Oyle of Cinnamon. Most of the Inhabitants plant Cinamon, and make great esteem of the oyle they draw from it, which is very odoriferous, and useful for many things. There are gold and silver mynes, but they have great want of workmen. For the Islanders are slothful, and vicious. The country is well stored with butter and hony,Butter and Hony. but not in su∣gar, which is brought them from their neighbouring countries: There are many mynes and precious stones and jewels, whereof the most in esteeme is one of Rubies,Rubyes. which is at one end of the Isle towards the East; and although they are not of the best in the world, yet they are passable. There are Chrysolites, Topazes, Ja∣cinthes, and Granatts. At one side of the Isle called Betala, Bateca∣lon,Betale a pearle-fishing. A fish charmed. there is a fishing of pearls, dangerous, for the Turbets a fish that devoures, both fishermen and nets; yet they have an art to charm them, and make them uncapable of doing harm. They fish for pearl only in April, in other places in May, and in some others in June. The King receives great profit from this fishing, taking the tenths of the fairest for his share. 'Tis said that the King hath the fairest, and largest Ruby in the world called Matouca,Matouca a Ruby. and that a Prince of Tartarge offered him a fair and rich Province in ex∣change. In a word; this Isle is one of the richest of the world, and of great commerce in all commodities, which renders the King both wealthy and potent; for from the Ruby myne alone, he deduces a vast treasure, though he hath sold a corner of it which is of great value, yet all those that surpasse four or five Abir or Car∣rats, belong unto him. The Rubies of Pegu are something high coloured, and the fi∣nest of the East. The Master workmen can adde to their colour, and make them finer, in which they shew much experience. In this Isle the Portuguese have a Fort on India side without the town of Columbo, by which means they keep the town in subjection. All this Isle for the most part is governed by a King, elected like him of Ormus,King of Zeilan. but this King is not tributary to Portugal, as the other is; so that he stands but in a voluntary subjection, having permitted that Fort for commerce sake, esteeming the Portuguese valiant and faithful to their allyes.
This King hath formerly possessed great territories and king∣domes in the continent. He is a Gentill in religion, magnanimous and liberal, Governs his subjects in peace, and quietnesse, and keeps good correspondence with his neighbour Princes: The Isle is held to be 500. miles about. The people are rather fair then Brown, there dwell no Jewes, but many Mahometans. Both men and women are richly apparelled, begirt with girdles of jewels of value. Women do but overcharge their eares with pearles, Rubies, and Diamonds; The country language is the same as is spoken at Malabar. There grow great store of Oranges in this Isle, and the Inhabitants delight in eating the rinde, which is as good as those of Lemmons. They drink Areca, and other de∣licious drinks, mingled with sugar and cinnamon. They make some drinks will inebriate like wine, both men and women drink of it; and when they are intoxicated, they go to sleep. They have five sorts of Date trees, which augments their trade; there grows a herb called Nabuc, whereof they make oyle, as well tasted as that of Palmes; the cinnamon oyle is too strong. The Inhabitants of Bengale, and Coromandel, trade much in this Isle, whither they come to truck Indian rarities, but they go as much to make merry, and carrouze with them, as for com∣merce; they eat Rice-bread, as they do throughout the Indies.Bread made of Rice. Trees are green throughout the year, and one fruit extrudes ano∣ther, the soyle is so fertile; the trade of Cinnamon belongs to the King onely, as do the mynes, gemmes, gold, and silver; the best haven of the Isle is Camouch, or Cosmuche, at the mouth of the River, the town is ill built. The ayr is good on Coromandel side,Camouch Haven. Streight of Zeilan. and is divided, but by a little streight, not much longer then Gibral∣tar, but more dangerous, because the waves raise banks of sand which make it the more dangerous for vessels of great burthen, forced to enter the Isle on the other side called Betala, or the pearl-fishing. Zeilan is held to be the ancient Taprobane, and others with more reason say she was anciently called Sumatra, however this Isle hath ever been potent, formerly governed by one King, of the race of the Sun, or at least from thence he pretended himself descended. This King was dethroned by one of Jafanapatan,Jafanapa∣tan. and since the country hath been divided into several kingdomes. The Portu∣guais warred with the King of Jafanapatan, who overthrown, was constrained to deliver up the Isle of Manar,Manar an Island. which they fortified, and inhabit to this day: the Christians were grievously oppressed, by the Badages their neighbours, barbarous people, & great thieves,Badages. but the Portuguese subdued them at last. In this invasion the Por∣tuguese amongst other things took that famous Idol made of the tooth of a Monkey, adored by all the Indians of those parts,Idoll of a Monkeys tooth. and enriched with Jewels. The King of Pegu so highly esteemed it, that he sent yearly Ambassadours thither, to take the print of it upon
Amber, Musk, and other perfumes which he had great reverence unto:Hanimam a Monkey. and since it was taken, he offered to redeem it at a great rate, but they christian-like, chose rather to destroy that Idolatry, then to reap a profit thereby, and so they burnt it; and from it, there came a most stinking and black smoak. They relate many fables of that white Monky named Hanimam, that he had been a God, expelled heaven, for some fault committed, and Metamor∣phosed into a Monkey, coming from the land of Badages, or— thence into Ceitan where after his death he was adored, and his tooth kept as a relique. The sea between the Cape Comori, the lower Chilao,Pescaria. and the Isle Zelan was called Pescaria Delle Perse, a place of pearl-fishing, which lasts about 50. days, and at the point where they begin to fish, upon a sudden many Cabbins and Booths are erected,The man∣ner of fishing for pearl. to last during the fishing onely; then they that can, dyne, and fill their bagges with oysters, and by a rope tyed about their middle, are pulled up again, and every fisher makes his own heap. The seasons are not alwayes favourable alike, some more, some lesse, and some seasons very dangerous, by reason of several fishes that devour the fishers, and other fishes will crop off a thigh or arme of a man, as close and even as a hangar, and those the Por∣tugais call Poccaspada, this fish hath two rowes of teeth, very sharp and long: and therefore to prevent the danger, they have Magicians that charme the fishes: upon a time a fisher-man ready to be devoured by a fish had his mouth open, and with∣in two fingers of reaching him,Fish char∣med. suddenly the Wisard (who was present) cryed out Veruas, which signifies, come out or charm, and the fish left him; and the man having a sword in his hand, struck a blow or two, and the fish swam away, leaving the Sea dy'd with his blood. At night when they go to rest, they dissolve their charmes,Chitmi are Commis∣sioners. because no one should venture to fish; There are cer∣tain Commissioners to set a rate upon the pearle, according to the season: and there are of fine sorts of pearls, some like stars, others half stars, others called Pedrati, which are much esteemed, and divided into five parts; The Merchants stand in order to buy them. The Portugese have those of greatest price, which they call Quercos, the Bengalians the seconds, the Canaranians the thirds; the Cambayans have the smallest: and the last which are of little worth, fall to the Jewes there, which they polish for deceit. It is a gallant sight to see so many Merchants together, and so many heaps of pearles, before every Cabbin, which within few dayes are all pull'd down. The best pearl is fished in the Chan∣nel of Setin,Setin. near to Zeilan, where they use flat-bottome boats, called Tune, because they have little bottome: some are gotten at the other side of Chilao between Manar, and the Continent. There is no pearl to be found in all the East, except in this place, and at Baharem,Baharem. in the Persick gulph, and the Isle Aynan near
China; those taken at Baharem are bigger, but they are taken here in greater number. The whole Coast of Malabar, from Co∣mori fifty leagues in length, or thereabouts, inhabited by people called Paravians, is much frequented for this fishing,Paraves. where fifty or three score thousand Merchants resort to that pur∣pose. The Paravians are Christians, and were instructed by St. Francis Ilaverius, and live under the protection of the Portuguesse, who have protected them from the Tyranny of the Mahometans, their neighbours. South-west of the Isle of Zeilan, are the Maldives, many in number, dangerous to Saylers, for the shelves of sand and rocks:Maldives Isles. I will say no more of them, because my knowledge is but small, besides, they have amply and exactly been described by others; but I will say something of a wonderfull Isle, on the Coast of Malduce, Southward, some ten degrees remote from the Line, and called Patovi, or Polovis, now deserte, though formerly in∣habited and flourishing; which (as I learnt since at Pegu,) was Governed by a Prince, called Argiac, a Potent King of many I∣lands and Kingdomes, he having many children by severall wives, gave this Island to one of the gallantest amongst them,Polovis the devills Isle. called Ab∣denac, for his portion, with several Treasures: this Abdenac was pos∣sest of it peaceably for five yeares space; his elder brother called Argiac, after their Father, and King of Achez, in Sumatra, refu∣sed him the share of Treasure his father had left him, the other enraged, craved the assistance of the King of Bengala, who furnish∣ed him with ships, with which he invaded his brother, burnt his Townes, and put to death most part of his followers, but re∣ceived a mortall wound himself, and returning into his Island with the Treasures he had regained of his brother, and finding himself near death▪ distributed his wealth, and bequeathed his Island to be inherited by his Duma, or evill spirit, intreating him to preserve it till the day of Judgement, and that he then hoped to return into the World. This Will made, he dyed, and had no other sepulchre then the bowells of his Alliance and Friends, according to the Custome of that Countrey, where in many places they eat the dead flesh of their Kindered, and near Relations; perswading themselves, the Soule to be sooner at rest, then if they permit∣ted the corpes to putrifie, and to be consumed by the wormes, and that there could be no Sepulchre so Honourable, as the bowells of a deare friend. This Island falling to the devils share, he became so turbulent, that from the very time he took possession, the Island was not ha∣bitable, and all the Inhabitants forced to retire into the ad∣jacent Isles: ever since this place remained desert, yet there are great store of birds and beasts▪ sometimes the
Maldivians have landed there by chance, but have been for∣ced immediately to retreate,History of the Magi∣tian of Pegu. the evill spirits do so perplex them, they raise great tempests on that sea. Being at Pegu, I heard a Magitian had promised the King to bring him some birds, and the Treasures of Abdena out of the Country, but the Demons did so perturb him, he could not effect his promise; for as he was taking footing in the Isle, and beginning his conjurations, he had writ upon a leafe, and put into the hands of one of his boldest disciples, they were by the illusions of the devill so suddenly terrified, that the miserable disciple fell dead upon the place, and the Master Magician was so horridly beaten, and dragged by the devills to the ship side, that his companions had onely time to reembarke him, and hoist sayles for Pegu. All the rest were strangely tormented and beaten, except the Masters Mate, and the Seamen, that were wiser, for knowing the condition of the place, they would not put foot on land, which afterwards they were very glad of. Thus was the Magitian soundly beaten, and 'twas almost past his skill to recover himselfe, but more of him another time. CHAP. XXI. Of the Kingdom of Bisnegar, or Narsingue, of the King, his Bramins, or Priests, of Melia∣par, where (they say) reposes the body of St. Thomas the Apostle, with a strange History of a Beare. Bisnegar or Mar∣singue,UPon the Coast of Coromandell, in the East of Malabar are the Kingdomes of Bisnegar, Orixa, Mandao, and others. Bes∣naga, or Marsingue, hath a King, formerly the most puissant of the India's, amongst the Gentills, and was esteemed their Empe∣rour, and gave his Lawes from Gemora, to Orixa and Bengale, to Goa, Onoe, and Baticola, and many other places were under his Dominion, but at this time he is much weakned, yet he esteemes himself very potent, and assumes very superbous and high Titles, as God of the great Provinces, King of Kings, and Lord of the whole Universe. A vast Army.'Tis reported that in an expedition against Italca, he Mus∣tered seven hundered thousand of Infantry, forty thousand Ca∣valry, horse-armed, and seven hundered Elephants; Bisnegar is the name of the Kingdom, and cheife Town, Negapatan her Haven, the Towne of Bisnegar is faire and large, lying
in the 17. degree 10. dayes journey from Narsingue, and eight from Goa: we came for trade, and to put off our commodities, that paid 4. per cent. viz. those that came from the West, as cloaths, scarlets, paper, saffron, all sorts of Iron and Lary ware, except horse-bits, that pay but two per cent. in the India's:Horsebits Horses are very small here as in Swethland, but very high prized; the Persian horses are the dearest, because they are the biggest and strongest: The Prince of Bisnegar, is stiled Benganera, or Vente cupati, which signifies great King, and most magnificent in his State, potent in Elephants and Horses, which he maintaines with the Gabells of the Countrey; and the easier to procure horse to strengthen himself against his enemies the toles are abated. Some few years before we came to this Town of Bisnegar,History of the King of Bisne∣gar. it was assaulted and sack't by four Kings of the Mores, all very potent and united to ruine this Prince: These Kings were Idal∣can, Nisamulaco, Cotamulaco, and a Brother-in-law of his called Sultan Jordas, Prince of the Kingdom of Viridi or Var:Var or Viridi. Their hatred was that this King of Bisnegar was an Idolater, and they Mahometans. Two Moorish Captains were corrupted to betray their Masters, and the day the battle was fought they turned about, and proved the destruction of the Town, that was that day sack't, and taken by the confederate Kings, and the King thereof put to flight into another strong Town called Panigont,Pagont. or Panicota, where there stood a strong Castle surrounded with a great River, and deep trenches, ten dayes journey off Bisnegar. The enemies pursued him thither, and gave him a second battle, where this Prince met with better successe, and defeated them, and had utterly disper∣sed them, without the auxiliaries lent them by the King of Tran∣siane, a mortall enemy of this Prince:Transiane. There he took prisoner one of the perfidious Captains, made him an example,Treason punished. causing him to be nailed on a Crosse, and to be shot to death with arrows, having rallied a puissant Army to recover his Town of Besnegar, he boldly resolved to fall upon Transiane,Timeragi. and to seize of Time∣ragi's Countrey, who had given his enemies their greatest assist∣ance; there he made great spoyle, sacking, and burning all before him, before Timeragi could resist him. He destroyed 22. Towns, being advanced unto Gondariane Capitall of that Kingdom, he put all to fire and sword,Gondariane. and burnt Timeragi's sumptuous pallace, his wife and children, before Ti∣meragi could stop his cruelties, passing thorough Lazaray, leaving all places desolate where ever he past, untill he returned to Panigoni, having spent but three months in this expedition. He returned not soon enough to recover Bisnegar, for his enemies had strongly fortified it, and every one had their post
assigned them, Dealcan, on Panigont side, the others at other places: the mean time these four Kings enjoyed this Countrey which they plundered, and to strengthen themselves against the Inhabitants, most affectionate and faithfull to their Prince, they commanded all Merchants and other persons of estate in that Isle to bring in horse, and Elephants promising payment: They were brought in in great numbers,Merchant deceived. but when they had possession of them they turned back the right owners without any satisfacti∣on, which was no small losse to them. Chandegry:The Town of Bisnegar, otherwise called Chandegry, is eight leagues about, and is so populous and powerfull, that she finds her Prince a hundred thousand horse. Narsingue.Narsingue the Capitall of the Country is of the compass of Flo∣rence, stately built, but their covering takes much from their beauty, being not permitted to use tyle, which otherwise they have great store of. This Town is partly scituate upon a hill pretty eminent 3. leagues round: There is a most sumptuous pal∣lace, covered with tyle, where symmetry and uniformity is exactly observed;Thatched houses. the Town is bounded on one side with the Sea, the other side with a great River, the Town is well peopled, and thatched, with a course straw reed or rush. The King maintaines a numerous Militia, that makes him for∣midable to all the East. No man can inhabit there without expresse leave from the King: and no person is admitted that appears not an honest and candid person, Merchants, strangers, and passengers, have commodious habitations allotted them, paying the ordinary duties.Lawes ob∣served at Narsingue. They live quietly, for justice is impartially dispensed, and the lawes are so well observed, that none breaks them for fear of punishment. The Citizens are obliged by oath to serve the king when ere he commands upon pain of life, or amputation of hands and feet, to keep his army more full he entertains the fairest wo∣men in the world,Coutry Dames. most gallantly dressed, and are onely courted by the great ones, and the gallantest persons: many strange Lords and Princes flock hither, to fight under Mars and Ve∣nus, but they are not admitted to the Ladies, untill they have shewed some Trophies of their valour, in some gallant exploit for the Princes service; then they are courted by the Ladies, honoured and respected by the King, who by fre∣quent presents and obligations, hurry them on to greater actions. Some of them abstain from women to keep their strength and vigour, boasting to feed upon Lions, Bears, and Tigars, and drink the bloud of the cruellest and wildest beasts, such is their Gallantry, and thus they decline effeminacy. They use them∣selves to very violent exercises, to war, wrastling, hunting, feeding on strengthning foods onely. They anoint their bo∣dies with certain unxious commixtions or oyles to harden their skin. They seldome fight in battle-ray, their High-Priests or
Bramins, lead on their Armies, who dare not stir,Bramins High-Priests. if the Bramins are not in the head of them, and when two Parties or Armies cannot agree, several persons are called out to decide the quarrell: and when they have fought sufficiently, a retreat is sounded, and judgement is given of the victory, sometimes they are commanded to fall on again. Those Bramins are wise,Thus did the Bardes amongst the anci∣ent Gauls. and well-composed persons, they never permit their Kings to engage their whole Armies, at the great expense of their Subjects bloud, and therefore few pitched battles are fought, between those Indian Kings; at least the Idolaters; for the Mahometans they are otherwise governed. When this King intends war to any neighbouring Prince,A manner of decla∣ring war: or Stranger, he marches forth of his capitall Town, accompa∣nied with all his Nobility, in battle-ray, with all his horse and foot, and Elephants in good order, as if he were ready to march, Then the King mounted on a stately courser, marches towards the Country he declares war unto, and lets fly an arrow: immediate∣ly many persons ride their circuits with flaming torches in their hands, to give notice of the day they are to attend their King, at the capitall Town; and the field Marshals, keep the passa∣ges, and let none passe but who are fit for war; if war be car∣ried far off, their houses are commanded to be burnt, that the whole families may go to war, they onely uncover their houses, for their houshold-stuffe, and goods are preserved in a publick place built for that purpose. The people thus disposed follow their Prince with resolution, and most freely expose themselves to all danger. They load their Elephants, and Horses,Poysoned circles of Iron. with iron and steel hoops three fingers broad, keen as rasors, which they use in fight; they dart them with so strange and dextrous a strength, and fleetnesse, that an arrow shot from a good arm flyes not swifter, with these instruments they make large wounds, most of them mortall and incurable, poysoning the instruments, besides these Armes they carry swords and bucklers of severall fashions, jave∣lines, bowes, and crosse-bowes, and some fire-pikes, they go so furiously to fight, little regarding their lives to serve their Prince. Paleacate is another noble Town and haven in Bisnegar,Palecate. upon the gulf Bengale; The Inhabitants are Gentiles, and profess the same law as at Malabar and Calicut, never eating beef; they war perpetually with Ternassari, onely for Religion sake, and are friends with Calicut; so are most of the Town upon the same gulf, as Aremogan, Bigara, Caricola, Putifama, and other fair harbours belonging to the King of Bisnegar. The inhabitants of Paleacate are courteous, and civil, yet you must be cautious of them, they wear neither breeches nor drawers but a loose long cassock, and cloak over it, of silk, or some fine stuf, with a cap of the same, and pumps very neatly made, and go bare∣leg'd,
their cassocks reach to their ankles. The women wear Tur∣kish coats loose, silk stockings, and buskins richly faced: this town hath great commerce, and hither are brought from Pegu and other places all their rich commodities and jewels. Between Paleacate and Narsingue, is a great vale, overgrown with stately trees like Sicamores, yielding a continuall moy∣sture, like unto those in the Isle of Fer in the Canaries; this vale is continually covered with clouds, and very deep, it resem∣bles a perpetuall night, the Sun never appearing, the roads are hard to hit, this vale is a good mile in length, and discovering the great and adjacent plains, you are in another world; there runs a little River out of the vale, one end of the plain is planted with Sugar-canes: there are three Sugar works that furnish the Inhabi∣tants with work all the year long; They have not the art to refine it, but make it up in powder, with these canes they feed their cattle; as horses, bufflers, and swine, which makes their flesh very sweet & delicious, and Doctors prescribe swines flesh to sick persons, and indeed it is sweeter and wholsomer than mutton, because of the clean feeding. S. Thomas his shrine.Near Paleacate stands Meliapur, or St. Thomas, a pretty fair Town, where the Portuguese have a Fort; here 'tis said St. Thomas the Apostle preached, and is interred; for the province of Parthia falling to his lot, he came into the Indies, and to Coulan: others say he was first at Socotora, towards the Arabick gulf, from thence to Granganor, then to Coulan, where being persecuted by the King of that place, he came to Coromandell, and to this Town of Melia∣pur, where he suffered martyrdom. Many are of opinion he came into Pegu,Christian faith prea∣ched in the Indies and by whom. and to China, for there are many monuments of Christia∣nism all over the Indies; yet 'tis likelier that the Indies were since converted by one Panthenus a Grecian Philosopher, about the year 200. and rather since by Aedesius, and Frumentius, who planted there the Christian faith; the latter whereof was the first Bishop, in the time of S. Athanasius, as hereafter we shall say more at large, since this they sent into Armenia, for sit instructers, and the Patriark sent them some itinerant ones, and have continued thus ever since. The Armenians had the holy Bible in the Chaldean tongue;Chaldean tongue. Meliapur signifies a pea-bird. however 'tis generally believed St. Thomas was buried here, where he was martyred by the Bracmanes, and the King of Sagamo: others say he dyed in the Town of Calamine, and was buried at Meliapur, which are one and the same Town;St. Thomas intomb'd. and indeed to this day the memory and name of him is much esteemed, and reverenced by the Natives, by the Gentiles, and Moors themselves. Many other pla∣ces of these Indies pretend to have the shrine of this glorious Saint: from thence 'tis said he was translated to Edesse, and from thence into Europe to Otoa: There are many more Churches dedicated to St. Thomas,Albuna in Aethiopia. five leagues from Cochin there is a fair one, but abused by the Gentiles, who have got it by force,
and the Christians revenues; many miracles are wrought at the shrine of this great Saint, and amongst the Panaims, many are de∣vout unto him. It was revealed to one, he was not in the true way, and that he should go into Aethiopia towards Albana, to be instructed in the true faith, which he did accordingly, and was baptized, and by his piety and holy life, succeeded in the charge of Albuna. The Christians of this place do yet retain some of the instructi∣ons left them by Saint Thomas, but are very ignorant of the prin∣ciple Articles of faith; they do not understand prayer, and there is great difficulty to reduce them to the right way: they have left the Idolatries, they yearly practised, sacrificing yearly to this S. (at Cou∣lan) a youth, either slave, or Freeman, voluntarily offering himself. When a person of quality desires to dye in honour of this Saint, he makes it his request to the King; he instantly referres it to his Councel: They considering of the importance of the person, and the service he may do his country, present another request, that he may not be permitted to dye, for the use, the State can make of him: the last being granted; four of the chief of the Councel are deputed to apprehend him, and bring him before the King, who embraced him, and shewes him that both the State and himself, stand in need of him, and that 'twas necessary to pre∣serve him, and promise him in marriage; one of his favourites, making him many rich presents, he is easily altered by the Kings perswasions, acknowledges many thanks for those great favours, and returns with his new bride very well pleased and contented. I have heard of many more ridiculous superstitions, which are at present totally abolished. The Town of Calamine or Meliapur, since Santhome, is a good haven town, on the coast of Coromandel, 53. degrees from the Gulph Bengale, subjected to the King of Bisnegar or Narsingue. They relate many miracles wrought by the intercession of this Saint, a certain Princesse of Narsingue, daughter to King Za∣maluco, or Nizamaluco, was shut up by her husband King of Narsingue, in a fair and rich Seraglio; she was faire, vertuous, and discreet, and reputed a Christian; before her marriage she was sought for by another Prince her neighbour; after three years imprisonment in this stately Palace; upon a time the guards through some illusion, saw at a window the lively image of the Prince her first lover, the place being extremely well fenced, begirt with double ditches, almost impossible for any person to make surreptitious entrance, the guard was much astonished; the King her husband being made acquainted, moved with anger and jea∣lousie, accused the Princesse of adultery, and condemned her to drink off a glasse of poyson; no excuses her modest innocence could make, prevailing, she begged of her husband she might dye neare unto Saint Thomas his shryne; 'twas granted, and
she immediately led to the place of execution, where a fire was kindled to consume her body: she cloathed all in white, her hair hanging over her eares, covered almost all her body; took the golden bowle, and made her prayer to God, and Saint Thomas, to vouchsafe to grant her mercy; and to discover her innocency; which done, she drunk the poyson, and threw her self into the fire, where without the least harme either to her person, or cloathes, she remained upon her knees, continuing her prayers to almighty God, untill all the wood was consumed; she safe∣ly came out of it to the great astonishment, and admiration of all the admiring spectators; and being helped into her litter, was carried to Narsingue, brought into her chamber, and was never since in the power of the King her husband: she spent the re∣mainder of her dayes, recluse, in great abstinence and au∣sterity. There are many Christians in Meliapur, and some Churches, as Saint Paul belonging to the society Saint Bartholomew, Saint Thomas, the most honoured, and reverenced in the Indies: The ships arriving here, of the Christians, Idolaters, and Maho∣metans too, give great charities in honour of this Saint. From Pa∣leacate,Indian earthen ware. and other places they come hither on pilgrimage. The Portuguese that inhabit here, are imployed in making Indian or earthen vessels, diversely, and prettily painted, they do it with the juyce of a root called Saya, and the more you wash them, the livelyer the colours appear. There is a good har∣bour,Nutmegs. and great trading, they resort hither from all parts of the Indies. The people of Sandanes exchange their Nutmegs for that earthen ware,Calanfour a Clove∣gilliflowr. and other commodities are brought from Malaca and Goa, They trade much in Clove-Gilliflowers, which are cheap. But before I leave Bisnegar, you shall hear what I learnt at a town called Sigistan, or Sagistan, near that country, being upon a time in one of the Inhabitants houses, who are very civill, and courteous,A story of a Bear. and much taken with our conversation: By chance I spyed the picture of a Bear playing with a young girle, and in∣quiring the meaning thereof, a most prodigious story (if true, which I question much) was related me. A Prince named Isma∣han,Ismahan. that raigned many Moones, (for so they reckon their years) in the Province of Bozari,Bzari. since Sigistan, going a hunting, took a female Beare, and her cub that followed her, which he pre∣served, till on a time one of the Lords servants, bitten by the Dam, killed her, then the cub was kept alone, run up and down the house, and in time grew tame. This Prince had a daughter about eight yeares of age, that de∣lighted much to play with the Cub, & fed him with her own hands; the young Bear was continually at her heeles. The young Lady (Agarida was her name) fell sick,Agarida. the Bear lay under her bed and
refused all food that came not from her own hand; she recovering continued her care, in keeping of him sweet and clean, teaching him many tricks, which he readily learnt, and most dexterously performed. The Lady-Mother one day perceiving the Bear to pull up her daughters coats, to lick her feet; angry to see such familiarities and carresses; commanded a servant to beat Sa∣gistan, (for so was the Bear named) the beast of an immense growth, though but 15. months old, flew upon the man (armed with a cudgel onely) very furiously, and strangled him, and ano∣ther servant came to help him, upon the place: this set a strange Alarum through the house, all running headlong to kill the beast, that made a most strange slaughter, and got into the wood, and of three years there was no tidings of him. The unfortunate La∣dy Agarida took a walk by a little Rivers side, accompanied with many Ladyes more: The Bear suddenly appeared, soon scattered the company, snatched up Agarida in his pawes, and made away with her so swiftly, 'twas impossible to rescue her; nor could she be found, for any search they made: The Bear carried her to a remote and obscure cave, where he kept her many years, and stole another girle to attend her: These two women made a shift to get food, and other commodities, and have since related strange stories of the beast, and actions worthier a rational, then an ir∣rational creature; I was told most strange things of the animal; That Agarida had five sonnes by him, all gallant men, with∣out the least shape or resemblance of the beast. That they left the woods at ten years of age, and built themselves a Cabbin or house to dwell in. But one of Agarida's Brothers hunting in the woods, kild Sagistan with a dart. She enraged with disdain, sent her sons to her fathers Palace to revenge him, and according∣ly they kild their two Uncles: Ismahan their Grand-father, en∣deavoring to have them seized on, and ignorant who they were, was slain also with two of the five brothers; The other three escaping, made themselves so Formidable, that none durst meddle with them; and hearing of the King of Bisnagar's wars, they offered him their service, bearing for arms, the figure of Sagi∣stan their father. The King informed of their strange birth, and ad∣ventures; gave them great commands in his Army, their behaviour shewed their desert, for they exploited so high and unconceivable actions, that one of them married the Sultane of Bisnegar,Sagistan Town. the other the Sultanes daughter, from whence sprung that illustrious family of the Sagistans, that hath given the name to that town: whereof those two brothers were the first founders. This was related me of this history, or fable rather, held for a verity in those parts to this day: all Peoples, States, Townes,History of a Spanish woman and a Monkey. and illustrious families have their springs, and beginnings, fabu∣lous, and Romantick. I have heard a story affirmed of a Spanish Captains wife, caught in adultery with another by her husband;
for punishment he was satisfied to expose them both into a desert Island; the man presently dying, the woman was accosted by a great Monkey or Drill, by which she had two children, and at the three years end a ship sayling by, discovered this miserable crea∣ture, liker a phantasme then a human creature, she naked with teares in her eyes begged to be released from this horrid and cru∣ell captivity, which they did, and reembarking, the Monkey per∣ceiving, full of rage, in her sight tore his whelps in pieces, and threw them at her; she was carried to Lisbon, where the Inquisitors informed of her case, caused her to be apprehended; and had been proceeded against, had not Cardinal Cayetan, the then Popes Nuntio, taken her cause in hand, and setting forth the vio∣lent necessity she was forced to, to yield to that beast, that had found her sustenance for three whole yeares; saved her from the execution, and she ended her dayes in all holinesse and sanctity of life and repentance. There are many ancient and modern histo∣ries to this purpose; all which I refer to Naturalists, and Divines. CHAP. XXII. Of the kingdome of Bengala, and Ternassery, of musk, some rare remarks of the River Ganges, of the Torrid Zone, and the conversion of a young Prince Idolater, to Christianisme. Maginus and Bar∣theme say this town stands be∣tween Ben∣gale and Narsingue, Modern Authours between Malalaca and Nate∣abam, un∣lesse there are two towns of the same name.FOllowing the coast of Coromandel, and the gulph Bengale you come to Ternassery, which is held to be between the Cosamba of Ptolome, a kingdom lying between Bengal, Narsingue, Orixa, and the sea; the Capital town, bearing the same name, is scituate upon the side of the sea, and a fair River called Zayta, making a little Island where stands another town of the same name. She hath plenty of all things, necessary to life. Their cowes are low, and their horns grow only skin deep. The sheep have neither horns nor wool, their skin as smooth as a calves, there grows great store of long Pepper called Casay, they preserve of it, and eat it all the year long with sugar & vinegar, which gives it a pleasant taste; in the middle of the Isle is a Lake that breeds good fish, better then any the River affords, it is called Ademas. It affords you Trouts (the most savory fish of the East) Pykes and Shads taken in March only, & are Sea-fish. They never eat the head, because there is a worm found in it, which makes that fish chuse the rapid waters, and swim aloft, by the streams affording him much refreshment.
The Town of Ternassery is large and pleasant, well built,Ternas∣sery. not walled on the River side, but strengthned by some Forts well for∣tified and provided: she is scituate in a plain, with a Castle on the North, with an inclosure or Parke, fenced with a great ditch, where the Queen keepes a breed of stately Mares, given her by her Father, who recovered them of an Indian Prince that owed him money, which he could no otherwise recover, for in that Country horses beare a great value. The King of Ternassery is provided with good Cavalry, which renders him potent and formidable, he is of Person strong, and Robuste, and wars continually with the King of Narsingue, and Bengale. The Narsinguer would indamage him much, did he joyne with the other, but he is so generous he scornes it. This King is a Gentill, and hath above a thousand Elephants trained up to Warr, and of the largest size of the East; cover∣ed to the very ground with beefes hides, and severally trapped; those hides are fastned underneath the belly, with iron chaines, and are hardly got off, four men may fight on their backs at a time, without the least incumbrance to one another, bearing broad bucklers, made of Tortoyse shells, taken in that River; he that rides the trunk to guide the beast, is the best Armed of the five, because he lies open to the enemy; their darts have three very sharp points, or heads, with a ball of iron upon the middle, which serves for counterpoise. 'Tis a warr-like Nation, yet curteous, civill, and voluptuous; they have fair women, which they Court and Treat in gardens full of rare fruits. They have Cattell, Poul∣try, and fowle of all sorts, they delight much in perfumes in their meates and dresses, and chiefly in Musk, called Sagay.Musk, and from whence. The best Musk is not drawne from the codd, nor blood of the beast, but from a certain swelling, or rising upon the lower part of his belly, at the full of the Moone, and that is the sweetest of all: for there gather the humors mixt with the blood, and Impostume∣like rise and break, which dryed cast so lively and searching sent, that it drawes blood from the very nose. The codds and skin, with some of the flesh are tyed fast together, from which they draw their ordinary Musk, mingling therewith a little of the bet∣ter sort. I quartered at a Jewes, who confest to me he had drawne thir∣teen or foureteen codds or bunches from one beast; They are of the bignesse of a Goate, and have foure teeth bigger then the rest, two ascending streight upward, and the other two oppositely de∣scending. Their childrenweare of those teeth about their necks, set in silver & gold, as in some places of France they wear wolve's; Per∣sons of Quality set them in a wood, called Betell, that hath a strange vertue against poyson, called by the Aethiopians, Euate,Euate. Bettell wood. whereof they make dishes, and trenchers of severall sorts, much esteemed, and sought for by the Great Ones, studded and gar∣nished
with gold and silver, jewells, ivory, and hart's-horn, which they hold to be an antidote against poyson: which I have experi∣enced in many other diseases, as the green sicknesse in women, taken in the juyce of a reddish cich pea boyled, with harts-horn poudred, mingled with steel, the weight of half a Crown, with the double quantity of sugar, taken every morning for twelve or fifteen dayes together: This is an approved and infallible reme∣dy against the green-sickness, and jaundize, yellow or black; they have a beastly custome, to betray the virginity of their young daughters to any strangers that are not tawny, be they Christians, or Mahometans, but not to Gentiles nor Idolaters, the women burn themselves after the decease of their husbands. From Fernassery we passed to Ausly, a Town upon the North of Narsingue, on the east of Bengale, and lyes southward, to the main sea, Governed by a Mahometan Prince, Potent by sea and Land, and sworn enemy to the Portuguese, with whom they make Warr. The Town is provided with all necessaries for Warr, and hath a large Harbor, of capacity to contain a good Fleet, the mouth thereof Southward, which is chained in, in case of necessity. He is Master of another Town, called Quelba,Quelba Maturane. Diamond mines. since Maturane, strong, and well furnished with shipping, and small Frigates, wherewith they scowr that sea, to the damage of the Portuguese, they often fight on both sides, reduced to streights. This Kings Treasure chiefly consists in three, Diamond, Rubies, and Jacynth mines, be∣sides all sorts of Groceries and Spices, Their frigats, or Busses, are caulked with a certain hearb, and Mastick is used in stead of Pitch; They are built in such a manner they can hardly sink, and saile with much security, The Vice-Roy of Indies being upon a time informed of that Kings intentions, to send his fleet to the Grand Jave, to wait for the Spice fleet; he set forth two great men of warr, with two more, St. Maloes men, who drawing to∣wards that Haven, feigned an escape from shipwrack, and the bet∣ter to play their game, tore all their sayles in peeces, hiding their Canon and Soldiers under Deck. They met with those Busses loaden, and returning home, desi∣red their assistance, to hale, and tow them along unto Maturane, that there they might mend their sayles, and they promis'd a reward for their service, the Mahometans, enemies to the Christians, re∣solved to conduct them thither, and there to use them at will, and having tow'd them two nights and a day to that Haven, suddenly the others plaid with their Canon, and seizing unawares of the place, made great slaughter amongst those miserable creatures, burnt their fleet, sack't the Town, and full fraught with rich plun∣der, they retired. The two French ships not satisfied with the pillage, let the Town all on fire, which was easie to effect, (as I have said of other places) the houses were all thatched with palme; returning homeward, not victualled sufficiently for so
much company, their thoughts having been wholly taken up with Treasure, they cast the men over Decks, and landed the women in an Isle. The mean time two Portuguais ships sayling by, and seeing the Town a fire, the Inhabitants fled, seized of the Haven, plundered the rest of the Town at leisure, and loaden with rich prises they found in a Magazine untouched, They retired with their booty, ignorant of the cause and manner of the destruction of the Town; such are the good, and bad fortunes of sea-faring men. Leaving the Coast of Coromandell, we came to the Kingdom of Bengale,Bengale, or Bata∣couta. the chiefe Town whereof beares the name, or at least so called by the Portuguese, and other Nations, & by the Natives Bata∣couta, one of the greatest antiquity in the Indies. Some would have it to be old Ganges, a Royall Town upon the River Ganges. This Kingdom of Bengale was 300 years since subdued by the great Cham of Tartary, freed her selfe since, and after that conquerred by the Parthians, or Patates, and is at last, and remains stil subjected to the great Mogull, Prince of Tartary, and Supreme Lord of all In∣dostan: and yet there remaine some Lords in that Countrey, that are Soveraignes, and obey the Mogull in a Noble manner: This Kingdom reaches 200. leagues upon the sea side, and containes the Kingdomes of Sirapu, Chandecan, Bacal, Aracan, or Mogor, and others. The Inhabitants of Bengale are Idolaters, Mahome∣tans, and some Christians, for there are Portuguaises, and Fathers of the Society. The Town is scituate upon one of the mouthes of Ganges,Ganges River. whereof there are two Principall, in regard that river (as some persons believe, with what reason judge ye) is one of the four rivers of the Terrestriall Paradice, called Whiton, or Giho. The opinions of the Antient and modern Authors do not agree, whether 'tis the true Ganges of the Antients, or whether old Ganges be not rather a Canton in China, or some more Eastern then this is; I leave to be decided by the most curious, and shall only say that the Portuguese take this for the true one, relying chiefly upon the name Guenga, or Gangen, which she retaines to this day; and 'tis confirmed by many relations from the great Kingdom of Tebet, or Tibet, and Cathay, and the Fathers of the Society say, they have followed that River a great way since their leaving of Lahir. The Moors and Gentills hold there is much holiness and vertue in that River-water, and wash themselves therein thorough Ce∣remony and Superstition, as you shall hear hereafter. They say 'tis the best and the wholesomest water in the World, and sent for 500. leagues off. Forty or fifty thousand persons bathe themselves therein at a time, and many Kings come disguised thither, her head springs out of the great hill Inde, not far from Indus, the Natives think she
springs out of the Terrestriall Paradise; at the mouth of the Ri∣ver is the Gulfe Gangetick,The Gulfe Bengale. or Bengale, 500. leagues in circumfe∣rence, containing the Coasts of the Kingdomes of Narsingue, Orixa, Ternessari, Bengale, Pegu, Sian, and others, unto Malaca. I have been told that a Frenchman, named Malherbe Breton, a great traveller, had taken a particular view of this River, and had gone 400. leagues up the River, and that she hath three Mouths, or places, she disgorges her self into the sea; the one toward Pegu, the second in the middle, that makes some Islands, and the third in the Country of Chingara, and each eight or ten leagues over. That at Labas (a Royall Town of Mogor) and fourty dayes jour∣ney from Bengale, towards the North, This River is a league over, her mouth towards Bengale is in the three and twenti∣eth degree. The Kingdom of Bengale borders Northward upon Tartary, or Mogor, and is bounded by the River Hieropec, sometime Hyphasis, that looses her self in the Indus, the bounds of Alexander the great's Conquest's in the East. Eastward is the Province Edaspa, that joynes to the Kingdom of Aracan; on an other side is the Pro∣vince of Mien, and Tapacura, under the obedience of Ben∣gale; Westward is Orixae, where is the Diamond mine, and the deserts of the Kingdom of Deli, Southward the maine In∣dian sea. The Kings of Bengale were able to conquer the Kingdom of Deli, were not the great deserts of Damida, and the Inpenetra∣ble Forrests of Sacara interposed the two limits Southward, on the one side is the Cape Sogora, or Sagagora, and of the o∣ther, that of Castigan, or Catigan, at the third mouth of the Ganges, over against the Kingdom of Verma, where are the mines of Chrysolites, Sardonix, and Topases. Verma hath formerly belonged unto the Kingdom of Ben∣gale, the people are very civill, and given to trade. And all Nations have free traffick, as Persians, Greekes, Abyssins, Chi∣neses, Guserates, Malabares, Turkes, Moores, Jewes, Ruffes, or Georgians, and many others. There is great commerce of Jewells, and other Merchan∣dises, brought by the Mouth of Ganges streight to Bengale, going up six miles by land, but above twenty by water, by reason of the ebb and flow, which (as I have already said) is different from other seas, the smallest tides falling out at the full of the Moone, but when the water is at the lowest 'tis three fadome deepe round the Walls of the Town, so that ships safely enter the Haven, and are there very numerous. 'Tis thought there are fourty thousand families in the Town, and the King dwells in a stately Pallace built of brick, with faire gardens unto it. The Town is pleasantly seat∣ed.
The King keepes a great Court, followed by a gallant Nobility, and his chiefest guard consists of women, as the custom is in Jave, Sumatra and Fransiane, they put more trust in them then in men, they march very gravely, are very valiant, and expert horseriders and vaulters, use the Cimitere and buckler, and battle axes very dexterously: you must take a care to come neer them in their March, for they will abuse you, calling you Gueriaer, which sig∣nifies bold villain, the King maintains a great many of them in his Pallace, and the handsommest are richly attired. The Sun once set, 'tis forbidden to any man to come neere the quarter, the Seraglio is kept in, it lookes upon a faire garden,Seraglio guarded. on the side of a pleasant river, where the Ladies walke at night, and 'tis death for any man to be found there. The Captain of the guard carries in his hand a poysoned nosegay, which (as it were by chance) he puts to the nose of any person he hath a mind to kill, and he dies within two houres, or thereabouts,Subtle poyson. or else he causes his hands and feet to be cut off. This customary law is with more rigour executed upon the inhabitants, then upon strangers. If the women are surprized in their amours, they run no dan∣ger, and men are very seldom exempt from punishments. One of those women being caught with a slave, was brought before the King, weeping, to excuse her fault, she said, that had she not consented to that act, the strangling of her matrix had killed her, which the King took for an excuse, and sentenc'd the slave to death, who was a Knight of Malta, and married his wife richly to a Lord of his Court. The King of Bengale is an Idolater, as generally all the Ea∣stern are, he is valiant of Person, and can draw into the field a great Army, both of horse and foot, wanting not wherewithall to maintain them, for his Countrey is rich in gold, silver, and jewels, he can draw forth two thousand Elephants caparison'd, their teeth are shodd with steele, and they will carry as many men as those of Narsingue, they use hand-guns, muskets, swords, javelins, halle∣bards, and pikes. The Bengalians are the gallantest Persons of the East, both men and women, both sexes go richly apparel'd and perfu∣med. All other Nations of the Indies flock thither to spend their money, and chiefly to buy young slaves to attend and guard their women, and manage their businesse; they are bought and sold as horses are here: they buy them young the safer to geld them; the Parents being poore, do not scruple to sell their children to strangers for three score, four score, and a hundred Ducates, more or lesse,Children sold in market. for they are sure their children run no hazardous fortune, they being instructed in all man∣ner of Vertues. The Law is, that if a slave return to his
father, they are both enslaved to the master, untill redemption. Apura.The King of Bengale hath many Kings tributary to him, as the King of Apura, who payes him fifty Elephants yearly, twelve pearls of the weight of a Miticale, he yields this for the ransome of six Towns this King had taken of him in open war; he made the King of Dimali tributary to him also, for assisting his enemy King Apura, and makes him pay 50. horses with 50000. cherats or crowns yearly. The King of Orixa payes him tribute too, and many more Gentiles and Mahometans, although he himself in some manner acknowledges the great Mogull: he hath an Army ever ready to draw into the field upon an instant, the No∣bility being generally tributary, and released from that duty, are obliged to serve their Prince upon his first summons, with a certain number of horse, and other necessaries. And when they are engaged and obliged to it, the war once ended, the King rewards them with money and favour, imbra∣cing them as his children, and after a solemn feast prepared for them, dismisses them home to repose. The Kings benign and gratefull entertninment so highly obliges them, that they spare no∣thing for their Princes service. A prodigi∣ous age.The Climate is very temperate, and well air'd, that makes them live long, witnesse the Moor of Bangale, aged three hun∣dred and thirty years, in 1537. the oldest of the Countrey never knew him but old, and of the same growth, and remembred Cambaye without a Mahometan, his hair chang'd colour four times, from black to white, and he lost his teeth as often, and still they came again, he had about 700. wives in his life time, he was an Idolater for a 100. years together, and was the rest of his time a Mahometan, he was maintained by the Soldan of Cambaye, since by the Governour of Diu, although the Bengaliens lye under the Torrid Zone, they are cooled with much rain, that falls from May to mid-August, it rains from mid-day to mid-night, the other twelve hours there falls none, and that's the time they have to travell and trade in. Such is the disposition of the air under the Torrid Zone, o∣therwise she would be dis-inhabitable for the great heats, as the Ancients believed, being not acquainted with the Countrey, nor the rains, besides many other reasons, as the nights being of the same length with the dayes, the winds, and other causes daily observed. The Bengalians are curious, and delicious in their diet, they feed much upon preserves, and sweet-meats, for having all sorts of spices green, they confect of all sorts: the husk of the nutmegs makes an excellent conserve, so doth the long pepper and ginger bruised together. They compound an admirable drink with Areca, mingled with the confection of the leaves of Bettel; they preserve Tamur, which is a sort of palm called Tamarindi, myra∣bolans
or plums, the roots of a certain Bul-rush, Clove Gillyflower tops or buds, another root called Cucuma, and many others. They are of complexion more fair than black, their cloathings are stuffs of cotton, silk, damask, satin and velvet. Their breeches, cassocks, or coats, are almost of the Italian mode, especially when they visit Ladies, as at Ormus. Their chiefest drink is milk, with Sugar and Cinamon; they make it of three sorts, Sugar and Cinamon are still added, and sometimes pepper, Durions, Mancoustan, and Bananes. The Banane tree is fifteen handfull high, the trunk juycy,Bonane is an ndian fig. and covered with a bark, and leaves growing like the scales of fish, two foot large and five foot long, of a light green: her root growing in the ground casts out sprouts, that in time grow up to trees: when this tree is come to full growth, she puts forth from the middle of her stock, a flower of a reddish colour, about the bignesse and shape of an artichoke, whence springs a bough hung with fruit, to the number of a hundred, each a handfull in length, and four fingers large, and bears but once a year, which is held a wonder. From incisions made into the tree, there flowes good store of juyce or water, very pleasant and gustfull, in some places of the Indies they are called Masa, in others Pican, and say 'tis the tree that bears the fruit of life. In that Country Partridges are all white, and bigger than ours; there is plenty of all other fowle. We went from Bengale in the company of many Merchants, to trade at Castigan, where were arrived some Portuguese ships, and in those meetings much is got, by the trade of gold and silver, and in the exchange of our own commodities, Castigan or Cati∣gan belongs to the kingdom of Bengale, which reaches over 400. leagues of land, and the Lordship of Aracan, a Kingdom be∣tween Bengale and Pegu, stronger by Sea than land, and wages often war with Pegu, and some years since (they say) hath swallowed up Pegu, but ruined by neighbours, and therefore the King is called King of Aracan, Tiparat, Chacomas, Bengale, and Pegu. This King hath entertained the Fathers of the society at Chandecan, his Royal Town; and his whole state is strangely altered on a suddain, as all the East is subject to innova∣tions and changes: the strongest still overcomming the weaker. Catigan is a good Haven Town, in the Mogor, or Mogull's Country, a great Kingdom, and rich in all sorts of cattle, in fish, rice white and black, spices, especially pepper, myrabolans, and ginger, which they candy and preserve, and is better than any grows at Cananor; the Prince of this Town called Banastarin, his Son Achamu was converted by the Fathers of the society, and ob∣tained leave of the King his father, to have a Church built for them,
he married the Princesse Cassubi a Christian Lady newly bapti∣zed,A king∣dom left for heaven he followed herein the advice of those holy Fathers, for otherwise he intended to have ended his dayes in Celibat. They relate many miracles of him, amongst others, that (the first night they were bedded, offering both their prayers to God upon their knees) they were suddenly enlightned by a glorious light, and smelt many sweet perfumes, whereupon they mutually resolved to abstain from enjoyment, and dedicate the remainder of their lives to chastity and sanctity. He left his kingdom to his Brother Agazima, desiring justice might be preserved in his Kingdom, and that he would follow the advice of Father Philip of the society. Agazima promis'd a perfor∣mance: but those Princes are all so jealous of our religion, holding that the Christians adore one God, great above the rest, that wil not suffer any others,The Ido∣laters fear of Chri∣stianisme. disdaining to communicate himself to any, and that he sets a greater esteem and value, upon innocent poor and simple people, then upon the rich Kings and Princes; and that Prin∣ces had need to preserve to themselves the affections and obedience of their subjects, to reign with more ease: these were the seeming reasons Agazima offered his Brother, and 'tis those poor abused creatures ordinary discourse and opinion, and the difficulty they find in our religion, ignorant of the true and pure grounds thereof, that teach subjects their obedience, and subjection to their tempo∣rall Kings and Princes above all others. Of Cassubi, or Chasubi, subject to Aracan, I will hereafter speak. Sartagan.In the kingdom of Bengale is the Town of Sartagan, or Sarto∣gan, scituate upon a River, that runs and loses her self in Ganges, where the Portuguese have a fort. There are great plenty of rice, fine linnen cloaths, sugar, myrabolans, and many other drugs. The people are Gentils, and in their Temples adore many Idols strangely and horridly shap'd, others adore the first they meet, my Camarade and I being lodg'd at a Brokers house, who was happy in a sweet disposition'd, & a modest wife, as we accompanied her one day from the market:Idolaters superstiti∣ons. some of those Idolaters prostrated themselves at our feet, and begun to make their prayers to us: and were extreamly incensed, when they saw we only endeavored to disabuse them, and to laugh them out of their fopperies and idolatries, they answered, they were thus instructed by their parents, and therefore thought it just and equitable. They told me they were not of the Guzerates religion, but were absolutely opposite to Mahometanism. They esteem it a happiness to be near the Ganges, believing that water purifies them from all filth and sin, and therefore are carried thither both in health and sickness; some leave orders, that after their deaths their bodies may be burnt, and their ashes cast therein, that so they may go strait to heaven,The river Ganges how e∣steemed. others hold the same of Euphrates; and for this reason the Portuguese and other Christians abominate these rivers, and never make anyuse of the water but of
force and necessity, wch is a little superstitious, on the other side, the water of Ganges, being the sweetest & the wholsomest in the world, and many drinking of it have been cured of great paines of the stomach which hardly afforded them any rest before;Strange ceremo∣nies. 'tis soveraign against many other pains, aches, and diseases. The Indian Priests sing in their Temples from break of day to noon, and after din∣ner they have other prayers, which last till night; when they hear this service, they wash their hands, feet, and faces, then walk barefoot upon stone laid on purpose to the Temple, which is matted, and there they stand upright without the least motion, and after awhile they sit crosse-legged like Taylors. There are two Altars, one for the rising, the other for the setting Sun, and so they turn their faces ever to the Sunne. They bury their dead in their Churches as we do, and maintain women to lament and weep over the dead, according to the an∣cient Roman fashion. These women are clothed in mantles of the Spanish fashion, which reach lower then their girdles, and of a purple colour; and beneath that have skirts of blew cotton, that trayle upon the ground, and ten or twelve of them are dres∣sed after this manner. The corps this while is laid forth in some great room, covered with a rich cloth or pall, according to the quality of the person with four of those women waiting, whilst the rest of them are sent abroad the town, to deplore and la∣ment the dead person, the last whereof a little separate from her fellow-sisters, declares the name, quality, and life of the defunct, that all persons may prepare themselves to assist at the funerals. They ejulate, weep, and lament with exotick gestures, and tortions, and in these postures having walked round the town, they return to the corps with numbers of people, and when the body is borne to the Temple, then they raise yet lowder cries and ejulations. One of these women makes a Panegyrick of the dead, setting forth the great losse he is to his wife, children, friends, and kindred: then the multitude expresse their sadnesse, acknow∣ledging the losse; they howle and cry out so hideously all to∣gether, that you would think them distracted, or at least at the brink of despaire; when the body is carried out of the house. Flutes, Kettles; and other Instruments play to the Church, whither the Parents, Kindred, and Friends follow; a most pitiful and sad sight.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the Isles of Archi-Pelagus, of S. Laurance, of the Island of Sumatra, of Elephants, and other particulars. AT the opening of the Gulph Bengale, are many Isles great and small, which make the Archi-pelagus, called S. Laza∣rey, and near 80. leagues in length, and end about the Philippines, and the Japon; the chiefest thereof are, Sumatra, Javes, Boraco, Banda, the Molukes, the Philippines, and others. Towards Su∣matra, are the Isles of Andreman, or Andemaon, which signifies golden mynes, inhabited by Antropophayes; who warre with one another,Andemaon. and eat their prisoners: They make the like provi∣sion of humane flesh, as we do of beef or bacon; each of those Isles have their Kings. It happened once to a Portuguese vessel, (having passed the Ca∣nall of Micobar,Sad acci∣dent. and Sombrero, called by the Indians, Jenibra, lying between Sumatra and the Continent, the Portuguais call it; Call or Canall of Sombrero, because the place is covered by the winding and shade of the Isle, as it were with a great brimmed hat.) One night by a sudden storme she was cast upon the Isles of Andreman, otherwise Maduca, within two leagues, whereof is a shelf or bottome of white rock, very dangerous, hardly possible to sayle by, without shipwrack. The Portuguais call the place Pedra bianca. Those in the shippe foreseeing the danger they were in, threw over-board all their Artilery, and all other things of weight they had therein, and threw away their main Mast; and by this means, they escaped the shelve and rock, being suddenly thrown out of that narrow passage, by a great wave; but behold their greatest misfortune, escaping one danger, they fell into another; for seeing their ship begin to fill with water, having sprung a leake, they were forced to commit themselves to the mercy of their fiercest enemy. The Captain Don sano Mendo advised them to prepare for land, and to resolve to sell their lives dear, since there was no hopes for a handful of people to escape the cruelties of so many barbarous villaines, they suddenly cut and broak the ship to flitters, every one snatching a planck, endeavouring to reach the shore, which was about halfe a league off, and having put themselves in the best order, could be expected in the like disorder or confusion, with such arms they could carry as swords and axes; as they were
ready to land, these barbarous insularies met them with their bows and arrowes, and truncks and killed some 20. at the first onset; the remainder of them about sixty, having got footing on land by force, made a great slaughter amongst the Infidels, and seized of two Merchants houses, where they fortified themselves, the best they could; untill their bloody irritated enemy fell upon them, and besieged their sconce. The Portugais reduced to this sad extremity, resolved to sally forth, with firebrands in their hands, and to fire the adjacent town or village, which being built with reeds, and covered with palme, was presently consumed; then they thought to have escaped in boats belonging to the Isle; but knowing not how to use them; they returned back again, and fortified themselves in the Caselba or Temple; where with certain provisions they brought thither, and others they found,Caselba. they maintained the place eleven or twelve dayes; at the end of which time, seeing there was no hope of a composition to be made with that furious people, they resolved to dye gallantly with their weapons in hand, and after a mutual and unanimous preparation, and resignation of themselves,Resoluti∣on in ex∣tremity. they threw them∣selves amongst those barbarous infidels, killed double or trebble their number, but at last yielded all to the same doome, and were eaten, and salted by those sanguinary Barbarians. Sumatra is one of the fairest Isles in the world, sometime Taprobane, and Pa∣lesimonde, some would have it to be, that which in old time was the Chersonese of gold, and Ophir, most renowned for Salomon. It is called by some Tasan, which signifies a great Isle, because she hath 800. leagues compasse. The Inhabitants of Malaca say it was formerly joyned to their continent, but divided by an earth∣quake; lyes directly under the Equinoctial lyne, in the first cli∣mate, her dayes and nights are all of a length: is divided into ma∣ny Provinces, which make three kingdomes, the chiefest whereof is Sougar, commonly called Pedir, and have all mynes of gold, silver, and other mettals, and of the best sorts of Drugges and Spices: the Pepper that growes there is larger, and more biting then any other, growing under the Torrid zone, which causes the country to be the most temperate, and best inhabited in the world, for the reasons I have already spoken of. The ayre is very wholesome, and people live there very long, and with good health;Sumatrans Insularies false peo∣ple. the na∣tives are very tractable, but of little truth; so 'tis not safe trading with them, for they will falsifie their word for their profit. The kingdom of Assy is the richest in gold, which is the finest of the world, and Achen is the most potent. The Isle is inhabited by Gen∣tiles, Moores, and Jewes, Many Turks have of late planted there for the goodnesse of the country, and purity of the ayre. The Idolaters only are natives, all others come from other parts.Continual rains. The earth is strangely fruitful in all products: the onely inconve∣nience is the great flouds from rain, which incessantly falls from
Mid-May, untill Mid-August; and from mid-day, to mid-night; onely, as at Bengale, and as it happens, in most of the countries under that Zone. The King of the country discovering his subjects falshood, (which causes him no small contempt and prejudice) he forbids trading, and takes notice of what quantity of pepper or other Drugge or commodities each subject hath, and sets such a rate upon them, as they may gain thereby; then he sends one of his chief officers with them to the Magazine, to trade and vent these commodities to strange Merchants; & they usually exchange or put off their commodities for half the rate in ready mony, the other half in other sorts of commodities. The Bahar of pepper which is 360. pound weight,Bahar Peper. is worth three crowns and a half, or four at the dearest, which amounts to about a Ducatoon, or 55. pence. Notwithstanding this order, many are privately licensed, to trade freely, and by help of the Portuguais interpreters, much is to be got. They have many sorts of jewels, aromatick drugs, and most excellent balms; there is great plenty of all sorts of fowl and fruit; they feed much upon Buffle, which they esteem an excel∣lent meat; their beefs have a swelling upon the top of their necks (like their Cammels) which is only fat: sheep of no wool. There are many tame Elephants, and great store of wild ones in the woods.Hunting of Ele∣phants. Those of Malaca who live upon the Continent with the Kings leave, come hither to hunt the Elephant, with their hunts∣men and engines, with many trumpets, hoboyes, and drums, with fire, to fright and to drive them up into a streight, and when they have taken them, they almost famish them; then they bring them amongst the tame ones; and by degrees make them so, feeding them gently, and otherwise instructing them, and in time they become very ready to learn, and serviceable in all things. The King himselfe takes much content to feed them, and at such times,Hermo∣phrodites. their allowance is doubled. This Isle breeds many Hermophrodites (which is very remarkable) and pro∣ceeds from an overflowing of imperfect seed in both sexes, cau∣sed by the drugges, and hot spices of the Country. I have been assured by some, they have found of Bezar stones in the bowels of swine, which have been of great vertue. They would have given me some in exchange for Cimeters. I believe this sort of Bezar is that the Portuguese call Pedra de Porco, so as I will not charge my self with what I know not. That chaine of Isles from Nicuba to Pegu, is called the Archi∣pelagus of Andemaon, where the inhabitants warre amongst themselves, with burkes, and eat one another. They cannot read at all, nor have coyne: They make stuffes of the bark of a tree, to cover their nakednesse. They have plenty of cattle, of wool, and poultry, which they feed at home, and of all necessaries to life. We have
their best commodities in exchang for some trifles of ours; for what we esteem least, are of greatest value there, and they give us in exchange Pepper, Ginger, Benjamin, and other drugs which they abound in. And indeed we trade not with them without some danger, by reason of their cruelty, and brutishnesse, since some ships coming from Malaca, to Sumatra, killed some of their people passing by, ever since they stood upon their guards, and have surprised as many as they could, and have struck such a terrour into those parts, that whoever passes there, must be strong and well advised, otherwise they are sure to be robbed, mur∣dered and eaten. They have none but forreign coyne,English and Hol∣landers in this Island. which they break into many pieces, as the Abussins do, because they cannot other∣wise put it off. The King keeps long boats to pillage in, and the easier to escape if pursued, as they have often been by the English, and Dutch, and surprised in their habitations, where they load themselves with their pepper and other spices, on free-cost, and so retreat: they have built some Forts in that Isle, and by that meanes force many tributes from the people, who otherwise pay at will; and whoever should assault them but with four men of warre, resolutely man'd, would make it a good businesse, for they have many mynes of gold and silver. Besides the kingdomes of Pedir and Pacem, there are those of Campa, and Manan, all watered with pleasant Rivers; There is found Gold refined, and Corral branches, forced from the mynes by the strength of the water; There is also the Kingdome of Zabas, plentiful in Pepper, Sugar, Brasil, and Mastick, Camphire, Mines of Gold and Silver. At Pacem there is plenty of Pepper, and the best silver of the East. The Town of Pacem hath a strong Fort, and three Avenues, where you passe by a creek of land Northward. From this Town you discover the Pole-Artick, and the Cra∣sero; There the Sea ebbes and flowes every sixth houre. The Town of Achen is well built, well walled, the houses stand upon piles or pillars, and covered with Palmes, and onely two stories high. 'Tis very good living there, for you have your own wishes, with most excellent fruit, different from ours, viz. the Macoudou like unto the Lemmon,Names of fruits. Du∣rions, Ananes, Mangues, Jacas, Mangostan, Bananes, and Co∣cos, Oranges, and Lemmons in abundance. The Merchants weare the Turkish dresse: you must re∣cede and keep at distance, when you meet women, who otherwise will abuse you, and spit upon the ground to shew your indiscretion. Many Nations of the Indies trade here.Golden coyne. They have Gold-coyne,
called Ma, nine of them make a crowne, and are stamped with two Lyon-cells. They have Lead also, called Casse, and two thousand of them go to a piece of gold; all the rest of their coyne is called Dran, and Tale. Here are many slaves sold and bartered, and prove very faithfull servants. The Kings of Achen are Mahometans, and warre continu∣ally with Idolaters; as formerly a King of Achen did with him of Butos, because he would not be Mahometan, nor re∣pudiate his wife to marry another, sister of the King of Achens, and having subdued him,Barres of gold. made him pay the yearely tribute of five barres of Gold, worth two hundred thousand Crowns; and since endeavouring further to enslave him, and take all from him, he implored the ayde of the portuguais of Malaca, by whose assistance he freed himselfe. The accesses to this Isle are very difficult and dangerous, for the shelves and rocks in two places. Two Arms of the sea, Nicobar, Catarana, called Sombrero.Southward and Northward are two Armes of the Sea naviga∣ble, but not without much care and caution. One of those Armes is called the Canall of Nicobar, and the other Catarana, and the Portuguais as they sayle along the coast, name it Sombrero. Most of the Insularies are Idolaters, and call their chief Idol Pagode, a general name among the Indians; Their Bramins or Priests incourage the women to burn themselves after the decease of their husbands, unlesse they will be esteemed unchaste: yet notwithstanding those Bramins free∣ly frequent the company of women of all ages, and of their nearest relations: they have little esteem of Christians, and if they give a cuppe of drink, they presently break the cuppe, although it be rich Porcelaine, because they hold it polluted. Metem∣psycoses.The inhabitants of Polloue an Island, assured us those In∣sularies eat the dead bodies, but we have found the contra∣ry, for we have seen them buried; they believe that the soules of the deceased enter into other bodies, as Pythagoras held, and therefore they welcome strangers; they raise them brave monuments and tombes of stone; and in honour to their bo∣dies, accompany them with winde-musick to their graves. Parents exceedingly lament, and abstain for a time from Are∣ca, and Betell. They use a pretty recreative manner of fowling. Their country abounding in many sorts of fruit, which near unto their full ripenesse, are easily corrupted by the raines; they gather such as are rotten, (as they may not spoyle the rest) and cast them into rivers, or into the Sea. These fruits being of many sorts, as Melons, Pumpions,
Pomegranates, and others; they are not sooner throwne into the water, but great number of birds flock to them, and feed upon the fruit, the fowler stripping himself, and hidden behind a tree with his head in a hollow Pumpion, that covers his very shoulders, they throw themselves thus into the wa∣ter, with a bagge under their arm, the silly birds not disco∣vering the men, perch upon those fruits, and come so neare to them, that with ease they catch them by the legges, and ring off their necks, and put them in their bagge, in this manner they take great store; which makes fowl little worth. There are birds sometimes too bigge and strong for a man to master, and they get away, not without a hideous noise, tha alarms the rest for that day, that they are hard to be caught: but the next day hunger banishes their fear, and thus they are taken again. The Kings of this Isle live in a most miserable condition, being daily in danger of being slaine by the first person, shall have courage and resolution to undertake it: for such a person shall be esteemed a God; and by all acknowledged their King; crying, God save our lawfull prince, and natu∣rall Lord. He that raigned at Pedir, during our travels, was called Arioufar, and had been a poor fisherman, overcharged with children, who used to carry fish to the Kings Pallace, and being known, had free entrance. He having on a time lost his nets, came straight to the Pal∣lace towards the King, (who had reigned many yeares, and was very good to his people) and finding him alone, the guards not mistrusting him, because he was beloved of the King, and finding free egresse, murthered the King, and assisted by one of his sons, he seized of all the treasure, and the people re∣ceived him for their King, saying 'twas the will of God. The Assassin, by force of money having raised a potent Army, conquered the whole kingdom of Pedir, and most of the other States of this Isle. Thus the Kings establish themselves then, and to such misfortunes are subject. From Sumatra we went to Java the great.
CHAP. XXIV. Of the Isle of Java, of the Inhabitants, their conditions, and of the riches of the Countrey. JAva the Great lies Eastward from Sumatra, and is distant from her five and fourty miles only, and the streight between them is cal∣led Sunde, whence all those Isles in general take name; the Isle is of good compass, and unknown, containing many Dominions, or Kingdomes, whereof the chiefest is Bentan, or Bantan, the Cly∣mate sweet and temperate. They say it is 150 l. long, the breadth is undiscovered, and some think it reaches the Continent Southward, runs from East to West, and South,Severall King∣domes. the Inhabitants are Idolaters, grosse and brutish, and some are Anthropophager, it containes severall Kingdomes, as Drasima, Dragoyan, Lembri, Falec, Sumara, Balambua, Bavarucam, Passeruan, Andrageda, Auri, Sandacanda, Bacani, Javara, and others. The Javanians say they came from China, being oppressed with slavery, they left that place, and planted here, they were for a time Tributary to the great Cham of Tartarye, the Kingdom of Falec abounds in gold, silver, spices, and all sorts of cattell: the capitall Town is Bismari, two dayes journey from an Island cal∣led Cambahar, where is Basma, a Town scituate upon the Sea, to∣wards the East, where are bred Elephants, Monkeys, and Uni∣corns. Dragoyen produces the Camphire, as Borneo the Brasill, and all Groceries; neer this place are the Isles of Bombe, Bache∣li, and Java the lesse. The King of Passeruan is a Mahometan, he demanded the daugh∣ter of the King of Balambua in Marriage, and obtained her, and having enjoyed her, murthered her and all her train, because she was not of his Religion. Sandacanda and Bacani afford good store of spices, their Kings are Mahometans, they were infected with that imposture by a famous Pyrate, named Mahomet Chap, who left them two of his ships full of men to instruct them; there are still some Idolaters amongst them,The in∣firm eaten. who have not left their old error, of strangling their neerest kindred, when they think them taken with incurable diseases. I was told of one named Basaram, be∣ing sick,A fortu∣nate escape. and ready to be thus dispatched, desired a slave of his to bear him company to death, which he durst not deny, and being ty∣ed together, were both cast into the Sea; and the slave (a lusty strong fellow) striving for his own life, drag'd his Master to shore, untied him, and put him to bed, and conspired with another slave to save themselves from the Alerir, or Magicians, when they should
come (as the custom was) to devour them, and indeed as they came to strangle the poore men, they cudgelled them so lustily that they left the sport, and the man recovering his health, lived many years after; and thus was discovered the roguerie of those Magitians, who thorough an insatiate thirst of blood, when a man was the least indisposed, made him believe he could not live, advi∣sing him to hast to their fathers God. Then the poore patient with teares in his eyes, desired them to cleanse their bones, when they should have consumed their flesh, believing that their soules would not be at rest, til their flesh were wholly consumed, & that then they would reunite to the body, and to remain in peace for all eternity. Meanwhile the King understanding what had happened to Basa∣ram and his slave, caused him to be brought before him, and laugh∣ing told him, that (if he would not devour the Magitian) he would put him to death. The other most willing, replyed, he was ready to obey his Prince, and that if the Magitian were brought him, he would eat him up raw in his very sight. The Judges had already condemned him, and others for their deceipts and villanies to be banished, and he & others were fled into the Ile of Camorre for safe∣ty, but was taken, & brought to Basaram,Camorre. who with his slaves made a plenteous feast of him. Thus, for the most part, live those brutish Islanders; and although they have Rubarbe, Scammone, Agric, and many other very Soveraine Medicinall druggs at command, yet they seldome use them, for when they are sick, they wholly pin themselves upon the advice of those Magitians, who tyrannize o∣ver them, and by their enchantments reduce them to such misera∣ble conditions, and make many a dainty bit of them, being possest of that notorious imposture of the immortality of the soul,Metym∣psphyass. and that she transmigrates from one body into another, and often into strangers, and therefore they make very much of them, and when one of them dies, they either bury him privately, or cast him into the sea, that he may not be devoured. These Canniballs say, we are very ignorant to suffer mans flesh, (that is so sweet and delicious) to rot under ground. The King keepes his Court in Gazima, guarded by women, which he trusts, rather then such unnaturall and sanguinary men: he maintains three or foure score of the handsomest he can pick out, armed with Bowes and Arrowes, and Cimiteres. They are expert Archers, he traines them up, and sends them to other Maritime Towns, as Ja∣patra, and others. Though these Islanders have many gold and silver mines, yet they dare not digg them, for going almost naked, the stones fall so sharp, and keen upon them, they are not able to endure it, nei∣ther do they value that treasure at all, being very well stored with flesh, fish, herbs and fruits, all in great abundance; but as I have said, they are very likorous of mans flesh, and of their neerest kin, pretending they do it thorough charity, as they may
not be consumed by the wormes. I was informed by a Merchant of an accident happened to two Fathers of the order of S. Francis, pushed on with a fervent zeale to endeavour the conversion of that Countrey, by the help of the language they had learnt, but they got nothing in requital but scorns and jeers, of those Barbarians who let them live,Two Fran∣ciscans eaten. believing their Idols would revenge them, but some of them beginning to taste and disgest their rationall dis∣courses, it bred some differences amongst them; of which the King being informed, and fearing that their instructions might bring prejudice unto his State, commanded the good Fathers to be thrown into the Sea, those villains unwilling to lose their flesh, drained their bloud dry, and fed upon it, then brought them to the publick place of execution, dead and disfigured. All those that had tasted of their blood dyed suddenly, by the permission or vengeance of God, which the King hearing of, asked why they were not drowned according to his commands, and their false Priests replyed, it was not in their power to kill them: but the King satisfied of the manner of their death, all astonished, went to his Temple to ask his Idols forgiveness: some fourty Dutchmen having lost their ship upon a shelve, saved them∣selves upon this coast, but taken by these Islanders were cruelly murdered,Japara. and eaten. The Inhabitants of Japara, (a Sea Town) adore the Sun, and are all flat-nosed, have great eyes, and are thin bearded like the Chyneses. They eat bread made of a root they call Igname or Gouera,Igname. Gouera. their complexions (the womens espe∣cially) are rather fair than black: they wear nothing on their heads but their naturall hair platted, like the Italian Curtizans, and if any person offers to cover them with any thing, they are in danger of being abused to death. Their houses are low, being but one story high, for they will suffer nothing over their heads, they are all Pyrates, Thieves, and Magicians, they are skilfull in Astrology. They obey and reve∣rence (an old Magician called Manguin) as their lawfull Prince: when any Pyrates land upon their coast, to rob them of their cattle,Pirates how ta∣ken. or other commodities, the Wizard makes a round hole in the ground; and causes some young virgin voted, to be sacrificed in their feast of Fotoque) to urine therein, and at the same time there rises a storm, so that the theeves have onely time to save themselves, flying to their boats, and if any are left behind, they are devoured, nor do they kill them out-right, but prolong their dying pains, they pinnacle them, and deliver them up to the fury of the children, who put them to tedious torments, walking them about the Town, and expose them to the scoffs and abuses of the multitude: some will clap a pompion on their heads hung round with plumes of feathers,Cruelty of the Javans. and every woman and child runs out with their bodkins and aules, to prick and torment them:
then having walked them warm, (as they do the Buls in Spain, to make their flesh tender) they cut them in pieces, and divide their flesh, if there be not enough for them all, they play at ball for it, and the gainers treat their friends therewith. This is the sad fortune travailers are subject to, who according to the Spanish proverb, Buscan la vida y topan la muerte, searching for life they find death. 'Tis very pretty sport to see them play at that sort of ball,A sort of ball-play or Tennis, the like at Mexico. or tennis, which they call Masiris, without ever striking with their armes or hands; but with their feet, knees, head, elbows, heels, and other parts of the body, with great dexterity. Bantan is the chief Town of the Isle with a good and commo∣dious haven, where the Hollanders have a Magazine or Store-house,Bantan. and whither many other people for commerce do resort, as Chyne∣ses, Guzerates, Portuguais, Persians, Peguans, Milacans, Turks, Arabi∣ans, and others. This Town is of the size of Roan, peopled with divers nations, the Chineses have a Temple wherein they adore a triple-crown'd Demon, offer fruit and other things to him,The devil adored. and they say because he is malicious he must be appeased, and that the great and good God hath no need of such offerings or adorations. They bring into this Town their silks, jewels, and other rarities: here their King resides, a Mahometan, who governs his own subjects and strangers with great justice, allowing all persons free liberty of traffick. He is a great Politician, well belov'd and honoured by his subjects, and observes good orders in commerce, wherein consists the glory of his greatness: of late the English and Dutch have tra∣ded there with good success, and very few years since some French have travelled thither, and have been courteously received;French at Bantan. they have a great esteem of the King of France, and have permitted Dominicans (sent out of France) to inhabit there, and promise them favour and assistance. The commodities that go off best there are iron and steel, lead, paper, and sulphure. At Fedeyda (a Town in Java) is got the best amber-greece of the East,Amber∣gris. that which is found in Aniane (an Isle adjacent) is equal unto the former in goodnesse. Not long since the greatest part of Java, and the adjacent Coun∣tryes, as Bali, Madura, and others, obeyed a potent Prince or Em∣perour, who kept his court in the great town of Demaa, and some∣times at Japara; he was a Mahometan, the Portuguese relate how he had a mind to propagate his law, and observing the King of Pasaru∣an (an Idolater) to slight it; he resolved to invade him with a strong Army made up of his own subjects, and the Portuguese of Malaca: his greatest strength consisted in certain Souldiers called Anoco, which signifies resolute, and despisers of their lives, persons who used to anoint themselves with certain oyls, to shew their for∣wardness to dye, with these men he besieged the King of Pasaruan, who stood gallantly upon his defence, but probably had in time bin
overcome,To be im∣paled is to have a stake thrust tho∣rough the funda∣ment and to come out of the mouth. had a favourable accident to him, and a most unfortu∣nate one happened to the Emperour, who during the Siege, was stab'd by one of his young pages, incensed with a blow given him by his Master upon his head in jest, which is one of the great∣est affronts can be given there. The boy taken, and put upon the rack, confessed no other reason, was staked through with his father, brothers, and 60. of his kindred, and his whole generation according to their laws: and thus by this strange accident the King of Pasaruan was freed, and the Empire of Demaa reduced to confusion. The most signall thing in Java is the bone of a fish (found no where else) called Caball, that stops bleeding, as 'twas experienced upon a Captain of Malabar, called Neoboada Beguea, who killed in a fight against the Portuguais, in the time of Albukerke, his bloud never issued at his wounds untill that bone was taken away, which he wore about him. That rarity was lost by shipwrack, as it was carried to King Emanuel. The Isles of Sumatra, Java and others more remote, are very temperate, rich, and fruitfull in most of them, they live very long without any infirmity, the air is so healthfull in other places, if any person fall sick he is left by kindred and friends, as defiled with sin, and visited by God for expiation, whereupon many hide themselves when they are sick, and die in holes without any help, some live to seven-score years active and jolly, and for that reason many strangers come thither to inhabit. Others resort thither, for the trade of spices, which are extream cheap there. As in other parts there is such plenty of Cattle, that they will give you four Cowes for an old shirt, a dozen of sheep for a pewter spoon, a Sea-man once shewed an old brazen dish to a Shepherd, who asked the price, the Sea-man said his whole flock, the other wondred not much at it; onely replyed 'twas something too dear; I remember that in the Isle of S. Laurence I saw a sheep given for a counter, and as much for a sheet of paper; this shews the goodnesse of those Countries, and the Inhabitants simplicity: most of them are civilized, living in the fear of one onely God, and believe, that in the next world the good will be rewarded, and the bad punished; some have no reli∣gion, yet they hold naturally the immortality of the soul, and one providence. Nutmegs of Banda.As touching the spices that grow in these Isles. The nutmegs grow chiefly in the Isle of Banda, the tree that bears them is like a peach tree, the leaves onely bigger, the nut is enclosed in a slender shell, like an almond, (or as when a peach opens it self, and shews the stone) the nut is inclosed with a red husk, which they preserve at Malaca: when this fruit comes to ripenesse the shell opens, and the nut drops out, if it's left upon the tree beyond the time of matu∣rity.Touman. They sell these nutmegs by a measure called Touman,
about a pint, they are called Cani, by those of Banda, Palla, the places they grow in are unwholesom: These trees grow naturally in the deserts, and who ever please may gather them, some are planted and kept by particular persons. The Calenfour, or carnation Clove-tree, growing in the Melukes is a shrub leafed like to the almond, but is larger and longer, and bears Gillyflowers like wild grapes, it needs a prop to bear it up, for 'tis weak; they grow naturally, and from every flower that falls a tree or plant springs up in a short time, and they suffer no other trees to grow about them. In Sumatra the stalk is bigger, and can subsist alone, having the collar and trunk like a quince tree, but very upright, and casts forth great store of white blossoms, that become yellow, then red, and thickning they become of a blackish colour as they do here, they preserve them green, and are excellent for the stomach, they are gathered from September to January. The Cocuma that grows in Java, is a root like to Ginger,Cocuma. her blossoms like Lillies broken off green, draws near to the yellow, and dried is easily broken, is sharp and quick, and is used thoroughout the Indies, to season meats, thought better than other spices; what they have left of their store, they preserve or pickle, and vent thoroughout the East, where 'tis much in request. There grows great store of ginger in the East-Indies,Ginger. and chiefly in Nova Hispaniola, whence they transport yearly for Seville a hundred thousand weight, this root is best if re∣moved every third year, and best of all if removed yearly, when they gather it, they take away the earth, and cull the young root: from the old ones, which they replant and do easily take root in the west 'tis little worth, for in the Isles of Barlovento a Spaniard may have seven hundred weight for a crown. The Betell which we have so often spoken of,Betel. is a tree very common in all the Easterne parts, and also in the West-Indies, where are many, as at Caramell, and called Esca∣rucou. There are some also growing at Souac in Aethiopia, 'tis the onely tree (I know) bears a leaf better than the fruit, she is almost of the heigth and shape of a pear-tree, the leaf is thicker, and not so full of strings. The Arabians and Syrians call it Bamboni, this leaf hath an excellent taste, but makes the teeth black. There are of them in the Preste-Johns Country, and are kept for the Kings own use where er'e they grow; and 'tis death for any tradesman or Merchant to eat of it, and he that watches the tree may kill any such person, and not be questioned: for those trees belong to the King, and none dare touch them,
but the Siramis, who are Lords and gentry. Those that feed of it have very black teeth, a thing held honourable, because they are occasioned by a Royal food. There are severall sorts of fruit in the East, Malaca produces Durions in great plenty,Durions: and few of them grow in the West-In∣dies, 'tis a fruit like a Melon, but whiter, and covered with a very tender rind or skin. 'Tis firm, and tasts rather better than the Melon, within are many little holes wherein lye their seed, and is very carefully kept: the leaf is of an exceeding bignesse, as that of the vine or figge; The tree is pretty high, her boughs like those of the cherry, the wood is well sented, they provide it against their womens lying in, and then sacrifice it to their Idols. I have seen much of it at the Grand Caire, and in Alexandria. CHAP. XXV. Of the Kingdomes of Malaca and Siam, with a prodigious History of Serpents. LEaving all those Isles, to return into the Continent, over a∣gainst Sumatra Northward, stands the Town and Kingdom of Malaca,Malaca: Ophir. where is that so famous a spot of land, with her Cape and Streight called Sicapura, at one degree northward. Malaca is a po∣tent kingdom, formerly the golden Chersonese, (as some yet hold) and the Ophir of Salomon, because much gold is found in many places of Sumatra, contiguous to the other: the Ancients believed her joyned to the Continent, as you have heard already. This Country obeyed the King of Siam, untill a Lord of Java subjected her, and by the assistance of some fishermen, and Pyrates built the Town of Malaca. Since the Malacans became Mahometans, trading with the Persians, and Guzerates, and at last Alphonsus Albukerke, surprized the Town for the King of Portugall; it is the center of the East for trade,The traf∣fick of Malaca. and the mart for all Merchandizes of the East-Indies, which improves her in grandeur, treasure, and power. The language is esteemed the smoothest, most elegant, and copious of the Indies, as the mother of all their other tongues, which they diligently study: they are much addicted to Poetry, Amours, and other Gallantries. Malaca is scituate upon a pleasant river called Crisorant, alluding to Chrise, or land of gold, which others rather believe to be China and Japan: this river is not altogether so big as the Thames, and divides the Town in two parts, coupled by fair bridges stately built, as is the rest of the Town. The people are very civill, of a good stature, but a little tann'd; the Country
abounds in fruit, subject to the King Siam, though the Town be∣longs to the Portuguese, where they have a strong Fort, and a Ha∣ven that brings in great Revenues, by reason of the customes im∣posed upon the infinite number of Merchandizes, are imported from forreign parts. Those imposts or customes were formerly paid to the King of Siam. The Captain hath two good ships, well rig∣ged, and man'd, with which he scowres those seas, and sailes into China, loaden with wedges of gold and silver, cloves, pepper, ci∣namon, linnen and woollen cloth, scarlets, saffron, corrall, mer∣cury, vermillion, and all other exquisite commodities of the In∣dies, and brings back from thence silks, purcelaines, satins, da∣mask, harts-horn, musk, rubarbe, pearles, salt-peter, iron, ivory, boxes, and fanns; These two places are eight hundred l. distant,Quinsay. and a great river, upon which (they say) ships are drawn by Ele∣phants to Quinsay, capitall of Tabin, or China, where the ships ar∣riving, salute the King with three peeces of Canon, and the Town with one, if they think good; then the Captain setting foot on land, is sworn upon the Kings Picture, that he comes Bona Fide, to negotiate, and then he is admitted. The ayre of Malaca is not very wholesom to strangers, nor natives. From Malaca we went to the Kingdom of Siam, very potent for∣merly, containing many Kingdomes. Their neighbour,Siam. the King of Pegu, got many of them in a Warr, he maintained against Siam for a white Elephant, which the Peguans adore;War for a white E∣lephant. and ever since the Kingdom of Siam hath been weak, and divided into many Provin∣ces, or Dominions, where the King is hardly acknowledged: for∣merly it contained sixteen or seventeen Kingdomes, or Principa∣lityes, and did reach from Tanansterin, or Tarnatsery, unto Cham∣paa, above 700. leagues from Coast to Coast, between Malaca,The Em∣pire of Sornao. the Isles Pacanes, Passiloco, Capimper, Chiammay; the Lahos and Gutts: 'Tis called the Empire of Sornao; the King Prechau Sa∣leu, who kept his Court at the great Town of Odiva, whither the Kings were tied to come yearly, to acknowledge the Princes,Odiva. and pay their tribute, kissing the Cimiter at his side. Then by reason of the great distance, and the many Rivers, which lengthen their journeys, and render them difficult, he remitted this kind of acknowledgment to be made to a Lieutenant, or Vice-Roy,Lugor. in the Town of Lugor, neerer, and more commodious. This Country confines upon Pegu westward, northward upon Chiammay, southward towards the Province of Caburi, and the main sea, and eastward upon the Gulfe of Cambaye, 'tis one of the plentifullest, and best Isles in the world, abounding in all fruits, victualls, silver mines, iron, lead, pewter, salt-peter, sulphure, silkes, honey, wax, sugars, sweet-woods, benjamin, cottons, rubies, saphyres, ivory, and great plenty of all spices, and other commo∣dities imported from other parts. The inhabitants are not warlike; The women are very lovely,
and well disposed,Pretty women. they are richly adorned with Jewells, their coates tuck't up to their knees, their feet and legs bare, to shew how they are decked, and loaded with gemms; they weare jew∣ells upon their armes, also their haire is platted, and covered there∣with, in imitation of the Peguans. They are carried in chariots, richly covered, their gownes open before, discover their naked breasts (their smocks being likewise slit,) when they walke they hold both their hands before them, to hide their nakedness, and yet so as tis plainly seen. They say that custom was first brought up by Queen Tirada, the wisest of her time, and her bones are to this day kept,Tirada, Queen. with great reverence: perceiving her Subjects to be besotted, or violently addicted to Sodomie; she thought by such charming allurements, to withdraw them from that bestiality, as indeed they are since wholly taken off from that abominahle sensu∣ality: and in truth that Countrey women are very faire, and well shaped, they play upon certain Musicall instruments, which they are diligently instructed in from their infancy; the men may mar∣ry two wives, but they pay double customes for the second, and most of them therefore are contented with one, the women are very tractable, humble, and discreet, their greatest care is to be be∣loved of their husbands.Strange Funeralls. They cruelly sacrifice Virgins, and their manner of burying the dead is as inhumane; for as soone as one of their alliance is deceased, they erect him a Monument in the fields, according to their conditions and abilities: then they shave their whole body, in signe of mourning: Women cast off their jewels, and are cloathed in white, the doleful colour there; all the deceased's friends and alliance are invited, solemnly to attend the Corps to the Interment. The Corps is clothed in a rich habit, exposed upon a Chariot, in a bed of state, and drawn by six of his nearest kindred, of the best of his family, and six more of his best friends, cover∣ed with an ash-colour canopy, and of the same colour, his Relati∣ons are cloathed; before the Corpes go six flutes, who with two kettle drums,Dolefull Instru∣ments. or tabors, make so lamentable a noise, that it drawes teares from the Assistants: The slutes are hired, and discharged by the Publick; drawing neer to the buriall place, they throw perfumes upon the Chariot. This done, they all retire, the pa∣rents and kindred only excepted, who strip the body, and make it clean, multiplying their cries and lamentations; then roast it with their sweet woods, gather round about it, and with many sad groanes,Dead body eaten. they make of it a most mournfull repast: This done, they scrape the bones clean, and perfume them with much cere∣mony, and lap them up in linnen cloaths (made of Arbeste) which wil never consume by fire, but grow whiter, and cleaner, nor rot under ground, but will keep for ever. I have got of the cloath in my Travels, which I have shown to curious persons. These Ce∣remonies ended, and the bones laid in the Tombe, every one drawes homeward. Such is their strange manner of sepulture.
The Town of Siam stands upon the fair and large river of Me∣can, that springs from the famous Lake of Chiamay; Sian is state∣ly walled, and conteines thirty thousand houses, with a Castle strongly fortified, built upon the water, as Penivitan, and Venice.Gigraff a beast, got by a Ca∣mell, and a female Panther. The Country breeds Elephants, Rinocerots, Giraffs, Tygers, Lions, Leopards, and all sorts of savage beasts, the fairest Hermines of the East, Camels, Dromodaries, and some say Unicornes, which being very timerous beasts, seldom appear in sight. Some of them are found about Chyamay lake, I will speak of them in another place. This Lake is 200. miles about,Unicornes whence many great and famous rivers arise, as Ava, Caypumo, Menan,Chiamay Lake. Cos∣min, and others, they overflow like the Nilus. This Lake is bounded Eastward, with vast forrests, and impassible Marshes and Fens, and very dangerous, prodigious Serpents are bread there, with wings like bats, which bear them from the ground, and carry them with a strange swiftness; flying, they rest themselves upon the end of their tailes, which are sharp, they did once so swarm,A story of serpents. that they made a whole Province desert, and desolate, and with∣out the juice of fig-leaves, (which was an antidote against their poison) not one had escaped. The Prince of those parts having armed his subjects, made vast trenches and ditches in that Province, and with the help of dogs, tigers, lions, and other savage beasts, trained up to hunting young, and disguised in other skins; he ar∣med many other beasts against them, he destroyed an innumerable number of those Serpents, that cast themselves headlong into those ditches: then he set a prize (to be given to those that should kill any of them) and by these meanes that breed was soon destroyed: Notwithstanding there are some seen still in the forrest, and I have seen of them of incredible length; they prey upon sheep, and o∣ther cattell. There is another beast in the same Country faced like a man, but all wricnkled, which appeares by night only, and is called Espaulouco.Espaluco. This beast gets up upon the top of trees, and makes a bewail∣ing noise, a purpose to catch something: when she lights of no prey, she feedes upon earth. 'Tis a very slow beast, and there are of that kind in many places. The Kingdom of Siam hath formerly suffered many changes some few yeares before we were there. The King a most renowned and victorious Prince, was by his own Queen poisoned, who after married one of the stewards of her household, with whom she had lived in adultery, and made him King, having likewise put to death her own son, that succeeded his father: since they were (by conjurations) both murthered at a feast, and the Kingdom subject to continuall revolutions, till Bramaa, King of Pegu, took occasion to besiege Odiaa, but leaving his life in the siege, hr successor utterly demolished the Town, and obtained the white Elephant I spoke of, since that Siam hath revenged
her self upon Pegu. Thus the Kingdomes of the Indies are ve∣ry various, never remaining long under the same condition, or Government. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Kingdom of Martaban, marvellous strength of Macaraou, or the flowing of the sea. Particularities of Pegu. Marta∣ban.FRom Siam we came to the Kingdom and Town of Martaban, sometime subject to Pegu, but since to the King of Syam. It buts Westward upon the Gulfe of Bengale, Northward upon Pegu, Eastward upon Siam, and Southward upon Tanasserim and Jan∣gome. The Fathers of St. Francis, and those of the Society have built them Churches there. The soyle is very fertile, yielding or∣dinarily three crops, the year; there is plenty of Rice, and other sorts of grain, fruit, trees, sweet and medicinall hearbes of all sorts, mines of all mettalls, rubies and other stones, and the aire is very wholesom. Gaypou∣mo.The Capitall Town is Martaban, sixteen degrees towards the North, hath a good harbor, and scituate upon the river Gaypoumo, or rather upon an arme of the sea, where the tide runs strangely toward Pegu; for whereas ordinarily it flowes by degrees, with an easie motion, without violence, here it fills that arme of the Sea, or River, on a sudden, and flowes with such fury and impetuosity, as it were mountains rolled up in water, and the most rapid torrent in the world doth not parallel this in swiftnesse; and by three pas∣sages fills the harbor, and other receptacles, with a most fearefull force and rapidity. This arme is by the Indians called Macaroou (which signifies) beware the Tyger, for the vehemence of the waves, which I will more amply speak of in another place. Dougon.Martaban joynes to the Territories of Dougon, the remo∣test Town of Pegu. The Inhabitants are given very much to trading,Laque. and especially in Lacca, a kind of gumm they draw out of trees, very fine, and better then that is made in Dalascia, in Aethiopia, which I have already spoken of. They have many more Droggues, as Galingall, Turbith, or Camomell, Rubarb,Rubarbe. found upon the mountains of Pegu, and is called Jubara: The leafe is broad, and bitter as gall, they gather it in May, which is the latter end of their winter, the root is of a tan'd collour, some is yellow, purple, and red, according to the land
that bears it. Some season their meat therewith, and 'tis a pre∣servative against many infirmities; 'tis sold very cheap, and is mingled with perfumes: there growes wood of Aloes, red Sendal,Aloes· and Cittern upon the hills. Women burn of all these to make concoctions, and use them in their labours, and delivered, they seek for a black-headed lamb, and carry the child to the Tem∣ple, covered with flowers, drugges, and perfumes. Then they begin their sacrifice,Banean & Satalico sacrifica∣tors. Castigay an Idoll. delivering their child and lamb into the hands of the Banean, or Priest called Satalico, the skin, head, feet, and entrals, fals to his share, this is done in ho∣nour of Castigay their Idol. All those Flamins are great Magi∣cians; They cast the childrens nativities new-borne, and set down, what shall befall them during their lives. This writing is carefully kept by the parents, for to prevent the bad accidents. For they esteem whatever those Baneans say infallible, and when any person is sick, they are consulted whether the party will dye or recover, and when they have given their opinion, 'tis believed as Gospel. One being once (as I may say) condemned or senten∣ced to death by a Wizard, and left off; was undertaken by one of our company, and recovered in nine dayes, which made them believe the Christians were more knowing then their Magicians: the like happened to another, whose wife was by a Christian per∣swaded, to shut out the Magician that had given his opinion of her husband; he recovering, was satisfied of the abuses and false∣hoods of their Magicians, Pagodes, and Castigais, and of their false Priests, and was also instructed in the truth, and purity of our Re∣ligion, that he might leave his own Idolatries: but Alas, the poor creatures heart being hardened, replyed: I believe (said he) that thy God is great, and more powerful then ours, and that being so great and Majestical, he will not vouchsafe to make himself known to such miserable simple creatures, as we are; and it would be very unfit to believe a God were not willing to com∣mand us. Ours (said he) makes his will known to us, which we all submit unto, and obey, but I shall never more trust the Ba∣neans, for they are false Prophets: and upon these accidents, ma∣ny of them remove their habitations. It were easie to perswade them to the truth, they being simple, and very credulous; and besides, they bear a great respect to the memorie of Saint Tho∣mas: but opportunities to destroy their Idols are wanting, that they might see, they have neither force nor motion. 'Twere dangerous to attempt it, without a considerable strength. Those deceitful Baneans, do so enslave the people, that they believe things strange, and absurd, beyond relation. In their festivals, when their Idols are carried in state upon chariots, some of them (through zeal) throw themselves under the wheels, and are broken in pieces. Others thrust their heads into steel hoops, keen as razers, and cut their own throats, putting
their feet in a rope fastened thereunto: and such are afterwards esteemed Saints, and registred in their Temples; others cut a hole in their sides, and fasten a rope thereto, and are dragged by the Chariot after their Idol, then their friends say to them (remember that I have ever been thy friend) and believe he hath power to save them. Parents are reverenced, and if poor, they are assisted upon the publick account. They have a solemn feast wherein they reckon up the twelve moons or moneths, with the twelve signes, and make great jol∣lity; when they draw their Idols upon Chariots, another of Vir∣gins is drawn off one hand, to incense and perfume it. At Martaban there growes a fruit, which opened, represents the perfect figure of a Crosse. At Martaban some years before, we made our travels there; a rich and potent King (as the Portuguais relate) named Chaubaina was besieged by Bramaa of Pegu,Chaubai∣na's dis∣aster. and re∣duced to extremity, he implored the assistance of Portugal, offer∣ing great treasures, which for some considerations was denied; and the distressed Prince forced to deliver up himself, wife, and children, to that inhumane Tyrant of Pegu, who contrary to his promise, put them all to cruel deaths, and sack't that flourish∣ing town; and the Portuguais were much blamed for refusing their assistance. There was a vast treasure, and (they say) six and thirty thousand Merchants all strangers, that repaired thither from fourty several nations of the Indies, and other remoter pla∣ces; as Portuguais, Greeks, Venetians, French, English, Abyssins, Turks, Jewes, Arabians, Armenians, Tartars, Mogors, Corozans, Persians, Malabarians, Javans, and many others. This Town had 24. gates. Pegu.We went from Martaban to Pegu, four small dayes journey di∣stant by land, and no more by sea, although 'tis much further; but their Frigates fleet sayling, bring all to one; and putting forth with the tyde; if your ship strikes upon a Rock, and is able to bear the shock, it glides over, like a Balon, for no arrow flyes fleet∣er. I have shot seven or eight times through the streight of Gi∣braltar against tyde, but with full sayles, and so you may stop in those seas, without casting Anchor, in expectation of better wea∣ther, but in Macaraou, the road to Pegu, 'tis impossible with the strongest winds against tyde, to make a stand, for the waves there over-powre the winds, I have not seen the like fury of the seas in any place of the world as in Martaban and Pegu, for there is a gulph of water, and the tyde taking her course, meets with those waters, the one roling against the main body of the sea, there is a terrible conflict, they withstand each other for a time, at length the weakest must yield, the two bodies separate with such swiftnesse and vehemency, that it seems a great hill overturned; nor is there a courage so great it daunts not, and where before a
hollow was seen empty and dry, covered over with ships; on a suddain, the Surges are so violent, you would believe, the infer∣nal powers were all united, to tosse those ships. I never yet heard a reason given for it, a search worthy the labour of the greatest wits in the world. I remember that some yeares after, meeting with a most famous Sea-Captain at Calis or Cales, I related him this wonder of Macaraou (saying that I should not be credited, if I made any such relation in print) he answered me that the words, or little faith of ignorant persons, could not prejudice the experi∣ence of knowing men, and that he himself (had he not seen) could not have believed the impetuous,Seas from North and South meet in the strait of Magel∣lan. and most violent encounter of two seas, from the North and South, in the streight of Magellan, from the North the water entred 60. leagues within the streight, from the South forty, where meeting with an unconceivable fury, they strike horrour and amazement into all beholders; which made him believe the discourses, and opinions of all natural Phi∣losophers to be uncertain, since his own experience so often con∣tradicted them. He told me he was very desirous to go witnesse what I related of Macaraou, at Cambay, and Pegu, but since I have discovered, that there is nothing liker to what I have said of Macaraou,Maskaret of Bourde∣aux. then the Mascaret of Bourdeaux. That is well known to be a moun∣tain of water gathered together (in the River of Dourdonne) while the waters are all quiet; that mountain is framed on a sud∣den, and rolles down the river, overturning what boats soever are in the way, which every man endeavours to avoyd, making with all haste to the shoare. I have asked the reason of the Inhabitants, who have told me it proceeded from the height of the Seas, meeting with the ebbe of the River, and by that encounter this water gathers together, but others agree not to this, for (if so) the like would happen in the Garonne, and in other places, which I never heard of:Garonnne River. so that with more reason they attribute the cause to some ayre inclosed in some channel or spring under ground, running from Garonne to Dourdonne, which raises this mountain of water when the Sea flows: but I know not whether the same reason might be given for Macaraou. The Kingdom of Pegu, is one of the largest, richest,Kingdom of Pegu. and most potent of the Indies, next to Mogor, and China, but to the two last are lately happened strange revolutions, they are extremely fallen off from their state, and have been dismembred by the Kings of Tangu, and Aracan, who had in my time the possession of the white Elephant, that bred so much contention in Siam.Empire of Pegu's length. Town of Pegu. This kingdom in my days contained many others, viz. two Empires containing 26. crowned States; Southward, Pegu confines upon Martaban and Siam, Eastward upon Brama, Cambay, and Cochin, China, Northward upon Ava Tazatay, & Aracan, Westward upon Bengale and the gulf.
The Town of Pegu is very large and square, 5. gates at every square or side, encompassed with a deep work or trench full of Water-Crocodils, and other dangerous Serpents. The walls are built of wood, with Watch-towers of rich work, and gilt, repai∣red every tenth year. The houses are stately edifice. At new Pe∣gu the King keeps his Court, the streets are exactly streight, and large; about the heart of the town you discover almost all the streets, which is a gallant curiosity; old Pegu is built after the same model, and there the Merchants inhabit: In new Pegu the streets are set with Palm-trees, and Cocos loaden with fruit; the new was framed and built by the line near a forest of Palmes towards the North in a large field: in the trenches (filled with water by the river that washes that coast) there are certain baths accommoda∣ted purposely; and very safe from Crocodils, otherwise swim∣ming were very dangerous. The Town is as bigge as Fez, where∣of there is the old and new, as Pegu. The King of Pegu is so potent that he never goes to war with∣out a million and a half of men, well armed, with Arquebuses and other Guns: they are the best Gunners in the world, but not many of them, and their Guns are far better then ours, being made of better iron, better temper'd, and better wrought. They have a 100000. good souldiers.Iron Guns: they live of little, and for need upon leaves and roots, and are gallant and resolute men. His guard con∣sists of 30000. horse,Good horses, and from whence. either Turk or Persian: and to have them plen∣ty at a pinch, there is an edict or law, that what Merchant soever brings 20. horses to be sold, shall have the rest of his commodities free, which make them furnisht from all parts of the Indies, Persia, and Soltania in Arabia, where are the best of the world; the soul∣diers exercise themselves much at marks, and often, the King gives rewards to the best marks-men. He may have 5000. Elephants, and many other beasts. Merchants follow the Armies upon bulls and oxen. The country is rich in Mynes of Gold and Silver, Rubies, Sa∣phyrs, Garnets, and other stones: These daily augment the Kings treasures: his Magazines may passe for the treasure of the East. In one Court of his Pallace at new Pegu, there is such store, that 'tis little esteemed,Statues of beaten gold. not one man to guard it, nor the dores kept shut: There stands the figure or statue of a proper tall man, all of beaten gold, a crown upon his head of the same, enriched with ru∣bies of inestimable value; and round it four statues more of youths all of gold, which seem to be Idols, (yet they say) they were made for delight.Other of silver. In another Court is represented a Gyant sitting, of silver, with a Crown of the same, but far richer set with Jewels: in ther Courts stand statues made of Ganze,Ganze a mixt met∣tle. a mixture of many mettals, whereof their Byzes are made, a sort of coyn, but not royal.Byze a coyne. The Crowns of these latter are richer then the others, with rubies and Saphyrs, the biggest I ever saw.
The Peguans go all cloathed alike, in Cottons, linnens, and silks the best, and all are barefoot ever, whether walking or riding; the country abounds in Sugars, which they make great and many uses of, they cover their houses with it, and mingle it with ciment, Their buildings are costly carved and wrought, sparing neither Gold nor Azure. When the King or any Noble-man builds a Pal∣lace, he provides himself with the purest gold to guild it. For there, as in many other places of the Indies Gold is not coyn∣ed, but is merchandize: at Tahaba, or old Pegu,Tahaba. are many refy∣ners, and gold and silver beaters, they work it into leaves (as we do) for the ease and benefit of the Gilders, without committing much waste, for they gild, (as I have said) the very walls and towers, and their houses after the Persian fashion. New Pegu is al∣most all so built, and nothing spared to make up a sumptuous splendid structure, they cover them with tortoise shell, which they place and joyn very neatly. There is a certain place, where Coa∣ches, Litters, Trunks, Boxes, Saddles, Harness for Elephants and horses, are only made, covered with gold and silver; I saw there a saddle and furniture for an Elephant, bought at a very high rate, for their King. What is most remarkable of their buldings is, that those that live of their own rents or estates are contented with the meanest and poorest houses: they are convenient, but like country houses, and thatch'd with straw, and only able to preserve them from the injuries of the weather. The Merchants and other tradesmen,Goudons or Mer∣chants houses. and shop-keepers, who have something to lose out of their shops, or warehouses, they live in strong houses well built, of stone & brick, close shut with strong gates and locks, and call those houses Godons. Throughout all the Towns of Pegu, there are the Taregha,Taregha. or persons sworn, to see good measure and weight made of commo∣dities, to the Merchants they have charge of: and if a bad bar∣gain be made, the fault is laid on them,Faithful trading. with discredit and reproa∣ches, which they escape sometimes very narrowly: so you take much pleasure to trade with them, they are so faithful and sin∣cere, and a most excellent order is observed both in buying and selling: and whatever is either bought or sold, is put in a lump into the Sensals, who gives notice of the number, and sets a price upon them; and sets a rate of what they ought freely to get over and above all charges whatever: if the price be liked, the mony is payed, and the Sensal keeps an exact account; for they are able chosen men. There is no danger of any deceit; besides,Sensals true. they do all to the advantage of those that refer themselves unto them: and in case the price doth not please buyer and seller, they have the whole day to confirm or avoyd it, although 'tis to the Sensals discredit and infamy.
CHAP. XXVII. Of the Kingdome of Pegu, of a bloody war for a white Elephant, of Crocodiles, and the nature of Elephants, THe Empire of Pegu is provided with all things necessary and commodious to life, and vyes with others as rich, and good as her self, as Cochinchine, Siam, Tangu, Marsin, Jangoma, Bengale, Ava, Aragan, and others. It is cut through in many places by that great river, called (by the higher Indies) Amoucherat, and (the na∣tives the river of Pegu or Caipumo,River Cap∣pum. or Martaban, that runs (by se∣veral branches) through the level, and fertilizes the soyle. This River abounds in Fish and Crocodiles, which they feed on in the Indies:Geogra∣phers de∣ceived. mean while our Geographers are mistaken, who say that the river that runs through Tangus, is the same that waters Pegu, although they be different countries, and remote. This River rises at the Lake Chiammay, passes through Brema, or Brama, wa∣shing in with her waves refined gold, which she drawes from se∣veral mynes the country is full of. She runs through the kingdom of Prom, where are the famous towns of Milintay, Calamba, and Amirandou. Those territories joyn to Alva, then to Boldia, called by the high Indians Siami, where they are very courteous,Siami or Siammon. and it passes for a Proverb, (cour∣teous as a Siamite) Siami is a vast kingdom called the Empire of Siammon. Then to Berma, or Verma, whereof the capital is Carpa, and butts upon Tazatay, and the kingdomes of Pandior, and Mu∣antay. The King of Pegu subjugated the kingdom of Berma, two years after he conquered Siam; then there are Vilet, Abdiar, and Caypuma,Canarane. whereof the chief is Canarane, of which more hereafter. Talcada.The King by his Talcada or Lieutenant, hath conquered many other countries, who subdued all the Provinces of Siam, Berma, Javay,Kingdoms conquered by Pegu. Manar, and others unto the kingdom of Perperi, Tarnas∣seri, Maragoura, Guertale, Langoura, Nigrane, and Joncolan, that touches Malaca. Winning Siam he got Ban, Ploan, Odian, Macaon, and others conquered before by the King of Siam. This Prince is a great lover of strange beasts, and hath of di∣vers sorts brought him from all parts of the world, and land at se∣veral places, as at Dagon two dayes journey from Pegu, Marta∣ban, which is four; at Guzan two dayes journey from Caponin, where beginnes the great Gulph of Saharic, at the mouth of Caypumo. This River, with that of Ava, and Siam, overflows like the Nile, from Mid-May, to Mid-August, which
improves the Country very much, she draws refined gold by wyres, wherewith the King enriches his Temples and Idols, for gold and silver in those parts, are but merchandizes, their coin of brasse, lead, and pewter, called Ganze or Ganza, and any man coins with the Lieutenants leave, who is Generall. That coin is currant thorough the kingdom of Tauay, the last of the territories of Pegu, in the middle of the Province of Manar, watered by that famous River of Marsina or Menan. Pegu is so temperate that 'tis green all the year long,Ayr at Pegu is temperate Herma∣phrodites: the people are rather whites than blacks, and well shap'd women, amiable, gay, and neatly dressed. There are many hermaphrodites, as at Sumatra. There is plenty of pepper, vermillion, mercury, cloves. They make Chamlets, hangings of feathers, silk stuffs, have store of rice, and beasts for chase. They want nothing but good hor∣ses, which the Prince is curious to procure from other parts bating merchants their imposts to bring of them in.) The Kings Palace stands at the farther end of new Pegu, shel∣tered from the Northwind by a little hill: there grow all sorts of trees, five sorts of palm trees, inclosed with a wall like a park, where they keep all sorts of beasts you can meet with in any part of the world, which the King carefully seeks after,War for a white E∣lephant. never regard∣ing each price, as it appeared, by that long war made by him, and the King of Siam, who refused him the white Elephant, to put into his Calachar, or park. 'Twas Aleager or Chaumigrem King of Pegu, begun this cruell war with an Army of a million of martiall men, two hundred thousand horse, five thousand Elephants, and three thousand Camels. The Vaunt-guard was composed but of 50000. horse: he sack't, and ruined his principall Town Lagi or Siam, which was reputed to be twice as big as Paris,Lagi. and thrice as Fez. The siege lasted 22. months. From Pegu to Siam 'tis sixty five dayes journey, by camels; he took all his treasure, wife, and children, and brought them prisoners into Pegu with the white Elephant: This deplorable King reduced to extremities, cast himself down from the highest turret in his Palace, and broke himself in pieces, some of his daughters and Princesses made themselves away, with a hoop or circle of iron, edg'd about, that closed it self when they thrust their necks therein, with their feet in a noose hung thereunto, which strangles them imme∣diately: and if Adigola and the other Ladies had had time, they would never have been brought away alive: there was but one Lady saved, wife to the Grand Mogull's Son, This Prince fol∣lowed the Peguan Army, to recover his wife, was taken prisoner, and by his frequent prayers, and desires, he obtained leave to visit his wife, and mother-in-law: The King himself gives them much comfort by his visits, representing unro them the change and re∣volution of affairs, he gave them freedom, and remitted them ransomlesse, sent them all back again, with many and rich
presents, and married the young Prince to his Lady, who were before but affianced, conducted them to his confines, with great honour and magnificence, whence grew the greatnesse of the Mogor, Mogoz, or Mogull, tributary to the King of Pegu, who hath since broke his faith, making himself a Soveraign. You hear for what reasons the King of Pegu waged this war, that bred so much ruine and desolation, for a white Elephant onely, a fatal and unhappy beast, as Sejans horse hath proved to all that ever possessed him, and hath cost five Kings their lives, and whole Estates, as it happened to the last King of Pegu, who had it lately taken from him by the King of Aracan, by the trea∣chery of the King of Tangus his Brother-in-law. White Elephants are very rare, yet they are so besotted as to adore them; at Siam festivals were kept in his honour, called Quinday Pileu, (which is to say) honest mens delight.White Elephants adored. The King of Pegu drew four in his coach, and I believe that in the rest of the East there were not more to be found. The Kings Palace called Chalousbemba, was built square, with a Dosme, at every corner stands the statue of a Gyant, of polisht marble, who Atlas-like upheld this goodly fabrick; and are re∣presented with such tortions of face, you would think they com∣plain of their load. The stone 'tis built with is smooth and re∣splendent as glasse, for the adjacent forrests, and gardens, are therein perfectly discovered. 'Tis inviron'd in with a deep trench, you enter over a draw bridge, thorough a gate of excessive heighth and strength, where are the figures of a Gyant and his wife, each of a piece, and of a mixt coloured marble, the pavement is of the same, and represents (like the Sea) this massy structure. They spare neither gold nor azure, and in Galleries you shall see carved the Histories of all the wars those Kings have made against their enemies. From thence you descend some steps of marble into a lower Court, encompassed with ballisters or railes, where there is a pleasant fountain, whence the water is conducted into severall gardens by pipes; the gardens fenced with strong walls, one of them is three miles long, where grow various sorts of trees, of a marvellous height, that cast most pleasant and delicious shades. The River Caypomo runs thorough one end of the garden, west∣ward: and at the other end there is a large and long walk, whence you discover, fair pastures for Cattle, that are very numerous, under the shade of those trees that bear variety of fruit, and great plenty; There are many Monkeys, Pea-birds both wild and tame, parats, white partridges, and other birds. There are many other gardens and Palaces nearer hand, built of marble, and Por∣phyry, and a lake a mile about. One of thee Palaces is allotted the Queen and her Court, (not far unlike the Escurial) which joyns to a Park stored with
exquisite and rare beasts, as Agouari, that give the musk, civets,Aguari the musk. car. Sindero. girafs, the Sindero, (like the Stags are bred in Swedeland, and are put to the same use as Horses, and are called Arsinga:) Abada, or Rhinocerot. There is an Unicorn called Drougala,Unicorn. and the head of another, with the horn in the midst of the upper part of the forehead, set fast upon a fountain side, with many more curious rarities. In the Sultanes garden there is a cage of birds, we call birds of Paradise, the Portuguais Saxaror Dell Sol, and the Indians Manucodiata: some of our Europeans believe those birds have no feet, but certain nerves or strings onely, but 'tis a falshood, for I am certain they have feet which they use as o∣ther birds: They hold to that they never light upon the ground, but that they build their nests upon their males backs; but 'tis appa∣rent by those that are brought into our parts, that their feet are dexterously cut, that they may seem more strange and admirable. I saw one at Goa, which a Portuguais fed with the sweetest flow∣ers, as Jasemin, Gilly-flowers and others, which the bird delighted in. In those parks or gardens are Besouarts, and swine,Besouarts: that breed the same stone within them. In that cage there are other birds of strange shapes, one hath the bill long and sharp, and is ravenous, feeds on flesh, and is called Tanarif. Another called Tiscan, white all over the body,Tanarif. Tiscan. and upon the breast, hath a bunch of feather, like a dried Rose, his bill strong and thick like an Eagles, but bigger and blacker, can break a sheeps bone in two. I think 'tis the Griffin, though it hath but two legs:Griffin. for I never could hear of any four leg'd, as they are represented unto us. This bird is an enemy to the Tanarif, and are therefore separated. There are many more strange birds, brought from Mo∣lukes, Maldives, Java, Sumatra, and other Isles in the Indian Sea, there are Ostriches which they call Zangir, from the name of the Isle whence they come, of a prodigious bignesse.Ostriches. In the Lake belonging to the Sultan's Palace,Water fowle. are seen all sorts of water-fowle, of many different colours, they feed on fish, and a slime bred therein, that is very sweet, and when once they have tasted it, they never leave it, but breed often; There are Connills or water-Rats, without tayles, they feed about this lake under the shades, they delight to dive into the slime or mud: There live little Apes, their hair or down softer than silk, of a violet colour admirable pretty. There was in this lake a Crocodile brought from the river of Pegu, but because e committed great spoyl upon these birds and beasts, the King commanded him to be killed, and with much ado they took him, although wounded in many places under the belly. We happened to be there at his death, a month after the King had given order for it, he gave many loud groanes, and sighs at his death: it was flead, and the flesh distributed a∣mongst the Courtiers, and is as sweet as musk, which occasioned
one of our gang to say, he thought Ambergris proceeded from those creatures, as he was informed in Portugall, for my part I am not of that opinion, for in the Isles Ambergris is gathered, there was never known any Crocodiles: and as I have learn't in my travells, it rather appeares to be bred in the bottom of the seas (as some Islanders (that have gathered it) have remarked) like a bitume, or thick mud: I much lesse believe it proceeds from a whale, having often both seen, and helped to take of them, we have made diligent searches into their bowells, but could never find out any such thing. A Portuguais, Don Jamo, informed us that he had seen many taken at Malaca, or Tacola, where five or six were taken in two years, of an immense bigness, their entrails were all searched into, nothing near Ambergreece was discove∣red. Francolin. a red leyd fowle, big∣ger then a Godwit.Near this Palace there is another Park, stored with tame beasts and birds, as Francolins, Pea-birds, Turkeys, their ordinary Poul∣try for the use of the Court, kept and look't to by young slaves, to gather their eggs, &c. There are many white, red, and gray Partidges, which are fed once a day with a small grain, called Naver, like unto buck wheat, but much blacker. There is a park for Lions, Tigers, and other fierce beasts, called Siparo, and 'tis a sad and dayly sight to see criminalls devoured by them. There was a Church founded there, in memory of a mira∣cle that happened to a Christian in the year 1572. who was expo∣sed to the Lions,Miracle of a Christi∣an, expo∣sed to beasts to be devou∣red. next to the Elephants, and thirdly to the Ti∣gars, the siercest of the three, and came off from them all safe and intire, none of the beasts would touch him, he was presented to the King, (who gave him a pension during his life,) and inquiring who he was (he replyed) he was a poore Christian pilgrim, come out of France, with intention to visit the Holy Sepulcher at Jeru∣salem; that since he had travelled unto Mount Sinay with the Ca∣ravane, whence he thorough devotion came to the Town of St. Thomas, to visit the shrine of that glorious Saint; there he was bidden go to Caranganor, where that St. suffered Martyrdom; and that then he had a curiosity to see the Court of that great Monarch, so famous throughout the Indies, and was not permit∣ted to crosse the river of Pegu without money (which he was but slightly stored withall) but cast himself into the water, to swim it over, and being re-taken, was condemned to the beasts. After this worthy miracle, some French Jesuites at San-Thomas, obtained leave of the King of Pegu to build a Church in remem∣brance of the miracle. Those Fathers go on cheerfully and suc∣cessfully in the conversion of those parts. There are in those Parkes ponds of clear water, where they
feed Tortoyses of a middle size, Their shells are a mixture of many colours, as black, red, tawny, yellow, and others, and there are none fairer in the world. They work up many things therewith, as Cabinets, Trunks, Box∣es, and other furniture, 'tis very neat work, for the shells are po∣lished, like diamonds, and are transparent, which make a fine show, and would be much valued here, but he hazards his life that ad∣ventures for them. This Prince makes it his only pastime every January, when their summer drawes near (for at Pegu, and all o∣ther places under the Tropick, and the Torrid Zone; winter be∣gins in May, because of the disordinate raines which fall from that Moneth to the end of August, that is their winter, their Summer begins with our Autumne, and lasts all our winter moneths for o∣ther reasons, and 'tis the same in Cochin-China, where they have three moneths winter, and nine summer) to visit his Tortoyses, which he calls Elisar, he drawes out of the ponds those of the highest colours, and he keeps fishermen to that purpose only, and which case them so gently of their shells, that they do not die, and within three yeares their shells are as well grown, and as bright as before: and thus they last 15 or 20 yeares, at that age they turned red, and their shels are of a good colour for three yeares: when the King hath a mind to eat of them, they cut off their heads, and five dayes after they are prepared, and yet after those five dayes they are alive, as we have often experienced. In those ponds there is a certain male animall, whose skin is gray,Asoufar and silver coloured, wherewith they cover their furniture. This animal is a great multiplyer, and is called Asoufa, like our sea Calfe, and as bigg as a small mule, and much esteemed amongst them. They have another kind, whereof they make bucklars, and coats of Armor, no steele will pierce them, they are so strong and hardned: The King himself and his foure white Elephants in war time are Armed with those skins, but covered over with slight silke stuffes. Those Elephants are exceeding strong,Telansin. the King takes great content to be drawn upon a Telanzin, which is a kind of litter, but with four wheeles: One day I heard him command his Nangin, or chiefe Coachman, to make his Telan∣zin ready, desirous to take the aire. Two of the Elephants being brought forth to be shewen the Prince Souac, he praised them to be two of the strongest in the World, he let one of them loose out of his hand, that took up the litter, (with all belong∣ing thereunto, as wheeles and draughts) in his teeth, and carried it before the Prince, and set it softly down, as if it had been a small weight, and yet it was 500. weight. This action so high∣ly pleased pleased the King, that he commanded that ten pound of sugar should be added to his dayly allowance. Their chiefest food is rice boiled in milk, made up in balls: and they have dayly
fifty pounds to their portions, besides they are turned into the fields, and feed upon sycamore leaves, and other pleasing leaves, they love cooleness, and bathe in those ponds: they are subject to the bloody flux, and heat is very troublesom to them. When the waters are not high enough to cover them, they lie down and tum∣ble, their naturall discretion is such, that they never mingle with females before company, they go two years with their young, and live two hundred. 'Tis a beast highly valued by all Easterne Princes, and are very serviceable; They are taken thorough the whole Empire of Pe∣gu, and beyond the river Savara, at Bremu, Ava, Bengala, and Ma∣laca. The King of Pegu, because he hath such a number of Ele∣phants, is surnamed Quiber Sencal Jasel; that is, the grand Mo∣narch of Elephants. In the palme Forrest, neer to new Pegu, they set their snares to catch those beasts. 'Tis a very pretty sight to see a tame female lead a wild male thorough the streets, when he sees himself fast, and caught, he condoles himself with many fearfull cries and emulations, and sometimes striking furiously up∣on pillars, wherewith the houses are susteined, breaks his teeth, and having sufficiently tormented himself all in water, & being sensible of the heat of that water which lies in his belly, he thrusts his trunk into his mouth, or throat, and drawes up all the water, that smells extreamly, and is boyling hot: Then with goades and pricks they force him into a dungeon, where in five or six dayes he is tamed with the female. When they are tame they are lodged in a Princely roome, pain∣ted over, with imagary and forrest work, and are fed in silver, the King esteems them the strength of his Army, they are richly at∣tired, and eat bread, they are fed with severall sorts of corn, or grain boyled, as barly, rice, lupins, and others, they love fruit, but care neither for flesh, nor sish. The King delights himselfe to see them monthly exerci∣sed in Battalia, richly harnessed, marching ten of breast, the Captain marches in the head, armed with a Crocodile skin, covered over with a cloath of gold: his forehead peece of the same, the riders cloathed in cloath of gold upon a green ground, with a lance, and a lyons skin hanging there∣at; even with the Captain march twelve Negroes women, young, and cloathed in Indian gownes of many colours, with drums handsomely painted, they leap and dance before the Elephants, making many grimoces, and ridiculous gesti∣culations, their faces painted red and violet; when the Ele∣phants go to war they weare the skin onely, with bars of steele over their trunks, and are richly trapped upon their fe∣stivalls, a squadron of a thousand Elephants well managed
follow the Captain, next the Kings Throne, or State, with his children thereon, high and exalted, like a Ganopy drawn by those famous white ones, followed by many Nobles mounted on others, with silken bridles, all this is accompanied with Trumpets, flutes, and other instruments, at which sound they leap and dance, and seeme to take great content, and between times they march with a gravity, becoming a rati∣onall creature. I remember that in this solemnity a base fellow crossed the street before the Royal Throne, the beasts stopt suddenly, and could not be driven on till the Criminal was brought unto them, who expected death, a tosse or two at the least. They gazing upon one another scorned to touch him, one of the riders beat the fellow sorely with his bridle; Their Governour told them with fair words, that they had done an act worthy themselves; the beasts satisfied, continued their march. I saw a mighty big one presented to the King of Pegu, by him of Siam his Tributary. The King immediately commanded meat to be brought him, to know his breeding, for the best bred eat with great modesty; but he that brought him said, that if he had drink, he could live without food: he that had the charge of the rest, either for scorne, or to disparage the beast's nature, brought him water in a foule vessell, the E∣lephant gave him a disdainfull look, and putting his tronk into his mouth, spouted a great quantity of stinking and hot water upon the Masters head, who returned him a blow with a staff upon the head, the Elephant immediately killed him with his tronk. The King admired his prudence, and caused him water to be brought in a clean silver vessell, and bought him harnesse, most rich and magnificent; they are sometimes served in golden vessells, and with great respect, o∣therwise they will kill their Keeper for the least offence. They are capable both of hearing and understanding, and learn whatever is taught them.
CHAP. XXVIII. Continuation of Pegu, of the Government and Policy, of Superstitions, and Magicians. PEgu is innumerably peopled with very good subjects, ready upon the least command to give obedience, and execute, (and they say) that to serve their Prince, is to serve God: and hold their companions most happy, who dye in the Kings service; when the King will raise an Army, he enrolls, the number he requires, with their names, their qualities, by certain itinerant Heralds, or Calfenes who publish the war abroad, with flaming Torches in their hands,How they raise an Army. as I have already said. They ride on Dromada∣ries, and change often: and they are kept in most towns for the Princes service, as are our Post-horses. When the people are ac∣quainted with the Kings will, they generally leave home, wife, and children, and follow the King; every town and village hath a treasurer, who duely pay the pensions allotted by the King, and every one is sure of a livelyhood, according to his merit in the Kings service, which is faithfully discharged. Triennial Gover∣nours.The Governours of all towns have triennial commissions, and are promoted according to their birth to the kings favour, and the peoples free consent. They behave themselves with great inte∣grity, and discretion; and take care the Kings treasure should be distributed to them that serve best, to their wives and children, and implore them in honourable occupations, according to quali∣ty, capacity, and the occasion of service, there being publick work-houses purposely maintained; where the third part of the people are continually imployed: as Mynes, Paper-mils, Silk-works, Su∣gar engines, and other trades, and works belonging to the King. If a soldier returned from war complains to the King, that his General had not distributed to his family, what the King had commanded: The General is presently sent for, laid flat upon the ground or table, where some Courtier takes a cudgel (with three whip-cords at the end, and a ball of ciment fastned thereto) striking upon the ground without touching the man, and the King asks why he had not payd the Zimbou, or allowance to the soldiers family:Zimbou. the other must confesse the truth, and if he doth alledge any reasonable excuse, he hath not so many stripes, but he hath three at least given him however. The exe∣cutioner strikes upon the ground, untill the King commands otherwise.
The criminal is next helped up by his friends, and makes the King a low reverence, giving thanks for the mercy he had shew∣ed in not stripping him. Then the King either invites him to din∣ner himself, or some other Noble-man, and the punishment he suffered, is not held disgraceful, nor ignominious. The trum∣pets sound gives the King notice of his coming, and at his going it sounds twice, and the multitude cry out, that the Ge∣neral or Governour of such a place was retiring. The Gene∣ral casts himself at the Kings feet, and kisses the ground, the King imbraces him, and presents him with some rich Carcanet,Admira∣ble obedi∣ence. or chain of Gold, or Jewels: so dismisses him, as content, as if he had got a kingdom, and this is a credit to them. Suits in Law are soon decided, for if a man be at diffe∣rence with his neighbour, the first Danubir, or Justice,Differen∣ces quick∣ly decided; they appeale to, decides it upon the place. The King once a week, sits in his seat of Justice and de∣cides differences of the greatest importance, by, and with the assistance of a Naire or Gentleman, that holds him a golden cup to spit in: 'Tis held shameful to spit on the ground in the Kings sight, but they spit in handkerchers. The King before he rises, drinks Areca and Betel,Areca. Betel. brought him by one of his women, and another of his favourites an∣noints his body with a certain oyle, or sweet balsome, to preserve his health. Most of those nations eat on the ground, and use leaves, instead of cloathes, they eat in curious wood∣den vessels, artificially painted, in various manners; others are served in Purcelain, which will not endure poyson, no more then the wood Avate. At his rising from his seat of justice, a Merchant presents him with some delicate drink; he hath a guard of a hundred Naires, armed with short swords hanging by their sides, in scarses richly embroydered with gold and jewels: There are many Gold-smiths, as are in most parts of the East. He hath other Gentlemen of his guard armed with steele bowes gilt, and neatly enamel'd:Peguans Armes. they are expert bow∣men, and are trained up from their infancy; the guard of 100. Naires, besides their swords bear quivers and arrows gilt,The Kings march. with a marvellous strong Cane that never breaks with a Pike or Fork at one end; azured at both ends like a walking staffe: They march in order. A Noble-man bears the Kings sword before him, another his buckler, made of Tortoise shels, garnished with Diamonds, and Rubies, as bright as the Sun. The King weares the Tiara richly adorned with gemmes: at one side of him a Lord carries a Parasoll, before him walk two jesters, with ridiculous motions and gestures, relating how they had like to have killed one another: the King is very much pleased with such Fictions and Drolleries. One of these Bouffoones, known in many languages, fre∣quented
very much Father Joseph of the societies company, by whom,A jester baptized. he was instructed, and satisfied of the truth of our religon, and resolved to be baptized. The Father advertised the King, he consented, and the man was presently baptized, and entertained for a time amongst those good fathers: mean while, his wife not willing to fol∣low her husbands example, assembled her friends and ce∣lebrated her husbands funeral, as for a dead man, and built him a tombe, where they made pitiful moanes, with many seperstitions, bringing the women thither to weep and la∣ment, and they all dined together upon his Tomb. They do this, that the wife of a newly baptized Christian, may marry; otherwise they hold her consenting to her husbands Christianity. This new Convert was named James, he came fourty days after his Baptisme, to salute the King, who desired to know whether he would perform his office as before, and that his pension should be still continued (he replyed) Sir, I ser∣ved you in the stead of a dead man, but now I will serve you alive, and retyring with the Fathers, he was not seen of two moneths, in which time his wife married another of meaner quality. But as I have heard, she would have returned to her first husband, and become a Christian, be∣ing satisfied and perswaded thereunto by a Portuguais, but her husband would not consent thereunto; knowing it could not availe him much.Big canes. Then she married a Rope-maker, which is a great trade there, for they have great need of Lines, Ropes, Reeds, and Canes, which they cleave, be∣sides the Cables, and other tackling for ships. The biggest of those Canes they make Pikes or Lances of for Horse-men, as the Mores use, and of the strongest they make, Chests or boxes; for they never break; of others they make hoops, bar∣rels, and halfe barrels, to keep their drink or water in. There are of them, of an incredible size. In this country (as well as throughout the Indies) they bear a great respect to the Image of the blessed Virgin, and to the memory of Saint Thomas, who hath wrought many miracles in the country. He raised from death to life a brother of the King of Granganor, who became christian thereupon, and built a Church upon the side of a little hill near the Sea, dedicated to that Saint, and left great revenues thereunto, which are continued to this day, but are very ill deserved. They say that the same King of Granganor, and another brother named Abanachacon, and that the King of Pegu desired S. Thomas to vouchsafe him a visit, who pro∣mised to become a Christian, upon condition he might enjoy all his women, which (as he alledged) he could not live without, by the frequent prayers and intercession of this Saint, his concupi∣scence was wholly allayed and asswaged; and in a vision this King
thought himself dipped in a pond by three celestial vertues,A Vision. A heathen King con∣verted. to cleanse him of all filth and sensuality, from thence lifted up into heaven, and made partaker of the heavenly glory, and received knowledge of his salvation, and was baptized by St. Thomas, and by his good prayers obtained of God Almighty, that his tomb (built of transparent marble) should be ever full of that water wherein he was purified, that shortly after this King ended his dayes wounded in a battle he fought, to assist a Brother of his against King Sangiscan. The Bramins who at present have the possession of this Church, where stands this Tomb, say that his body is covered over with water to this very day, which is seen through the transparency of the marble, at the light of three bright-burning lamps, and that this Tomb is four fathom height raised from the ground. This they relate of it. And I remember I have seen at Arles (in Rolands Chappel, in the Church of St. Honoretus,) an ancient Marble monument replete with water, which increases and diminishes according to the motions of the Moon; and let the air be never so hot or dry, yet at full Moon the Tomb is full of water. They relate as much of another in the Church of St. Severinus, in the Suburbs of Bourdeaux, a German Lord visiting this wonder, assu∣red me he had seen the like in Austria, as at Verona in St. Zeno's Church, the sepulture of Pepin, King of Italy, Son of Carolus Magnus, is seen full of water: many things are naturally known to rise and fall according to the course of the Moon, as the ebbe and flow of the Sea, stones, plants, and animals. They hold that St. Thomas (as I have already said) was martyred at Granganor,S. Thomas maryred. Oysima. by a Huntsman, making his offerings to Oysima, their three-headed Idol, who shot the Saint with an arrow, aiming at some wild beast, much more they relate of this glorious Saint, which they hold by tradition, although the ancient testimonies have left us little of his memory. The Ecclesiastical History saith that his body was translated from Meliapur, or Calamina, to Edesse, from thence to Ortuna in Pouilla. The Christians (that are in the Indies, who stile them∣selves of St. Thomas, and say they are instructed from Father to Son, by that Saint, are Nestorians,Nestorians. and infected with many more heresies, for to this day they are instructed by the Syrian hereticks. Those Indian Kings rely much upon Magicians and Conjurers: the King of Pegu maintains one in his Court, to foretell what he desires to know; he was called Bongi or Bonze, (as their sacrifi∣cators are called) a bruitish man addicted to all sorts of vices and abominations, yet he is the Kings minion. He carries ever in his hand a very keen hanger, like a Turkish Cymeter, onely more bow'd, dressed in two Monkeys skins, which he wears, the one before the other behind, hung all over with bells, to the weight
of fifty pounds, which make a hideous noyse: upon a time the King taking the air in a chariot, spied one of his choicest Ladies at a window, he sent for her to take the air upon the lake in a barge, or Gondola, covered and richly adorned, they were no sooner both in,Tempest. but a sudden and dangerous storm arose from the west; that overcast and clouded the skies. The King presently called to his Bongi, to clear the air; the Conjurer immediately made a hole in the ground, wherein he urined, and using strange Conjurations, many Devils came forth of the earth, making a most horrid and fearfull din, and howling, scattered the clouds, and tempest; the King made with all speed to his Pa∣lace, putting no great confidence in his Duma, for fear of being overturned. Charms against the tem∣pest.The Enchanter full of mirth and vanity threatned with his Cymiter the tempestuous winds, jumping and leaping incessantly, he made a confused noyse with his bels, and mad-man like ran to the Kings Palace-gate, where he skipped and leaped, until he frightned, and scared away all the birds and tame beasts that were kept in the Park. 'Twas the same Magician, (who as I have already said, treating of the Maldives) undertook to bring birds and beasts out of the inchanted Isle of Pallouis, and was soundly beaten for his rash undertaking, and brought back onely with life enough to witnesse his shame. The great Cham of Tartary entertaines of those Magicians, and puts great confidence in them; but more of them here∣after. As throughout Arabia they obey the Seque, or Sequemir, in spirituals, so do they in the Kingdom of Pegu their Abedale, of a Sect called Abedali, and there are of them at Malabar. They are Santons,Confession amongst Idolaters. or Hermites, otherwise called Jogues, and by the Maho∣metans Marabouts. A people that observe a religious poverty, holding property in nothing, of austere life, and as the Guzarates, never feed on any animated creature. Though ready to perish with hunger they ask nothing, but the people furnish them a∣bundantly with all necessaries. If any one have rob'd, mur∣ther'd, or committed other crime, he presently repairs to his Charif, who supplies the place of principal Abedale, confesses en∣tirely what he hath done, and the other enjoyns a punishment and penance according to discretion. Though he perpetrated all the iniquities on earth, if his Superiour give him absolution, no man can further question him, or call him to account. Sometimes they punish with death,Ʋldarin: as it happened to one Ʋldarin, a Native, who in a savage quarrel having killed and privately buried his Brother under a tree, confessed it to his Charif, who caused him to take up the dead body,Punish∣ments for crimes. and seeing it so cruelly dealt with, condemned him living to be buried, together with the dead. Another time he caused another to be cast into a pond, for that he
had denied their Duma. These people have abundance of zea∣lous followers, who provide them whatsoever they want. Like∣wise are they vertuous people did they not want our true Reli∣gion. There were some who instructed by the Jesuites,Idolatrous and Ma∣hometan Martyrs. yet continuing their belief, embraced burning from the Mahometans, for holding Mahomet was damned, and Jesus Christ was God, and born of the Virgin Mary. One Ali a Merchant of Guzerate, inhabitant of Amiadiva, told me he saw at Bagdet fifteen Reli∣gious, called the Deruis of the Sect of Ali, burned for the like confession. Some of this order I have seen wear rich girdles,Deruis Martyrs. others with diamond pendants in their ears; one at Pegu, with two curious and costly Cassocks, one of a Munkeys skin of divers colours, the hair fine as silk, the other given him by the King, covered with a Tortoise shell, but of a most splendid delicacy. These Santons, Joguies, or Indian Anchorites, lodge in the field, in hollow trees, seldom speak, have some Disciples exceeding obedient to the least notice given them, addict themselves to Magick, and to recompense their austerities, the Devil perswades them either to the precipice, or to take a death from their disciples hands, who afterwards interre them, and build a Chappel over them as to a God. Besides these the generall name of Religious in Pegu and Siam is Talapoyes.Talapoyes. CHAP. XXIX. Of the Idols in Pegu, bloudy Sacrifices, Exorcisms, strange Communions. WE have mentioned before how the Rivers of the Country yield the King of Pegu a grand revenue in fine gold,Idols of Pegu. which he designs for embellishment of his Temples and Idols, whereof they have abundance of such extravagant effigies, as the Devil presents to their fancies. They have excellent casters and scul∣ptors, that draw these apparitions to the life, which generally are exceeding hideous and formidable: for the Devil becomes visibly conversant with these poor wretches, shewing them any thing they desire, the more firmly to engage them to his service. At the Princes Palace in the back Court, there are abundance of these Idols, all of pure gold, with Crowns, enriched with gems, as I said before; one amongst the rest of a prodigious heighth, they call Apalita, who assists pilgrims and travellers, through the world, whose Temple no man visits but with some present, which is converted to the use of the Priests, who ordinarily have wives and children. Such as enter these Tambous and Gouias, or places of
adoration would think to have some miserable end before they returned home, if they brought not some offering with them, so as he that hath but a leather to cover his pudenda, will take it off to offer to the Idol: others will present little bels of silver and gold which they hang at their genitories, in little rings drawn through the flesh, which they do to be the better esteemed of women, testifying herein that they delight in no other sex but theirs. Some there are so superstitiously devout,Bleeding sacrifices. that they will cut them∣selves to immolate the bloud to their Idol. 'Tis something proba∣ble that the Turks who so scarifie their bodies for devotion, learnt it of the Indians, because the Alcoran contains no such pre∣cept. The Priests confirm them vigorously in this Idolatry, and some there have been who meeting poor Portuguese Merchants and tra∣vellers, ignorant of their custom passing by their Temple, have cruelly cut their throats, and sacrificed them to their A∣palita. But the Jesuites complaining to the King, and shewing him the horrour and indignity of such an execration, he sentenced to death 70. of these abominable Priests, and the sentence had passed further even to their wives and children, but for the media∣tion of the Fathers. Notwithstanding their devotion, the people looked upon this execution patiently, and without the least com∣motion, for the affection they bear their Prince. Likewise through the supplications of those Fathers, they were freed from a pesti∣lentiall disease then reign'd amongst rhem. Some amongst these Priests use holy ashes and holy water also. They are the ashes of things sacrificed to the Idols, and a∣mongst the rest of such as have made themselves voluntary sa∣crifices. There is another Idol of silver, in the proportion of a Gyant,Holy ashes and holy water. An oracu∣lous Idol. who as an Oracle makes answer to demands, foretells things to come, but with a thousand lyes and a∣buses. They believe this Pagode, assists them in their wars, and as their Mars renders them victorious: They coin money in honour of him, and stamp his name upon it: But he is not alwaies effectuall in his assistance, for at the time they sacrificed the poor Portuguese I told you of, the Inhabitants of Goa and Malacca for revenge mann'd eight Gallions and some Carvells, put in at one of their Towns, which they took possession of,Idols de∣stroyed by the Portu∣guese. thence advanced to another which they pillaged, burnt the Temples and Idols, with all the Priests, their wives and children. 'Twas at the time the King of Pegu was gone to the Conquest of Siam, so as the Portuguese alarm'd the whole Countrey, and had Don Alouse d' Aquila, who commanded the Foot, arrived in time, they had easily carried the Town of Pegu it self, taken the Kings treasure, with the Idols rich in gold, silver, and precious stones, which had been a wealth inesti∣mable.
They put abundance to the sword, and carried a∣way numbers of prisoners: But at the Kings return the Je∣suites reconciled the difference betwixt them; at which time 'twas accorded that at new Pegu, in honour of the Concepti∣on of the blessed Virgin, a Church should be built at the Kings charges, which in these parts is no novelty, where from time out of memory, as I said, they have had an image in ho∣nour of the Virgin with her infant, illustrated with three lamps, and the Temple of God where this image was reverenced, was ser∣ved with divers sorts of Priests. The King of Pegu this while was much incensed for the af∣front, the violence and indiscretion of these Priests had brought upon him, and conceived a hope that the very Idols would take some revenge for the injuries they had suffered from the Franques Ramatas, so they call the Portuguese, but he was perplexed, when instead thereof,The tooth of an ape. he observed them perse∣ver prosperous, daily overturning more Idols, as they had a∣mongst others burnt the famous Apes tooth adored in Zelan, which he would have purchased at the rate of so many thousand crowns, as I said before. Another Idoll they have, called Fotoque, (as likewise in Ja∣pan and China) of the same stature as the other,Fotoque an Idoll. but of different matter, of lead and brasse mixt, such as their money is made of. They tell us this Idol with his intercession inclines their Duma, and obtains grace for all, in particular, for soules condemned to black and dark places. The Palpas are obliged to sacri∣fice to him every Saturday a black swine, and three pullets of the same colour. Poultry in this Country contrary to the ordinary, have their flesh black, which they call Fare,The flesh of hens black. and makes the pottage black, neverthelesse very savoury. All the Sacrifices passe into the Priests bellies, for they burn nothing but the liver with aromatick odours, and pulverizing the bones, mix it with their holy waters. When they would have any sacrifices brought to their Idol, they go about the Town, ringing a Bell made like a Still,Sacrifices for the dead. and say this is to supplicate for some of their friends, who are tor∣mented in the black shades; for as to those which immitted in∣to other bodies, as of oxen or cows there to be kept till the day of judgement, they hold them well quartered,Mtemp∣sycose. and to have no need of prayers. For this cause the Peguans had a custome to eat none of these sorts of flesh, as in Malabar and other places; but since such time as their Duma in a vision gave precept to one of their Chaouris, to use all living beasts indifferently, and that a soule condemned to the body of one beast, when that dyed, passed into the body of another, they have made no further difficulty to eat it. For such beasts they have
a reverence,Supersti∣tious salu∣tations. Asses for chase. and bow to them as they would salute a friend. They have a sort of small Asses that come from the Pro∣vince of Beluacarin, almost all red and black, or black and white, which they hunt and take with hayes like Co∣nies, and being brought to hand serve for many uses, but are of low price, by reason they hold soules never enter them, their flesh is so faint and disagreeable: we met with heards of them in the Champian, which appeared to be tame, suffering one to come so near as to lay hand on their neck; when on a suddain they sprung away like Mun∣keys, and returned about a quarter of an hour after. They are not so courtly to them as to other beasts, for the o∣pinion the Priests have put in them: and as we in de∣rision would salute them, they would reprove us, and tell us, their great Duma had commanded Fotoque to curse the genera∣tion of Asses, and the soules that should take up habitation in them. They have likewise many other Gods, as that they call the god of atomes in the Sun, and others. Hell, they call the dark cavern of the house of smoak, where a horrible Serpent devoures soules, and whence one of their gods frees them by his power. In a word, 'tis stupendous to consider the number of gods and Idols in their severall temples; their Monasteries, Priests, Monks, Hermits, Sects, Sacrifices, &c. Their belief likewise of the Creation of the world is strange, and of the sin of the first man, all disfigured with a thousand fables. For in the year 1557. a Cordelier, one Bonfer a Frenchman, being at Goa, moved with a pious vocation, went to preach the Gospel in these parts, and going to San Thomas, and thence by Sea to Port Cosmin, and Pegu, did what could be done by Sermon to impresse the faith in these people, but with small effect they were so hardned,Peguans whence derived. so as after some sufferings, he was con∣strained to return from whence he went. He learnt, that 'tis held the Peguans descended originally from certain Jews, some∣times banished,The Pegu∣ans creed. and by Salomon condemned to work in the mines of Ophir: that they believed an infinity of successive worlds to all eternity, innumerable gods receding respectively to the diverse worlds, and lyable to death at last. That men having passed thorough all sorts of animalls at last became Gods, and that these Soules after many ages being purified in certain appointed places, and having returned diverse times into these new worlds at last, were placed some in Paradise, others in Hell, and some reduced to Niban, that is, nothing, and a thousand other dreams. After this Corde∣lier, came the Jesuites with better successe, by means of some
signal services they did them,Jesuites in Pegu. in certain popular maladies they were infected with. As amongst others, Father Andrew of the socie∣ty, at the time that an epidemical pestilence destroyed innumerable people in Pegu, a Christian Townsman came and besought his intercession for his family, that was wholly infected; and the Fa∣ther demanding wherefore he had not caused his wife and chil∣dren to be baptized, he answered, he had such a real intention, but that their Pagode had prohibited him,Conversi∣on and truth. and that his wife would not permit it, but threatned, if he forced Baptisme up∣on her or hers, she would publish his obsequies according to custom, and marry another: which excuse the Father took for some satisfaction, and at his supplications the people were cu∣red. Whereupon many more repaired to him for the same cause, but he would not grant them any such assistances but upon engagement to receive Baptisme; which their Priests vigo∣rously sought to hinder, telling them 'twere better to dy of that malady then be damned by the cure of Baptisme. These Indians,, amongst other superstitions,Extrava∣gant com∣munions. which they have derived by corruption from Christianisme, they have one ex∣ceeding remarkable, which is, that once a year they make a so∣lemn communion. Having immolated a white sheep, and mingled the blood with meal, they call Agricar; on the day of the great feast of Duma, they give it to the whole congregation in form of a heart, with exhortations and remonstrance, that this which they take, is the blood of their God, and upon that day strangers are not admitted to celebrate the solemnity: but on the morrow they are received, and before they communicate, a Sermon is made to excite them to devotion, telling them their God receives them into his alliance, embraces them as his children, to whom he gives his grace by meanes of the blood they have taken. Behold how they transform and prophane what they have been heretofore taught of the Mystery of the Paschal lamb, and the Eucharist. In Mexica and Peru they have likewise confession and Communion after their manner. But they have another sort of sacrifice yet more strange, that is, they buy a slave of a high price, of thirty yeares age, beautiful, sound, and jolly, and ha∣ving washed him in a lake, or other water three mornings by the rising of the Sun, they cloath him in a white gown, keep him fourty dayes, and shew him to the people, telling them, this is the innocent that must be sacrificed for the sins of the peo∣ple. Then every one brings presents to him, and with humility beseeches him to remember them when he shall come before the great God. All this while they take a heedful care he escape not, giving him good cheer, and Areca. Every morning for the fourty dayes when they shew him, they beat a kind of Pan, and melodiously play on flutes doleful, and pathetical straines, to excite devotion, in which conset every one beares a part that he
may be mindful of them. Thirty dayes expired, the ten Priests called Gaica, persons of veneration and antiquity, habited like the Victim, come to advertise him, that within ten days he goes to inhabit with the great God, and observe diligently if his counte∣nance change at the sound of death; and take it for an ominous augury, if he shew the least fear: For which cause on the day ap∣pointed, they give him a certain potion that renders him as 'twere frantick, and takes all apprehension from him. After diverse other ceremonies on the fortith, they sacrifice him, and after eat him. They lead him to the very top of their Temple, stretch him as it were into an oval upon a stone of the same figure, rip up his belly alive, tear out his heart which they burn, and sacrifice to their Idol, besmearing their cheeks with the blood. This flesh they eat as a sanctified and sacred Viand. During this space, they religiously abstain from all inordinate pleasures. See but to what deformities they have changed the mysteries of our faith, as Father Andrew often made appear to them, though few made profit of it: we must attend till God of his mercy open their understanding. Zibi de∣mons.But amongst the abuses and Idolatrie of these wretched people, 'tis most lamentable to see how they are tormented by these De∣mons,Possessed. where there are some called Zibi, which at their grand Fe∣stivals, enter into them while they dance, counterfeiting the deaf and dumb, contemning all sort of conjurations: so as to eject them, they must make new suffumigations and sacrifices; call in the Ma∣gicians to implore the favour of their Duma for deliverance of these miserable possessed creatures,Exorcisms. who all this while nei∣ther eat, drink, nor sleep, become meer skelitons, so lean, and disfigured, that they are the horrour and pitty of all that see them. Now doth the Magician repaire to the Devil to know the quality of this Demon usurper, and what is to be done to enfranchise the possessed, whom they carry by night into a field, and put him in a cave or tent without light: Then in∣structed by the devil, they seek out an hearb called Sacathy, which gives light by night, containing a splendour that may be perceived at a large distance, but as they say so pestiferous, that he who gathers it dyes immediately;Sacathy. for prevention where∣of, they tye a dog with a line to it, and so pull it up, then they burn it in the room with the Demoniacle; and the Demon in the instant, leaves him, as not able to endure the sent of this hearb. 'Tis not unlike to the root of Bachaza mentioned by Jose∣sephus, which growes near the town Machera in Judea. They ne∣ver have their Festival the Corouita,Coranita and the Sacrifice. but some one is unfortu∣nate in this kind. For as they carry along their Idol upon a six-wheel chariot drawn by Oxen, or Bufflers covered with flowers, and attended by the multitude, along the town, there are ever two or three pitiful wretches on a Scaffold in
long gowns of gray cloth, who declare to the people how they are ready to sacrifice themselves for the sanctification of the rest; Then down they come with a countenance pale and dis∣figur'd with apprehension of death, and cast themselves under the wheels of the chariot, where they are crushed to death. One there was who after he had been well fed by the Palpas or Priests for five dayes together, as a thing sacred, when the houre of sacrifice was come, his nose bled, and he would not dye upon any terms, for whatsoever the Priests could say so to encourage him, but at the same instant there was another, who voluntarily offered to take his place, and was broken un∣der the wheels: afterwards his corps was laid in the chariot by the Idol on the side of felicity. For the Idol bears in one hand a number of Serpents, to punish such as obey not his commands, and in the other a cup of some exquisite liquor, to recompense his good servants. They have special honour for these miserable Votaries, and all their Alliance. The sacrifice ended, they take the mur∣thered bodies, and give them honourable burial wrapped in a sear-cloath, and entombe them with solemn ceremonies, and in∣strumental musick, all their alliances coming for certain dayes to rejoyce over the Sepulcher. When, any one being sick, the Ma∣gician shall declare him irrecoverable, he is put apart in a gar∣den, one of his family being appointed to attend him. But if he chances to recover, he is held as a reprobate, and no man will visit or converse with him; saying, that had he been any thing of good, their God had not disdained his company. And if he desires to be admitted in society, the Chaouri or Sorcerer must make a sacrifice of Purification for him: then being purified, he makes his friends a feast of the flesh of black cattle onely, especially a goat, which is eaten with a grand ceremony. CHAP. XXX. The Peguans dyet, their Military exercises, their medicinable drugges, their Summer. AS to the ordinary dyet of the Peguans, with their lawful wives they feed soberly; but with their friends, their slaves,The Pe∣guans diet. or others they regard not to drink excessively, and be drunk with their sort of drink: notwithstanding they have a commendable custom not to stirre out of dores upon what termes soever, till
they are sober, lyars are detestable to them, and they decline their company. Saluta∣tions.They use diverse manners of salutations, according to the di∣versity of Countreys: the most ordinary with Persons of Qua∣lity, and equals is to kiss; first the cheek, then the hands: the meaner sort bow the knee to their betters, who are such as keep more slaves, and Concubines to bring them children to serve the King in his Wars. So are they likewise of more honour, and the King gives them allowance for the learning of Military Exer∣cises, as to ride, to vault, and others, for which they have Masters; but their method is different from that of our Cavaliers. For this reason the King keepes a good number of horses, of purpose for his subjects exercise; Gentlemen themselves unfurnished, some∣times taking them for a year, or more, and then employ them on other occasions. They have likewise Masters for shooting in a bow, backward upon retreat,Military exercises. as it were upon a charge, like the Parthians here∣tofore, and the Arabians at this day. They use it to draw on the enemy, and learn it of the Tartars their neighbours: like∣wise they practice to tosse the pike, and push with it on horse∣back without loosing it, sliding it dexterously in their hand; they likewise use the Azagaye, or javelin, and the Tamaca, which is a staffe, with a stone at one end, sharp as a razour; then they throw the ring, and three or four sorts of balls, very dangerous, sword and bucklars they use, and other armes much differing from ours. They have had the use of Cannon,Cannons. and other guns from all anti∣quity, like the Chineses, as they say. In a word, they hold Mili∣tary discipline in great esteem, and every one lives happily, accor∣ding to his vocation, the greater part at the Kings charges, who in time of peace employes them in mills of severall sorts, and sugar-workes; for you must know they spend more sugar here, then in any part of the world; for that as I told you, they make the very plaister of it that covers the Tarasses of their houses, mingling it with pounded shells, whereof they make a mortar, that being dryed becomes firm, as marble. They are a numerous people, but were they more they could find meanes to employ them, for every man labours, and you see no man in want; and if they see one in poverty, their charity is such, that if he be able, he is immediately employed, or his neces∣sities relieved. Medicina∣ble drugs Cocos.For account of the Medicinall Drugs of this Country, the ri∣ver Pegu with the inundation brings in the fruit of Cocos, of great esteem amongst the Indians, of great vertue to purge all humours, and proper for all diseases. For my part I never used it; for we used a method of Physick, approved of by Persons of Quality in those parts:Summer in Pegu. That is about the entrance of summer, which there begins early with the going out of January, whence Debla
or Scammony thrusts forth it's buds, and a sort of little birds feed upon them; when we would purge, we got of these birds that go in flights like our Snipes, and eating three or foure, we find the same effect, as if we had taken a physicall medicine; another sort they have, likewise easie enough, that is, to take the husk of a certain chich pease, a grain like Palma Christi, of wonderfull ope∣ration. Likewise Scammony water, which they draw like rose-wa∣ter, to make it more operative: at the same time they take the root of Rubarb, when the leaves are on, which are large as the great Lunary, and bitter as gall; when tis first pulled up tis full of juice, near orange colour, though the root new gotten be violent.Rubarbe. you need but break it, and the water within distills by little and little. Others pound it, and distill it with Scammony, and take the quantity of half a spoonfull. For purging they use likewise the wa∣ter of Jelac and Mechouacan, and other drugs, the substance where∣of they know how to draw very exquisitly; as they can the quintessenece of cinamon and cloves, which they put up in Bor∣rachoes and skins, and with other drugs, load them for the red sea, so to Meca, thence to Suria, where the Venetians fetch them, who know sufficiently how to choose them,How drugs are brought into Eu∣rope. leaving the worst to the Sensall, who distributes them to Provence, and thence to the other parts of France, where in stead of good drugs, they have nothing oft-times but pieces of wood, and things of small value. CHAP. XXXI. The Election of the King of Pegu, their Offi∣cers, the Homages, and presents of the Subjects to their new Prince. FOr account of this Great King of Pegu, his creation,Royall Officers. and Mi∣litia, I will say in few words what I there learnt. A Prince of high Quality in the Empire, called the Califerech, is as it were Constable, and grand Master, who by prescription assists at the Election and Coronation of the Prince, which cannot be done without him. His Residence is in the Town of Mandranelle,Coronati∣on of the King. to∣wards Tazatay. When a new King is to be Crown'd, this Calefe∣rech comes to Pegu in barks of war, and at his arrivall the Prince goes to receive, and entertain him, kissing his shoulder; the other bowes to the very ground, and kisses his leg; then the people cry out, Este lansar, that is, God be praised; then they both ascend into the Princes Chariot, no one presuming to approach near
them; and returning in gracefull order to the Town, a thousand sorts of fireworks play, the Fortress Cannon is fired, and all in good order to receive them. Being arrived at the Pallace, abun∣dance of Clarions and Trumpets sound, and a Noble man sayes with a loud voice. The Califerech commands you all to joyn in prayers, that if our Prince be not worthy, he may die before his inauguration, and the people cry out aloud, God grant it. Im∣mediately after a repast they create Officers, being necessary they should be chosen with the good liking of the Prince. The better part of the Officers have Arabian names, in imitation of Sechemir of Arabia, and the Court of Persia, to which almost all the Princes of the East conform themselves, as the most magnificent. The first that is made is the Gadalaro,Gadalaro. who disposes and rules all that belongs to the Empire, and keepes a magnificent Court. The second is the Amicassen,Amicassen. or Generall of the Army, who commands all that have conduct of any Souldiers, commissioning Governors, and disposing the Kings Treasure in all things necessary to war. Then there is the Libaganir, and Libasan, joynt officers, one whereof administers the Revenewes of the Provinces, the other the tributes, imposts, gabells, and rents Royall: they have both a good strength of Souldiers to assist them, and these attend the Prince every where, never leaving him. There is the Ostades, or Captain of the Pallace, who takes order for the Provi∣sion. The Amiracho, or Master of horse, that disposes of the Kings horses, mules, elephants, camels, dromedaries. The Amural that governs the Elephants. The Cansidibir Master of the Pages and Eunuches. The Madrecon that drawes forth the Army, and ran∣ges it in battalia. The Amiraf, Agitant Generall. The Armermi∣rac that beares the Kings Poleax. The Casandera, who gives or∣der to the Captains, and distributes the troops where he thinks necessary. The Ostender, the Treasurer of the Army. The Bi∣cassen, Master of the Wardrobe. The Testacavir, Master of the Robes, and divers others; all Noble Men belonging to the Pa∣lace Royall, Persons of Honour, and well attended. Besides these there are abundance of inferiour Officers, and Honourable Persons of War, who receive pay by the moneth, ac∣cording to the occurrence of Affaires, to which the Merchants many times contribute for convoy of their free Commodities. Strangers are there exceedingly respected and honoured,Respect given to strangers. Amirsent. and if one have use of an Amersent, who are as the Chaoux in Turki, or the French Exempts, they will bear him company every whither with the Kings provision, whereof they have the weekly dispo∣sall, and a reasonable matter is satisfaction to them. Then there are the Cachi, men of war, armed with Cassocks, quilted with agglet holes, expert horsemen, and dextrous at their bow, or the Zanfart or Zagaye,Zanfart. with three pikes, which in full speed
they will most actively cast and catch again, These I take for the Captains of Forts and Sconces, and Governours of holds. There is another sort of souldiers called Atefiar,Atefiar. who are paid by Country rents, not of the Kings Demesus, but things left by Heroes, and Persons of Armes, the Souldiers right after their decease. They weare no other Armes then the Alfange, or Cimeterre, with the steel ring, and are skilfull wrastlers.Caranizi. The Caranizi leads the souldiers, who have nothing but meat and clothes, being a Con∣quered people, and obliged to serve the King:Archilet. When one dies another succeeds, from father to son. The Archilet is a conflux of people of all qualities, and religions, like the Grand-Seniors, Spai: These have no pay till they have done some signall ser∣vice; as also they are placed in the wings of the battell, most commonly; prepared with Afarca, a compounded drink, that ren∣ders them so furious, they apprehend not death; they are ar∣med with the Cimitterre, Cris, or Poniard, and a Target. The Chesonana, who conducts the Elephants to battell, their teeth ar∣med with steel: He that sits upon the beasts neck to guide him, is called Dramont,Dramont. and for this purpose is chosen with a strong and loud voice, by reason of the great noise in fight. Their ar∣mour is the skin of Crocodills, fastned with strong iron buck∣els, and have double pay, when they are expert in the conduct of these beasts, who once heated grow furious. They put twelve of the largest, with abundance of feathers before the rest, to guide them. These beasts once stirred to fury,Number of Elephants in Pegu. make strange slaughter in an Army, whereof no Indian Prince is so stored as the Peguan, where I saw foure thousand five hundered belonging to him; and for this cause is he stiled the Prince of the Elephants, as I said before. They are exceeding chargeable, being kept with boyled rice, fifty pounds a day a peice: the females have not their teeth so long and big, who, if they are governed by young youths, out of sence and civility will lift them gent∣ly to their shoulders. It hath sometimes happened that the enemy hath turned the Elephants upon their own men, with fire-brands, which they ex∣treamly dread. But to come back to the creation of the Prince,Creation of the Prince, and the Ceremo∣nies. all the Princes and Nobles of the Kingdom must be there present, and if any one hath exceptions against him for injury or indignity received, before Coronation he may bring his complaint before the Calefe∣rech. Then is the Prince brought by him into the middle of a field, where there is built a Theater of extraordinary height, with a bridge, or ascent to it, covered with a coloured cloth: then the first Prince, whose office it is, pronounces with a loud voice, that it is but necessary they should have a Prince to Govern and Rule them, to Protect the Common-Wealth, and administer Justice▪
then takes a ball of gold, with three points, exceeding refulgent, and lifts it very high, all the people observing a profound silence: then he declares to them what the Councill hath decreed, and names the Prince to be Elected, whom he causes to stand stark naked upon a stone, with his face toward the Congregation, and tells them, this is he whose Ancestors governed the Empire, and that he hopes by Gods grace he will not degenerate from their vertue. At the instant one makes an Oration of his Endowments, his Be∣nignity, Valour, and Magnanimity, and in breif, all of Galantry he hath ever done; and that if there be any one who hath cause of com∣plaint, he should speak, and order shall be taken before his Creati∣on: then all the people cry out, God hath blessed and ordained him for our Prince. After this they keep silence for a good quar∣ter of an hour, to see if any complainant appeare. This done, the Hoboys sound, and the Principal Castle discharges the whole Ar∣tillery.A Crown of lead. Proceeding, they set a Crown of lead upon his head, and put an axe in his hand, apparrell him in a sheet of white silk, with a short cassock of the same colour, but embroydered with silk of various other coloures.Wholsome documents for Prin∣ces. One then presents to him how he ought to Govern with Presidents of his Predecessors. That the Crown of lead signified, that in all things he should use both weight and measure: and the axe, that he ought to Admini∣ster Justice, and maintaine peace and concord in his Domini∣ons; and that the Principall strength of a Prince is the hearts of his Subjects. After these wordes they bring him in a Vessell of Emerald the ashes of the first King of Pegu, upon which he takes his oath to observe and keep all that his Predecessors have ob∣served and kept, at the cost of his very life. Then they take off his Crown and Robe, which are laid up as things Sacred; and they put on him a Cap of Crimson Tissu, with a Chapplet of gold, that hath a peake before, not unlike the Flower-Deluces, set with very resplendent stones. They invest him in a Turkish Robe, furred with the skins of white hares, to denote the innocence of his life. They say these hares change their coate twice in a year, winter and sum∣mer. Presently the musick sounds, and the three Princes that assisted him, support him in his descent from the stone he was Crowned on, which emblem'd the stability of his life. The ash-colour he treads on,The Ashes what. and the ashes in the cup represents to him death, and the in∣certainty of life, that therefore he must imploy himselfe in good∣nesse, to gain immortality, that his people may pray for him. Then being conducted to the Palace, they present to the 3 Princes three golden censors, hung in leaden chaines, with odorous per∣fumes, and the Falcada in a white Robe with the golden axe
pronounces a loud De Cysimar Caradacy, that is God hath created him, not the people. As he passes by, all prostrate on the ground, in reverence,Shoulders kissed. and reciprocally kissing shoulders, congratulate with one ano∣ther for their new Prince. In the field where the Ceremony is performed are abundance of Tents of severall colours, belonging to the Princes and No∣bility, and under Coco and other trees are tables covered with clothes of Cocos, and reeds,Feasts for the people the wood or leaves painted the China way, set with meat to feast the people. The King being come to the Palace, sits down to eat with the three Princes, and round about for the subject Kings and Prin∣ces are many tables sumptuously set forth and furnished, with a device on each of them, that is, a crown of gold, with the arms of the King that eats at it. The King of Siam as Emperour hath three Crowns, and eats with the Princes: Of Tazatay hath two Crowns, and eats likewise with the Princes. The Caleferech hath a single Crown, and eats alone. Mandranele hath two. Gilolo but one: as likewise Verma, Salaca, Aua, Martaban,Subject Princes. Palea∣cute, Capouin, Campa, Tauay. These are all in the first room. In the second are the Princes, Nobles, and Governours of Provinces, as Ternassary, Manugaron, Pepery, Micoan, Malaca; and Bengala, all heretofore Subjects, but now for the greater part are infranchiz'd: Odiata since did the like, but is returned again to subjection. The Tables orderly rank'd, covered and served royally, and what multitude soever there be, all is done with order and wonderful silence. The three Princes that bear the Censers walk thrice about the Chamber incensing the King, then sit down and dine with him at distance, notwithstanding when the King calls for drink, four Princes who have charge of the Talcadifs, or his Cup-bearers, every one with his cup of Purcelain, hoop'd with horn of Unicorne, taste the drinke and present it to him, while the hoboys and the rest of the musick sounds. These four Talcadifs who are of the Princes blood, cry aloud,Talcadifs. The Prince whom God hath newly ordained us, drinks to all the Princes and loyall Subjects: then every one drinks his health, the three assistants stand up and salute him, then sit down a∣gain, and the King continually presents plates of meat, sometimes to one, sometimes to another, so that for the feast time there is businesse enough. The meat is seasoned with musk and amber. At the Feast there are Buffons to delight the King and Company,Viands perfumed: who have a thousand anticks and devices. The King having done at Table, the Emperour of Siam kissing his buskin, as an homage,
presents him a rich Crown of gold,Presents to the King. which the King receives with embraces, and kisses his cheek in testimony of perpe∣tuall amity: Then the rest kissing his buskin, lay every one their presents at his feet. The Kings bring Crowns, the Prin∣ces chains and collars; the rest present according to their quality, all in gracefull order: for the kingdoms and provin∣ces, march all according to their rank, without confusion: Then the rest of the people present other things both rare and curious. These presents are brought in such quantity, that every four hours they are forced to remove them: at the coronation, which was in my time, the presents lasted five dayes from morning till night, with unparallel'd wealth and magnificence; during this time the people are all provided for at the Kings charge, and take up fifteen leagues of land, with wonderful regularity. The Presents delivered, they stay five days for dismission to return. Besistan Cock∣fight.Amongst other things the King delights much in Cock∣fights, for which he hath Cocks from Besistan, with beards, which beard is properly but a carnosity hanging under the throat, very brown, growing of a burnt bloud, the bird being exceeding hot: for sport they match them with the Cocks of Pegu, that are not altogether so fiery, but more heavy, and mortall ene∣mies. The King and his Court have this recreation once a week. Their pens are close together, with mats of palm that cover the windows, at which they are fed. At the creation which was in my time, they had this game, and lifting up the mats, the Cocks immediately fell to fighting with their bils, through the spaces of the lattice, but the keepers parted them with switches, till they had taken their portions, which is of a small black grain, they call Versin, as big as a grape stone, of quality exceeding hot. The mats taken away, then is the sport, to see how they will range themselves in Battalions for the assault, frowning with rage, and the window once open they fall on in good earnest; till they most cruelly tear one another, and fill the place with blood, for a good hour together: then they part them, many lying dead in the place, which they eat, the flesh being reddish like beef, but exceeding tender and tastefull.
CHAP. XXXII. Of the Justice and Policy with the Peguans, their Sacrifices and horrible dances. A lamentable History of two young Princes. AS to the revenues of the King of Pegu,Revenues of the King of Pegu. when peoples or∣dinary payments are brought in, there is Proclamation through the Dominions, that no Subject is obliged to pay any Royall right, gabell, subsidy, or impost, for a whole year. What Handicraftsmen alone pay him amounts to three millions, or as they reckon so many Baselins, a sort of weight. Every house-keeper payes him so much by the year. When a new King is elected, all Towns and Villages send Deputies to make their acknowledgement, with pre∣sents of rarities, and things extraordinary: As to the elect in our time, were sent three white Cowes, with tayles dif∣fering from others, like swine, hornes growing in their skins only, not on the top of the head, which they could move as their eares, decked bard bridles, covered with cloathes of crimson silk, and hung over with bells of gold, silver, and Calin, a mettal like silver, much used in the Indies. This present was very acceptable to him, notwithstanding 'twas done in derision of another people, his Subjects,Calin a mettle. who wear the like bells at their genitories, to content their Mi∣stresses, with little hooks, and rings to take them off when they go to visit them, and testifie to them they have satis∣faction in nothing but themselves; for amongst them there are that are addicted to the unnaturall sin, no more prohi∣bited there than amongst the Turks, except there be vio∣lence used, for which there is severe punishment.Sodomie. When the first Prince of the kingdom comes to take his leave, he embraces him and kisses his cheek, then presents him with ten fair white Persian coursers, barded with cloth of gold, of diverse colours,Bells for beasts only. their feet hang'd round with bells of gold, to shew the people they are proper onely for beasts to wear. These bells so disquieted the horses, four or five men could but hold them, so unruly they were: likewise to the Prince of Siam at his departure he gave a collar of rubies of inestimable value, in brief there was neither Prince nor Nobleman, that parted with∣out satisfaction. 'Twas thought the King distributed the best part of the horses in his stable, where he had above thirty thousand,
which are the most magnificent present can be made in that coun∣try.Honour and ser∣vice to the King. He gave besides many pieces of scarlet cloth, silks of di∣vers colours, and other stuffes sufficient to load twenty thou∣sand cammels. An Elephant he never bestowes, but on the con∣trary, all Princes diligently endevour to get them for him. All the horses he gives, arise to the advantage of the State; for when he hath occasion for them in war, the subjects upon the least orders are all ready, so well they affect him, esteeming them amongst the blessed that dye in his service, and for such the Priests never make prayers, as being already in the number of the Saints, and happy. Justice & officers.For their justice 'tis equally administred to all offices and estates, depending on the Kings will, who gives them gratis, and payes all officers out of his own Coffers; which keeps them from doing any thing against Law and Justice; for their punishments are very severe. Debtors sold.Creditours may by right take their Debtors for slaves when they have not wherewithall to pay them, and if they will, may sell them at the price of their debt, and sometimes sell their wives and children by Port-sale, till they are fully satisfied. The charge of suit amounts to little or nothing. They all live in good awe, and all apply themselves to labour: who hath no meanes of his own, betakes himself to Mills, Buildings, and Mines,Hospitals. where the King entertains them, so as no one wants a way to live. Poor orphans are brought up at the Kings charge.All em∣ployed in Pegu. There are diverse enclosed places for girles, where they are employed in working silk, and many other ingenuous arts. A stranger passing through the country, may be employ∣ed if he will, or they will give him a passe to another town. The King hath four hundred slaves, but they are only for the service of the houshold, without regard to either Nation or Re∣ligion, so they are honest and serviceable: They have no wa∣ges, yet never want money, for all that have occasion at Court, still give them something. Two hundred slaves more there are, who have no other office then to hunt the Woods and Marshes for triple-coloured tortoises for the Kings Vivary: likewise they gather the silk Cottons which the trees bear na∣turally,Silk upon trees. whereof they gather sufficient, and leave enough for the year following. They have another sort of silk called Fongi, gotten in De∣cember, it proceeds from the great Erpo, which we call Alove, whence there comes a silk More short, but stronger and bet∣ter then the rest. I made trial if the like could be produced here by drawing threads out of the leaves, and found it might be done, there being no defect but want of experience; For though the Climats differ, nevertheless nature is every where assi∣sted by art and labour. All these silks come to the benefit of the
people, though the King takes a good share by reason of his slaves employed in it, besides abundance of Orphanes and poor girles brought up at his cost, under the tuition of matrons and an∣cient women, to govern and correct them for their neglects: and the same for men, all with great order and policy.A great policy. When one hath committed a haynous crime, 'tis best if he communicate it to some friend that may acquaint the King before the Justice is in∣formed of it: for the King is most clement and supremely abso∣lute: then the King being informed the quality of the crime, per∣son, and matter; it may be, that without hearing the parties, he may grant his pardon. The custom of the country is, that as soon as one hath perpetrated a crime, he layes by his apparel, puts on a white shirt that drawes on the ground, like persons doing pen∣nance with us, goes bare-head, and bare-foot, lies stretched out upon the ground, and so attends his sentence. Some there are sit down, others stand upright, according to the nature of the offence. Many that presume upon the Princes grace, are deceived, and meet their death. They who are condemned, are immediately given to the Ele∣phants, who with their trunks lift them on high,Adultery punished. then let them fall, and so they are broken in pieces; then the bodies are gi∣ven to the Lions, and Tigars, whereof there is a great num∣ber. Adulterers are severely punished, as well men as women, and especially, if they are of a good family. One was taken on a time with his slave, who were both bound together, and buried alive. For account of their marriages,Marriage. when persons of quality will marry, they consult their Divines, and Magies, to know the suc∣cesse: when children are born, they have their nativity cast to know if good or ill shall befall them, whereof I shall rehearse a remarkable example hereafter. When these Grandees, lose their affection to their first wives,Repudia∣tion. they are allowed to espouse another, without any injustice to the first, who must suffer till her husband pleases to call her back, this happening most commonly for dislike and change of diet. Where the husband and wife preserve a perfect amity all their life, when the husband dies, if the wife will do according to the custom of the country, the obsequies ended, she remains with her friends for a certain time to bewaile his death, then makes them a great feast, in token of rejoycing, distributes her jewels and chiefest goods to them, who are dear∣est to her; and having embraced and kissed her Parents, Kindred, and Friends, they conduct her with Flute and Ho∣boys, to her husbands monument under a Tent, adorned with Folliage, and covered with flowers, where they drink, eat, dance, and make merry, and the poor woman takes a potion, that makes her as it were frantick: then dancing,
and carowsing, she sacrifices her self to her husbands ghost, throwing her selfe into a fire, having distributed to her friends the rest of her rings and jewels. Their Priests and Ma∣gicians confirm them in these abominable customs, which they observe in divers other parts of India, as at Narsinga, Cambaya, Coromandel, and other places. But they take diligent care in these marriages of the great ones, that the women have free choyce with the consent of their kindred, to the end it may be the vehemence of affection that obliges them to so cruel a te∣stimony. Likewise men to assure their affection to their Mistres∣ses,Testimo∣nies of love. use strange testimonies: some with a Torch will burn their Arms before them, others will cut and stab themselves with po∣niards: others taking a cloth dip'd in oyle, will light it, and have the patience to let it burn out and extinguish upon their arm: which obliges a woman to the like love, and to render the like proof at his death. But that truculent sacrifice they immolate to their Gods of their poor and wretched daughters, is no lesse strange and truculent: for in a part of this vast Empire to celebrate the feast of their great Crocouatas,Sacrifice of their own chil∣dren. they bring up their daughters in the Temple, Virgins devoted to prayer and fasting, who are consecrated and preserved for the solemn sacrifice in such sort, as when Father, Mother, or kindred visits them, they do it with reverence and adoration, as to Saints and celestial persons, and entreat they would be mindful of them, when they have the honour to come before their great God: for this consideration they bring them for an offering all sorts of dainties. Every year they sacrifice one of these poor girles. In the front of the altar stands a marble stone very radiant, and of various colours, where they imagine they behold the figure of that furious Demon they adore. The maid devested of her rich attire,Palpes, or Priests. beholds her God, and observes if he yet call her, for they say the Demon calls her by name, and invites her to union: then their Palpes or Priests vested in their garments sacerdotal, take her, and setting her stark naked upon this stone; after divers incensings both to the Demon and the maid, they strangle her in the presence of father and mother, who ob∣serve well if she be dead, that she may not suffer a second mar∣tyrdom; and having with a stone sharp as a razor ripped up her body, they tear out her heart, which they throw in their Demons face, burn it, and sprinkle the ashes mingled with water upon their Idols: the rest of the body they burn at leisure with aromatick woods, for the use of the Temples. In other places the Priests eat the Victim. The sacrifice ended, they go to dinner, the congre∣gation assists at the service, and prayers made by the Priests with many incensings: the Priests then change their vestments, and take others of a horrible form, and mounting upon a Scaffold, as soon as the Musick playes, begin to dance. They begin in a low
key, then they rise, with prayers and imprecations mingled, til heal∣ed with keeping time to the cadence of the musick they become franick, some falling to the ground, others continue dancing, holding bells which accord with the instruments: So soon as any one falls to the ground, none but would think the de∣vil enters into him, they change the tune, and dance with more violence and fury, without missing the least point of the cadence. But what is most strange of all, they say at the same time they see the the devils dance with them,The devils dance. and that they easily know them by the agility of their motion, for otherwise they are attired like the Priests. They observe visibly that they must needs be Demons; because only a certain number of Priests mounting the Scaffold; when any of them fall, you still see the same number dancing, without diminution. By reason whereof, the behold∣ers suffer strange distempers, and their hair standing an end.Strange accidents to the au∣thour. I re∣member that being present on a time for curiosity, on the sud∣dain I felt my self seized with a swimming in my head, that so in∣flamed me, I was almost suffocated, not able to speak a word, nor draw my breath, and striving to cry out and call for help to my company that was not far off; I could not possibly bring forth a word: so as being all in a lavour with agony and distresse, that held me a quarter of an houre, in my heart I made my prayers to Almighty God, by whose grace I was deliver'd, having never known the like torment in my life-time; for I felt I know not what pass betwixt my legges, then leapt upon my shoulders, the phantasm continually grasping me fast. I was so dejected, as nothing could be more, but my companions reassured me the best they could; and as soon as I was gotten away, I went to tell it to Father Hipolita of Saint Francis order, who assured me 'twas a di∣abolical illusion to have destroyed me, had not God with his grace secured me. He counselled me to be thankful to Al∣mighty God, and come no more where such abominations were, the curiosity whereof had cost me so dear; for I was a glad man to see it end in a mockery; but thenceforward I had a care how I came within their Temples, and congregations to see their ac∣cursed Idolatries. But to end the feast, when the ceremonies and dances have lasted four dayes, the Nobility makes a feast in some Palace of account,Feasts and ceremo∣nies. where the principal of the city, men and women, are invited, and come most richly apparelled, and covered with jewels, and ru∣bies sometimes as bigge as a nut, blazing like burning coales: then after a sacrifice, these Nobles command the Musick play some pleasant ayre, and one of them takes a dame, whom he likes best forth to dance, not touching her hand nevertheless, but hold∣ing by a handcherchief of silk, and all the rest do the like till the ball be ended. They dance round, and 'tis prety to see this humble
dance,Laudative songs. artificiall for the many changes are in it. This ended, the musick changes to a very solemn base, as 'twere for repose, with certain stanzoes sung in praise of their deceased Ance∣stors, celebrating their valours with a thousand encomiums for the most part false. Then they sit round, discoursing still of the valour of these deceased, and the women more tender of heart fall a weeping, and amidst their lamentations all cry out, they shall never be like their Fathers, who did such and such high feats: after having invited each other joyntly to complaints, at last being tired, they take a collation together, and so the cere∣mony ends. By what is said 'tis plainly seen, how strangely superstitious these people are, and how serious an honour they bear their gods or demons, to which their Priests cease not dayly to excite them more and more, and omit not the least diminutive Ceremo∣ny for their honour or profit. These Priests bear a wonderfull authority over them, which as I said before, is more remarkable in their wars, than in any other thing. How the Priests dis∣pose of wars.For these Eastern Princes in raising war differ much from us, insomuch as having a considerable war to be commenc'd with their neighbour Princes or others, the Priests take upon them authority to arbitrate the matter, having such priviledge, as freely to remonstrate to their Prince his duty to the people: whereupon two Bramins or Priests for both sides, without passi∣on, confer together of their Princes complaint, to find a means to accommodate the matter: when they cannot effect it, they draw a hundred of the prime horse, and as many foot out o their Armies, ranked in battalia, consisting many times of three or four hundred thousand men, rarely ever making war but with equality, the stronger still giving law to the weaker. And though one Bramin find his party stronger by a hundred thousand, he yet makes a conscience to use his advantage as much as may be, to prevent combat, and if of necessity it must be, he uses a thou∣sand protestations to his Prince to hinder it; but not effecting it, they order the two small parties to joyn, giving their benediction to them, and exhorting every one to do his best, the Victor giving conditions to the other, who is compelled to yield, and so their wars are concluded for the most part. To them who in this action shall have done any thing signall, the Prince gives a favour which they keep as sacred, though many times 'tis but a scarf or silly taffeta ribbon,Reward of valour. with a certain character or figure in the middle, that denotes he hath behav'd himself well in fight for his Princes cause,A deplo∣rable Hi∣story of two Prin∣ces. which they wear on festivals in hats or palm bonnets, and some there are who have divers of them respective to the occasi∣ons they served in. For the example I touched upon in the predictions at the marriages of great ones, and the fortune of their children,
'tis thus. In the land of Transiane there was a Prince tributary to the King of Pegu, and his near Kinsman, who married a sister of the Prince Tazatay, one of the greatest beauties in the Eastern parts. The nuptials were kept with great joy and so∣lemnity, amongst other things the Divines were consulted of the successe of the marriage, and 'twas found that never two persons had loved, and should love so well as these two; the Prince and Princesse Alfonge and Abelara, this hariolation doubled the joy and celebrity; and in effect they lived a sweet and a happy life, with intire affection, and for their greater felicity they had two twin-sons, who in their under-growth discovered some∣thing of great and lofty, and appeared singularly hopefull for the future: These Infants having attained their ten yeares age, loved so cordially they could not live asunder,Fraternal amity. and the ones desire, still met with the others consent in all things; but the Devil, that enemy of concord, inspires a curiosity into the minds of the Father and Mother to know their fates, and to their grief were told, the time should come when these two brothers that now loved so fondly, should cut one anothers throats;Curiosity and pre∣dictions dangerous. which much astonished the poor Princes, and filled them with fear∣full apprehensions. The two Princes being come to their fifteen yeares, one said to the other, Brother it must be you that must murther me, for I will sooner dye a hundred deaths, then do you the lest harm imaginable: the other reply'd, believe it not good Brother; I desire you, for you are as dear, and dearer to me than my self. But the Father to prevent the misfor∣tune, resolved to separate them, whereupon they grew so troubled and melancholly, he was constrained to pro∣tract his design, till an occasion happened that invited all three, the Father and two Sons, to a war betwixt the Kings of Narsinga and Pegu, upon Title of Territories, one detained from the other: but by mediation of the Bramins a peace was concluded, upon condition these two young Princes should espouse the two daughters of the King of Narsinga, and the King of Baticalas Sister, two Princesses of transcendent beauty, and that the King of Pegu on him that should marry the elder, should conferre all the Countryes he took in the last war, with the Kingdome of Martaban, and the other Brother, besides the Kingdome of Tazatay, should have that of Verma, which containes the Seniory of Zait, that payes yearly for tribute twelve pearles, weighing two Serafs of Gold, and of intire perfe∣ction. These contracts agreed upon, were signified to the two Princesses of Narsinga, who, though then very young,A reaso∣nable con∣dition. told their Father they consented to the marriages, but on this condition, that their husbands happening to die before them, if they made
not voluntary sacrifice of themselves, it should not be im∣puted an infamy to them, because they were unacquainted with them. This was agreed to, and the Nuptials consummated to the generall joy of all men for the common peace accompanied them, and great feasting there was every where. The one of these Princes stayed with his Lady in Narsinga, the other went to possesse the Province of Verma, lands spaciously divided: so as a long time they were without inter-view, visiting each o∣ther onely by missius and presents of value or curiosity. Now it fell out the King of Tazatay was engaged in a sharp war with the King of Mandranella, and sent to the two Brother-Princes his Sons, for aid: who both hastening with a good strength of Souldiers, one knowing nothing of the other, the one declining his direct way, marched up to the enemy, and in a bloudy fight defeated him: thence went to present himself to his Father, but by sad destiny on the morrow, his Brother arriving from Verma with his Lady, in the evening came secretly into the Town to visit a Lady, once their anci∣ent Mistresse:An unfor∣tunate meeting. the other Brother being on the same design they met at the Ladies gate by night, not knowing one ano∣ther, where furious with jealousie, after some words they drew and killed each other. One of them dying, amongst many other things said he, gave humble thanks to God that he had prevented the direfull destiny of his Horoscope, in not ma∣king him the assassine of his Brother, as 'twas prejudicated: Hereupon the other finding him by his voice and discourse, drawing near his end himself, crept to him, and embraced him with tears and lamentations, and so both dolefully ended their dayes together. The Father being advertized of it, seeing his white haires led by his own fault to so hard a fortune, overborn with grief and despair, came and slew himself upon the bodies of his Sons, and with the grief and tears of all the people, were buried all three in the same monument: which shews us the danger of too great curiosity, nor is it an easie que∣stion how this can be found by knowledge of the stars, or if they are things inevitable, which I leave to be decided by the more learned. But before I end this Chapter I shall observe, that amongst such a diversity of Idols, as well of the great Corcouitas, who is the principal and most ancient, on whom all the others depend, as of the Oysima, the promotor of all things, and diverse other strange and horrible shapes, every one with Temples and Sacrifices peculiar, amongst all this they have, as I said, the image of the blessed Virgin with her infant, which with lighted lamps they honour reverently. These lamps are not of glasse, but Talc
stone, of which they have abundance,Talc in∣stead of glasse. whole mountains at one point of the Countrey, eastward. They work it very artificially, and make of it severall sorts of Utensills, compounding the met∣tle Calin, so much esteemed through the Indies, from Persia, as far as China, like silver; but as easily melted as tin. Of this they likewise make their windowes, and lantorns: lantorns they likewise make of the triple coloured tortoise shell I spoke of before. I omitted to tell you that for their dances they use a sort of pans, which being wel handled, yeild an elegant melody,Musicall Instru∣ments. but to play well requires long practice. They have other Musicall instru∣ments, not of use in Europe, amongst the rest a sort of pans, flat and double, the cover whereof stands two fingers distant, set with wyar strings, they call it a Hydrac, it is tedious,Hydrac. and difficult to learn. For the quality of their yeares, I could not well under∣stand their manner of account, but in generall I find they reckon by Moones, as the greater part of the east,The Pegu∣an yeares. and their dayes by the sun; out of these Moones they raise five dayes, allowing thir∣teen Moones to the year; and the fift day being come, about mid∣night they make a solemn sacrifice in their Temples, where they universally meet. I conferd with some about this matter, who told me, the Peguan year was like that they use in China, which is Lunary, and that they compare it as neer as may be to the Solary; for their year consisting of twelve moneths, twice in five years they gain a Lunary month, making that year of thirteen Moones, so as they have no knowledg of the golden number, nor the nineteen years circle, and the anticipation of one hour and twenty eight mi∣nutes, which remits the new Moones to the golden number, with them is accommoded by the annuall supputation: for they nei∣ther have, nor will have a perpetuall Calander, but at great charge print every year a new one, which they send through all the Pro∣vinces of China. It may be our Peguans would imitate this after their fashion, and according to their understanding, which is very weak for such matters, which the best wits amongst us find task hard e∣nough. Of the Philosophy of the Indians, and their opinions in Astronomy and Geography, I shall say something hereafter. Before I leave the state of Pegu, I will not omit what some of the Peguans told me, and have mentioned in writing in their Tra∣vailes. That some yeares before we arrived, there was in the Countrey a King of the ancient Royall Race, who had many Depu∣ties in the Countrey of Bramaa, towards the Lake Chiamay, a∣mongst the rest, one in the Kingdom of Tangu that rebelled against him, defeated and slew him, and made himself King of Pegu,Alterati∣ons in Pe∣gu. they called him the Bramaa of Tangu, a great Tyrant, and a Potent Prince, who by force of Armes joyned many Kingdomes to his Empire, as Pram, Melintay, Calani, Bacam, Mirandu, Aua, Marta∣ban,
and others; He afterwards was put to death by a Peguan Lord, called Xemin, of Zatan, who made himself King, but was defeated, and slain by another, called Xemindoo, who likewise being made King, was not long after defeated, and put to death by Chau∣migren, of near aliance to Bramaa, who became one of the most Powerfull Kings hath raigned in Pegu, who brought totally un∣der the Empire of the Kingdom of Syan, with twelve great King∣domes more.Vast Ar∣mies in the East. They report that in the War of Syan, he led into the field seventeen hundered thousand Combatants, and seven∣teen thousand Elephants, whereof nine thousand were for fight, the rest for carriage. To which the immense Armies brought heretofore by the Persian Kings against the Grecians, may induce us to give credit; the cause is, that in all these Eastern Countreys, the greater part of the people go to the wars, and that there are not amongst them so many Ecclesiasticks, Lawyers, Clarks, Book∣men, and idle Persons as are with us. The King that raigned in Pegu in our time, called the Brama, was as I think, the son of this Chaumigren, afterwards hard enough dealt with by the Kings of Tangu, Aracan, and Syan, as I said be∣fore. But it is time to advance to the Provinces and Towns of high India, subject, or confining, and neighbours to Pegu, as Abdia∣re, Vilep, Canarane, Cassubi, Transiane, Tasata, Mandranella, Tarta∣ry, and others. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Abdiare and Vilep, Towns of Pegu Fis∣mans, Apes, Unicornes, and other ani∣malls. Fotoque, an Idol with three Heads. PErsevering constantly in our trafick, thorough the Towns and Provinces of this great Empire of Pegu, and the Countreyes adjacent; amongst others, in the Town of Abdiare and Vilep, a Kingdom in high India, subject to the Peguan; and having traded with certain Merchants (whom we found open and reall) treat∣ing with the Sensall, or factor, not by words, but by fingers, and joynts of the hand, the practise of all the Indies, to conceale the price of Merchandises. We parted from Vilep with good company, and within three houres came to the descent of a hill, exceeding shady; upon the hanging whereof was a plea∣sant fountain, where the whole company stayed for refreshment,
but we had not been long there when there came about us an ex∣traordinary number of Apes, the greater part black as jet, some small ones black and white, very lepid: one of them addressed himself to me, as it had been to crave something of that I was eat∣ing, and thinking to fright him away, he was not scared at all, as if he were accustomed to passengers: I cast a piece of bread to him, which he took very modestly, and divided with his company and two young ones he had with him;Apes. presently there came three more, which seemed to crave their share, I gave them something and they eat very quietly: but on a sudden part of our company arose and took their Armes, by reason of a heard of Fismans,Fismans. or wilde dogs they discovered, making towards us, which with one musket shot were all scared away: in our sight they fed on grasse like sheep. Proceeding on our way we met with abundance of other sorts of strange animalls, as likewise of fruits, some whereof of growth much to be admired: some that bore rosin,Fruit. that smell like Mas∣tick; others a red berry, wherewith they dye carnation, which never fades, but dayly becomes more lively. Having thus tra∣velled ten or twelve dayes through diversity of soyles, meeting with many rivers, animalls, trees, and other things unknown to us, amongst others abundance of civit Cats, whereof they have some domesticall, which you may buy foure for one Pardai,Civit cats. but they are stinking, and their dung smells like Mans. At length we took to the River Jiame, and in three dayes came to the Village called Tanza, on the morrow to Canarane, a faire Town, rich and flourishing as any Town in India, the Capitall of a Kingdom, bearing the same name, confining eastward, on the Country of Tazatay, south on Carpa, and northward on Moantay, another great Kingdom. The Town is seated betwixt two great rivers, Jiame and Pegu, it is in circuit about foure leagues, magnificently built: in customes and conditions the people differ much from those of Pegu, for they never go barefoot as the others do. Princes and Noble Men weare rich buskins, and sandalls set with gold. The King of Canarane is Potent and Wealthy in Mines of gold and silver. He hath also one of Emerald, the finest in the east,Mines. whence he drawes great profit. This Prince was never known to diminish, but augment his Treasure. Likewise they have Mines of Turkesses. When a King dies, they interr all his Treasure with him, and sweare his Successor not to meddle with it. For the first year he and his Court are maintained at the Subjects charge, and all the Nobility by obligation come to make their ac∣knowledgment with rich presents, and sue to be establisht in their Estates, Offices, Seniories; for the King hath right to sell estates of all sorts then vacant; and hereupon all his
people high and low, are tied with petition in hand, and with presents, to sue for their offices and vacancies, which raises him in this year a marvellous treasure. No one can wear shooes, rings, nor girdles of gold, without the Kings license, which brings him in a great gabel, a share whereof belongs to the King of Pegu as soveraign, who granted him the grace, because the Countrey is colder than Pegu, and I have heard it of Merchants, that in the winter here rage certain in windes,Mounsons windes cold in ex∣tremity. Debtors slayes. or Mounsons which come from the North, so cold that travellers lose their toes the cold is so sharp and rigorous. Their custom is, if a Merchant will oblige himself, he obliges likewise all his goods, wife, and children, and failing at the day promised, the Creditor may seize on all for slaves. The usual money is called Canza, and all the Peguan is currant there, which the King stamps in gold or silver, through the In∣dies called Jamis, besides what every particular Prince coins of his own. They have another sort of silver money called Pardain and Tazifo. They make some likewise of tin mixt with copper, which being no coyn royal is lawfull for any man to stamp; as also another sort called Bise, wherewith they may buy any thing: one must be carefull in taking it, or he may be deceived. The King keeps abundance of slaves for his Elephants and stables. In their structures they use ciment mixt with sugar, as in Pegu, which mixt with calcin'd shels becomes very firm,Sugar used in build∣ings. the shels are dear and sold by measure. They have many plantations of sugar, the canes whereof they give their Elephants, who love them exceedingly, so as when they commit any fault they deprive them of that food, and so easily chastize and instruct them;Elephants instructed. when their keeper speaks to them they will moove their great ears to understand what he sayes. They are decently lodg'd, and, as at Pegu, fed in silver vessels. The better sort of people live after the Persian way, their houses ennobled with gold and azure. They have onely one law∣full wife,Women. but divers concubines who go richly apparelled, their face vail'd in the streets, as in Spain and Italy, but within door their faces are uncovered, and are very sociable. They are Gen∣tiles and Idolaters, and easie to be dealt withall. If a Merchant make stay in Town, he shall have a couple of young women will furnish him with a house, and all necessaries, and serve him like slaves; nay 'tis lawfull to beat and chastize them if they do not what they are commanded, having once submitted to it. They go well apparelled and decent as may be, are very affable, dance, and sing well; preserve a Merchants goods with great care, Lar∣ceny amongst them being held a notorious ignominy. Almost all the women are clothed in white, as all the Inhabitants, men and women in Arabia Felix. We lay in the Town of Canarena, at one Chamuts, a Brokers house,Unicorns hornes. who had two Unicorns horns, one whereof had half the head remaining to it.
We put the end in water to see if 'twould make it boyle as the horn doth, but I thought it boyled more vivaciously, and it came out like pearle. I asked him if he ever saw of these creatures alive, he told me he never saw but two, which were very young; and not come to have hornes. That the King going a hunting, took one of them, but they could not take the damme, whatsoever they could do, be∣cause as they say, they shun and fly from the aspect and pre∣sence of a man, and the places where the Serpents haunt, whereof we spoke before, who make a cruel warre upon them for greedinesse of their blood, which is said to be of excellent scent, as it hath been divers times proved; particularly, when one was sent by their Prince to the King of Pegu: which stung by a fly, the bloud which issued out, was put in a bottle and brought to the King, who made no great esteem of it, not finding the scent agreeable, though notwithstanding he found it more odorous then Civet, This the Sensal or Bro∣ker told us. I my self saw a perfect Unicorn in the King of Regues Seraglio, who had the tongue differing from other beasts, very long, and jagged; the head more like a horse then a hart, and there are of several haires. The Keeper said, 'tis but an uncleanly beast, delights in his own soyle, and that having often seen him drink, he never observed him to put his horn in the water. The Indians report many other things of them, but so strange and various, there is no great assurance, as that they breed but once in their life-time, and like Elephants, go two yeares with their young, and the like. A Bramin (an order Kings themselves hold it an honour to be of) told me once with a protestation, laying his hand on the wreath of his order, that he was present with the King of Casubi at the ta∣king of one of these Unicorns, which was all white, and ve∣ry old, the chops so hanging down, all her teeth were seen, that she was so fierce in her owne defence, she broke her horn amongst the boughs, that being taken, they brought her bound to the Kings Pallace, but being so bruised with blowes, for having hurt the Kings Nephew, she would not eat, and so died within five dayes, which shewes she is a cho∣lerick and sullen beast, The Queens had bracelets made of the bones, as Indian Ladies have a curiosity in wearing bracelets of Ivory, and the like. The King of Casubi reserved the horne of this beast to himselfe: about five moneths after being at this Princes Court, who was both courteous and curious, I desired the Sieur de la Courb, one of our own company, to request the favour we might see this horne, which he did; and the
King immediately sent for it, and gave it him, and the Sieur in requital, gave him a delicate watch. This horne was of different colour to those I had seen in the Sultan of Mecaes Serallio, and other places, for this drew neare a white gray, whereas the other were of a black gray. I have been told that Lewis de Bartheme in his travailes, recounts how he saw at the Seldans of Meca in Arabia, two of these Unicornes, which were sent him by the King of Aethiopia, high, as a two year old colt, of a dark co∣lour, the head like a Hart, the horne three fathome long, a little Mane, small legges, cloven feet, and a Goats cley; likewise the English and the Hollanders report, that in their last voyage towards Spiteberg, in a place called Horendsond, they found Unicornes hornes, not knowing of what beast they were. The Prince of Casubi moreover shewed us his Ladies brace∣lets, made of the other piece of this horn, which had a very sweet scent. He shewed us likewise the bones of an intire head, which one of his Princes kept in a Cabinet, and divers other cu∣riosities; amongst the rest an Estrif, that which we call a Griffin, but the head was wanting, because at the time it was killed,Estriffe or a Giffon. it fell amongst brakes, so thick and thorney, they could not finde it till the morrow; by which time the Marmosets had eaten the whole head; the feet were of strange length, and the Tallons would well have seized a bushel, his plume was white, and reddish upon the brest; they have but two feet, and a Tallon is a good halfe ell long, from one end to the other: I have seen of them of prodigious strength, and furiously ravenous, that would have carried away a calfe of six moneths old, and eaten him. There are abundance of them about the lake Chiammay, whereof we spoke before. MandranelFrom Canarana we made some dayes to Mandranella, a fair Town, fifty leagues from Tasatay upon Zingis, a large and deep river, that bears great vessels. They traffick with the Tabins, or Chineses; and the peo∣ple of Bugazan come thither for all necessaries. Califerech.This is the residence of the grand Caleferech of Pegu, where∣of we spoke before: All persons of quality that passe this way, go kisse the Princes buskin, who is as affable and courteous as may be. There is another Town of the same name in Indostan towards Persia, above six hundred leagues from this. In this countrey there is a sort of domestical fowle, they call Bouiagui, which live for the greater part in the water, and feed on what is thrown them: such as have
house and lands upon the river, keep abundance of them, being of little charge, and great profit; he who can get two hun∣dred of them, thinks himself wealthy; for he needs no more then one little lad to drive them a field, with a basket to gather up the eggs, whereof he will not loose one; for they sit down to lay, and are very fruitfull. They have a custom every evening to stay an houre in the water, then to call them out to seat; they have an u∣sual signe, which they readily observe. They are very good meat, and delicious. The nature of them is, that turn them into a ground sowed with Mil, or Rice, they will most strange∣ly pull up all the weedes by the root, without touching the grain. The grain they call Taffin, is like our Millet, and hath a leaf like a reed, which these birds will in no sort meddle with, whether for aversion, or other cause. They are very cheap, we had two for a halfe fanon, which is no more then two pence with us,Fanon money. and are as big as a hen, and very fat. We found them to be excellent meat, we bought more of them, my Companion and I, for our re∣creation, walking by the river side, to turn them into such grounds to see them cull, and pluck up the no cent hearbs. We were con∣sidering how to transport of the eggs into France, and specially to Arlids, a corn Countrey, where they are at so great charge in weeding, but making tryall of them in a ground sowed with Chi∣za, which in other places is called Moussa, a sort of round beanes,Chiza. but twice as big as ours, and of the same taste, only the skin more thick and hard, of chesnut colour, the leaf flat; but we found they eat the corn, and let the weeds stand, so we learnt of the In∣dians these birds are not weeders for all grains. For two Fa∣nons, which in our money amounts not to eight pence; one may sometimes buy a hundred: they take paines from morning till night, without intermission, and cost little the keeping. In other parts of India we saw another sort, of a diffe∣rent colour, drawing towards green and gray,Artipan. called Ar∣tipan, serving for that use, and others; For in November they Mue, and cast all their feathers, with which the Inhabi∣tants stuffe cushions and pillowes of Coco mats, to sit and sleep upon, to cover their Country houses, for lattices, and diverse other things: they are so large, they eat all sorts of vermin, flesh, and fish. In this Town of Mandranella, an Indian of good quality fre∣quented our company, and often eat with us, bringing of his Coun∣trey fruits with him; of whom I demanded one day, if he made no scruple, we being Ramata, so they call the Portugues,Ramata. and all Christians on this side, to eat with us, since the greater part of the Indians esteem themselves polluted by it. But he told us no, and that their three headed God, Fotoco, was esteemed a friend to the Franques Ramata, and that one of them had brought a
Sanacarin,Sanaca∣rin, or virgin. or image of the Virgin, as they terme it, which their great Oysima had honoured with such high vertues and attributes, that it had the priviledg to make the third head of their Fotoco, for which reason this God hath ever since been the most accom∣plished, the greatest and highest of all, to whose excelsitude none can attain, and that the day will come when he shall judge all the other Gods for abusing his faithful people, but for being cruell to the wicked, that they shall be quit of. The Indi∣ans faith.In Cambaya likewise they adore a triple headed God, and say the God the first cause of all things, had three children, on whom he conferred his Divinity, and that they had all but one will. In Tazatay likewise they have the same God, with three heads, which they say is three Gods united in one. In other places they adore a fowle, which they hold to be the Holy Spirit of God, and many things of like sort, by which may be seen these poore Indians have heretofore had some Doctrine of the blessed Trinity, and other Mysteries of our Religion, but they have confounded all with fables and imaginations. The Bramins themselves, to signi∣fy this, weare three cords tyed on one knot, and a cross on o∣thers. CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Kingdom of Casubi: their Religion. FRom Mandranella we went to Casubi, both a Kingdom and a Town (sometime subject to the King of Bengala) where we first discovered a most high mountain, and then the Town, and drawing nearer we perceived abundance of lighted torches, and a multitude of people: We stayed to observe the matter, and saw some bring the body of a Tree, which immediately was laid in the ground, with lime and ciment, attended with women clo∣thed in red jackets as low as the girdle, and a cotton skit thence to the foot,Interment and Cere∣monies. in which colour they likewise were cloathed that carried the Tree, in which was enclosed a Corps wrapt in linnen, and aromatically imbalmed with mastick and other drugs, that prevent corruption, then laid in this Coffin, and covered with the same timber, and fastned with pins of the same, all pargetted over, within and without with mastick, frankincense, and bitumen. For∣ty dayes they spend in feasting over the sepulchre, near to which there is a booth built, of purpose to dress and season the Viands, with Aromaticks, that, they say, the soule of the deceased may sent the prefume. They go then before their Pagode, or Idol, without weeping,
because they think the dead all go streight to heaven. These fourty dayes terminated, they employ fourty more in erecting a Piramis, made sillily enough of earth and water, but as high as a Tower, proportionable to the elevation of the person. This done, the wife of the deceased all alone, retires to her house for fourty dayes more, incessantly weeping for her husband; her kin∣dred mean while supplying her with all necessaries, for she would sooner be her own death, then go forth to demande any thing. During these six score dayes there is continual treaty of a new marriage for the widow,Widowes, how re∣married. who is led forth in a delicate virgin gar∣ment, accompanied with other delicate young dames, that make a set to play at tennis, or ball, made of a spungy Ciment,Ball play that bounds higher then one filled with wind. The women affect it much more then men, and use this game to get them husbands, by their agility and addresse. While we were in this Country, there was one, who after she had ended her widow Ceremonies, was found dead in her bed,Sapony, a motibe∣rous herb. by having slept upon an hearb, called Sapony, absolutely mortall to such as lie on it. The Town of Casubi is faire, great, and of good traffick.Casubi, and the ayre. The men are of good stature, something tawny, the women very beautiful, and kind, well apparelled, of blith and jolly humour,Women. their garments are something lascivious, for being cut, and open their skin is seen, and discovered; the aire there is likewise tem∣perare enough. The Town is environed with high mountains, garnished with pure fountains, and fruit of all sorts, chiefly quinces of the lar∣gest size, and the most kindly of any other part of the east, they call them Goncha: here grew likewise excellent grapes,Goncha grapes. the same as at Aleppo, which they bag up in sacks, made of Co∣co cloth, and load, and unload upon the ground, as they were nuts, without hurting the least grain, upon the trees there is abundance of Manna, which they gather diligently before sun rising, for it dissipates, and vanishes so soon,Manna. as the sun rayes come upon it. They sell it very cheap, though it is very purgative; I remember that gathering some once of a tree that resembles our salleyes, I thought I had taken Scammony. In these parts people live long,Long life. sometimes above a hun∣dered and fifty yeares, and they who retire beyond the Moun∣tain live yet longer. The Town is crossed with the great river Paroget, stored with Merchandizes of all sorts, and a good company of Merchants. There is a vast space incircled with walls, as at Goa, in the middle whereof stands the Pallace Royall, where there is kept a great market, and where every Saturday all sorts of Mar∣chandizes are brought, chiefly ermyn skins,Furs. and Martins of
three kinds, very exquisite. The mountains round about are stock∣ed with cattle and venison, the inhabitants being great hunters, and given to nothing but to husband their land, and make profit of their commodity; women when they work, wear buskins, and the Otoyac shooes. They make in their houses great store of cloth for their use,Cocos the benefit of the tree. and decent living. Like∣wise they make a thousand delicates, and artificers of Cocos, as flaskets, baskets, boxes, mats of diverse colours, singular∣ly wrought, this fruit serving them for meat, drink, and all other humane necessities. They are exceedingly addicted to Idolatry, and fond su∣perstitions, testifying much religion and devotion in their ce∣remonies, and affectionate to their Priests, who are married: they have a sort of remarkable confession, which holds some∣thing of Christianism. Before the great day of jubily, which they make at their Oyzima,Confession in Casubi. they go to a lake to wash themselves, where they stay some part of the night, then wrap themselves in sheets of cotton, they call Bambou, and retire under trees, where there hangs abundance of lights. The day of confession being come, they go to their Ca∣tibe, or Priest, and falling on their knees, throw off their mantle, which they wear on the bare shirt, then presenting some small matter to the Priest, confesse their sins, and the Priest with a small ball made of a root, beats them, often repeating Gazay, that is, speak, speak. Confession ended, he enjoyns them a penance, and a∣gain they go to wash in the lake, and after all they go in procession,Procession together with their Idols, which they bear a∣long likewise in procession: when they have gone quite round the Town, the Priests cry out, Go eat in the name of our God, and his peace be upon you all, then kissing in sign of peace, and such as have had any difference, or animo∣sity betwixt them, embrace and kisse, weeping as heartily as for the greatest matter that could befall them. Recon∣cilements.Whereupon their friends and kindred come to comfort them, telling them they must forget all; so as thus reconci∣led, they go dine together, and continue ever after perfect friends. They take not easily offence one of another, never using bad language one of another. These Priests esteem us polluted people, and I remem∣ber that some of them once conferring with us, washed their garments, and would not eat of the meat we had tou∣ched. All the people are much addicted to sciences and manual arts.
The soyle is good and fertile, and their land bears twice a year as their sheep do likewise. Being there we came acquainted with a Christian Merchant born at Aracan, expert in Greek, in the Abissine, Syriack, and the Spanish language, who was converted at Diu. He took much satisfaction in our company, and told us how his mother was an Abissine, and that his Father dying young she bred him up to Greek and Abissine, and shewed me a Greek Author he ever carried with him, where he met with many worthy Histories, amongst others, how the Christian faith was brought into the Indies, and particularly into this Countrey of Ca∣subi. That St. Thomas was to preach to the Parthians, and at Ben∣gala, St. Matthew in Ethiope, and St. Bartholomew in the further India, towards the Kingdome of Verma, Aua, Pegu, and other places. Since that, about three hundred yeares after,This is partly ta∣ken out of the Eccle∣siasticall History out of Socrates Sedomenes. Theodoret and Ruffi∣nus. Ardesius and Fru∣mentius. a Christian Philosopher Native of Tyre in Phenicia, by name Meropius, came into the Indies with two young Children, his Nephews, called Edesius and Frumentius, out of curiosity onely to see the Country, at the example of another Philosopher called Me∣trodorus, some years before, and that having well view'd and considered those Countries, about to return, his vessel was assault∣ed by the barbarous Idolaters, and he and all his slain, except the two young youths, who were brought to the King of Casubi, and he taken with their Gentilesses, caused them to be brought up carefully, afterwards made Aedesius his Cup-bearer, and the other Frumentius Steward of his houshold, whereof they did both acquit themselves very worthily, and to the Kings content, who loved them exceedingly, as also the Queen Arsinda and her onely son. The King dying, the Queen became Regent with her onely son, who had a speciall favour for the two Christians, to whose charge the King had committed his Son for instruction, till he came to age; wherefore the Queen had a speciall re∣gard of them, and they behaved themselves laudably in their office, all this while continuing in the right Religion, reap∣ing still some benefit amongst such Christians as came into those parts, who were Merchants, or Roman negotiators, whom they ever confirmed in their faith, and by permission royall they built a kind of Church, or Oratory, to meet and make their prayers in. Notwithstanding wanting such freedome as they desired, and inclining to their naturall Countrey, the young King being now of age to reign, they requested his license, and whatsoever the King or his Mother could say to disswade them, they could not prevaile, they aiming to
carry neither gold, silver, nor other wealth with them. So they both came back into the Roman Empire, and the Aedesius retired to Tyre, his native Countrey, where he became Priest. We staid some time at Casubi, to sell and truch our Marchan∣dises, where we made good profit; and amongst other things of some safron we had, of which they make no other use then to die their nailes, mingling it with brasill, whereby they make a dainty colour. There are men and women that make incisions in their Armes, with a pointed piece of wood, out of which wood they get fire,Wood to strike fire. putting the end of one of these sticks in the cleft of ano∣ther, and turning it hard about till smoak and fire come. In these incisions they then paint what they list in severall colours, and ordinarily cover it with a pole-cat skin newly flawed, which makes the colours more lively, without ever fa∣ding. CHAP. XXXV. Of Macharana, the hunting of Tigars, and o∣ther wild beasts, a History of a Rhinoce∣rot of the Escuriall. The esteem they have for the French there. Machara∣na.FRom Casubi we took our way towards Macharana, a dayes journey and a halfe from thence, which I may reckon about fifteen leagues, and came to a Village entirely surrounded with Palisadoes, close by a pleasant river, wherein we saw diverse women and girles bathing and smimming, as it is the generall custom of the Indies,Women swimers. where the women are as ex∣pert in swimming as the men, and some take great delight in it, so as to be more proper they shave all their haire, ex∣cept a lock on the fore part of their head. The women of this Countrey have all very black hair, which they hold for a great beauty, with a white plump body. Quinsin.They use an oyle called Quinzin, which dyes their hair, and makes it shine like ebony. We were at a brothers house, who had foure beautiful daughters shaved in this manner, only a lock on the fore part of their head, as it is the fashion throughout the Indies, though in some parts they shave only the girles of eight or ten yeares old. These maids brought us certain coros to eat with them,Pudomel. called Budomel, in shape like a quince, with a thin skin upon it, which bruised betwixt two stones yields
a kind of musty flower; but laid it the Sun, or before the fire becomes like wheaten starch, boyling it with Cocoes of Palm mingled with yolks of egges and sugar, they make the most delicate dish India affords. Of Poultry and Turkies they have abundance,Poultry. as of white and gray Partridges, and Pheasants, which are there as domestical as Turkies: Peacocks both wild and tame of no great price: their money except the royal coyn is all tin or brasse.Money. They have for another dainty a grain in the Islands called Bindi,Bindi. very small and black, they boyl it with milk and sugar, or honey drawn from Palm, and eat it upon broad leaves, which serve but for once: they invited us to this as a great dainty. Still as we travelled through these parts,Apes im∣portunate. we were every where troubled with Apes and Monkeys, which haunted us con∣tinually, and whensoever we rested, they were importunate to get something of us. 'Twas our custom in the fields to erect a lit∣tle tent of cotton cloth with a pole in the middle, and cords to hold it; and having made our repast, we went to rest, while two stood Centinel to see that our horses, or beasts of carriage strayed not away. There is a kind of beast called Azoufa,Azoufa. which haunts most commonly Church-yards, to scrape up dead bodies, and feed on the flesh, whereof they are very ravenous. I have seen many of them at Fez, Morocca, and other places in Africa, where they call them Chicali;Chicali. I my self saw them one day pull up one of our company that died suddenly. There is ano∣ther beast called an Ira, exceeding greedy of mans flesh,Ira's, A beast of the same nature as the Chicali, but red. they go in heards, and if they meet with any straying, they will devoure him: these likewise unbury the dead for food; but the skins of these have an odour so excellent, that nature seems to have gi∣ven it them, that men may be incited to hunt and take them for the repose of the living and dead. Really the importunity of the Apes is great and troublesome, but they take good order for them by shutting them out of the high wayes, as every one hath notice to do carefully, but the Azoufa and Iras are both troublesome and dangerous. Through∣out these countries there are abundance of other wild and san∣guinary beasts, as Tygars extremely fierce,Tygars▪ and are not daunted with men, though never so troop'd and armed. They are as big as small Asses, and go night and day in great heards, their heads are like the Cats of Suria, but more furious, a Lions paws, and their colour white, red, and black, and very shining.Tygar skins. The skins are very precious with them, because from Persia, In∣dostan, Samarcant and China, they come to be furnished here. The King and and the whole Court make a great businesse of this chase, and take a strong number along for it,Tygar hunting. though not∣withstanding some still come to misfortune; at narrow passages
no man dare assault them, for they will fly most furiously at men on horse-back, strangle and tear them to pieces in an in∣stant, and in another instant leap away to flight so swift, 'tis impossible to reach them: the Kings make this chase their de∣light and glory, and the people pray for him for destroying this pernicious race. Elephants.They likewise chase the Elephant and Rhinocerot, beasts so huge and robustious, there needs both art and craft to take them; for the Elephant which they call Cheses and Gusier, is so forcible and impetuous, they could never gain him, but by means of a fe∣male, as I said before. A story of the Rhino∣cerot of Escurial.As to the Rhinocerot, there must be good heed taken of him, because he is armed from head to foot, with his dark gray horn on his nose, exceeding sharp, of two foot long, his scales not pene∣trable by any thing whatsoever, of Chesnut colour: if they can lay hold on man and horse, they will fling them six paces from them. At the Escurial in Spain I saw one that was brought from the Indies; but because he had overturned a Chariot full of No∣bility, though fortunately no harm was done, the King command∣ed his eyes should be put out, and his horn cut off. The difficulty was in the execution; for they were constrained to put him in a close place to bind him, which was done with so much trouble and danger, that nothing more; for he wounded and maimed divers: there was one Casabuena, a bold resolute man, who to prevent danger, put an armour of proof under his Cassock, the beast came upon him with such force, that he threw him against the wall with such violence, he was carried forth for dead, bleeding both at mouth and nose. The Duke of Medina advised the King to kill him with a Musket, because he had maimed a Gentleman of his, one Cavalier Mortel, but the King would not, and at last they compassed their ends; and his eyes were put out, and his horn cut off. By this we may see how dangerous the chase is. They are chiefly found in Bengala, Patana, and Macharana. Very dan∣gerous Wolfes.There is another kind of beast like to our Wolf, but black, and so fierce, they will venture on a man armed with sword and buckler, and he must quit himself well to escape; the skin is hard as a Bufflers. The Indian Kings delight much to see the fury of this beast, exercised upon some unfortunate criminal, and 'tis la∣mentable to see how they will tear their throats out.An armed Monkey. For this purpose I remember the King of Casubi had a great black Mon∣key chained, who armed with his staffe, the King would set to fight against a man; such as came without arms he strangled: but he met at last with an Indian so valiant and resolute, he subdued him, and ordered him so handsomely, the King gave him to him for his trophy. He made him cleanse the streets, and carry the filth out of
town, and when he muttered or grumbled he gave him the cudgel soundly; so as he got his Master a livelyhood, who was a poor man newly come out of slavery. We often met upon the way with several of these savage beasts, but we never met with any so safe as are the Lyons, who will not rise at the approach of men, be they never so few. They seem to look for nothing from passengers, but if they are sought for, and assaulted, they defend themselves in a furi∣ous manner, and are light and strong runners. One day as we went from Casubi, to Transiana, with a numerous convoy of all nations, Moores, Gentiles, Malabates and others, be∣cause there is no other travailing through these forests, repleat with such beasts, and every water and river swimming with Cro∣codiles or Caymans, a youth who waited on de la Courb in his chamber, a Frenchman one of our company, of a daring spirit, had a desire to shoot at a Lyon he had spy'd, for which purpose he left the way some twenty paces, and had with him an Indian called Talmassac a person of courage likewise: a Bramin advised them as soon as they had given fire to make all haste with the best speed of their horses for fear of mischief. The Lyon lay along under a tree, and though he received two shots at the same instant one in the head, the other in the left shoulder, notwithstanding finding himself wounded, he sprung so vigorously after them, that though they made good haste, he overtook one of them in going two hundred paces, and caught his horse by the Crouper, which he killed like lightning, though his strength was spent. Poor Talmassac was so astonied with a blow he gave with his head on the side, that he fell sick, and we were fain to send him back to Casubi in a Palanquin or Litter with four Camalous or Porters, yet for a further mischief he was stript by the way. The Naires, with leave of the hunters took the Lyon, and presented it to the King of Transiana, who admired his growth, having teeth great and thick, as a pul∣lets egge. The King recompensed Talmassac with another horse in lieu of that he had lost,The King of Transi∣ana his cu∣riosity, and affability. which was looked upon as a great liberality for the esteem they make of horses in that country, and our French∣man had a gown of razed cloth of gold, and the King caused us all to be treated and entertained in his Palace, enquiring diverse things of Sieur de la Courbe, amongst others the state of our King; and because I understood something of the country lan∣guage, I was called to the conference, and I know not if he were pleased with my discourse, but he called one of his grooms of his chamber to bring him a handful of gold, which he gave me, telling me, if I would stay with him, he would give me every Moon as much, and that I should have care of his person, for the Sieur de la Courbe had intimated to him
that I applyed my self to Physick. I made him an humble re∣verence and acknowledgement, saying: I was of such a hu∣mour, I should never serve Princes for their money, but I should be sufficiently satisfied with the honour to be near his Majesty:Esteem of the French on the East. he was exceedingly pleased with my answer, saying the French are the flower of the world, and I am delighted with your conversation. Afterwards he shewed us two Culverins given him by a Cap∣tain of Diepe, well wrought, and upon either of them a Dragon for Armes. The Sieur de la Courb's present.The Sieur de la Courbe presented him with a steel sword of Damis, which he had gotten in the Indies, a thing the Prince highly prized, and instantly taking a ring off his finger, with three rich Rubies, would have given it him, but the Sieur would not receive it, rendring thanks; and saying, 'twere a great indiscretion in him to acccept of such a rarity, that was worth a thousand times more then his present; and that it was a full satisfaction, and ample recompence, that his Ma∣jesty would vouchsafe to accept so poor a thing; with many more respects and compliments, which gained the Kings esteem much more; saying, 'twas apparent there was something of great amongst the Christians, because their discourse was more elegant and polite then the ordinary language of other Merchants; and if he would stay at Court, he would con∣ferre upon him any office in his Palace, he should like of, and would tender him as his brother; the Sieur rendring his acknowledgement with reverence and submission. In brief, we were obligingly treated by this Prince, on whom we waited to chases, which is a thing truly royal and mag∣nificent. In this country there is another kinde of savage beast, exceeding fierce, that indifferently falls on all things come before her. She hath four teeth that cut like a razor. About the size of a midling oxe, a head like a Bear, and a taile like a hogge. These beasts are naturally black, they hunt them for their hydes which are of admirable strength to resist blows: the flesh is good and spends like Pork, though it be some∣thing red. This chase is exceeding dangerous, and some alwayes pe∣rish, for she flyes most furiously on the first that attempts her, and failes not to strangle him, though a hundred should come to his rescue, if they kill her not at the first stroake. She is ex∣ceeding licorous of a fruit they call Coeoma, which is of ex∣cellent taste, and great refreshment, so as in Summer 'tis much sought after: for one shall no sooner eat of it, but he perceives an entire refreshment, nay a chilness if he eat a quantity.
The Indians make hollowes in great trees, near this fruit, and hide themselves within to wait for this beast, and kill her, when she comes to feed: but when she findes her selfe surprized, She enters into such rage, that she tears up the tree for spight. There are so many other sorts of savage beasts, that it were too troublesome to rehearse them all. They have divers birds of de∣licate plumage, whereof they make divers works, the most quaint and lively in the world; and birds so great, they will take a calf up into the ayre. They have Griffins, which in my opinion, are, no other then that they call a Tofon, of white plumage, and red∣dish under the belly; but they have not four feet, as our Pain∣ters draw them; but two only long and great, as likewise Tal∣lons like a Falcon, but large, and exceeding strong; the beake like an Eagle, but much thicker; they are cruel creatures. They have here likewise those we call the birds of Paradise,Birds of Paradise. the Irico: they cut the feet off, and sell them so to Merchants; as I said in another place. They have abundance of Turkies; and wild ones, that go in flocks, as Peacocks, white Partridges, and other birds and fowles of divers kinds. CHAP. XXXVI. Of Transiana, the valour of their women. THe Town of Transiana,Transiana. which is likewise the name of the kingdome, lying between the Towns of Sian and Tinco, is the last in subjection to the Empire of Pegu, towards the North, having Westward the Province or kingdome of Ta∣zatay, Northward the kingdom of Carforan, South Pegu, and Eastward Cauchinchine, situate upon a pleasant river, that comes from the lake Daracan. The countrey is temperate enough, except in the ex∣treme heats of Summer, when they must of necessity travel by night. Here they have a Myne of Diamonds, which they call Geay, besides those of Gold and Silver in abundance, and of the purest in the East, abundance of grain and fruits of all sorts, and Palm-wine, which they call Serolle. The people are insolent and proud; of make, and fashion like the Persians: the women exceeding beautiful,Women, more then in other parts; but something lascivious, and affecting the coversation of strangers. They love to dance to the musick of their Pan, and delight much
in melody and banquets: they wear their hair at length in knots, and platted with silk ribbands very quaintly in divers manners, with rings and jewels according to their quality. For none but Princesses and Ladies of the better rank may wear Dia∣monds set in gold;Jewels, and to whom. rubies and other stones are for the rest of the nobility whom they call Canubi; amongst whom are com∣prehended the whole Militia of the King. For the vulgar they wear bracelets and rings, of silver, tin, brasse, and Ivory, neatly made and enamel'd with all colours, and they hold the same custom I have observed in other places to break them all in token of mourning at the death of their kindred. If any one will wear jewels above his degree, he must agree with the Kings Officers, to be rank'd in the Nobility, for there as in other places all is carried by money. The women affect to be courted, wear their gowns slash'd like the French, and go habited like our Europeans, quite diffe∣rent from the other Indians. Adultery punished.Women of what degree or condition soever are obliged to nurse and suckle their own children. Adultery is there punished with death, for which cause there are divers will never marry, that they may live with more liberty: for maids and wi∣dowes are subject to no law, without any dishonour neverthe∣lesse,Maids free. and having taken their pleasure, they may marry with∣out any mark of infamy; and if she have had children by any others, each Father is bound to take his own and breed it. A female guard for the King.When the King goes into the field, whether to chase or war, he hath a Van-guard of a hundred women, who carry Crosse-bowes, wherein they will shoot so directly, they will hit the breadth of a peny, they call them Memeytas, and suc∣ceed one another for their portion Royal, which is great and honourable; which they gain'd for a signal service they per∣formed for King Bugunda, great Grandfather to Amaous, who reigned in our time. They have this place for their valour and fidelity, and are excellent in all things: they keep slaves, and may wear jewels as the nobility of the first rank. They attend the Prince in his wars, as well as the gallantest Cavaliers of his Court, and they are more welcome to the Prince at his Table, then any other;A dance in armes. esteeming them for their magnanimity. Some∣times for his recreation armed with skins of beasts covered with scales, they will enter the Palace four and four, and present the King with a civil combat, with sword, buckler, and cask of wood, and all with such grace, that the King will leave both meat and drink, to judge of the blowes and addresse: for they combat in order and measure, without missing a single step to the purpose; like a dance well consorted. And they have their Masters to instruct them in the use of all sorts of arms, which they practice diligently.
When they have performed any noble act of dexterity, or feat of arms, they are assured of a chain of gold from the King: they are all lodg'd in the Kings Palace. There was one that per∣formed a combat once with such grace, boldnesse, and dexte∣rity, that the King could not forbear, but taking off her cask upon the field, he kissed her before all the Court, and put a∣bout her neck a chain he wore himself, of rubies, pierced in form of pearls, and garnished at the ends with fauset dia∣monds of inestimable value: opinion was, that after the King had so blandished her, and given her such a gift, without doubt he would marry her. She was indeed one of the most amiable Ladies of the Indies, of twenty years age, her skin admirably white, her hair dis-shevel'd, black as jet, her name was Langir, and I asking mine host who the maid was, and if 'twere probable the King would marry her? smiling he told me in my ear, 'twas surmis'd she was sister to the Prince himself, so passionately his Father Amaycan lov'd her Mother Acosrias, who was so gallant and valiant, that at wrastling she had not her match, and that she threw all the strangers she wrastled with: and if they took it with disdain she would strangle them in the place: she was a Lady of perfect beauty, and was unfortunately slain by a Lion: where∣upon the King her lover was violently grieved, he buried her with royall obsequies, and mourned with solemnity a long time, abstaining some dayes from eating Areca or Betel, being shav'd, in sign of grief and sorrow. In his huntings the King takes great pleasure to see these women shoot in their crosbows, whence they will discharge three arrows at a time, with such celerity and vigour, that lighting upon a tree they strike themselves so deep, that they are not to be drawn out. They use also fire-locks, and other arms, wherein they are well exercised. These women are not at liberty to marry without the Princes license, who allows them not but to Favourites, who at the same time have charge or office at Court, or some other place, for they never displace any. There are other guards called the Viluaires,Viluaires. who bear no more before the King than the bow made of Indian cane, or Palm-wood which never breaks. The servitors and domestick Officers of the Palace are called the Lambri,Lambri. who are for carriage of all necessa∣ries to the Palace, and serve likewise in war, being honourably ha∣bited, and armed with great Indian canes, which they know how to manage very well, and these take orders from the King. The Prince is very powerfull both in Foot and Horse,The mili∣tia of the King of Transiana. being provided alwaies of a thousand Elephants, and fifty thousand Horse, which are lesse, but stronger than the Persian, whereof he keeps divers races; for the Country hath the fairest and most fer∣tile herbage of the world, and abounds in all sorts of commodities. This King is tributary to the great Emperour, to whom he
payes yearly so many horses, the best in the Indies, being indefatigable in travaile,Horses and their breeding. he is likewise exceeding carefull, and breedes them of an extraordinary manner, getting Mares from Persia: when there is a number of foles, of foure or five moneths old, they are put to certain wild cowes, that are expresly for this purpose kept in the race: so as the little cowes, the mares, and the colts are all together; then taking the calves from their dams, they put the colts to suck them: This course continued for some time, makes them more strong and lasting then can be imagined, and it is observable their hoofes are more durable then any others. All their fault is, they are not so sleet as the Persian, which horses are most esteemed of all in the Indies, and next to them those of Tran∣siana. This King hath so great a number of them, they render him formidable throughout the Indies; he is exceeding peaceful, and beloved of his people. In the Countrey, though it be very fertile, and well tilled, there are notwithstanding vast and profound forrests, stocked with wilde beasts, who often intercept the pas∣sengers, and devoure them; as Ounces, Lions, Tigars, beares, Wolves, and dangerous Boares of an incredible size. The King hath huntsmen for the purpose, well skill'd in the woodes, with little dogs proper for finding out the beasts. They have also tame Lions, and Hart-Wolves brought up to hunt their own kinde, and so animated against their own Species, that there are not in the world more cruell enemies, as man hath not a more mortall foe then man himselfe,Beasts brought up to hunt. and amongst men Renegado Christians more cruell to true Christians then the other Infidels. These Lions, wolves, and other beastes of chase are taught to it, when they are young, and trained in parkes to hunt others, till they are at growth; and then they take them abroad to the grand chase, ar∣med with caps and pointed collars, which with the assistance of the hunters makes them more dangerous, so as they make a great slaughter amongst the other beasts. There are likewise abun∣dance of harts, large as heifers, which lie in the fields, and will not stir for a passinger. When the King goes into the Country, he is attended with a thousand horse at least, and when he goes to the grand chase, he takes along abundance of Pioneers, to stop up the Avenues with walls of clay, and turf, to secure himselfe and his Court. There will be sometimes twelve or fifteen thousand hun∣ters, the greater part Lords, Persons of Quality, and the Kings do∣mesticks, who frequently engage themselves; there being pleasure without danger. Sometimes these beasts come in such heards, they are forced to open for their passage, and fall upon the last; and notwithstanding the walls are strong and high, being made of palms, and earth mixt with brakes, there are beasts so light and nimble,Chase of recreation. they will leap over them; and before the souldi∣ers, (who lie concealed) can take them, they will do incredible things, making such strange assaults, and such havock with teeth
and nailes; but the whole Court, with the female guard, stands in order upon the curtain and parapet of the walls, to attend them at the passage, where there is a great slaughter. But after this tragi∣call danger, comes a comedy of the Marmosets, Apes, and Monkeys, and others of that kind, for the greater part unknown to us: The young ones will be there so fastned to the necks of their dams,Apes. you would think they grew there: all together makes a very pleasant prize. The hair of these Apes is soft as silk, and their genitories violet colour, or pale red. There are huge Munkeyes white as snow, that make a thousand ridiculous faces, seeming to crave liberty, and they of the guard that know their hu∣mour, give them a signe to climbe upon a tree, and save themselves, where of she faile not, but then the sport is to see the trees covered over with them, with the confused chattering they make one at another. For wild swine, wild goats, harts, hindes, fallow-Deer, and Aloroc, with beasts of Beasar there are abundance; as also of porcupines, the Country yeilding such plenty of grain, and wild fruits for their sustenance. The boares are very dangerous, panching all they meet with their tushes: Elephants they hunt but seldom, being forfeit of life to kill one. They go with such vehemency, they break all before them; and when by sub∣tlety they are once enclosed, they make most horrible cries and roarings, for rage breaking all that is near them: being tyred, they lie along, and thrusting their trunk down their throat, they fetch up a loathsom water, as hot as if it came out of a furnace. When all the dangerous beasts are either killed or scaped, the King for his pleasure kills the boares, the goats, and others with the Ront, the most assured armes, and makes the widest wound. Then the hunters all choose their marke,Ront. Armes. taking plea∣sure in darting their lances, taking what serves for provision of the Palace, leaving the rest for another time. The skins of bears,Beasts skins. ounces, lions, leopards, serve to Arme the foot and horse, and to bard the horses, Elephants, and other beasts for use in hunting, whereof they make them caps, that cover so well the head and neck, it is not easie for the savage beasts to endanger them, there being steel piques that make them loose their hold; nor is there great or small, who hath not his horse cap∣ped with these skins. Towns and Villages circumiacent to the hunting, come with a thousand presents and rejoycings to the King, esteeming themselves much honoured to have any share of the prize, wherewith they make a publik feast, as of a thing sacred and solemn. For their falconry and hawkes, the King hath eagles and ravens, so well trained both for furr and feather, that nothing more. Fishing is there likewise much pra∣ctised. As we travailed through the Country, we came one day to a
mountain of extraordinary height, they call the Culma, or Colu∣ma, grown over with all sorts of trees, as Sendal, Danum, Ebony, Palmes of all sorts, and others. All the ground we passed over was full of Rhubarbe,Rhubarb. with leaves large, and very bitter, and round the skirt of the mountain Tombes orderly ranged, cut in the rock,Remarka∣ble Moun∣taines. ingenuously carved. Maritime windes are frequent there which the Indians call Sourou, and other windes exceeding drying, which they call the Mounsons, and the Portuguese Abra∣zador, which consume even iron. These mountains have a reasemblance of the Cordilleras of Peru of a long extent. Amongst the rest there is one mountain that rain never falls upon, by reason the southern windes which conti∣nually blow there, force back the cloudes, so as the mountain is ex∣ceeding barren. The mountain of Columa being fanned with the maritime windes on one side, preserves and keepes incorruptible all the bodies brought thither. The other side towards the North, being de∣fended by the heads of trees, enjoyes rains in abundance: but both the one and the other side are fertilized with large streams, that nourish these trees of excellent odour. IntermentsWhen they will bury a body, they wash it, and taking out the heart and bowells, they burn them with Aromatick woods, sacri∣fising them to their Duma, then put the ashes within the Corpes again, that nothing, as they say, may be wanting at the day of Re∣surrection. For this purpose there are six men engaged, who buy their offices of the King, and whosoever will cut a Tombe there, must pay great rates to the King: Their burialls are so considerable to them, that so soon as they are marrried they provide for it. Divorces.By the way I shall tell you they are much inclined to divorces, which they may make three severall times, and accept again, but not the fourth time; for he must stay till the wife be marri∣ed to another, and after divorce she may marry with her first husband, and the children stay with the father. As to the dead bodies, they who order them, cleanse them exceeding carefully, putting within them a perfume like Ma∣stick, then the ashes put in again, as I told you; the Nu∣bis,Nubis Priests. or Priests in their Ceremonies recommends them to their God, with severall prayers, and having dined with their kin∣dered, six women approach the corps, with loud cries and lamentations, which last till evening, meanwhile six sworne men put the body in a sheet of Chantli, or cotton, the bet∣ter sort have Taffeta, with cotton under or over, so dispo∣sing the hands, that one lies on the eare, the other stretch∣ed down by the thigh. Then having watched by it all night, they restore it to the kindred, to be laid in a coffin, and thence to be borne
to a Tomb at the foot of the mountain, where they remain incorruptible, as well by reason of these drying winds, as a composition they apply. There are abundance of them in this place, and if any through fatnesse, which causes hu∣midity, and by consequence putrefaction, chance to be con∣sumed by worms, they hold the soule that left this body lost, and condemned to darknesse amongst the Devils. When they bear the body to the Tomb they go all bare-headed, and the women their hair dischevelled, weeping and lament∣ing, but wear no sort of mourning, onely their nearest kindred will be shaved, and abstain from eating Betel. In this Moun∣tain there are intire dryed bodies, which they say are of seven or eight hundred years,Mummy. and this is the right Mummy brought into severall parts of the world; For that Mummy that is taken out of the sands is a meer fable, since there is nothing but bones to be found there, the rest being eaten by the worms. CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Kingdom of Tazatay, and the Philosophy of the Indians. WEst of Transiana lies the kingdom of Tazatay, or Tasatail, otherwise called the red kingdom, or the land of Liarrean, or Hiarcan, and the Kingdome of the Sun, for the severall apparitions the Sun makes there during his twenty four hours course, as they say. While we were in Transiana, a Country appertaining to the Empire of Pegu, hearing speech of Ta∣zatay, and the wonders of a Mountain there, I prevailed with my companion to go thither, so with an Interpreter two small Elephants, and two Hacambals or Camels, we parted thence, leaving all our goods and Merchandizes with our Host, having registred them in the Casa de la contration,Fidelity for the Mer∣chants in India. in the Indies thoroughout there being such order that a Mer∣chant can loose nothing, though he should dye, all being faithfully kept and restored to his heirs, paying onely the dues of custome and impost. After three dayes travaile we came on the top of a moun∣tain, where there was a small Town called Brasifir, here we had convenient accommodation that night; in the mor∣ning going down we crossed a River, and came to the other great Mountain we so much desired to see,The mountain of the sun. that appeared exceeding high and arduous: neverthelesse having ascended
about two good leagues we met a man mounted on a Dro∣medary coming down the Mountain, and asking him if we had far to the next habitation, he answered we had but the tenth part of one Sun, as through the Indies they count Suns, that is, by dayes journies. Then travailing about an hour, we came to Tambo, and alighting from our beasts that were all in a water for the difficult travaile, we found there plenty of provision for our refreshment. There was a good old man and his wife that gave us freely what they had,Tambo an Inne. and amongst other things Areca, the best methought I ever drunk. At the same time there arrived a man we took by his carriage to be a fool, he sate down with us at table, never∣thelesse would eat nothing but what we entreated him to, and while we were at meat he told us severall stories an∣swerable to the opinion we had of him. Our Host asked us if we would not go see the Lord of the place at his Cha∣bacaran, or Palace: to which we agreed, and went this visit on foot, for 'twas on the top of the next mountain, not far off. Ridicu∣lous opi∣nions of the sur∣rising.Being arrived we went to make our respects to him, and he returned us great civilities, and discoursing of our voy∣age, he told us 'twas truth, that at the top of the Moun∣tain the Sun rose three severall times in four and twenty hours, as we might easily perceive if we ascended: where∣upon out of curiositie I requested my companion we might go thither early in the morning, and hereupon I asked the Lord being there two houres before day, if I should see the rayes of the Sun; he told me for this purpose I must be on the top of the Mountain upon a structure we saw some two leagues and a half above us in a bending of the Mountain, and that below, where his Castle stood, it was not seen but twice a year, that is, once three houres before day, and a∣nother time an hour and a quarter before Sun rising: and seeking to be informed by the most ancient Inhabitants, they all told me the same thing. But I found my companion so incredulous of this matter, as he had reason, that we desisted, and on the morrow took the way to return whence we came: and since, meeting with a Gentleman of great curiositie, he told me he had been in a Countrey beyond Swedeland, where for four moneths toge∣ther the Sun continually appeared, which must needs be in Lapland,Lapland. in seventy eight degrees, from May to August. And a Merchant of Sabooram assured me that in his Coun∣trey the longest dayes were one and twenty hours of Sun,Sabooram Liberia in high Tar∣tary. with little or no night, which is in about sixty four or sixty five degrees.
Hereupon I will say something of the Astronomy used amongst these East Indians; their opinion is, the earth is not round but flat,The Indi∣ans strange opinions in Astro∣nomy. and that there are not, nor can be Antipodes, else say they, there must be two suns, one to lighten us, the other them; that there is but one Hemisphere for the Sun and Moon to move in; that the sun is not of the bignesse we make it, nor so great as the earth, whereof it is but the sixtieth part, that the Sun never leaves our Hemisphere, no not by night; but then conceales himselfe behind certain Mountains. That 'twere a great folly to say the earth were higher then the heavens, which notwithstanding must needs be, if we allow Antipo∣des. That the Poles held immovable are not so, but that these two starres turn within two degrees round the Pole. That 'tis an errour the Sun should by night go hide himself under us: that the two Poles are not diametrically opposite, since, as they say, they may be seen at the same time, upon sea and land, though very low neverthelesse. That if there were Antipodes, that must be the bottom of the earth, and all rivers would naturally run thither, contrary to experi∣ence, and a thousand other opinions as strange, as absurd, for want of knowledge in the spheare and Astronomy: So they laugh as at a thing childish and fabulous, at the opinion of the Ancients and Moderns on this side, of the rotundity of the earth in the middle of the world, and the Ubiquitary habitation, and that the Sun turns quite round from East to West. They hold for certain, that the Sunne rises in all other points, as they observe in Tazatay where they imagine it to rise as 'twere North, and North-West. They think to prove their phantastical imaginations, when they describe the Iliaca, a bright starre in the West,The Indi∣ans Iliaca and Pili∣aca. and opposite to that Biliaca, which appears beyond the Line; and is, that the shepheards fear so much,This must be the dog or Medusa's head. by the Persians called Zobona, so mortiferous to cattle; for which cause they house them while that starre raignes, and the better to preserve them, they make them turn tayle to the starre, for if they face it, it makes them languish, and dye in the end. They say that these two opposite starres may be seen in a Line at the same time through a trunck, and that each moves about his Pole in twenty four houres, but that these are not the same, as the North, and the Crusero. The North being no more distant from the Pole then two degrees and a quarter, and one of the other two, a degree and a half onely. And whereas the ancients observed onely two Poles, each in his Hemisphere, they make six Poles in the same Hemi∣spheare,
which are Casara,Six Poles with the Indians. the pole of the World, that of the Zodiack, the Artick, and Antartick, and these two starrs, and a thousand other fancies as incomprehensible, as they are farr from the sence of reason and experience, And that which confirmes them in their errors, is, that they can discerne the two polar starrs from the same place, as in Japaca, seven degrees beyond the Line in Java, and the like in Sumatra, and other parts, and accordingly in travell, they make a strange calculation of the distances of places. They jeer likewise at the frame of our spheare, and the divi∣sion of the Zodiack into twelve signes; some to the North, some to the South, and understand not this but after their own way. The Zodi∣ack.They call the Zodiack Cazatoni, that is, Significator. The signes they call Ant, Ronia, Amiessem, Emisen, Courpsa, Cheoser, Irat, Metrias, Escorgat, Tamasee, Besir, Bizihir, Azourac, Persan, the highest spheare Birquen, Emine, the Ecliptick Zo∣berna, that is obscurity, because Ecclipses proceed thence. That the Zodiack is an oblike circle, and that from thence and the Re∣gion of fire, the Sun takes his course, and thence makes ge∣neration of all inferiour things. Like some of the ancients, likewise they hold that the Heaven stands like a vault o∣ver the earth, and floates, and swimmes upon the wa∣ters. St. Basil in Exameron.In breife, I shewed them the work of Paul Rao the Italian, who speakes of all this Astronomy of the Ancients, which sup∣poses the Equinoctiall divides the Zodiack in two parts, South and North, at which they scoffed, and grew cholerick, say∣ing, so base a book was fit for the fire, that held nothing but errors, and wondered our Prince would suffer such frauds and impostures, as they called them, to be published in his Dominions; they believing as well the lands inhabited from East to West, as from South to North, are in view of the pole Artick, and that it is false there should be any part of India under the Antartick, since, as they think, they have the North as much elevated as we in Europe, and many ex∣travagancies hereupon, which I leave to be argued, and confuted by the learned in Astronomy and Cosmography. Hearkning to these Indian opinions, I have been told, that the Chineses,The Earth square with the Chinesses. that speculative Nation, hold the Heavens to be round, but the Earth square, and the Empire of China stands punctually in the middle, as being the excellence and Principality of the World, other parts being but as the skirts and accessaries, so as they were a little cholerick when they saw our cards designe their Countrey in the extremity of the East, as an indignity to the Grandeur, and Maje∣sty
of their Country and King, whom they call the sonne of the sun. And truly these poore Indians wanting the knowledg of sci∣ences and experience,The opini∣on of the Geek Philoso∣phy, of the forme of the Earth. are not so much to be blamed for their opi∣nions, since in the middle of sage and learned Greece, there were of the ancient Philosophers that maintained almost the same; that the earth was not round, but some as Lucipus, that it was like a drum, others, that it was hollow like a barke, as Heraelitus, others like a Cilinder, or Roler, as Anaximan∣drus, and Democritus; others that it was absolutely flat, as Empodocles and Anaximines: some have wandered as far as this Paradox, to release it from the center,Antripodes, by whom not belie∣ved. and make it run in the heavens, about the immovable sun, which with no less extravagancy hath been renewed in our times. But for the Antipodes, they who held the rotundity of the earth, allowed them not for all that, holding those parts inhabita∣ble, either for being covered with innavigable seas, or for the insupportable heats of the Torrid Zone: even some of the anci∣ent fathers have for other considerations been taken with this opinion, as Lactantius, St. Augustine, and others,Virgill, Bishop of Strasbourg. and they say a learned Germane Bishop was accused of Heresie, for maintain∣ing there was Antipodes. But besides the reasons of science, experience of Navigation, and modern voyages shewes sufficiently the truth of this mat∣ter, whereof I leave the large discourse to the more lear∣ned. CHAP. XXXVII. Of Tartary, Frightfull deserts, fierce dogs, a strange History of two lovers, the Empire of the Tartars, and their Religion. OF Grand Tartary, which lies on the North of all the Pro∣vinces I have spoken of, I know nothing but by the re∣lation I received in these parts, and by the Memorialls of a certain Hollander, who was at Pegu. The Inhabitants of these Countreys then tould me, that beyond the Kingdom of Tazatay, Mandranella, Transiana, and Casubi, towards the North, are vast solitudes, and sandy deserts,Sinabo. which you must travell for many dayes, before you can arrive at a Kingdom called Sina∣bo, which at one end, towards the East confines with Co∣chinchina, subject to the great King of Tabin or Chi∣na.
To passe these vast sands, there must be made good pro∣vision of victualls, water, and beast; for as a Merchant of Drogomania told me,Drogoma∣nia may be Dragoian, or Turco∣mania. Deserts of Tartary. a Country confining Eastward upon these Kingdomes, the deserts of Arabia are little in compari∣son to them: and when I told him the fourty tedious days it cost us, betwixt Suria and Medina, through the deserts of Arabia, he answered, this was nothing in respect, since by the help of guides they might here and there find a well, whereas in the deserts of Asia, in two and twenty dayes journey together, nothing was to be found but sand, and that one day as he travailed along with the convoy, by mis∣fortune one of the jarrs of water broke, which was a great mischiefe to them, and a very important losse, being for∣ced for want of it to kill one of their Camells, to drink the loathsome water within him, and eat his flesh. He told me then for more commodious passage, above all things it was necessary to provide good beasts, and chiefly Persian Asses,Persian Asses. the best beast the world affords for carriage, and the most proper for those wayes, and are worth as much as a good horse. That after these sands they came to huge Mountains, ab∣solutely barren, which in my opinion must needs be mi∣neralls, but they try them not, they are so far distant, and the way so troublesom. I observed in my East and Western voyages, that where the Mines of gold, silver, and precious stones, where the Moun∣tains were ordinarily barren, having nothing growing about them, as they observe of the Calanfour, or clove, which suf∣fers no plant near it. The Merchant observed likewise, that in these Mountains, which must be those the Ancients called Juac, dividing high and low Asia; there are abundance of serpents of prodigious bignesse,Serpents good meat. but are more advantage then damage to them; for being free from venom, and of an excellent substance and nou∣rishment, they eat there nothing else. As I remember I saw in the Mountains of Syr, in Africa. For, passing these Mountains, and lodging with the Arabi∣ans under their tents, 'twas our admiration to see huge ser∣pents play with children, who would give them morsells of bread. But to return to our Tartarian Merchant, he told me, that having passed this Mountainous Country, they came to ano∣ther desert, of twenty dayes over, void of all food, where he was constrained to stray a good dayes journey to hunt for water, and other commodities, and this too with weapon in hand, because there lives a certain Horde or nation of
Shepherds or Tartars Nomades, who keep huge Mastifes,fiere dogs the most fierce and bloody in the world, which indeed have more of the wolf then the dog: they keep these dogs to de∣stroy passengers on the way, to which they train them for diet for themselves. He told me that about three yeares before this breed of Rascals were almost all devoured by their own dogs, after their cruell usage of certain Merchants who passed that way, these to revenge themselves made an Ambush, and having taken them, served them as they had done others. He told me many other curiosities of this country, and amongst others, that about twenty years before, he passed by the Isle of Volmous or Ayman, near to Cauchinchina, and the country of the Meores, that the people are haughty, great souldiers,Volmous. well clothed, and very civil, lovers of honour and vertue, and of complexion rather white then black: that the land is full of im∣penitrable Forests, but well stor'd with Venison, and betwixt the Mountains good pasturadge; that they had there a potent King by the title of Emperour, on the day of his birth, wearing on his head three Crowns, in form of a Tiara, for the three king∣domes he possessed: that this Prince was King of Sinabo, the Magers, and Patanes. Amongst other particulars of this country,This must be the great Mo∣gor. he related to me a strange History, if it be true: Thus, that in a mountanous country vulgarly called Ismanca, very fertile, where there are clownes very wealthy in cattell, whereof they drive a great trade; as also in skins of divers beasts: there was a rich shepherd called Ismahan, who amongst other children, had a daughter of excellent beauty, who according to the custome of the country,A History of an Incu∣bus. kept her fathers flocks. This maid of twenty yeares of age, loved a young shep∣herd her neighbour and kinsman, but poor, and to whose Father the rich shepherd had sent some corn, who seeing he could not be paid, and being aware of his daughters affecti∣on, he told his debtor, that on condition he would send his son to live in some remote parts, he would forgive the debt, which the other did; the young man being thus banished by force, the maid was extremely afflicted, and as one day she walk∣ed alone in the fields, lamenting the absence of her beloved Li∣za, so he was called; a Fiend in the same shape appeared to her, and demanded for whom she was so much tormented, since she had him assuredly present, and that he loved her more then the world besides. Some say this poor young man being banished the presence of his dear Mistresse, sought out a Magician, who promised he should see and enjoy her; but bringing into a room to him a spirit in the form of the maid, as the spirits of joy and love made him fly
to embrace her, the Demon strangled him afterwards, taking the shape, or rather the body of the dead youth, continued his visits a long time to the maid, whereof her Father and Brothers having notice, resolved to surprize him; and in effect breaking up her chamber door, they found a stinking carcasse in bed by her, at which both she and the rest were extremely frighted; and the King of the country having notice of it, sent for the maid to know the truth, which she related as it was. The King sent her to live with an Aunt of his, where they say the Devil still frequented her, and would visit her publickly in the shape of her friend, wherein she took extreme content, nor could she be dis∣swaded from his conversation. How I know not, but they say she conceived, and was delivered of two children; who grown up, became the most valiant and strong in the country: so as since spirits are incapable of generation, as the best Divines conclude; we may suppose this was the youth himself, who by the Magicians means enjoyed the maid, and was afterwards killed by the devil that abused him; and indeed some authentick authours mention such another History of one Phillinnion, and Machetus, and others.Phlegon Trallianus. The ad∣ventures of Amador a Painter.But let us come back to Tartary, where I learnt many other things of one Amador Baliora a Limner, with whom I met coming back from Pegu, and saw good part of his Memorials. He had been in the Indies twelve or thirteen years, and had drawn the plots of several Towns excellently well, insomuch as having escaped shipwrack, and arrived in health at Diu, when all his company was hanged; for his qualification the Gover∣nour saved his life, and he drew him many exquisite pictures, for which he gave him five hundred Croysades. He had about fifty draughts of the principal townes in the In∣dies, Persia, and Tartary; and had leave of the Vice-roy to draw the plots of as many more as he would; his design being to com∣pile them in a large volume, and present it to the King of Spain; but I understood afterwards, that returning for Europe, he died upon the sea of Scarbut, and for that his Comerade had disgusted him, he would not give him his memorials and draughts, but by Testament bequeathed them to the Captain of the ship he was in, Joseph Grogne a Portuguese, esteemed a Jew though he dissem∣bled the Christian. The Memorials was a great losse; for be∣sides the draughts, there was abundance of remarkable singula∣rities he had noted in his travailes, whereof the Captain made small account, for that he had written them in French, which he understood not, and withall in an imperfect and bad character: But the plots and draughts were excellently done, and besides the deliniation of the towns, he had drawn the inhabitants and their garments to the life. I drew some my self though rudely, which is not hard to compasse,
THE SECOND PART OF THE TRAVAILES OF VINCENT le BLANC IN AFRICA. CHAP. I. A generall Description of AFRICA. HAving left the East Indies, as I said in the former part of this work towards the end, and having taken the road of Africa Westward, the first land we came on was the Isle of S. Laurence. Before I relate the particulars either of this Isle, or other places I have seen in Africa, I conceive it not im∣proper to draw a general Description of this third part of the Universe, as well for that I have traversed it from one end to the other in three severall voyages, as to shew the errour of mo∣dern
Geographers, who in their Maps of Africa, have left out more then fifty kingdoms or Provinces of note,Maps of Africa de∣fective. as I sometime made appear to the late Mr. du Vair, then chief President of the Province, and afterwards Keeper of the Great Seale of France. And first to take it from the streight of Gibraltar, or rather from Porto Farina towards Tunes to the Cape Bona Esperanza, the greatest extent from North to South,The ex∣tent of Africa. there, is found to be seventy degrees, which are above two thousand leagues: And from Cape-Verd to Cape de Guardafu or Guardafy, from East to West there is near upon eighty Degrees, which are about two thousand five hundred leagues of Teritory, comprehending a space most prodigious, such as our Europe is a very small matter in comparison of; the greatest part lying betwixt the two Tropicks, the rest on this side and beyond. For from the kingdom of Budonell passing through the Negres, lyes Eastward the Empire of Tombut, or Tombotu; by the Arabians called Iza, containing thirteen large kingdomes watered by the famous River Nigrite or Niger, with Senega, a part of Guinee, Mel∣li,See Pliny l. 5. c. 1. of the Cavarian of Affrick. and many other Countreyes, as far as the Cape Verdi. The people here so savage, they scarce know how to speak; so sordid, they eat beast-entrailes uncleansed, and so brutish, they are more like ravenous dogs, then men of reason. The people toward the Western Coast are better civilized, in the Provinces of Gavaga, Azemay, Galata, by the Arabians called Abu∣gazai, or Zenaga and Azanaga, and on the Coast of Cape-blanc, where they drive a great trade in white salt. Senega, where the River Niger waters large territories, abounds in Crocodills and fish, with which it furnishes Budonel, Meli, Gago, Guber, Agades, Cano Gazena or Cassena, Zegzog, Zanfara, Burneo, or Borno, Gan∣gara, Gaoga, and others where it reaches. The kingdome of Gangara contains seven others, as that of Borneo nine, who to gain a single dominion, have often come to Battell, but in the end satiated with blood, were constrained to agree again. Then have you the kingdomes or Temian, Daouma, Medra, Benin, Gorbani, Gi∣afiar, or Biafar, Amas or Amasen, which towards the South fronts Damula and Vangue, lying towards the Zaire. From Senega towards the North, we find Scombaya, Musmuda, Zenera or Havia, Gumea, Guzula, Hea, Sus, with others called the Whites of Africa, who speak not Arabian, but use the tongue of Songay,Leon of Africa, lib. 1. cap. 11. as they term it; Likewise the usuall Language in Nuee∣dia through the kingdomes of Terga, Gaziga, Lemta, and Berdoa. These people have a black or gray cloth hanging from their Tur∣bith over their face, that while they eat their mouth may not be seen, which were a great incivility. There are moreover, the Countries of Guzulan, Belu, Benin, Belbee, Toga, Afar, Alates, Crin, Beni, Gumi, Muzali, Abubenam, Zuir, Cazai, Dura, Zinzaler, and others. The vast kingdome of Fezor Morocco, contains Agar or
Agal, Elebat, Eris, Geres, Elcanus, Elegazar, or Elgezair, with the kingdomes of Tnes, Bugie, Constantine, ipoli, Telensin, Tre∣mesen, Telche, Teese, &c. There is here a River which issuing from the bowels of Africa, passes through many countries, and threads Fesse where it se three hundred and threescore mill-wheels of extraordinary compasse at work, and gliding from thence under Miquin and Elcassour, throwes it self in sea at Ma∣mocre, under Arache, little distant from Arzille. Towards Tom∣but and Meli on the other side Senega lyes the wide-stretcht king∣dome of Gago, the King whereof is highly potent,Majesty of the King of Tombut. compelling in a manner adoration from his people, who how great soever speak not to him but on knees, holding in their hand a cup of sand, which they cast on their head while they prostrate before him, and retire without tergiversation. He affords not audience to his subjects, but at certain houres, morning and evening, and when they are found guilty in any crime, he chastises them with confiscation of goods, and sale of their wives and children, for slaves to strangers. The two great Rivers Niger or Gambra, and Senega, Wash a very great part of the country, overflowing in the same sort and times as Nile doth. Budomel which is in like manner a River of the same denomination, as the country it travailes through, unites it self with Gambra, and the kingdome of Melli is upon a branch of Senega, environed with dismal deserts, and impenetrable Forests. This river on the North and South, is banked with the Deserts of Gilolef and Jalofel, on the West it hath the vast Forest of Aba∣cara, and Gago on the West. Next you come to Guber, Mount Chigi, or Gigi, or Sierra de Meleguete, then Guinga or Guinee, or Guinoy. These people are all black like quenched coles. Salt in the kingdome of Gago is more precious then gold, which there abounds; as likewise Fruit and Cattle. Guber abutts Northward on Cano, Eastward on Zeger or Zegzeg, a woody and desert country, peopled with an infinite heard of beasts. In these Deserts you meet with Cassena, then drawing towards the Cape of bona Esperonza; You enter upon the king∣domes of Benin and Zanfara, under the Equatour, well inhabited, containing in length two hundred and forty leagues, where from mid-May to the middle of August, it rains for the most part, and almost constantly from noon till mid-night, as I have observed it to do in other countries under the same line. In fine, so fertile are these countries, that like those water'd by the river Nile, they yield two harvests annually, and each harvest of sufficiency to fur∣nish the people with provision for five years. Whence it comes, that storing up their corn in Cavernes under ground, which the Moores call Mattamorres, calked against moysture with a cement made of Sea-shels, —where being first dryed in the Sun, they keep it what time they please; they never think of sowing more
while they have any thing to live on, so as the land being thus laid up at rest, becomes more fertile. Their sheep breed twice a year, and often two or three lambs at a time. The Cape of Palmes is in the territory of Isma towards Guinnee, with the Castle of Mina which the Portugues built upon this coast, drawing towards the Cape de bona Esperanza, the kingdom of Manicongo extends it self from the River Val de Biraco, or da Borca, as far as the River of S. Paul. This River da Borca, other∣wise called Rio de Los Reyes, is a quarter of a dayes journey from that of Agina or Asicera. True it is, there are Maps which place it near to Biafar, though it be distant thence more then five hundred leagues; Biafar lying near to Amasan and Medra; the cause of this errour is, that they take it for the River called the Infanta of Portugal, which on the East hath the River Angra which waters the Town of Masire, or Maciera, directly over against the Isle of S. Thomas, and fronts the great kingdome of Damute, through the middle whereof pas∣ses the River of Bancara, Vibris and Vamta, with a branch of Noir, all which conjoyne in Zaire. Zaire overflowes like Nilus, and runs through many countries,Africans who adore the Sun. some Mahometan, some Pagan, who adore the Sun, and about the break of day compose themselves on some eminent place, to make their Salema, that is, their prayer; at his Rising, casting themselves covered with a large cloth a hun∣dred times to the ground, and kissing it most devoutly. Some say that these two great kingdomes Damute and Monicongo bound upon Goyame or Guiame, which by reason of their great distance is most incredible. It is rather on one side, for on the South and West side, Monicongo is divided by the River Bancara, which lyes three degrees on the other side the line, and two from Cape de Lopo, or Loubo, at his disgorging near the river Gouan, or Gabam, not far from the Cape Gonzal, and the Cape St Catherine directly opposite to Cape Primaco, something near the Torrent of Fremo, which the Natives call Gouira. The last Cape of Damute is Alma∣da or Almadias, into the Gulph whereof one branch of Zaire, and the River of Saint Helen issuing forth at the same place do cast themselves, having on the North Abidara, which joynes it self to the Cataracts; On the West the land of Jair and Gubara, on the East Cogira, where begins the Cape de Corrientes, twenty four de∣grees from the South. The Em∣pire of the Abissins.Next we come to the great Empire of the Abissins, containing more then thirty five kingdomes, insomuch as some would have it equall with all Europe. The people for the greatest part are grosse and bruitish, clothed with beasts skins; though the country abound with gold, which the Rivers wash in with their streams. The women carry their Infants at their back in Goat skins, and never go into the field without their staffe, and victualls, and cast their hanging breasts over their shoulders for their children to
suck. For the generality, they are a very wretched people, sub∣jects to the great Neguz, who Commissions certain Deputies for administration of Justice amongst them. But these Deputies finding them so voyd of reason retire them∣selves to Townes twenty or thirty leagues distant, and the others will not afford the paines to go so far; so as when any difference happens, they entreat the next Passenger to decide it, and in case he refuses, they way-lay him with bow and arrows, and by force oblige him to give sentence, which be it good or bad is observed most religiously, for recompense presenting him with some beast to carry his baggadge, most commonly with a Dent which is much like to a little Mule, only it hath a hogs taile, and little horns, which grow only skin deep, which it moves as the eares, and is much more swift: travelling on the sands his hoof will burn and cleave, so as 'tis impossible to get him wag a foot: then their only way is to make meat of him, his flesh being exceeding delicate, though without salt not long to be kept from corrupting to worms. The greatnesse of this part of the world is particularly seen in that we find within it a hundred and fifty large kingdoms,The pro∣digious greatnesse of Africa. with∣out reckoning many more of lesse quantity; which people this vast Peninsula of above two thousand leagues in length and latitude. It is water'd with many fair rivers, some whereof have their over∣flowes like the River Nile, and as beneficiall; others role before them sands of gold, besides Lakes, Marshes, and impenetrable Forests, rich gold mines, numerous heards of cattle, double har∣vests, the horrible monsters, the diversity of people; some civili∣zed, others so bruitish, they know neither religion nor articulate language: some christians of various Sects, others Mahometans, and a great part Gentiles and Idolaters, under the dominion of several Princes, of which the chiefest are the Grand Seigniour, who pos∣sesses Egypt wholly, with great part of the Coast of Barbary. The great King of the Abissins, who holds almost all the intestine Africa, with both the strands of Nile. The great Monomotapa Lord of almost all the Southerne Verges, even to the Cape de bona Esperanza. The potent King of Fez, and Marocco, and a multitude of other Kings and particular Princes, as those of Tom∣but, Ganga, Borno, who possesse many kingdomes.The divisi∣on of Afri∣ca. Of this so spacious and populous Africa, the Ancients had discovered but some few countries under the name of Egypt, Cirenaica, Numidia, Libia, Mauritania, Ethiopia, Nigrites, Garamantes, Atlantes, and very few more. The Arabians at this day make a quadrupart division of it, not∣withstanding that it is not intirely known by reason of the dismal deserts which shut up passages, and deprive us of discovery. The first begins at the Cape of Babouchi or Guardafuni, where they in∣sert many countries out of Africa, taken in by a Prince named
Tramurat, who subdued Arabia Felix, and went in Arms as far as Carmanio, to which they call Erac, and amongst these are the kingdomes of Macran and Guadel, which are contained herein. The second called Biledugerid, heretofore Numidia terminates Egypt at the Town Eleocat. The third is a vast and horrid wil∣dernesse, which stretches it self to the bounds of Lible by them called Saria, or the Desert, because it takes beginning at Nile, and ends at the Desert of Saria. The fourth begins at the king∣dome of Gonaga, and ends at the kingdome of Galata. Some make another division likewise into four parts, which are Barbary, Numidia, Libia, and Nigres. Barbary extends it self by the side of Mount Atlas upon the Mediterranean, from Egypt to Messa upon the Ocean, and comprehends the kingdomes of Moroc∣ca, Fez, Telessin, Tunes, &c. Numidia or Biledugerid hath in it Segelmesse, Bugie, Zeb, &c. Libia is Saira. And the land of Ne∣gres containes Galata, Tombut, Melli, Gaigo, Guber, Guinee, and others, as far as the Cape of bona Esperanza. CHAP. II. A Description of the Isle S. Laurence, with the conditions of the People. Read An∣drew Cor∣sals letter of this Island.WE came then on shore in the Isle of S. Laurence, or Mada∣gascar one of the largest in the world, scituate under the Tropick Capricorn between fourteen and twenty six degrees of Latitude, in circumference about eight hundred leagues, double the quantity of Candia. Upon one point thereof towards the Me∣ridian line, stands a reasonable good Town called Sancta Maria, under it is the Coast of Saint Sebastian, which compacts a Gulph full of small Islands, inhabited only by an excessive number of fowle. That point which looks towards the Cape de Corientes in Afri∣ca contains six hundred leagues or thereabouts, betwixt the river Monica, and Mount Monica, and is called Gouara or S. Augustins, almost under the Tropick. Here is a very pleasant being, the In∣habitants civill, and well clothed, yet the heat is extream, where a River stuff't with fish frames a good harbour, and the soyle is fertile in fruits. A Topo∣graphy of the Island S. LaurenceIn progresse upon this coast of Sancta Maria, we meet with a gallant Town called Antipara, between two Rivers, one of which forms the Cape Salido, so called from the saltnesse of the water, and is precisely the point of one end of the Island. Going on we
fall upon the Bay of S. Rochon de Machara near the Cape of S. Roch, which gives it name; then winding about eight miles from thence, we arrive at the Cape of Turmey, four miles downwards from the Bay Sancta Maria, directly underneath the Tropick. The country abounds in fleecelesse sheep, cattle, and fruits of all sorts. Fourty leagues from hence, ascending towards the Indies, you shall see Manalba a gentile Town, then Moropata a good Port, Manazero, Arco, Pescado de S. Antonio, and about a hundred paces from thence, the Point of Soulatar, by Mariners called the Cape of Amtar, and between them lye two Islands cal∣led the Irmanos, by the Islanders Bema. Passing on from the Cape of Natall in Africa, the Coast is well peopled, there the Point of S. Anthony is, and the fair river Om∣zel with fertile Plaines all along from the Cape of S. Vincent, to that of S. Anthony. Here it is that Christianity was first embra∣ced: likewise have you there many Townes, and many Villages, as Acousia, Nabrada, Monalega, Dolaganza, Zanabi, Zarcara, Fra∣nonzara, Manatape, Babonda, Mancaua; with very good Havens almost throughout, with rivers and shallows, where the Sea flows and ebbes, as in Europe. Mancauia abounds in all sorts of ne∣cessaries for livelihood, and the Inhabitants of a kind disposition, because that part is much frequented: On the contrary, they of Alocanza or Aleganza, where the coast abounds with fish, are fierce, and proud. The more Southern Coast towards the Cape of Am∣bar is not so populous, though throughout the Island there are sufficient, and some are savage, others civil, and some of them as well men as women, richly clad and adorned with jewels and pre∣cious stones. The Inhabitants of Secora and Ambia, are handsomely housed,Chreumain or Indian Safron. Garcias l. 1. c. 39. and well accommodated, they reach as far as Cape Salido, from whence to Cape Dental is taken the breadth of the Island. In generall, this Island abounds in all sorts of good fruits, as Oran∣ges, Lemons, and Spices, which the Inhabitants eat confectioned, but Ginger especially; Cecuma, or Corcuma, and long Peper. They likewise boast of Clove-Gillilowers, which I dare not affirm, be∣cause I know it not. Of woods they have Ebony, Sendall, red, white, and Citron colour, Brasil whereof they make their bowes and arrowes, Sicamores, and Mastick. They have moreover, Mines of excellent silver, but such is their sloth, they had rather live from hand to mouth, then work; here is gotten the best Indian Safron, and very excellent Sugar, which they order but very grossely, because they have not the perfect art to refine it; though neverthelesse they make a great Trade of it. They have Melons of incredible bignesse, yellow, red, and white, much more delicate then Provence or Spain hath. Throughout the whole Island there growes a root they call Igname, or Patata,Igname or Inhame a root. from whence the invention was brought to Spain, of taste like a
Chestnut, but more dainty, particularly when it is boyled, rather then roasted. This root is of great use to the poorer sort, which though it be produced from seed sown, yet it multiplies in a pro∣digious manner, being cut in gobbits. They have Dates of five severall kindes, and other trees which yield them excellent drinks, besides fruits to eat, and strings which they pull out to make Akpargates, or thread shooes after the Spa∣nish manner, which they call Pargas or Otayas: they have also thread from another tree called Langir, or Coatir in another lan∣guage, whereof they make cloth as fine as silk. Then from one certain nut they draw oyle sundry wayes, pres∣sing what is within, and pouring thereon hot water, which makes an oyle like that of Almunds, or else pressing a little kernell which growes within the nut, when 'tis ripe like that of a Pastique, or Pumpion; Likewise from a grain or nut which is in common Dates, they draw a very good oyle, and the strong prickles which grow about the leaves serve them for needles to few their sayles, and the apparell of the poorer sort; which needle they call Cambiza. As for the drinks they make of these trees, being drawne by distillation they are incorruptible, otherwise they grow sowre and dead in four and twenty houres; they make a certain compound of the juyce of Igname or Joucas, which in taste is like good Aqua vitae, and mixt with sugar and cinamon, is a good and kindly nourishment. The Inhabitants of this Island take thought for nothing but how to live jovially, and which is admirable, in so great a num∣ber of people, you see neither beggers nor vagabonds, as in Eu∣rope.The occu∣pations of the Inha∣bitants of Madagas∣car. They all live happily without injuring others; some con∣tent with little, others will have more, and no man wants imploy∣ment, if he will take paines. Here some give themselves to gar∣dening, others there labour in the Mines, some apply themselves to Merchandizes, others to fishing, with their boats made of neats leather, so well joyned and liquored, that water cannot pierce them. They live in perfect amity, such as if one man take fish, he parts freely with it to him that asks him. Some there are who addict themselves to hunt wild beasts, whereby they get skins of price, as Ermins, the Girafe striped with white and red, which breed in this Isle, with all sorts of wild creatures, as Elephants, Rhinoceros, which they call Couzan, and a certain sort of Asses, which are like the usual Asses, being almost all dapled gray, and white or black, and bay; they will suffer you to come close to them, but if you touch them, though never so gently, they spring away with most stupendious leaps. Birds of Paradice.There are in this Island six kingdoms, the Kings whereof delight much in field-sports, as Hawks, for the Hare, and for the Par∣tridge,
which with them are called Gits, and others for fishing. Here are likewise the birds of Paradise, which live on Muschroms, and fragrant flowers; some call them Lapi, others Mie: The Ri∣vers feed Tortoises to a wonderful bignesse, excellent meat, and very fat, but are so laxative, they cause even Disenterias, as it hap∣pened to the Sieur Amador and his company, of whom we made mention in the first part. We finde there likewise Crocodils,Croco∣dils, and the man∣ner how to take them. in the world again none so cruell and bloody, which come sometimes above a mile on land to feed on beasts, which they devoure at a morsell. They are ta∣taken with hooks fasten'd to a strong twisted cord made of canes, by them called Restant, laying some raschal sheep or goat for a bait, which the Crocodile swallows at a bit, and so is caught. 'Tis almost incredible, what hideous cries, groans, and tears, this creature sends forth, finding himself taken; as if foreseeing, he were now to be the fishers diet, who feast it merrily, the flesh being white, in taste like Capon, and of an excellent favour, but in Lent 'tis not to be eaten. For which reason some have thought Amber gris to come from this creature, though there is more likelihood that it comes from the bottome of the Sea, and not from a fish as we said elsewhere. To conclude, the Island is so plentiful of cattle, that they have often given a fat sheep for a Counter, or a leafe of paper; and a Marriner told me for truth, that being at the point of Cape Salido, to take in fresh water; an inhabitant of the Town of Antipara, gave him four Cowes for a scurvie piece of leather, he was about to throw into the Sea with his dead Master. I remember Sieur Amador told me, how that passing through this Island, Alitadir King of Janiharou sent for him to have a piece of Scarlet, and that being upon a River imbarked with a Mahometan, they sayled two dayes compleat from the mouth of the River; then landed, where were ready for them two Chariots drawn by four bufflers a piece, which brought them to the King. This River is called Janiharou from the name of the chiefe Town, where they have extream heats in the month of February,Janiharou a Town and River. which is their Summer. It takes name from a fair fountain called Maraca Jenehar, that is, the fountain of Janiharon, then joyning with another called Marouca, it divides into two large streames, the one whereof presents it self directly face to face with Natal on the Ethiopian Coast; the other swelled with that of Macarahou, falls down to twenty two degrees near the coast — of S. Augustine, which is in twenty three. There we suffered such vio∣lent heat, that each moment we were forced to go into the river or sea for refreshment. These people are of Olive hue, their humour docile enough, The women are kind and courteous; handsomely clad in Mantles; of amiable complexion, and take much delight in dancing to the
musick of certain Cimbals, which as they say they learnt from the Isles of Comore, or the Isles of Theives, not far from thence, Ethiopia lying betwixt them in twelve degrees and a halfe, and 200. miles from Mozombique.Isles of Theives. Of these Isles of Cemore there are five principal, which are of reasonable greatnesse, besides many small ones; al∣most all inhabited, whereof the most considerable is Malaquil. As for the Edifice in the Isles of S. Laurence, their houses are co∣vered with the leaves of Coco tree,The Coco tree. whence they produce their prin∣cipal sustenance; as the people of the Maladines doe, and have great store, because this tree furnishes them with all necessaries, though here they are not so good, as with the Maladines. They have moreover another root called Joguia, which being dried yields flower, whereof they make a very delicate pudding, mingling it with milk, with sugar, or honey, and with the yelks of egs.The root Joguia. They eat also, as likewise throughout all India, bats of ex∣traordinary greatness, and very good taste. They who dwell along the Sea coast, apply themselves chiefly to fishing, making their houses of turfs — dried at the Sun, or of Date leaves, aptly tempered with stone and morter, and some again for cover∣ings, use the shells of large Tortoises, which live both on land and water like Crocodiles. CHAP. III. The Customes of the Inhabitants of Belugara, or Monopotapa. Salubrious windes venting from a Cave. AT our departure from the Isle of S. Laurence, we steer'd our course towards the Cape of bona Esperanza, and in a short space arrived at the Arme del Spiritu Sancto, a renowned river which descends from high Ethiopia, and thence in two dayes we reacht to Belugara,Belugara. a Town scituated upon the river of S. Lucie in the kingdome of Monopotapa, below Cephala in five degrees beyond the Tropick Capricorne, upon the side of the Mountain Bezula which stands in the middle. Winter is there in the months of June, July, August. The country is fertile, and abounding with game for Chase. As we stay'd by the way to re∣fresh our selves at a fountain, and make some repast, The Sieur de la Courbe, of whom I made mention in the first part, went on hunting, where he took some Hares, and many white Par∣tridges, which did us much courtesy. A league or thereabouts from the Town is a Cave, where during the violence of the heat the windes are very frequent, as in the Monsons of the East, and the Tournacaui of Potozzi, or Peron. And to make free passage
for this anniversary gale, the inhabitants have slit the Mountain,Windes which pre∣serve bo∣dies incor∣ruptible. through which it blowes to the very Town, refreshing it ex∣ceedingly, and purifies bodies in such sort, that it renders them in a manner incorruptible. For which reason the Belugari∣ans and they of Zenzana, and Albigara burying their dead in this Cavern, the winde dries them and preserves them from cor∣ruption, as I noted in another place of another Mountain,Lib. 11. c. 2. and like windes blowing in the East Indies. The People are either Idolaters or Mahometans. The greatest part at the rising of the Sun, prostrate themselves many times on the ground, muttering between their teeth I know not what prayers; and all, as well Moores as Gentiles,Christians in Blu∣gara. are given to these ceremonies. You have there men both white and black, well ci∣vilized and courteous, of handsome carriage and addresse; there are amongst them some who have received documents of Christi∣anity; for one of them observing one of ours reading in a Prim∣mer, had a curiosity to see what it was, where perceiving a Crosse, he kissed it with tears, requiring of Captain Inart if there were a Priest in our company, and being brought to one called Chaousandre, who afterwards became a Capchin, he confessed to him, and told us that he had formerly travailed three hundred leagues to finde one to confesse to, but at that time he was not in capacity for voyages of that length being guide of a family; that he had but one single wife, though fully as perverse as she was faire, and deprived of the light of Religion, as the rest of his houshold were. He feasted us at his home with great kindenesse, and we presented him with a Roman Primmer, which he held in high esteem, for the pictures onely; for our characters were unknown to him, nor did he understand our language. He bestowed upon us a Girafe and a sheep all white, but the head, which was black, as they are all in that countrey. For Girafes, they are docile beasts, white and spotted with red, their fore-feet very short in proportion to the hinder, with a Deers head, and very short horns, there is great store of them in the land of Cefala.
CHAP. IV. The Country of Monbaze, Melinde, and Quiloa: the nature of the Inhabitants, and the respect they bear their PRINCE. HAving left Bulgara, we run all along that stretched forth coast of Ethiope, where we visited Melindo, Monbaze, Quiloa, Mozambique, Cefala, and other Townes, for truck of our commo∣dities. The country of Monbaze takes name from a Town and Island so called, which on the East hath the vast Indian sea, on the North Melinde, on the South Quiloa, and Westward the spacious lake of Zaflan, and the kingdome of Xoa belonging to the King of Abyssins. Heretofore this kingdome was subject to a great Prince styled the King of Monemuge, neighbouring to Ethiope, Mo∣natapa,The town of Mon∣baze. and Mozambique. As for Monbaze 'tis a Town about the rate of Monpellier, built almost after the Italian model: the people are of Olive colour, affable, courteous, and well apparelled, speci∣ally the women, who delight in rich apparel. There is a good Sea-port, strong, and much frequented by the Indians, who drive a great trade in spices, drugges, and precious stones, which much enriches the place, and brings a great con∣flux of people from Zanzbar, Penda, Agair, and other parts of Africa. There is gold, silver, precious stones, and Ivory in great quantity. The country abounds in good fruit of all sorts, parti∣cularly in Citrons and Oranges of prodigious bignesse, and of ex∣cellent taste, whereof the rind is sweet, and good to eat. There are likewise Peaches without stones, but of little savour, Pomegranates exceeding large; and above all, excellent waters, fresh and light, herein surpassing Quiloa, which is defective. The People are of a sweet disposition, contrary to other Mari∣time places, where the natives are ordinarily mutinous, and liti∣gious. We had there an Host called Francesco Cosmel, of comple∣xion between black and white, as he were born of a Father black, and a Mother white, he gave us testimonies of a generous soule, and seemed to be of good extraction. He lodged us in the chief chamber of the house hanged with Matte, both walls and floore, with abundance of well-wrought cushions, with an artificial foun∣tain on one side which water'd little trees, where was a whole flight of birds of Paradise male and female, which contrary to the com∣mon opinion had feet, as I said elsewhere; whereupon I shall relate a pleasant passage which befell us. My companion resolving to go
to a jolly town not far thence to put off some Safron which he had, was taken with an extreme cholick, which made him go to stool oftner then he would, in our chamber there was a little Cistern full of pure water, he finding himself pressed, and conceiving this Ci∣stern to be a place of purpose for discharge, seats himself on it.A merry passage, see the like story in the first part. By misfortune there was a young maid washing clothes, who finding this nasty showre fall upon her, began to cry out, and I that knew what the matter was, immediately went out; pretend∣ing I had something to buy; so as my companion, who suspected nothing, was amazed, when he saw two slaves fall upon him with cudgels, who cured his disease with a new sort of Cataplasme. Returning up again I saw this lucky adventure, and my com∣panion as well as he could defending himself. In fine, after many excuses, the matter was taken up, by mediation of twenty seven Miticales, each being in value four French Livers; which my companion was forced to pay for mundifying the Cistern. True it is he was cured of his cholick, but so ashamed of the accident, he had not confidence to suppe with us. The Territory of Monbaze is of no great extent, confining on one side on the Town of Orgaba, or Orgabea seated on the river Onchir, which runs to powre it self into Nile near Mount Amara, where the kingdome of Melinde begins, having Amara on the North, and Monbaze on the East. The common diet of the coun∣try is honey and rice, their drink Areta, Fatigar, and Belinganze, which they keep in great Oxe hornes, cut in severall figures, that they may be the more useful. This sort of vessel is much used in the Ethiopian Court, as well for their capacity, as their not being liable to break, especi∣ally with the Monbazians, who neverthelesse will make no use of any but of a beast that had his throat cut, deriving this custome from the Jews. In their traffick with Merchants they apply charms to force them to their intent, a thing I never observed in any other nation.The man∣ner how they re∣ceive Em∣bassadors. When notice comes that some neighbour Prince hath sent Em∣bassadours to their King upon affaires of importance, they doe then much more. They take a wilde goat by them called Ma∣chorati, and having laid some charmes upon it, mounted upon his Elephant, the Prince passes three times over him with most horrible cries and imprecations, which their Labis or Priests pro∣nounce against their Singiscan or Demon: Then having made three cries more in manner of prayer, they require to know if this Embassadour comes for Peace or Warre, if it be answered for Peace, they march before him with abundance of perfumes, and signes of joy; and being arrived at the Town, the perfumes are cast into the water, to shew that all this was only to do him honour, and to endear him. But if it be for Warre, they testify the plain contrary.
I have heard since my return, that the town and Port of Mon∣baze is by the Portugals taken and demolished. Melinde Town and Kingdom.For a draught of Melinde, which is a kingdom lying above Monbaze, and subject to the same King, the Capitall Town of the same name is scituate on the sea in two degrees and a halfe be∣yond the Line, the Port is at some distance, by reason that on the water side 'tis pester'd with many craggy rocks, which render the landing dangerous.Melons of excellency, The country abounds in all sorts of Fruits and Viands, bread excepted; instead whereof they make use of Pa∣rates, which are both good and wholesom. They have likewise variety of flesh which they roast and dresse in several manners, the fruits excell, and chiefly the Melons, called there Dormous, admi∣rable in taste, which they eat not but in Summer, because they are excessive cooling, and as it were freeze the stomack, being neverthelesse not ill of digestion, or causing chollicks; what quantity soever one eats. They are for the most part Idolaters, except some Mahometans, who dissemble their Religion; for which cause, the Prince hath but a sinister look for them. This Prince hath a high veneration from his people, who subjugate their shoulders for his support, burn perfumes to him when he ap∣peares in publick, as they do likewise for all Princes or Potentates who come to visit them. But indeed this Prince is most laudable in this particular, that he himself will take cognizance of what∣soever is acted by his Governours and Magistrates, and if any one impleads other before him, it behoves him on the price of his head, to be assured of the fact. When a complaint is made to him, immediately he sends for the party accused: If he be a Noble man, when he arrives at the Palace gate,The Prince of Mlinde a gave Justiciar. he gives notice to the Officers of his presencce, by the sound of a Cornet, who cause him to ascend single before the Prince, who with great patience hears hoth parties in presence of his Council. If oth are found culpable, the inferiour is remitted to the ordinary Justice, who punisheth him with stripes of cudgell, the Grandee is punished by fine: But if the Noble-man prove only guilty, the King leads him to his chamber, where being dis∣robed, prostrate on the ground, craving pardon, he receives from the Kings own hand certain stripes with a cudgell, more or fewer, in proportion to the crime and services he hath done. Which done he revests, kisses the Kings feet, and with all humility thanks him for the favour received. Then without further shew of any thing attends the King to his Hall, who in presence of all the Court, gives him a dismission, and recommends o him administra∣tion of Justice to his people, causes him to be accompanied out of town with ordinary ceremony, so as what hath passed, is not perceived by any, and this Grandee returns as well content, as if he had received a rich treasure. The charges of suit are defrayed out of the Kings Coffers, or if he please by the
criminall, without the knowledge of any one. When as this King who by his subjects is esteemed a Saint, makes a progresse into the Country, he is mounted on a horse richly trapp'd, and going out of his Palace passes over a new kill'd heifer, where the people raise a loud outcry, and instantly go view the entrails of the beast, to judge by sorcery if this voyage shall be suc∣cesseful, or no. When he makes entrance into any town, all the fairest Ladies walk before him with censers of perfumes burning in their hands, some singing his encomiums, others melodiously playing on Basons, with fine nods, endeavouring to render them∣selves as complaisant as possibly they can. To conclude, their territories confine upon the country of Zan∣gueliac and Ethiopia. Aquiloa is a Kingdome with an Isle and a Town of the same appellation, where the Portugals have a Fort, the Governour whereof drives a main trade by means of the ves∣sels he sends for the Indies. The King of Quiloa was Lord here∣tofore of Mozambique. All these are countries of Zanguebar, or Zanzibar, which com∣prehends that large extent of ground which lyes between the Oriental and Occidental seas, of the people called Cafres. Zan∣zibar, properly speaking, is an Island which faces directly Mon∣baze, but the country I intend to speak of is Zanguebar, named so by the Arabians, because in their language, this word Zangue sig∣nifies black, and this country for the greatest part is inhabited by Blacks. Mark Pol esteems it an Island of above a thousand leagues in circuit, being water'd with many rivers, making as it were an Island. Concerning the Town of Quiloa 'twas built,Quiloa, Zanguefar, Zanzebar. as Tradition sayes, above six hundred years past by one Hali son of Hocen King of Siras in Persia, who came to live there. Women here go ex∣ceeding well arrayed, richly adorned with Jewels and Ivory bracelets quaintly wrought, which upon death of husband and al∣lies, they break in signe of sorrow, as the men forbear to eat and shave their hair, as I before recounted of the East Indies. CHAP. V. Of Mozambique, the nature of the Inhabitants. Cefala. Mines of gold in Ophir. Belugara. HAving passed by Viada, where the people for the best part dwell upon the river Dumes or Humes,The river Humes. since the vast inunda∣tion of this and other rivers in the country, upon the day of Saint Abiblicane, we entered the kingdome of Mozambique; this River runs towards the East, passing by the foot of the Mountain Zet,
out of which issues one of the heads of Nile, the other from the Mount Betzoan, which ancients called the Mountains of the Moon streaming towards the points Maestro and Tramontanus. The branch which runs Southward, is divided not far from the head by a rock into two streams, the one watering the land of Sefala, the other running to disgorge it self in the sea right over against the Isle of Saint Laurence. Mozam∣bique.Mozambique is a small Island hard upon the firm land, with a Haven and a Fort of the Portugals within fifteen degrees of the Line. 'Twas subject to the King of Quiloa, till the Portugals be∣came Masters, where now in their voyages from Portugal to the Indies is one of their securest harbours to rest and refresh them∣selves. The greatest part of the Inhabitants, who are all Blacks, professe Mahometisme, the rest Idolatry. They upon the firm land are absolute brutes, going stark naked, their privities only covered with a cotten cloth. Adorers of the Sun, like them of Sephala speaking the same language as they; their traffick is Gold, Ivory, and Ebony; their chief food the flesh of Elephants. They delight much to parget their bodies with a reddish earth, perswading themselves that so dawb'd, the world shewes not finer men. The better sort paint themselves with a certain Folliage, which to make azure, they use Indico and other compounds. There are amongst them who bore their lips like the Americans, enchasing some delicate stone. Salomons gold.Some say this county in times past depended upon Ethiopia, and and 'twas hither Salomon sent his Fleets for gold, and that the Queen of Saba stil'd her self likewise Queen of Mozambique and Melindo; moreover that their speech resembles in some sort that of Senega. Though to speak truth, 'tis more likelihood Salomon fetched his gold from the mines of Sefala, which are not farre thence, or may be from the East Indies. Zinguebar.Touching the country of Cefala, or Sefala and Zinguebar, which takes up in a sort the whole breadth of that end of Africa, even to the Cape of Bona Esperanza, which coast is inhabited with Blacks, called Cafares, or Cafres, they appertain to the great Em∣pire of Monomotapa, of which we are to speak presently. In particular for what concerns Zinguebar, or Zanzibar, which ancients called Agezymba, and which they placed above the high and interiour Ethiopia, 'tis as it were an Island environed with seas, and rivers, 'tis a plentifull country of all kinds of commodi∣ties for livelihood. The town of the same appellation in twenty four degrees and a half, hath a good Port well frequented upon a lake, excel∣lently well built, of stone, lime and sand, after the manner of the Italian Towns, embellished with pleasant gardens, entirely be∣guirt with water, as Meroc is, but there is no drink but the draw-well. The Princes Palace seems very lofty, which defends the
mouth of the haven, before which there is a convenient place for calking vessels. 'Tis scituate in the best part of Monomotapa, and fronts Eastward with the Province of Simen or Simis, which joynes with the land of Melinde. The Inhabitants are well civi∣lized, and 'tis thought this is the same Monomotapa which lies up∣on the river of the Holy Ghost, where all the houses are flat roof∣ed — as they are at Naples, and the Palace royall like that at Calicut, there is not one but hath his Alfongi, which is a boat of one peice. The Presterian or Natahachi,Abassins. and Abassi hath often attempted to take in this country, but failed, only he plun∣dered it, taking away a number of slaves to make Christi∣ans of his kinde. Amongst his other warres he took the Region of Canfild, which Geographers place where they should not. This country stretches very far even to the lake of Zaflan,The Isle Zunan. which makes the faire Island of Zunan or Zanan, near which is Garga, or Gorga, the capitall town of the countrey, beauti∣fied with pleasant gardens, and abounding in fowle and cat∣tle, rice, and other commodities for livelihood. This lake of Zaftan is as 'twere a wide and vast sea of sweet water;The lake Zaflan. lying close upon the great Province of Gazasele, which confines upon Cafates, Cara, Esaui, Noua, Ambian, all which meet at Agag, scituate between the two Cataracts called by the In∣habitants Zembra, with the entire kingdome of Aygamar. As to Cofala, 'tis likewise a reasonable large country, rich and fertile at least from the lake Gourantes to the Cuama: for the rest of the Coast,Magnice a river. from the River Magnice to the Cape, is but barren. This Magnice, or the River de Espiri∣tu Sancto, as the Portugalls call it, rises from one of the lakes whence Nile takes its Origine, called Zembra; or as others will have it more probably from Zachaf, and cros∣sing the mountaines of the Moon, and the great Empire of Monomotapa, deliver themselves in the Meridian Sea, in twenty three degrees and a halfe forth of the same lake Cuama or Couesme takes his birth, which disgorges it selfe at seven mouthes, a little above the Cape of Cou∣rantes, in sort that this kingdome of Sefala is invironed with two great Rivers, which towards Mid-August make exceeding inundations, and fatten the soyle, as Nile, by its overflowes, fertilizes the countries of Egypt, Beni∣ermi; Nubie, Tamatas, Soba, Bugamidei, Goyame, and others. These two rivers then launch out of the lake Zaire and Zembre or Goyame as some think, and moderne writers say,Zaire and Zembre. from a lake called Zuman, or Zuama, or Sachaf, as two great branches, one whereof which is Magnice, runnes into the sea, as at a place by the Portugalls called Punca, or Labras
del Spiritu sancto. The other is called Fuama, that is, faint, be∣cause it failes at threescore and fifteene miles from Cefala, and is lost in the sand, whence it rises again afterwards. The large lake of Zembre bears great vessels, and some re∣port they have sailed upon it above two hundred and fifty leagues. It receives other rivers, as the Paname sixty leagues be∣neath Cefala, others about twenty leagues, as the Libia Mariancia, called by the Abissins Eshusula and Sancola, both great inundati∣ons, laying the whole country under water, and in Marshes of difficult passage. Rivers in Suama.The soyle of Cefala is exceeding rich in gold, and the river Cu∣ama brings it ready fn'd in small threads which are found in the sand, so as this river passes through mines of gold, for which reason the Portugals by permission of a Mahometan Prince who rules the Country, have here built a Fort to facilitate their nego∣tiation with the Inhabitants. Before they arrived here, some Mahometans of Quiloa and Magadoxo built the town of Sefala in one of the Islands made by Geuesme,Divers ri∣vers in Couama. this river augmented by Paname which takes birth near the town Amara, and swelled by Laanga, who leads with it the Arrouia, and joyns with Monoua at the Ruenia, and the Inedita called Iradi by the Ethiopians, which together water many countries, making vast inundations and Mar∣shes, which render the land so dangerous to passe, that there needs well experienc'd guides, and to make Mount Masima, by the na∣tives called Manica, the way to Ethiopia, there are many fair Pro∣vinces,Goldmines. rich in ore of gold and silver. They term the gold mine Manica, the country Matuca or Mataca, and those which get the gold Bothones. There is another an exceeding rich one in the Province of Torta or Toroa, and in that of Gag or Agag one of silver, as there is also at Bocaua or Batua, Boror, Tacouir, and other places, and the soyle is universally very fertile; as likewise at Potozzy and Perou. To avoid these immense Marshes, as I said, one is forced to take the way of Mount Manica, bending towards Ambea, and Sabaim, where at this day are seen huge ruines of ancient structures, which re∣semble the greatnesse and magnificence of those of the an∣cient Romanes, chiefly in the kingdomes Batua and To∣roa, where are the most ancient mines of gold in Afri∣ca.Alvarez testifies, that in the mines of Chaxumo, there are stones of 64 fa∣thoms, six in breadth, and three height. There you finde likewise store of stones of exces∣sive bulke so excellently pollished, they never lose their lu∣stre, fixed together without Cement, so fine, it is not per∣ceivable. In like manner we finde there Remainders of walls of above twenty five handfulls thick, with certain hieroglyphick cha∣racters engraved, not to be read, as the like is observed in Per∣sia among the ruines of the town Persepolis. Many do conceive 'twas from hence Salomon fetcht his gold, as I said elsewhere;
and these great ruines to have been of that Ages building, and by the same King. Howsoever we took not this road by the Mountain, for being come from the Cape Gourantes, with a Portugall Captain called Baccheo, a fiery and insolent person, with whom we had contract∣ed for our passage, with design to come for Spain, by the Cape of Bona Esperanza, and along the coast of Africa, we were con∣strained to go on shore at Agoas de san Biasio, by some called the coast of S. Rafuel, to avoid the tyranny of this Captain.The au∣thor changes the design of his first voyage. 'Tis scarce credible what discommodities one suffers in these Portugal vessels; for though he shift his clothes and linnen a hundred times the day, he is eaten up with lice; have you need but of a glasse of water, you must make insupportable submissions to a very boy, contest every evening for your lodging, run every hour to the drudgery of the ship, and depend on a Captain more cruell then a Comet; finding my self in this distresse, I resolved to disbark at what rate soever, and I took my time when I saw them putting some Hogs-heads in boat, to put in a little chest of mine also co∣vered with red leather, and locked, pretending I went to fell some commodities. Being now on land, I followed a path towards a vil∣lage called Git Bulgara with my mantle on my shoulders where meeting by the way with a country-man, who understood me not, because I spoke Indian, he only apprehended some Arabian words, and made signes to me, that at the next village I should be understood, and helped me himself to carry my Baggadge. Being come to a Fishers house we found him mending his nets, who at first accost cryed to me, Afartas, as to bid me I should not be afraid. I took him by his countenance to be an honest man, he had many children, and amongst the rest two tall girles, who gazed upon me with wonder at the strangenesse of my habit, which was Persian, with long Bases, a Cassock, and a vest like a Honger-line over all of a neat stuffe: I opened my chest, and took out some bracelets made of Venetian Beads of several colours, wherewith I presented them,The cour∣tesie of sa∣vages. which they accepted with much content, even ravished with the prettinesse of these little toyes of glasse: but the Father restored them to me again, and rebuked them sharply for having taken them, conceiving them to be pre∣cious stones, till with entreaties I prevailed with him to take them, and gave them back to his daughters, who had never be∣fore seen themselves so richly deck'd. This good man having hidden my chest, and given me notice by signes that I should not speak a word of it to any one, lest it should be enquired after, cau∣sed a Moor to be brought to me, who had on his arme a Crosse, by whom I understood he had been at Tunis, and, what was more content to me, told me I might travell throughout Africa as far as Cair and Alexandria, going from town to town, and from dwelling to dwelling, with security.
The Abif∣sins im∣print a Crosse on their flesh.I had a curiosity to know why he bore that crosse upon his arme, he replyed, his Father lived at Magadeli, and was a Maho∣metan, but that he and the rest to exempt themselves from pay∣ing tribute to the Ngus, imprinted this mark, that they might be known for Christians. In the mean while my courteous Host killed a kid, and made ready plenty of fish to entertain me, adding that, though I should stay a twelve moneth entire in his house, he could not make satisfaction for the present I had given his daugh∣ters, who would get husbands much the sooner. And really all the neighbours near at hand flocked to behold and admire them with these splendid bracelets, and christall pendants red and gar∣nisht with guilt, which I hung at their ears when we rose from ta∣ble, notwithstanding their fathers opposition, who was ashamed and confounded at my prodigality. Some three houres after, or thereabout, the boat belonging to our ship came to shore, where I presently saw my Comrades arrive, who had been at sharp words with the Captain, for that he permitted me to leave the ship, and importunely entreated me to return, rather then to expose my self single to the hazard of being devoured by wild beasts, till be∣ing satisfied by the Moore, that we might securely travel through the midst of Africa, they took my design themselves, and resol∣ved to go strait to Alexandria by the River Cuame, which is a branch of Zaire as I said before; which falls very gently; and the sea at full tide comes in, and goes above twenty five leagues up∣ward; upon this design we bought two Almadies, wherein we stowed our carriage, Sieur de la Courbe, Cassis my companion and I, with our Moore, and one Ismaro who came aboard with us at the Cape of Courantes to go for Lisbon, we took our leave of our Hoste, whose name was Adilau, and going along up the Ri∣ver, we arrived the first evening at a Town called Alzizir, the Lord whereof, whom we presented with a paire of knives, treated us with much humanity, and having feasted us with good cheer, lodged us upon cotton quilts. On the morrow we took the tyde, and in our Almadies going up the river, he met two men, one of which spake Arabian to us, which was much comfort to us, he embarked with us, promising to wait on us three Moones, that is, three moneths for a Capos which I gave him. At night we landed at Aiasita, a convenient town, but meanly built, whose situation my companion took with his Astrolabe, and found it distant from the Line twenty four de∣grees. Being arrived, although there were no danger for the rest of our journey, we thought best to go together to Belugara, to visit the Lord of the place, and get a passe from him. He was very glad to see us, and much the more for a present we made him of a little neat basket, a diverse coloured glasse, and a pair of knives, which he so highly esteemed, that he caused us to dine at his own table, and gave us a piece of Parchment of Azure co∣lour,
about the bignesse of a card for play, with a writing for our passage; gave us a favour two Gazells, and two Pea-Birds, and caused four small Elephants be made ready to carry us to our Barks, which lay some two leagues from thence, and he himself bore us company for a quarter of a league, mounted on a another little Elephant decently trapped with cotton cloth of several co∣lours. The rest of the day we traveld not far by reason the tide was spent, as also for that we went a shooting in the woods with our Guns, where we found such abundance of white rabbets, that they were troublesome, and great store of tame Partridges, and went through no other then onely the town called Langada, be∣longing to the Prince of Atasinga. The Candi came himself to visit us, inviting us to stay that night there, but in respect the day was far spent, we held on our way, and arrived something late at a town called Suguelane, subject to the Subacchi,Suguelane. whither we sent one of our men before to take a lodging for us. On a sudden be∣hold a company of young girles, who came to us with Pipes, and Tabors, made of the bark of a tree of one entire piece, drawn over with certain fruit, which sound much like Cimballs, dance∣ing and tripping to the musick of these instruments. Sieur de la Courbe gave them a piece of money, which on one side had cer∣tain characters, on the other a crown'd head, with a kind of Nose∣gay in the form of a Pyramid, with a great many flowers round about. They beheld this piece with much curiosity, and one of them holding it aloft to the view of the party, the rest fell to dancing after their fashion, till such time as perceiving a troop of about fifty men, wrapt in woollen cloth, which covered their whole bodies, we made a soft retreat to our Barks. Then we saw in the middle of the company one raised above the rest, borne on a Palanquin, having on his head a Miter, enriched with stones, who being come near our boates, descended, and having said Afra∣res, which signifies come nigh, entered affably into one of our Barks, and saluted us with the word Ergai, which is, welcome. The Sieur de la Courbe understanding this to be the Lord of Su∣guelane, kissed his hand, and by an Interpreter delivered him the occasion and design of our voyage. This whole night was divi∣ded into good chear, and dancing with the wives of this Poten∣tate, the Principall of whom, The Sieur de la Courbe presented with a chain of various colour'd glasse beads, which caus'd as much wonder and envie in the other Ladies, as contentment in the Prince, who reciprocally gave him a cup of Euate, filled with Pe∣pitaian gold, which he forced upon our country-man by the strength of entreaties, but in retribution, out of the civility natu∣rall to his country, he presented a guilt Cimeterre with hangers of China work. I likewise presented the Ladies with some rare pendants of red Pausell christall, and very glittering, who imme∣diately cast off their upper garments, and fell to dancing.
To conclude, having seen Jerma, and Simbada, a great and huge Town erected in the water, where is the right country of Agisim∣ba,agisimba. staid fifteen dayes at Rifa, where we became known to the Chanubi or Governour, who gave us good instructions for our journey, and brought us better then half the way to Cheticoura in a boat of his; The Sieur de Courbe, and I, who had a particular curiosity to see the country, resolved there to go render a defe∣rence to the great Taboqui or Monomotapa, who was at his capital Town of Zanguebar or Monopotapa, who bestowed many indulge∣ments on us while we staid, our boats being left with the rest of our company, who had no such curiosity, with order to meet all to∣gether at a certain place called Calboute, without parting any more thenceforward. I cannot give a particular account of the distance of places, I may be excused by reason of the deviations and turnings we were forced to make, returning sometimes the same way we came: notwithstanding I shall speak precisely enough of what concerns Monopotapa. CHAP. VI. Of Monopotapa, the Princes estates, and Government, his way of living, and the singularity of his Country. Monopota∣pa.THis Prince is by some called the Benemotapa or Benemataxa, and by the native people the Grand Tahaqui, he possesses so large an Empire, that 'tis given for a thousand leagues in circuit, invironed with seas and great Rivers, which render it inaccessable and inexpugnable; for on the North it hath the vast lake Zembré or Zembaré, on the South the Cape of Bona Esperanza, and on the other sides the Eastern and Western seas. Towards the Siroch it stretches it self as far as the Mountaines of Manice where the king∣dome of Toroca or Toroa takes beginning, whereof the principal town is Zenebra, next is Tatuca rich in gold, silver, and ivory. Then there are the kingdomes of Agag and Boro, which on the Blacks side face towards the Beche, on the West towards Tacui, which goes as far as Mozambique. Likewise within this Empire the Province of Butua lyes, as also that of Simbage or Simbatni, plentiful in Ivory,Mines of salt. by reason of the great multitude of Elephants, in salt of the rock whence good part of Africa is furnished, though at dear rates in some places; by reason of the great di∣stance and difficulty of the roads. These people for the greatest part are Idolaters, stiling their chief God Maziri, the maker of all things; others call him Atuno.
In great reverence they have likewise a Virgin by name Peru, and have Monasteries where live recluse maids; moreover, they are grand magicians, as they are through the whole country of Guy∣nee. There came a certain one who reported he had passed the kingdomes of Candabar, Couzani, Transiani, Ʋsbeque, and many other countries of the East, as China, San, Pegu, Bengale, Besnagari, Calicut, and the wide sea of Alondon, to have runne through all the dominions of Preste John, to have been in the floods of the Torrid without wetting himselfe, clothed with a meer Sattin, walking upon the clouds, to have passed the Zember upon the back of a devill, and to have arrived in the kingdome of Sahama, to finde the Monopotapa to declare his Religion to him, having in few dayes gone thirteen thousand leagues. He added far more, the particular satisfaction he received after so long a travell, in that the Prince caused four Christians their hateful enemies to be massacred, and engaged in honour of their God to pray at the Temple five times the day, under pain of the scourge. The King building a faith in this sorcerer, made an ordinance that all should yield obedience to this Mulila and his associates, whom they named the Jubacumba. For the first time the people presented themselves at their ce∣remonies, but being absent the second time, these impostor Priests, coming forth, fell upon them with scourges made of Elephants hyde, and beat them most rudely, persevering in this harsh way of treatment, till on a day a young Portugues, called Francisco Sanche, who lived in the Fort of Safala, being come to the town for trade, and to visit a Mistresse he had, a Merchants daughter, received some lashes in the street from these magicians, whereupon being sensible of his injury, lets flye his cimeterre at one of them, and lays him dead on the ground, without much trouble, confiding in the Kings favour, to whom he had brought a present from the Go∣vernour of the Fort Henrique Mendez, and they joyning in their defence, he killed four, and wounded four more, then mounted on horse, and went safe off. The King being told of it fell into laughter, and praised the Portugues for his courage, which ingratiated him with his Mistris; so as she after married him. True it is, this Prince had not long before put some Jesuits to death, but he made them ample satisfaction, by putting to death all the Mahometans, who gave him such councell, whereupon the Fathers of Cochin being advertised of it, sent others presently, who declared to the King the benefit they were to all mankind, in instruction and salvation of souls, and gain'd so highly upon his grace, that besides other particular favours which he did them, he granted free liberty to his people to be converted, and em∣brace the Christian faith. So it is that Christian faith was intro∣duced by the fathers of the society, where to this day 'tis pre∣served
and practised by them and the Dominicans, and though the Prince be an Idolater, he is a well-wisher to the Christians. He holds a stately gravity, allowing audience to none but on the knee, nor tergiversation in retiring. No man hath accesse but up∣on extreme submissions, and prostrating himself on the ground on six paces distance, the Princes answers are briefe. He delights at be decked with chains and stones as women are, bestowes little, and loves to be presented with all curiosities possible. He keeps a great Pack or Seraglio of wives, and some say he hath a guard of armed Ladies, like Amazons, and a number of fierce great dogges. Madrogan the chief town of Monopo∣tapa.The capitall town where he keeps his Court is called Madro∣gan, where he hath a stately Palace; the houses are good build∣ing, the materialls are wood and loome, which being well temper∣ed and whitened over, are sufficiently gracefull and inhabitable. The King must not go robed, but after the manner of his Ance∣stors; that is, a Cassock of his own country silk, for stuffes brought from forrain parts he wears not for fear of poyson, over this a large and long scarfe, like a womans mantle, which comes betwixt his legs, and is brought up to be tucked under his girdle, with a rich handcherchief over his shoulders, he hath buskins embroydered with gold, and rich carkanets on his neck, with a band about his hat interwoven with big pearles, rubies, and emeralds. He makes great use of Elephants, and of a beast called an Alsinge, seldome ridden on, which resembles a hart, never using horses, for that rhere are so few. What is most remarkable in this place is, that there is no sort of prison, the reason, because all matters of justice are finally con∣cluded upon the place. Here as in other parts 'tis a crime capi∣tall, to deflowre a maid before her years of maturity, because she ought to be capable of bearing children. The Kings wives are most richly and artificially attired, who live separate in several apartements, without any knowledge of one another, unlesse when through speciall grace he convokes them. 'Tis pain of death for him that but goes about the lodge∣ings of these Ladies. Many Colledges likewise where youth is instructed in vertue. The Ladies of quality held it an honour to dresse the Princes meat, and wait by turnes, taking charge of his diet at meals, at which time he hath Musicians for his alacrity, but they are hood∣blinded, that they may not view his face, and when he drinks, a great person calls out aloud, Pray for the Kings health. His drink is wine of distilled Dates, with Manna, Ambar, and Musk. His odours and perfumes for each day, come to two pound weight of gold, provided him by certain Merchants. The Ta∣pers for his service are compounded with odours. When he goes forth in a morning, if the Sun with his rayes have not refined the
ayre, he hath four great perfumed torches borne before him, himself being carried by foure Gentlemen, in a Chaire Richly a∣dorned, with a Curtaine, or Canopy over it: an Umbrella, en∣riched with jewells, and a numerous Attendance of Nobility; Before him goes a Guard of two hundered Mastiffs, each lead by his keeper; and amongst these (for his desport) a Buffon. Up∣on the way he never gives audience to any one, and goes not out of his Pallace, whether on foot, or mounted either on Horse, Elephant, or Alsigne, but he bestrides some new-killed beast (as I related of Monbase,) and being pas'd, they raise a loud cry, making inspection on the intralls, to know, if there be good or bad towards the Prince, whereof their Flamins make report. His Chaire-bearers are dawb'd all over with a red earth, wherin they work folliage of divers sorts, after the manner of the Mozambiques. The Royall Pallace is very commodious, flank'd with Towers without, within furnish'd with cotton cloth of diverse colours, gold tissue: the floore costly pav'd with plates of gold cut in figures, with great Candlesticks of ivory hung in chaines of silver; Seats enriched with gold Folliage, properly beautified with co∣lours, and Transparent Ennamell, and foure Principall Gates, sumptuously wrought; and Guarded by those they call Sequen∣der. His Family is by a number of Officers, very orderly go∣vern'd, who observe him with a most profound silence. While he sits at Table, you heare not a whisper, nor the least noise. His Vessell is Purcelan, garnish'd and set round with sprigs of gold, fashion'd like Corall. The Captain of the Gate is called Cadira. The Captain of the Guard Acar. The Treasurer, or he who disposes the Revennues, Cabacada. The Seniglaren is as 'twere Constable, or Lieutenant Generall, who are all in array of Honour, of cotton cloth, or silke of diverse colours, girdles inrich'd with stones, guilt falchions, or swords, with hilts of Mas∣sie gold carv'd and enammell'd, which is for ordinary; on high dayes, of Diamonds, Rubies, and other stones of inestimable price. I saw there the pommell of an Alfange, or cimeterre, made of one fausell Ruby of extraordinary bignesse, of one peice entire, which was given for the Ransom of a Province. For, the Father of Tabachi, who reigned at the time we were there, having disburs'd a Masse of gold-ingotts, to releive the King Vida∣rati, the other gave him a Province for security, and when he came to redeem it, Tabachi chose rather this gorgious sword, then all the gold they would restore him, which was a great quantity. When this King Marches to the Warr in Magnificence, he weares a Robe of silke, with hanging sleeves, a girdle enchas'd with stones of peculiar vertues, as the Magicians make him beleive; a Poniard at his girdle, and his sword borne before him by a Prince, with a small casket of jewells; Himself in a Littar, born by Gentle∣men, called Singaro, one Page marches before him, with his Um∣brella, another with a fan of Austrich feathers, which are here in
abundance, some as large as oxen. The Princes and Gentry ha∣bited in the Turkish dress, saving that for a Turban, they weare little round bonnets, all bravely mounted on Elephants, or Hor∣ses, which are bred and suckled by Cowes, and train'd by Jaloses, so expert at it, that running at high speed, they will throw a dart, and riding catch it again, so dexterously, and with such agility, that without stop, they will (stooping) take a stone off the ground. He hath with him a hundred Elephants, caparison'd with the skins of Sea-oxen, unpeirceable by any dart, each carrying foure Eu∣nukes, with cross-bowes, of farther reach then long-bowes. Upon the neck sits the Besgu, who guides and commandes him; and during the clamour and confusion, layes his mouth to his eare, hol∣lowing to him, that he may understand him; and so docile is this creature, that he will turn back his long eare, to hearken, and o∣bey what he bids him. This Besigu beares a bow and quiver, a short sword, and a coat of Sea-oxe. In the Van of the Elephants march great Mastiffs, cap'd in the same manner, to each a keeper, who hath him linked to his girdle with an iron chaine. In summe, tis of Faith with all of them,Subjects zealous to their Prince. that he who dies for his King, gains salvation, though in other points they embrace all sorts of Reli∣gions, telling you they cannot be damn'd, for that they are freinds with all the Gods in Heaven, and cheifely with Runia, Adula, Isaten, those are the Christian Gods. In the Head of this Mastiffe-Regiment, Marches a body of Musketteirs, who do good service with their fire-clubs: before them above two thousand chariots, covered with leather, drawn with six oxen, which carry each fifteen men, of those called Ar∣besrait, with short guns, like Carabins. One part of the Army may shade by day under these Charrets, which again will shelter them by night, while the Mastiffs with their keepers lye in the Head, under Tents, who by turns stand centinell abroad. The whole Army Marches divided in three Squadrons. The Eunuques go clothed like women, and do all sorts of service, dress their Masters diet, made of Rice, Mill, or the Root Igname, whereof they make cakes, which are heavy, and offensive to the stomack, and soon hurt it. Their ordinary fare is powder'd beef, milke a little turn'd their drink; The King, & Great ones drink hon∣nyed-wine, which they keep in oxe-hornes, as they do in Ethiopia. The Vulgar are cloathed only from the girdle downwards, ca∣sing up their privities in little purses, or pumpions, made hollow like sheaths, when they go into the field, by reason of certain venimous creatures, which sting cruelly, wherewith some have been sore handled. All that belong to the Court, are known by the priviledge they have, to weare upon the shoulder the Talmassaca, or Mantle of severall stuffs, according to quality, and of the sort the King wears it, which is very costly, and tis a high Honour to weare the Mantle of the Kings make.
Poyson is very common throughout the Empire, and at deare rates, there being some that is sold at a hundred Miticales, or Sequins the ounce; The reason so much is used, is, the rigour of the King, and his Ministers of Justice, who inflict such cruell pu∣nishments upon Offenders. For, no sooner hath a person committed a Crime, but he is pu∣nished in the instant, and if the Crime requires the Offender should be suspended some dayes, to render his punishment more long and greivous, he is tyed to a tree, with strong guards, there being no Prisons, as I said before; so, as the Criminall seeing no possi∣ble escape, the best remedy is to poyson himself, by a speedy death to cut off the rigour of a long paine. Nor will the Prince be clothed with any thing but what is made within his own Palace, for fear of poyson. There are cer∣tain trees called Coscoma, which beare fruit like the golden ap∣ple, of violet sent, which tastes well, but, being eaten in any quan∣tity, purges so violently, that it voids blood, and at last is mor∣tall. There are those that ingross the poyson by Patent, for which they pay a high excise to the Prince, by reason there are so many who use it for there death, to free themselves from the Tor∣ments of Justice, for there is no pardon to be expected for offen∣ces. If one injures another without cause, he is cruelly bastina∣do'd, as they are in Turky, where I have seen Judges themselves, for that they have failed in Justice, punished in that manner. They are laid naked upon the ground, and the Officer, or Exe∣cutioner, is to beat them with a cord knotted, and buttond at the end, and when the President gives the word, then he doth his Of∣fice: having done, he gets up, puts on his clothes again, and gives thanks to the Judges, and Executioner, for their Justice, without any disgrace for the matter, and returns to his function, as if no such thing had happened. This makes the Judges can∣did in their sentences. The greatest Lords and Magistrates find the like from the King, as I observed before, speaking of Melnida. For, he hath them castigated in his presence privately, and then with instructions dismisses to their charge. Justice thus se∣verely executed, without exception of persons, preserves the Na∣tion in firm Peace and Tranquillity, and gets the King as 'twere a Divine Adoration, so really, that as he passes thorough the streets, the people praying for him, cast themselves to the ground on their face, not presuming so much as to look upon him. There are some Princes and particular Lords, fancy much to hang bells at their neck or leg, conceiving it well becomes them. At Court every man goes habited as pleases him best, so,Lions skins as there are Courtiers: but they are of the highest rank, who, over all, weare a large cassock, of a Lions skin, made up unshapely enough, as they use in Preste Johns Court; but no man can weare this Lions garment, but a Prince of the blood. Others
go to the wars in coats of sea-oxe covered with ivory, to defend the thrust of a sword, for 'tis not their custome to cut. They also use Swords and Bucklers faced with ivory, or skins of sea-oxe, or Crocodiles, with which all their Rivers abound, the flesh whereof they eat throughout all Africa and India, as an excellent meat. CHAP. VII. The History and strange adventure of Prince Alfondie. Another of the Amours of Princesse Abederane. BEeing here, we further came to understand that Alfumigarba∣chi, one of the last who raigned in this Empire, dying sudden∣ly at the age of 47. years, without leasure to call a prudent coun∣cell, or settle the succession in the child, that of all the rest, he most desired, amongst the sixty four sons and eleven daughters, which he had by several wives, whose name was Abditsinda, his minion, a gallant and generous Prince. This change bred great tumults and dissentions at Court, each of these wives striving to thrust her childs head under the crown, so as to attain more easily to it, and to gain the Peers and Officers of the Crown, to purchase the Scepter, they spared not whatsoe∣ver was dearest to them, a cause of much blood and murther. Of these sons there were four principal, whose names were Abga∣rou, Adala, Corcut, and Gulman, who having seap'd some enter∣prises upon their persons, united themselves against their other brothers, of whom they put to death as many as they could lay hold on, the rest saved themselves in several places, flying the cruelty of those who proclaimed Offices and places of trust to whosoever brought in their heads. During this state of things, here raged great warres, and many bloody encounters passed, wherein two of the four brothers payed their lives, and there re∣mained only Corgut and Gulman, who at last reconciled with a general peace, and lived in great amity, copartners in the royalty, so as after the modell of Eteocles and Polinice, those ancient Kings of Thebes, each governed six moneths by turns. This lasted for a time, till Corcut took to wife the Princesse Dafila, an ambitious Lady, who six moneths after her nuptials, perswaded her con∣sort to murther his brother, and reign without a partner, which was done accordingly, calling him to Court under pretence of communicating some affaires of consequence, and so he became sole King, and reigned thirteen years, till an Uncle of his called Nahi,
in revenge, put both him, his wife, children, and all his allies to death, to the great content of the people, for the hatred he bore to this unfortunate Fratricide. Then they imagined an ancient Prophecy which they kept amongst them, was accomplished: That the Lamb should kill both the Wolfe and his wife: She was called Gildada, and was drowned. But the King of Dafila incensed with the death of his daughter and Son-in-law, brought a most cruell warre upon the new King Nahi, wherein fell numbers on both sides. In the mean while, amongst the Princes who had scap'd the truculent hands of their brothers, one there was who strayed far off, and got into the kingdome of Deli, where contenting him∣self to live meanly as an unknown private person, he purchased a small possession for his livelihood, and betook himself to labour: where taking a wife, she brought him a son they called Alfondi; who at seven or eight years of age, gave the world great hopes of his person, for the excellent parts which began to bud in him, and which made him amiable to all men; in so much that ad∣dicting himselfe to the words, as yeares encreased his vi∣gour, he did wonders in the slaying of Lions, Beares, Ti∣gars, and other furious beasts, and in all his actions appeared no∣thing but what was great and noble; insomuch as hearing spoken on day how strenuous a war there raged betwixt Tahachi his un∣known great Uncle, and the King of Dafila, he was transported with emulation to be a Party, and being furnished with a good horse and Arms, with the society of a Troop of brave young men, he hasted to those parts, where, in the service of Tahachi, he soon gave proofe of his Courage, and abilities in warr; but, amongst others, on one signall occasion which presented it selfe, where, with a small party of Souldiers, he defeated the much more numerous Enemy; and the King of Dafila admiring his Valour, endeavou∣red under-hand to win him to his side, by offering a Daughter of his in Marriage, with a Province, which he had taken from Ta∣hachi. To which Afondi seeming to give eare, dexterously made use of the opportunity, to seize upon the Towne of Ama∣zen, a most considerable place, which exceedingly pleased Tahachi, and heightned his affection to him, feeling, I know not what secret motion in his soul, which pushed him on to this Dearnesse, without any apprehension that he was his Nephew; but, Good blood, as they say, cannot dissemble. At length, Alfondi, assisted with his Uncles Forces, did such Atcheivements and Exploits, that within six Months, he delivered the Empire Zanzibar from the oppressi∣on of the Enemy, which obliged Tahachi for recompense, to give him one of his Daughters in Marriage, without any deep∣er knowledg of him, then his Heroick Actions, and Noble As∣pect; forall the Orientall and Meridionall Princes, regard more the Mind, and Physiognomy of a Man, then they do the extracti∣on, or Nobility of Blood.
Alfondi raised to so high a degree, reflects upon his father the honest labourer, whom he omitted not to send for, who being arrived, and having declared who he was, begat an unparalleld joy in Tabochi and his whole kingdome, every one shedding teares for his discovery, rendring praise to God, and his just pro∣vidence for reducing things to so unhoped for a point, and after so many years reposing the inheritance on him, to whom of right it appertained. For this Prince was immediately acknowledged by all, even Tahachi himselfe, who voluntarily released the Em∣pire, which he surrendred into the hands of his Daughter, his Son-in-law, and Nephew Alfondi, who with the consent of the good man his Father, to the general joy of all was received and crowned King, and governed with so much equity and justice, that he gained the hearts and suffrage of his people, who adored him as a God: nor failed he in rendring to his Father and Uncle while they lived, a due honour and respect. This Prince had reigned forty seven yeares, when he arrived in the countrey. Before I conclude my discourse of Tahachi, and his condition, I shall not omit another story, which testifies the singular justice he dispenses with indifferency to all his subjects. He had consti∣tuted in the Province of Quame one Abdalami, a person of high quality, his confident, a gallant Cavalier, and one who had done most signal services in the war with the King of Dafila; but being inclined to avarice, and hord up wealth, he played the Tyrant, and sacked the country to satiate his own humour, and the de∣sires of some women he gave entertainment to: When Tahachi was informed thereof, he was much displeased, for 'twas his rule to maintain equal justice, peace and freedome amongst his sub∣jects: Notwithstanding he concealed his resentments for a while, giving way to his proceedings as well for his great services, as for that he had bestowed on him a kinswoman to wife, called Abia∣sinda, by whom he had children. He admonished him often by letter, to bear himselfe more temperately, but perceiving his small regard, by the constant intrusion of complaints that came to him, he sent expresse command that he should repaire immedi∣ately to Court to give account of his actions upon pain of death, and being proclaimed rebell, and guilty of his treason. Abdalami understanding his own wealth and power, slighted this summons, and fortified himself in the holds of his Government. Whereupon the King caused his wife and children to be apprehended and brought prisoners to his city royall. This Princesse with her best art excused her husband, beseeching his Majesties mercy towards him, for his former services, adding withall that these complaints, were but a calumny raised by the malice of his enemies. The King covering his resentments, mildely answered her, that she should only procure her husband to come to Court, but she fear∣ing to bring his person in danger, thought best only to advise him
to send a certain Casket of rings, and all sorts of rich jewels for a present to the Queen, and by that means work his peace: This he did, and she having presented it, the Queen shewed them to the King, who wondred at so great a treasure, where amongst others were five hundred pearles, each being a Miticale or Crown and half in weight, besides many other jewels of value, sufficient to buy a kingdome. 'Twas much affliction to the Prince to see such treasures gotten at the price of his peoples blood, and then he commanded the Princesse his kinswoman to bring her husband to Court by a day appointed, or he would make feel the weight of his displeasure. Poor Abdalami was amazed at the news, and fearing not without cause, the Kings incensement, fai∣led not to come accordingly; and without calling on his wife and children, went strait to the Palace, where having sounded the Trum∣pet according to the custome, as I observed before; he unclothed himself, and sitting on the ground stark naked, only a linnen cloth before his concealed parts, he attended in this manner the mercy of the King: whereof notice being brought to his Lady, she with her children disrobed in like manner, went to the Palace gate, and there seated themselves on the ground by him, with each a great stone on their head. The Queen espying them from her window, in this deplora∣ble condition, moved with compassion, shewed them to the King, who gave order they should be bidden to revest themselves, go back to their lodgings, and there attend his further pleasure; so they did, trembling with expectation of the consequence. Many advised Abdalami to make escape, and his wife her self was of that opinion; but he would not be perswaded, his services raising him a confidence of the Kings clemency. Now moreover to compleat his calamity, when the King began to relent, the suits and supplications which came on all sides in his behalf, one of the principal persons in the Court called Isman, charges him with a new crime, complaining to the King that he had seduced & debauched a daughter of his, for which he craves justice, which suspended the Kings clemency, resolving to examine the truth of the matter, which proved, in fine, to be but a meer supposall. For it was most true, that Abdalami being a Prince of an amia∣ble form and beauty, and of high esteem for his valour, this Lords daughter had so impetuous a Love-passion for him, that she fell sick to death, and Abdalamies Lady visiting her as a friend, obser∣ved she fell on weeping as oft as she beheld her, whereupon one day she importuned to know the reason, conjuring her to speak freely if she had in any thing offended her, protesting she was rea∣dy to make her as ample satisfaction, as she could desire. The poor Lady confounded with shame, was sometime before she could form her answer, but at length love taking place of Virgin-modesty, she ingenuously confessed the eause of her distemper,
with such abundance of tears, sighs, and supplications of pardon for the affront she offered her, that the other was moved to such tendernesse, she promised her notwithanding one so near and dear to her as a husband was aimed at; neverthelesse in pity of her violent passion, which deserved some pardon, she would contri∣bute what was possible to her reliefe; hereupon the young Lady told her, how she had presented by her bond-maid a chain of pearl and rubies to her husband, with request that he would wear them for her sake, which he accepted as well for the value of the thing, as for that the slave was a gay and pretty girle, to whom he gave a pair of pendants of Fauser diamonds, of an Olive figure; but for the Mistresse, he returned her a bare meagar thanks, with∣out further acknowledgement, which the slave notwithstanding dissembled, making her Mistresse believe he had a strong affection for her, and for love of her, wore her favour: and so this slave treated her with these fictions, in hope to give some remission to the violence of her passion, and twas she who first embarked her in these amorous follies. The Lady was amazed at these passages, and remembred the chain, because her husband had given it to her self, without ac∣quainting her where he had it. Now being desirous to invert some cure for her malady, though a most perfect reciprocal affection animated both her husband and self, notwithstanding compassion forced her inclinations to offer her a nights concubitation with her husband; which so reviv'd this Damsells heart, that immediately she arose from her bed, and in few dayes was perfectly recover'd. To compasse this with∣out her husbands discovery, she consulted both with the daughter, and the Lady her Mother, who was likewise of the Party; so, as re∣turning home, she told her husband she found some unusuall di∣stemper in the state of health, and entreated him he would forbear her enjoyments for some nights, which expir'd Abdalami passionate for her commpany: she, to heighten his flame, shewed some unwillingness, till pressing her with importunity, she con∣sented for the ensuing night, upon condition that for that night he should not speak a word to her. Being thus agreed, she gives the Lady notice to be ready at the houre appointed, so being con∣veyed into the wives roome, she conceived with child, without the husbands knowledge of the juggle. Meanwhile, time ma∣king the Father perceive the growth of his daughter, and under∣standing by her acknowledgment, whose act it was, fired with rage, accompanied with his Allies and Relations, without delay he re∣paires to the King, with a violent complaint of this injury, as I said before. Hereupon Tahachi enters into a deep consideration of these two Persons, whereof the one was his Kinsman, and of high deserts for his services, the other was Lord of the Pro∣vince of Essen, between Dafila and Ganfilira, below Barnagasso,
heretofore tributary to the great Negus, but being not inclined to be a Christian himself, nor be subject to a Christian King, had put himself voluntarily under the dominion of Tahachi an Infidel. In conclusion the King resolved to have the matter examined, and to pronounce Justice as the cause merited. And hereupon notice was given to Abdalami of the accusation, wherein being conscious of his own innocence, he was much satisfied that the Kings anger lay on that side, and conferring with his Lady, told her he admired the impudence of that Lord, to accuse him of a a thing he was so ignorant of, and much more at the insolency of his daughter, that laid two bastards to his charge: The Lady smiled, as who should say it may be true, whereupon as he was about to make oaths and protestations to the contrary she ac∣knowledged and related the whole to him, and how the businesse was brought to passe by her invention, whereat he was strangely amazed, admiring his Ladies goodnesse, that was so charitable to her own injury. In this conjuncture, the King gave licence to Lord Isman to take revenge of Abdalami in what sort he could, under his assured grace; so he now layes wait for all occasions to effect it, and to surprise him on the water as he went to take the Ayre, for the town of Zanzibar, or Zanguebar, is compleatly encir∣cled with water, which runs both within and without, and almost every inhabitant hath his Almady or flat boat, wherein they recre∣ate upon the Lake. But Abdalami, whether advertised, or sus∣pecting it, stood upon his constant guard, so as passing one day upon the water, before the windowes of the Palace-royall, that the King might have the prospect, if any one attacked him, Isman comes up with his boats to assault his enemy, who was not un∣provided: then there succeeded a fierce combat between them, where Abdalami did miracles in his own defence; so effectually, that he put the adverse barks to flight, to the extraordinary de∣light of the King. In the mean while Princesse Abasinda waits up∣on the Queen, and recounts to her the plain truth of the mystery, which being told the King, he sent to Isman to let him know, that if the case were found such as he apprehended, he would lay the head of Abdalami in his hands, to carry into his own country; whereof, though spight & shame of his defeat had made him their Bedfellow, and he had not stirr'd forth of twenty dayes; he was so satisised, he came immediately to the King, who remitting the matter to Councell, 'twas concluded that the Mother and daugh∣ter should be brought to Court, to answer what should be deman∣ded of them. At the same time the King made a personall visit to Abdalami, who upon this vouchsafed descent to come thus alone to his house, conceived some hopes of his businesse, and casting himself at his feet, said he held himself over happy in the favour his Prince had done him, and for ever after he should esteem it an honour to lay down his life for his service. The King causing him
to rise, embraced him, assuring him of pardon for what was pass'd, for which he and his Lady rendring humble thanks, attended him to his Pallace. Three dayes after, the Mother and her daughter arrived in their Pelanquins, born on their slaves shoulders, then the Councell being sate, three Calsena or Officers were sent for Abdalami, as who understood not the matter looking on him as a lost person, and Isman for his part conceiving he durst not appear, but rather trust to flight, had laid souldiers to wait and intercept him on the way. But they were strangely amazed when they saw him appear at the Palace in his Talia Massara, or Persian mantle down to the foot, under a Cassock, a figur'd cloth of gold, cove∣red with a white Cipresse in testimony of his innocence, and about his head a cord made of small reeds according to custome, in te∣stimony of self-punishment, if he were found guilty. The Judges then examined both parties, and finding they could produce no sufficient evidence, they took the Mother and daughter apart, and learning from their mouthes the pure and reall truth, they thought fit to have Princesse Abiasinda to be brought, and since 'twas through her charity this affair was consented to and contrived, 'twas but reason she should speak her opinion: Then placing her on the Bench with the Judges, Abdalami was called forth, who being asked if he would stand to what sentence his Lady should pronounce, answered, Yea most willingly: then raising her voyce, she pronounced, that since Alberane had so firm an affection to her husband, and had born for him two lovely children, by the good favour and permission of his Majesty, she condemned him to espouse her presently, and she would receive her for her faithful compani∣on. The judgment was admired by the whole Assembly, and the Father being asked if he held this Award sufficient reparation of his honour, was so confounded with the unfolding of what he was before kept ignorant, he knew not what to say, but the King pressing his resolution, in testimony of submission, he cast himself on the earth, saying, If Abdalami would honour him with marry∣ing his daughter, he would give with her the Province of Assen, with the mines, and threescore carriages of fine gold, which he had gotten that present year. The businesse so well accommo∣modated, the King gave order for great rejoycings, with solemn feastings, and open court for fifteen dayes, for all Princes and Lords of his Train. The Councell would have had the moity of this treasure dispensed, for satisfaction to the complaining province of Zuamin, but the King opposed, content only to abridge him of the Crown rights for five yeares, which amounted to much more then all that treasure: which was done accordingly, to the content of all, and these two Ladies with sincere affection, lived dear companions in peace and unity.
CHAP. VIII. The Authours voyage into Ethiope: A description of Preste Johns Dominions, with the Quality of his People. HAving staid some dayes in the Court of Tahachi, and learnt what is here before rehearsed, we took our way back to our company, whom we left at Chesicoure, who were something troubled for us having spent two and twenty dayes in this short voyage: for passing by Aruama a beautifull town, the Sieur de la Courbe for some occasion would needs stay; then upon a streame from Zuama we came to Gazira, Sequesma, Boagiara, Salera, Aimaca, or Armeta, and many other Townes and Villages. At length being come to Gustigoari we understood there had happened a difference in our com∣pany whereby some were wounded, and being come to Si∣gara, three dayes journey thence, we took the other part of the River, which bears name with the Town of Zuama, crossing the Province of Almadrega, which with the coun∣try-men is called Calhouras, because the capitall Town bears the same name; 'tis but small, governed by the King of Ti∣grai, Vassail to the grand Zeguz, facing Westward the Province of Bagamidri: we made it four dayes from Calhouras to the town of Bagamidri, and it happened well we covered our Almadies, for the rain much inconvenienced us travelling these four dayes through a waste country,Land Tor∣toises. where land-Tor∣toises abound of exceeding bignesse, which were very com∣modious for our diet, and within them there were great num∣bers of egges which purged us strangely, this being very laxa∣tive meat. Our fellows lying at Chasicours had intelligence that we were on the other side the River, and enquiring, found us at Carboran, a Village three leagues distant from Bagami∣dri, where you may imagine the joy this review diffused through all of us. In the first place we considered and re∣conciled their discord, on the morrow together went we all to dine at Bagamidri, where we rested some dayes to truck and put off our commodities, as well in Town, as the adja∣cent Villages. We had all the same desire to behold the Court, and person of the grand Negus, who ever resides in field un∣der Tents and Pavillions, ranged about like a formall City. To which we were rather induced for the meeting with a Portugal
Lord who came from the Indies expressely to visit the grand Ne∣gus in the name of the Spanish King his Master, who went aboard on the coast of the red Sea, and landed on the territories of Bar∣nabas, who accompanied him to the place we found him at, and brought us together as far as Barra upon Moraba, where we expe∣cted to finde the Prince. To be short, I set not down the wayes and distances betwixt Bagamidri and Barra, another town of Ethiope, because for our negotiation we made diversions to both hands, as we did through Arabia, Persia, and India. But from Barra to our compleat return, we observed as near as might be. Before we discourse of Bagamidri, it seems not improper to tell you that 'tis the beginning of the vast Empire of Ethiope, or the grand Negus,The ex∣tent of the Abissins country. whom commonly we stile the Preste John of Ethi∣opia, in distinction from another who was sometimes in high In∣dia. He is also titled Kibir Negus and Senab, and King of the Abissins. They report him to have in possession above thirty five kingdomes or Provinces, which containes a strange scope of a po∣pulous countrey, of more then three moneths travell. True it is, he is not at instant of such power as heretofore by reason the neighbouring Mahometans, and amongst others the King of Adel, with the Zeilan, by a continual war have deprived him of many territories, even of the best part of the towns and havens he held about the red Sea, the chief whereof are Zuachim Manzua,Manzua. an Ercoco. So as at present this Empire is much dimi∣nished, both in extent, strength, and dominion, only that by the assistance of the Portugues of the East, he hath regained some pla∣ces of late years. And though at this day he is very ample, so must we not give credit to many things of Grandeur and Magnifi∣cence we finde in Spanish Authours tasting somewhat of the fable,Cdignus & others. published in a Romantick way: which are sufficiently refu∣ted by the Fathers of the society, in their more authentick works, extracted from the very notes of those who were, and are con∣stantly in person there, from whom we have exact information both for the spiritual, and for the temporal. The countrey of the Abissins was known to our Ancestours by the name of Ethiope under Egypt, afterwards the lesser India. This Ethiopia is divided into the Eastern, the Western, and the middle. The bounds at this day are the red Sea on the East, Egypt on the North, the Mountains along Nile, Maniconge, the Black River and Nubia on the West, and Southward the Moun∣tains of the Moone, and the Lakes where the Nile rises, or rather the borders of the Empire of Monopotapa. Some afford it fifty kingdomes and more, others are satisfied with five and thirty or lesse. For absurdly some would make this Empire greater then all our Europe, and that it should hold out from Egypt to the Promontory of Guardasu, and to Babelmandel and Mogadoxo, and of another side to the Southern or Ethiopian
Ocean, the Cape of Good Hope, allowing for Tributaries many Moorish Kings, to Monomotapa it selfe, with the S. Laurence Islanders: though at this day he hath his hands full to defend himself against the Mahometans, the Gales or Galois, and the Agays, a people that are Blacks, by whom for these threescore years he hath been rudely jostled; till the Prince was constrained to sup∣plicate the aid of the Portugals who brought effectuall assistance, and by degrees have restored him to a recovering condition. As you go from the red Sea Westward lye these Kingdomes,King∣domes. Tigrai, Dancaly, Angote, Xoa, Amara, Leca, Baga, Midai, Dambea, Datali, Fatigar, Ambra, Anogotera, Bernagas, Belin∣ganza, Damure, Edear, Guiame, there are the Cataracts of Nile, Vangui, Masmude, Cafates, Gilama, and others; some whereof Christians inhabit, the rest Mahometans and Gentiles. The people of these kingdomes when they bring their Gibre or tribute to the Prince, They have wound a rope about their head, and proclaim with a loud voice, The Revenue of such a Pro∣vince, My Lord I am here present. Then doth the Negar distri∣bute this Gibre or revenue to three uses, the first to relieve the poor of the Nation, and support the Church, a second for pay and maintenance of his army, and the third to his Coffers for the ex∣hibition of his houshold. Now is the Revenue small, for they have trees, of which we finde many growing upon the high ways loaded with silk, not by the work of art but nature, whereof the gatherers pay a fift to the Prince, as they do of their gold and silver mines, where they employ their slaves, as sometimes they do the children of them who have not paid the King dues for their har∣vest of silk. Of Benjamin, Storax, and other Aromaticks, 'tis the same thing, for the gathering whereof they make choyce of young lads, as concerning their smell to be more exquisit, and more firm, and indeed the Merchants have a speciall regard for these gatherers, and the younger, the more they give them. They who get Safron, pay the same rates, but they observe not the like niceness in the gathering. The Farmers of these customes have a set day to bring it in to the Prince himself, who receives it in person, who so much delights in odours, that whatsoever used in Court even to the Flambeaus is perfumed. But when these are brought in, they are attended with Drums, Hoboyes,Tributes paid to Preste John. with other in∣struments and consorts of musick, which the towns are by duty to provide. The same Prince hath likewise his fift out of the soul∣diers booty in time of warre, as the Spanish King hath out of the Merchants mines, but that he exacts an impost from thieves or Curtizans, is a mistake. This State was known to all Antiquity, but upon uncertainty enough, till about 120. years since, the Portuguese gave us a bet∣ter information of it, and specially since these last threescore years that the Fathers of the society came thither.
The soyle in some part is exceeding fertile, in others not, It a∣bounds in mines of gold, silver, brasse, lead, sulphure, fruits of all sorts, as citrons, oranges, but vines are scarce: The air is tem∣perate enough, though under the torrid Zone, the people there are black for the greater part, and of long life. Their principall traffick is salt, which they carry very deep into the Provinces, and sell dear, making it serve as 'twere for their money, trucking it for all sorts of commodities, whereof they have square pieces of severall proper weights, as we have gold and silver. In the sacred History, the land of Ethiope is called Chuz, or Phut, from the two sons of Cham. who lived there. 'Tis said the name of Abassie, or Abissine, came from the Ara∣bians, who called them Elbabassi, and Abex. Others say 'twas given by the Egyptians, who by this name understand all such as inhabit a Countrey encircled with deserts, as we find this is. But the Ancients made ordinarily two Ethiopes, the one East on the other side the red sea, in Sabia, or Arabia the happy, the other west, on this side, or under Egypt. And indeed the Home∣rists, a people of Arabia, along the coast of the red sea are called Ethiopians, and there is some evidence, that heretofore Kings of Ethiopia reigned on both sides the Gulph; also some do opinion the Queen of Saba came from Arabia, others from the true Ethi∣opia. The west Ethiopia was either the lower from Egypt to Meroe,Ethiopia double. or the high from Meroe to the Mountains of the Moon. Some there are again, who confound the Eastern with the Abissins, place the Western towards the Atlantique sea, then will have tho interiour towards Zanzibar. Some hold the Ethiopians to have been the first Idolaters, as descending from Chus the son of Cham, and that they first received Judaisme, and circumcision upon the Queen of Saba's voyage to Salomon; and after Chritianisme, by the Queen Candace's Ennuch. Times past the Ethiopian Kings were very potent, and brought under yoke Egypt it self, and being by Semiramis and Cambyses assaulted, defeated their armies, nor durst Hercules and Bacchus, those famous Victors, invade them: The Poets had this land in such esteem, were it for the goodnesse, or for Religion, that here they would celebrate their Deities festivals, and inthrone Alemnon, Cephee and Perset, mighty and illustrious Kings of this Countrey. There was one Melilec, who holds the chief renown amongst them, who they report to have been the son of Salomon, and Mecheda Queen of Saba, and of whose race by lineal descent, from Father to Son, all their Kings to this day report themselves descended: I know not how justly it can be proved. Howsoever it be, the most ancient Histories attest, that about the year 521. in the time of Justin the Emperour, there was one Elesbaan King of Ethiopia, a Christian, who subdued Dunaam a Jew, King of Arabia the happy, who infesting the Homerites being Christians,
Elesbaan he freed them, and being returned into his Countrey, became Hermite. Afterwards there was another King named Hellisteus, a Christian also, who entred confidence with Justinian the Emperour, and brought famous victories from the Infidels in Arabia. These kings made the royal town of Cachumo, sometimes called Aucumo, their mansion, which stil holds the name since those times, by reason of the length and difficulty of roads, we have had little or no intelligence of the Ethiopian Kings, the Turks and Saracins having constant possession of the passages, til the voyages of the Portuguese, who have given us some light since this latter age. As to spiritualty this Countrey hath ever submitted to the direction of the Patriarch of Alexandria, who for the danger of coming thither by reason of the Saracins who ruled in Egypt,The Abis∣sins religi∣on. sent them a Prelate called Abuma, for Governor; as the Patriarch of Antioch sends one into the East, called Catholica. Some say that in the year 1439. the Abissins came to render obedience, and to acknow∣ledge Pope Clement 5. at Auignon, that they sent since to the Council of Florence, in the year 1439. But 'tis more certain that since the Portuguese conversed with them, the Kings have made a fuller acknowledgement of the Romane Church. As to their Re∣ligion, though it be Christian, yet they retain divers Jewish ce∣remonies, and other heresies, received as wel from Pagans, as from the heretical Eutiches and Dioscorus, sent to them by schismatical Patriarchs from Alexandria, whereof at present they begin to be purged, and better instructed by the Jesuite Fathers, and the Patriarks sent to them from Rome, as we find in modern relations. For a long time there have regular Religious been in the Countrey, and Anchorites of the order of St. Anthony, St. Macharius, and St. Basile, but no Dominicans, as some would have us believe. From St. Anthonies order is proceeded another, they call Este∣farrus, which must be St. Stephen. For the nature of the people, they have a strong propensity to vertue, and orthodox religion, render exact obedience to their Prince, and most high veneration to Church and Clergie, are se∣verely chast, and addicted to pennance, and austerity of life, very charitable and very hospitable.See Alua∣rez ch. 41. Priests while they celebrate mass are covered with a vail, after the Greek manner, and the men di∣vided a part from the women in the Church. The whole Court lodges alwaies under pavilions in the field, rang'd in the form of a Town, for places and streets drawn to a direct line, where there is assigned for every one a Captain, or Justiciar to prevent tumults. 'tis of great circuit, sometimes con∣taining two leagues of land, with twelve ports in honour of the Apostles: within this circuit there are two Churches, one for the
Emperour and Nobility, of seven or eight hundred paces in cir∣cumference, the other for the vulgar. The reve∣rence they bear to sa∣cred pla∣ces.Within there is one Altar onely, and upon it the figure of a Crosse of a gray colour, shadowed with a vail of white silk, on the middle of the Altar stands a picture of the blessed Virgin in co∣lours, betwixt two more of the Apostles, St. Peter, and St. Paul: upon solemn Feasts the Emperours white tent is changed for a red: through all the Churches there is said but one Masse a day, where there is observed such reverence, that 'tis not lawfull to spit, speak, or sit down, upon any occasion whatsoever; the Tem∣ple of our Lord, as they say, being a place neither for uncleanness nor discourse: If one be constrained to passe by on horseback, he alights, and walks with hat in hand. When the Sacrament is e∣levated, one rings a bell of stone, the clapper of wood, (as are all the bells in Ethiope) and immediately all fall upon their knees. The Emperour himself if he be on horseback, alights in haste, and continues on his knees till another sign be given. The Priest is never seen while he consummates, because he is covered and sur∣rounded with a white vail, as likewise the people never behold the blessed Sacrament, but they bow their face to the ground, jogging their bodies in a dancing manner, and standing on their toes. The Offertory is made at the end of Masse. They give the Sacrament to little children as well as others, causing them to abstain before. The Negus never eats in gold or silver, but in vessels of Euate onely, which endures no poyson, but breaks immediately. For wine there is none made but in his Palace, or in the Abuma's house. As for the Abissine, or Nubian language, 'tis a distinct tongue, but much compounded as they say, with Hebrew, Chaldean, Syriack, and Arabick words, which reaches to the very East, by reason of the soft and sweet pronunciation, and because 'tis plain and easie to learn. So the Abissins when they travel, as I have often mark'd, make themselves easily understood, with the Guinoii themselves. They use the Chaldaick for sacred matters and sciences, in which all their books are written, and Masse celebrated, as the Abissins do in their Church of St. Stephen of India at Rome, in like manner as the Maronites and other Syrians. Now for the Rivers in this Countrey there are many very great ones, but the principal is the so famous Nile, which cuts it from one end to the other, sallying, as some say, out of an unsoundable lake in the Country of Guyame, others will have it from the Mountains of the Moon, or Cafartes, and from Befsi or Zech, whence likewise issues the Zaire and the Aquilonde, which run Westward, and the Zuama southward. But the Nile towards the West, falls into the lake of Zambra or Zaire, and from thence passing betwixt the Kingdoms of Damus and Am∣bea, inclining towards the East, then on the other side the Equi∣noctial enters Beleguanza, corporates with another River flowing
from the lake Zanflan, likewise called the Nile, and thence betwixt Bagamidri, Vangue, and Abiancantiva, it visits Tigremabon; and having swallowed the Tagazzi, or Tecassin, and other Rivers, swel'd with so many flouds, it creates the famous Isle of Meroe, with two arms, by the Ancients called Astapus and Astaboras, at this time Tecassin and Ahambi; afterwards re-uniting, passes the Tropick Cancer, and at Siena or Asma, makes the renowned Ca∣taracts, or falls amongst the Mountains, which so compresse it, that it seems a shot or lightning in quicknesse, and thunder in horrid noyse; till having crossed Egypt, and entertained some Ri∣vers of Nubia, branching it self into many streams, which com∣pose the so much celebrated, fair and fertile Countrey of Delta, comes to render it self into the Mediterranean at mouthes and sluces, which our Ancestors took for seven, others nine; at this day the most known and remarkable, are those of Damiete Rosete, heretofore called Heracleotique and Pelusiaque, which com∣pose the two sides of the triangle. As to the surfluxes and inundations which fertilize all Egypt,Causes of the flow∣ing of Nile. and serve instead of fructiferous rains from June to September, laying the Countrey like an Archipelagus, covered with in∣numerable little Islands, wherein stand their habitations more excelse then the rest, which is a piece of water, I leave to Philo∣sophers to search the causes, who in all ages were much perplext and much divided, some attributing it to the dissolving of snows from the Ethiopian mountains, where snow never fell: others to anniversary winds forcing the waters to remount, and so o∣verflow: others with more probability to the continual rains of the torrid Zone in this season, as I my self have seen it hap∣pen all along this Zone to the Indies, both East and West. Yea there are some who go further for a cause, and will have it proceed from winds and furious tempests, which at this season rage about the Cape of good Hope; swelling the Sea, which by certain secret Subterranian channels, communicates it self with the Ethiopian Lakes, which makes Nile and other Rivers taking birth from thence, to surfeit. But howsoever it is, and whencesoever it proceeds, certainly the effect is altogether admirable, the en∣crease lasting fourty daies, as likewise the decrease, and some say the River Noir, or Cambra, or Senega do the same. The course of this River from birth to dissolution, is esteemed to be nine hun∣dred leagues in right line, and windings and bosomes considered to be above two thousand, which is the longest course of any Ri∣ver in the Universe, except the Plate and Maragnon in Brasile.
CHAP. IX. Of the Town of Bagamidri, and the coro∣nation of their Kings. TO return to our voyage, I shal tell you that Bagamidri is a Town in Ethiopia, in three degrees of altitude beyond the line, in a fair champion upon the River Zuama, which disbanks as Nile do's. For the kingdom of Bagamidri it reaches to the Tro∣pick, watered by Zuama, called by the inhabitants Zimbada, which crosses the deserts of Manica, where are dismal Mountains, and goes til it ingulphs it self in the Oriental and Meridian sea, com∣posing a most commodious shore, where vessels take in fresh-water and fuel. Here are abundance of wild goats, and small Buls and Cows so fierce, that he must be very skilfull that takes them, they have little horns which grow but skin-deep, moo∣ving them as their ears, as I observed in another place. This River of Zuama is by the Portugalls called, Rio del Spiritu sancto, for the content they receive who saile upon it. Moreover, in passing or bathing in this River, there ought great caution to be had, and to be well arm'd against the Cro∣codiles, which are here in great numbers: nor is the danger on land much lesse, for the Tigars, of which there are great Troupes, and will very sawcily dismount you, either from Horse or Mule. Towards the West the Countrey borders on Mancigonge, Eastward on Cafates, to the North it lyes on Gidada, which some call the Countrey of Amazons, South-ward on Mono∣potapa. The Town of Bagamidri is called Imperial, by reason the King of Tigrai, or Tigremahon, having received his first Crown at the place of his election, receives the second here. Abba Li∣canus who some say baptized Candace the Queen Aluarez. ch. 14,This Ceremonie was first instituted in the time of St. Abiblica∣nus, who lived in a cave near the Town, in so high repute, that the King who then reigned would have the honour to be crown'd by so great a Saint, since which time there is an Ordinance, that all the Kings of Tigray shal be crown'd here, (as the several Crowns of our Emperours were received at Aix, Milan, and Rome) and the third he receives from the hand of the Grand Negus, his Soveraign, who hath onely a crown of silver, whereas the King of Tigray hath his of inestimable value. Here I shal tell you by the way, that in Tigramahon I saw a Church of one intire piece, wrought in a Rock near
to Tecassin, which they call the Church of Creatures, for that 'tis dedicated to the four Evangelists. In the lower Ethi∣opia, there is the like which they call the Maiant Calassen, that is, the Seat of Eternity. For the Kingdome of the Amazons they report it to be betwixt the country of Damut and Gorage, or Goraga and Gongara where they recount many things, not unlike the stories of our Ancestors; as that the women have the au∣thority, are exceeding valiant, and excellent Archers, that they cut off their right breast to draw a how the better, with o∣ther things of that kinde. There is mention made of the like women in many other parts of the world. Some say the word Amazon is derived from a country belonging to the Negus, or Monopotapa, near Mancinconge, where the women are of great courage,Amazons. though the men are Masters, and Preste John makes use of them in his warres. In this country stands the faire city Fe∣lucia, or Falacia, where they say is a sumptuous Tombe of a Princesse called Agagina, built all of a black marble, clear and transparent as glasse. The people of these countries,People black and white. are of severall complexions, according to the place that gives them breath: For under the line they are neither white nor black, but of a swart tawny colour, though the world affords not a more temperate climate then they are under. They who live Westward from the countrey of Agagne to Ambian are intirely black, and four degrees from the Line, troubled with excessive raines for three moneths together. But they of the Province of Zembre, are more white and ve∣ry docile, especially the women who are passably beautifull and gracefull, and good Christians, though they were the last that received the faith, since the Eunuch baptized by Saint Philip planted it in the better part of the Provinces of Ethi∣ope, and as some will have in Arabia the happy it self, and as far as Tuprobane▪
CHAP. X. Of the Mansion of Preste John, and his Justice. A History upon this subject. BEing at Bagamidri, some of us more curious then the rest of our company, agreed to go see the Court of the Grand Negus, or King of the Abissins; and to this purpose leaving them that had no such desire we took a side-way towards the towns Barra, and Barua, where we were told the Prince most commonly resided: Following on this road, and having crossed many Provinces and Kingdomes, at length we arrived at Barra the chief town of the Country, where we found a numerous multitude of people living under Tents, to the number of ten thousand, or more. Amongst these there was one covered with white cloth conspicuous above the rest, with twelve gates of marvellous largenesse belonging to it. We Inn'd in an Abyssins tent, who obliged us with curtesies, and while meat was making ready, they brought us in an oxe horne honied wine, whereof we drunk. Not long after, we percei∣ved upon the way, a troop diversly armed with twelve Ʋgandes or Trumpets before them; then came a Prince mounted on a black and white Elephant, which is a great rarity, accom∣panied with four Noble-men, who bore over him a Canopy of gray damask. Being advanced near the Kings tent, he dismoun∣ted and presently was attended with a numerous and honourable train. Next with great submission he suffered his garments to be taken off; they were of silk, interwoven with gold, and em∣broydered with pearles of exceeding greatnesse: He was a po∣tent Prince, who having received injury from another King, came to seek justice at his Majesties hands. 'Twas not for want of power to take revenge himself, but he would shew this defe∣rence to the King, who inflicts most severely on all transgres∣sors.Aranuhi. Now this Prince, called Aranuhi, stript off his gorgious habilliments, cast over him a Lions skin, which in the Sove∣raigns presence all are obliged to weare, with a large shirt of silk trailing on the ground. Being come before the Pa∣lace, the Trumpets began in a dolefull sound, and the King having notice, gave order he should enter; for this Prince in times past had done famous military services, then casting himself on the ground, framed his complaint, that the other King his enemy had violently carried away his wife, with a daughter which he had heretofore refused him, intending to marry her to another a greater Prince then he, and had taken besides 40. Quintalls of gold.A hundred weight. Upon this complaint the Negus immediately dispatched a Calscena to summon the Prince offen∣der,
whom he met upon the road,Calscenas, Peste Jhns mes∣sengers. Aluaca. 141. hasting to Court to clear him∣self of the accusation. Then instantly the Prince complaynant was called aside, reve∣sted with a rich habit given him by the Negus, with a hat of more then usuall largenesse, according to the custome. When the latter was arrived and disrobed as the former, and mantled with a Lions skin, he took a stone, carried for him by a Gentleman to the Palace gate, and having caused the Trumpets sound, he could not be admitted; but for above two houres waited in this po∣sture, taken for a bad omen amongst them, till a slave brought or∣ders he should repair to his lodgings, and attend there till he were called for. Some dayes passed in this manner, before any commands came from the Negus, then having laid down his appa∣rell, and put on the Lions skin, he seated himself on the ground with a heavie stone upon his head, as a criminall, till the Alicassin or Steward of houshold came, who caused him to reassume his apparell, which put him in some hope of grace. This Officer conducting him by the hand, brought him before his Majesty in state, under a rich Canopy, with a Curtain of silk of the same colour as the Canopy, screening his face, then cryed aloud; Most mighty Emperour, I bring thee here this Prince thy servant, and tri∣butary according to thy command. At that time the King was com∣plementing a Princesse wife to the Tigraian King, arrived lately at Court in a very plain habit of frized Cottons. The Prince no sooner entered, but he cast himself on the ground, the complainant who was summoned being present, of whom the Negus demanded what he had to object against this person; the other answered, that this Prince of Jauas had stolne away his daughter, and a great quan∣tity of fined gold. To which the Negus commanded the Defen∣dant to make answer, and deliver the very truth; who first putting his hand to the ground, then laying it on his head, with eyes lift∣ed to heaven, a sad pale countenance, fell on his knees, not pre∣suming to turn an eye towards the Kings face, who is alwayes screen'd, and answered. Most excelse and redoubted Sir, most true it is, I sent to re∣quest this Prince for his daughter Adila in mariage, and being de∣nied without further instance I desisted, content to seek another of my own degree. But not long after, the Queen her mother ac∣companied with many of her Alliance brought her to me, toge∣ther with gold, which she told me was of her own proper treasu∣ry, and not her husbands, and thereupon gave me both reason and license to marry her, and that with her own free mind and consent, without the least violence imposed upon her, whom I love and honour more then the whole world besides. The Negus having then taken the matter into consideration, told Prince Aranuhi, he found not the other so guilty as was pretend∣ed; that his sentence was, he for his part should repay the gold
doubled, that the Princesses, his wife, and daughter should be bor'd through the lips, and confin'd during pleasure, to what place he should appoint. The Prince of Jauas to this sentence durst make no reply further, then to desire time for payment: two moneths was allowed him, and immediately Commissioners were dispatched to see the Arrest of the Court executed, nor did either of the Princes quit the Court till the King bad them retire. But in this conjuncture, the Princesse of Tigremahon, moved with compassion for the condemned young Lady, casting her selfe at the Negus feet, besought him, that for a singular grace and fa∣vour to her, he would vouchsafe the young Lady might continue with her husband; and the Queen having applyed her prevalency to Aranubi for his consent, by the mediation of these two Ladies, all was ended in peace, and the two Princes embraced as friends and Allies. Mean while the Commissaries ignorant of what had passed, had already done execution upon the mother, and had likewise on the daughter, but that she made a seasonable escape, to the joy of the whole Court, and the Negus causing them to come to Court, would have the Nuptialls solemnized there with all sorts of rejoycing, feasts, and combats of savage beasts. Then certain Lords of the Court with the Kings Sister were sent to the Sea-side to bring the Ladies, who being arrived, covered with a white linnen cloth, and bare-footed, cast themselves on the ground before the King and the Father. At that time the King wore a Crown of silver for some mystery which I could not learn by any enquiry I could make, and the treasure and jewels being brought, were distributed by the Father to his two children, and the King in token of his favour and indulgement released to Prince Aranubi all rights of Signeurie, with letters Patents of free and absolute Principality. Amongst the Combats at this solemnity, one was of a white shaggie Ape put within an inclosed list, with a Serpent that had six wings, and was 14. foot in length. The Ape was armed with a wooden helmet, having a pike on the top exceeding sharp, and his body mailed with leather, liquored, and made fit, so as he could use his teeth at pleasure, the lists were rounded with painted cloth, with pieces of timber, and cords hard straind, un∣der which the Ape might shift when he was hard pressed upon, he made most horrible faces when the Serpent came to assault him, who raised himself upon little feet like a Gooses. Next was brought in an Ape of extraordinary size, armed with silvered Paste-board, mounted upon a great sheep, with a small lance, against a beast they call a Chilacou, like a wolf, whose design was to attack the Pal∣frey, not the Cavalier, who during the conflict, fretted, and made mouthes in a strange manner; at length they were parted. After them was brought in a small Lion of a brave courage, who finding nothing to combat, laid him down along, but he no
sooner saw a Creature called a Bachuro enter, arm'd with scales, but with a loud roar, he nimbly flew upon him; for a good hour the fight lasted, with terrible assaults on both sides, till at last the Lion had the day, strangled his foe and eat him, for the flesh is ex∣ceeding good. Then the Cheger, or Elephant with the Rhinocerot, which was a most furious combat, but of little delight, because for their bulk and weight, they could shew but little agility or motion. Then was brought in play another sort of Elephant, called by the Indians a Gachias, and against him four dogs of exceeding greatnesse, of which at the very first bout he kil'd one: The fiercenesse of the beasts made this fight of much recreation. Next was a Crocodile and a Tigar, who treated each other very rudely. After them two great Dogs against a Targout, a kind of wolf, but much different from ours, 'twas a bloudy combat, where one of the dogs was kil'd, and the Targout hurt. So this day was concluded with the combats, for other dayes there were other Triumphs, which I omit, to avoid prolix∣itie. This is all of remark which happened at Court, while we staid at Barra, which I thought fit to recount, for information of the nature and manners of the people. We stayed something the longer at Barra, in expectation to see his Majesty the Negus who was suddenly to come thither, and be∣cause he had not been there of a long time, a magnificent entrance was prepared for him. CHAP. XI. Magnificence of the Negus and his military Officers. THey have a custom that whensoever the Prince visits their Towns, he makes each to observe, whatsoever his Prede∣cessors, and himself at his coronation engag'd for, as to worship one onely God, to have but one Faith, and one Law, to uphold the Christian and Apostolick Church, some say of late years they have added Romane, acknowledging now obedience to the Pope, then to administer Justice, love the poor, observe continency, to impugn with all his power the Moores, Jews, and Idolaters, in sum all who believe not in Jesus Christ, to innovate no new laws, nor coyn other money than the Ordinary, not to stay above three dayes in any one Town, not to admit any Prince of the blood, or next in succession to be at large, but to keep them immur'd in the Mountain of Amara, with other things of like sort. To be
brief, The Negus was received into the Town, with a sumptuous state and magnificence, and we had the satisfaction to see his whole Court march. Here the Portuguese Embassadour arriv'd, of whom I spoke, with a train of twenty men, all mounted upon Mules; having staid, as they told us, three months, at the famous monastery of the Vision in the Country of Bamazaz towards the red sea, where report goes are 2000. religious gray-Friers, who live in great au∣sterity without want either of victuals or habit. He addressed himself to receive audience of the Negus, but was deferr'd to another time; by reason his Majesty having staid some dayes at Barra, was constrained to depart that night to go towards Sacouon three leagues from thence, two dayes march for the Army, which moves not above three or four miles a day: and here we saw the order of the Armies march. Aua. c 8.About break of day the Vaunt-guard marched first, consisting of some twenty thousand Horse without shoes, which in those mountainous and stony waies, is a great inconvenience to them. They ride as the Arabians do with a bill, their stirrups very short, wearing certain cimeters, and generally a certain two-edg'd arms they call Perdagalzes: This troop was led by a great Prince called Lychano,Betudete a grear offi∣cer. Al. c. 69. which in vulgar Greek signifies Light, but his proper name in Abissine speech, is Betudete. This troop being passed in very regular order, came the baggage of the court, amongst whom were a multitude for removal and ordering of the Tents. Then the officers and servants of the kitchin, about three thousand, who carried the kings fare in baskets, and his drink in small barrels marked and sealed: next followed a great number of horses, mules, elephants, Alsinges, and other kinds of beasts with carri∣age. Amongst others there were four Lions, as tall as mules, un∣der one mans charge, who never ceas'd raving and rating after them, to keep them from straying from their company: They were gentle and tame as sheep; and by the way, 'tis a strange thing to see these beasts feed; their keeper to shew us a rarity, hung up a joynt of mutton, upon the wall of the stable or den, all the four gaz'd upon it, and then lay down, as knowing their share was in it: afterwards the first that was hungry came, and at two or three mounts & active leaps spear-high, fetches down the piece of meat. But after this train of seven or eight thousand head was past, came 12. or 1500. Foot, with bows, quivers, and short swords, led by one they called Abagarindas: after them followed another part of the Cavalry, and the body of the Army in handsom order, with trumpets and hoboys before them, to cheer and recreate them. Lastly came twelve or fifteen thousand Musqueteers upon the wings, as 'twere in the form of a half moon, carrying their guns strait upright; cimeters they had, and wore a very large cap or hood, which they folded up, and let hang upon their shoul∣ders,
because they are troublesome and inconvenient. The Army which consisted of fourscore or a hundred thousand men, being past the Negus, his Majesty followed, of whom we could not then have a sight: Afterwards he came to Church with Stan∣dart borne before him by the Berenega upon an Elephant; 'twas the figure of a plain crosse in a piece of silk. And 'tis remarkable, that you finde not the figure of our Saviour nailed to the Crosse in any Church of the Abissins, and their reason is, because we are not worthy to behold him in his passion. Before this Ensigne march about fifty Priests singing Psalmes, and Hymnes, and four in Pontifical robes, who carry a hollowed stone large and square, which they call the Tabuco, which they use when they celebrate Masse before the Negus: before it vested as the four are, marches another who going backward,Tabuto the altar stone. incences the stone: then followes the Standart, and some five hundred gentlemen of quality, all on horse-back, and clad in large white shirts of silk, and plaited like a Chanons Surplice. One part of this company they call Calsena, who are exempt Officers in readi∣nesse to execute the Kings commands. After this attended with Musick and Hoboyes, appears a Canopy high exalted, and before it one whom they call Licadona mounted on an Elephant, bearing in his hand a lump of gold or silver guilt, who seemed to be the chief of this musick. Four Princes, upon four of the highest Elephants can be gotten, bear the Queens Canopy, plainly ha∣bited with Lions skins over their shirts, and broad hats on their heads: the Queen her self's in a Littar, and with her com∣monly a little childe for her recreation, accompanied with a nu∣merous train of Littars, Chariots, and other attendance in great magnificence. Next comes a man mounted on a great horse, trapped with Aiofar, a sort of stuffe which the tree Areca bears, and he often cries aloud, Tacar and Etefra, which is the same; as take heed, and make room. Then three hundred Elephants follow richly mail'd with Sea-wolf skins, lin'd with skins of Crocodile, of four or five hundred pound weight, and of such firmenesse, that they are Musquet proof. One clothed in Velvet, embroydered with gold, sits for-most upon the head; the principal rider beares a banner of a Lions skin at the end of an Indian Cane: upon the neck sits one who guides the beast with two barres of steele fastened to his jaws, hanging downwards, not turning up, as our Printers represent them; the Saddles are girt with chaines of iron, four men besides the guides may conveniently mount them. They call the guide the Digali, who is armed with a most hard skinne, and in time of battel hath a Trumpet or Cornet to put in the beasts eare, to make him know his meaning, who otherwise could not for the confused noyse: after follow many chariots, some of four, some of six wheels, bound with massie bonds
of iron drawn by horses, mules, and other beasts, wherein the baggage of the Army is carryed. They also use these chariots against the Elephants, who at first onset falling into fury by the in∣stigation of the riders, make bloody havock. Against which the enemy sometime provides fire-works, which thrown into their eyes before their feet, terrifies them, and makes them turn and rush over their owne men; but being backed with these strong chariots, and managed by souldiers skilfull in the art of war, they maintaine battell. Two thousand foot next with bows arrowes,Ariates. and broad short well temper'd hangers. In the middle of them twelve men march, termed the Ariates, that is, the Apostles: after them came a Prince mounted on a white Elephant, bearing upon his lance a banner of a Lions skin, who marched with solemne gravity before 2000. horse, richly capa∣risson'd with a certain stuffe, down as low as the Cambrell, a fore∣head-piece of a hard skin doubled, which arm's the whole head, except the ears. The Prince that led these, they called the Betu∣dete or Generall, who had to wait on him a company of the Ne∣guses pages, whom they called Legameneos. Next to these marched another great Lord they called the Alicassin, upon a gallant horse in the head of two thousand horse more, armed with swords; and woodden bucklers, who are Gentlemen of Guard to the Prince, with them called Cumali. Then another great Lord mounted on an Elephant, and two horse-men advance∣ing something before others, who often cry out Imbrane, room, room: next two thousand barded Cammels, each mounted, with two men armed with halfe-pikes, and strong bucklers of leather: then another on horse-back with a banner of a Lions skin, the like as I saw before the King of Angotera, with a company of four thousand horse; this Prince bore a ball of silver, with four pages riding bare, excellently mounted, called Laga Menegus. The Audrugez, or high Steward, with a thousand horse in rich equipage: at the heeles of these came twenty vene∣rable old men in gowns so large, they almost covered the horse, then as many on foot, who seemed to be of the family of those they call Snachagora, who are Physicians, Philosophers, and Counsel∣lours. Then appears a most rich Canopy, with Valence of gold and silver, borne by four Noble-men, with a numerous cavalry, no bo∣dy under it, and four Beteneguz, who carry lumps of silver gilt, all accompanied with musick of Hoboys, and other Instruments. Then comes the King of Tigrai with his standart and a numerous company; and not farre after the Abuna, or grand Patriarck, with four Lycanates, or Prelates, who beare a Tabutt, with the Logatera, and march reversed, giving incense, facing the Cata∣mar, or body of the Army. Lastly, the Baldaguin or Canopy of State of the grand Negus, appears, accompanied by the rest of the Princes, himself mounted
on a horse richly trapped, with excellent musick. Two Kings on foot hold his bridle, two more at his stirrups, and two at the crupper; all in white silk shirts, which they call Aotila, the Prin∣ces wearing over all a Lions skin, a thing allowed to none but those of the blood, except some few upon speciall favour. The Negus goes under the State with a vaile over his face, nor does he appear unvail'd to his people more then foure times in the year, and some years only at New-years tyde, and Easter, when he keeps open Court. But since the death of Negus Nahut was concealed so many moneths after his decease, this custome is changed, and 'twas enacted by the Councell generall, or States assembled, that he should shew himself four times the year at solemn feasts. When these times come, the people expresse extraordinary joy, as if the Deity it self descended to them, by reason this Prince is exceeding just, compassionate and mercifull, dividing his reve∣nue in three parts, one for his family, a second for the Church, and a third for Orphans, widowes, and others in want, for which purpose he builds abundance of well-founded Hospitalls. CHAP. XII. The victory of the Negus over the Goragues. His entrance into Barua. LEaving Barra we went to the town of Barua out of desire to see more of the Negus, and the triumphant entrance provi∣ded for him, for a victory lately had over the Soldan of Gorago, a people so wilde and savage, that of how many soever are taken in war, 'tis impossible to preserve one alive; by reason they are no sooner prisoners, but by the sent of a certain poyson they have in readinesse, they die in the very instant, or suddainly after. In this war the King of Tigray brought him very effectuall auxilia∣tions, else he had had a bad match of the Goragues, a mortall ene∣my to the Abissine, whom they call Israelites. In conclusion, after he had put them to the rout, he pursued and besieged them in Tamar, a town surrounded with strong walls, and good ditches, where they were provided of En∣gines, made of great timber-pieces so drawne and bent by cor∣dage and wheeles, fixt opposite, that the reverse was so vigorous, they would founder or break a ship in pieces. For which rea∣son the Negus, after the trench was filled forbore to storme, nor indeed, but for the help of a Genoese had he accomplished his de∣signe without extream losse. This Genoese by mine blew up a Tower, which opened a marvelous breach. Then the people,
mad with despaire, choosing rather to dye, then be reduced to ser∣vitude, exposed their wives and children in the face of the assault. In the end, the town was taken and demolished, and the inhabi∣tants to a man put to the sword, not one amongst them yielding to accept of mercy. The Negus took prisoners the Kings wife and daughters, and while he was using perswasions to gain them to come live with his Queen, and that he would wealthily bestow the daughters, the mother and one of the daughters had dis∣patched themselves with poyson: The other who was faire in perfection had no ambition of death. The Negus gave her to his wife, who richly clothed her, and used all sorts of blandish∣ments to comfort her. After this victory in Gorago, against the Negus was to visit Barra, the inhabitants amongst other magnificences had erected to him a stately Pyramid of timber, covered with Fausell garnets, either cut by the hand of Lapidaries, or coming so from the mine, sup∣ported by four Gyansts: with a spacious Palace of divers works and Niches, furnished with statues of Ladies, gloriously adorned with gold and silver, and laid with colours to the life, many Tro∣phies of victories. Upon the town River, called Morabo, was ere∣cted a sumptuous Pageant, with the figures of an Elephant, and a Rhinocerot. The Elephant was filled with fire, and the Rhino∣cerot was so contrived with springs that suck'd in water, and spouted it against the Elephant; the whole supported upon piles, by which the fire was conveyed with a singular sleight: for from the bank to the Elephant there ere secretly lines drawn, whereon were hanged cartridges filled with powder, which being sired with a cane,The tri∣umphall entrance of the Ne∣gus into Barra. the blazing cartridge flew like lightening upon the Rhinocerot; and at the same instant the springs being set on work, the Rhinocerot encountered the Elephant with such a stream of water, that the cartridges (the fire not being wilde-fire) lost their effect. It could not but be delightfull to see these flaming squibs of such velocity, and in such a multitude in the middle of a bulk of water which opposed, and vanquished their fury. The Negus and all the Court were much delighted therewith, and the Divertisement discharged a good part of those griefes, which oppressed the captive Princesse, to whom the combate of the ar∣tificiall beasts was very pleasant, it continued above two houres, till at last the conflict grew so robustious, they overturned the Fabrick under them; and all fell at once, and vanished in the River together, to the exceeding pleasure of all the Beholders, and thus was this day spent. The Negus on the mor∣row went to Masse, and as he passed, the Militia of the town saluted him with fire-works of ingenious invention. Being returned from Masse, and going to Dinner, unexpected came in a strange Prince, who falling to his feet, petitioned him he would bestow upon him the captive Princesse, or vouchsafe to impose a ransom on her,
The King looked upon him as admiring how he passed the guards, a thing extraordinary, and unusual amongst them; neverthelesse admitting his passion for an excuse, he demanded who he was; the other answered that his Countrey bordered upon the domi∣nions of the Barnaguz, that is high-Admiral, north-ward towards Ganfrila and Drafrila,Ganfrila and Dra∣frila. and that the late Zambaze Prince of Gorago had given him this Princesse his daughter for wife: whereupon the Negus caused her to be called, and after a mutual acknowledg∣ment, weeping she told the Negus and Queen, that but for hope of meeting again with her husband, she would not have pre∣served her life, but had in death wayted on her mother and sister. The Queen had gotten a promise from her that she would be∣come Christian, and being mov'd anew, she said she was most rea∣dy; then turning to the affianc'd Prince, she declared to him that being a Christian she could not match with an Infidel, and there∣fore requested him they might together receive their baptization: this at first seem'd very harsh to him, yet at length by perswasions and manifestations, they so prevailed, that he condescended, and both of them with divers Lords of his train were baptized toge∣ther. The Negus released him of a certain tribute due, which, as likewise other Princely presents, he gave his Lady. CHAP. XIII. The manner of service at the Negus's table, the receipt of the Portuguese Embassadour. AS to the service at the Negus's table, 'tis as magnificent as with any Prince on earth, for the multitude of Officers: our curiosity found so much favour as to see it, and amongst other things remarkable, there were three pages in raz'd tissue, suitable with a bed in a corner of the room, as we perceived coming in, the Negus's lodging as I suppos'd. These Pages brought to the Table three dishes made of a black wood they call Euate,Al. calls it Gauete. like to our Ebony, of precious esteem with them, for the property it hath to burst in pieces as soon as poyson comes within it. These dishes were half full, one you must know with a sort of pear, which cut in middle presents the perfect figure of a Crosse, a strange rarity in a fruit, the second half full of burning coals, and the third of ashes. This to represent Christs Passion, Death, and Hell.
The rest of the service was most splendid, as well for state as deli∣cacy of meats, ingeniously dressed and perfumed, with an odour so sweet and pleasant, as 'tis impossible any could be more. The canopy of state over the Princes head was of the same as the bed and the Pages apparel were. There were others diversly habited, but all rich, and every one two distinct vestures, one that had but a half-sleeve, with bases falling over their buskins, and hiding some part of their shoe. But I will relate the rest of the service, when I deliver the reception of the Spanish Kings Embassadour, Don Francisco di Lopes, sent to the grand Neguz for leave to build Forts upon his coasts, as well for the advance of commerce, as the propagation of Religion. He came on land in Africa, towards the river Souac, near the Monastery of the Holy Ghost, of the religious Observantines I spoke of before. We met with him before that in our travels, and he came along with us as far as the head of that River, where we set him on shore near the Church or the Monastery of the Holy Ghost, which is one of the chiefest Fortifications the King of Ethiopia hath, and 'tis there 'tis said 300. religious are, where he staid some dayes to refresh himself, then took his journy towards the Court, whither from that place he had 4. or 500. leagues of land to crosse, and yet 'twas a for∣tune to him that the Court was no further remov'd, for as it might have happened, he might have had above 700. leagues before he reacht thither. Being furnished with horses at this Monastery for himself and his company, (who were some fourteen or fifteen in number, he came, as he since told us, to another Church or Mo∣nastery some seven or eight leagues from thence, but with ex∣tream trouble, his horses so tiring, that the servants were fain to carry the baggage themselves for two leagues together. At length he got to the Monastery of St. Dominick, as he called it, where he found good entertainment, and changed his horses, which were for no further service, being so extreamly beaten out with travail∣ing unshod, as they use in those parts, because they have not the art of shooing. As he was upon the point to depart thence, there fell such an excesse of rains, that the Rivers were so broken out, that he was constrained to stay near a month longer, and ex∣pect till they retir'd within their banks. Then he continued his journey, and having crossed a vast Countrey came to Mongibir, where he made a visit to the King, who was then sick, but used him with great civilities. The Embassadour offered him the ad∣vice of his Physician, but he told him our Lord who had sent his grief should cure it. He furnished him with horses, and appointed his own Son to conduct him even to the Court. By the way he met with many other Monasteries, and mountainous and unplea∣sant Countries: thence he came to the Province of Tigremahon, subject to the Negus, who hath five kingdoms under his domini∣on: here 'twas he first drunk the honied wine kept in great ox∣horns.
From thence he travailed to Culusen, and many other Countries, till he arrived near Barra, where the Court lay. As soon as we had notice of it, we failed not to present our respects to him, and he returned many civilities to the Sieur de lu Courb, as the principal amongst us, but neverthelesse with a Sossiego and Spanish gravity, of which the Sieur seemed to take no notice, for that we designed by his mediation to see the Negus at table, which as yet we had not compassed; though for his own part out of the gravity or vanity of his Countrey, he disdained to see it, yet by reason of his quality he might have done it without difficulty. This being observed by the Sieur de la Courb, he so well feasted a Master of houshold to the Abuma, that he promised us we should see him at supper, as we did two dayes after: but I believe he first demanded his Masters licence, then he brought us to the Mona∣stery of Atania, for the Negus seldom lodges in tents, where he finds Monasteries or Churches, as there are plenty in this Coun∣trey. 'Twas there we saw the Prince sup, in the manner I spoke of. As concerning the Embassadour, the Negus having intelligence of his coming, sent a handsom company of Cavaliers to receive him, and some eight dayes before had sent a grand Serami to conduct him, which Serami was not sparing of his cudgell to any upon the way, that gave not the Embassadour honour, who being met by these Cavaliers many salutes and complements were inter∣changed. Being arrived at the Camp they presented him a tent of Canvas, which was something disliked by the Embassadour, as being unsuitable to his quality, neverthelesse he seemed to take no notice of it; but the Serami perceiving something, told him for excuse, they used him no courser than the Prince himself who had no better: which gave satisfaction to the Embassadour: then they brought him in provision of victuals, for him and his retinue. 'Twas three dayes before he had audience, then some principall Gentlemen and Officers came for him by night, and conducted him to the Court, which was then at a goodly Monastery; and being brought into the chamber of presence, he found the Negus sitting on a bed of raz'd gold, and silver tissue, four pages in the same stuff standing bare at the bed feet with lighted Flambeaus in their hands. The Embassadour made him a most respectfull reverence at seven or eight paces distance, bowing exceeding low, whereas others kisse the ground; and the Negus unvailing a little one side of his face, demanded the Presents the King of Spain had sent him, where the other being ready to answer, supposing he should have a compleat audience, the person that brought him in told him at present it might not be, and that the King had seen him was sufficient for the first time, and so without further cere∣monies he delivered his letters, which were read by an Interpre∣ter. On the morrow about midnight the Embassadour was sent
for again in the same sort and ceremony; then the Embassadour carried the Present, which was in pieces of silk, spices, and some rich and well-wrought arms. The Negus received them, then dismis'd him, causing one to tell him he should shortly be dis∣patch'd. The next day he was sent for again to Court, where he dined with the King and Queen, the King a little remov'd at some distance from them. The first service was three gold dishes, the first full of fire, the second of ashes, and the third of the miraculous pears I spoke of, in which, being cut, there appears a perfect natu∣rall crosse, representing our Redemption, as the other eternall pains and death. Afterwards came all sorts of exquisite and delicate meats. The Embassadour having staid some months in the Court, the Negus sent him a letter for his Master, though letters are not in use with them, content onely to send their messengers, who deliver their missives by vocal relation: but this letter was at the proper instance of the Embassadour himself, as he told me a good while after, when I met him at Grenada in Spain. When I mentioned the Army of the Negus, I forgot to tell you 'tis ranged in such sort, that the Lanciers are quarter'd outmost round the Camp, lined with the Cavalry, and musqueteers within them, all quarter'd in order, and streets, as in a Town: the Soul∣diers apart by themselves, Merchants on one side, and Artificers on the other; six or seven thousand tents will serve for fourscore thousand men. The Cavalry most commonly consists of thirty thousand horse, all unshod, for they have not the art to shooe them, stout and indefatigable, being brought up by Cowes from which they take the calfs and put colts in their places. To conclude, the Emperour ordinarily depends not upon his proprietary possessions: for bedes the gold and silver his people pay as tribute, they pay him amber, musk, civet, stones, and all sorts of victuals and sustenance; so as he hath not much use of money more then to pay his Officers and servants, who are paid their stipend in gold or silver uncoin'd in gobbets exactly weigh∣ed, besides such a proportion of diet every day for their lively∣hood, as in Italy, Cardinals, Princes, and the Nobility use to do.
CHAP. XIV. Of the kingdom and policy of Mongibir, of the Mountain Amara, where the Abissin Princes are. BEcause I have made mention of Mongibir,Mongibir. I shall inform you that this Countrey, the capitall Town whereof is called Scan∣fourin, is subject to the Negus, and neighbour to the Province of Calasen. The Natives are of a middle size and olive colour, which makes them affect strangers exceedingly, esteeming them more beautiful than themselves; though very few come amongst them: for they are wretched, base, and timorous beyond imagination, trembling at the report of a gun, which they say is the Devils han∣dycraft, and call him Hocalsic, that is a good man, who carries none of these fire cudgels. Neverthelesse they maintain a continuall war upon the Calasens, who are Christians, and they Idolaters, wor∣shipping the sun, the Negus never being able to reconcile them, nor introduce Christian religion amongst them. Amongst other heresies they believe, that after death the soule enters into another body, which makes them indulge strangers so highly, upon opinion they may be of their alliance; yet they hold they cannot enter into the Calasenians, nor the Suecans, be∣cause they are Romarins, that is Christians:Romarins Christians nor delight to inhabit a body of a contrary Religion, and so ceremonious and austere as ours is. The earth, say they, was made for our sustenance, and 'twere in∣dignity to the Maker not to make use of all which it produces. When one speaks to them of the kingdom of Heaven, they say 'tis the mansion of the Gods and Lights, and not of men, and that God will have no communication with sinners, who are unwor∣thy to approach a thing so holy, which shews they once had better knowledge of our mysteries,Strange prostitu∣tion of wives. though in the whole time of our travaile there, we saw not any book or the least record of the true religion. They will invite Passengers to lodge with them, and command their wives to keep them company; while they go to the wood or river for entertainment for their guests, their wives caresse them, and esteem it a happinesse if they prove with child by a stranger, which when they bring into the world, they call it Gilchaquillan, that is a child of the sun, who being grown up, the Prince takes him to his service, saying, this is the way to multiply his Nation with vertuous people. And what is more, the wife is the better esteemed of her husband; and the Prince, if it be a male child, sends him a little snake of gold or silver, in
form of an ear-pendant, which renders him so qualified, that the time may come he may be capable of the charge of Benchaye, who is the person next to the King: if it be a girle she shall be married to a person of high degree. Though they want not mines of baleys, rubies, and of silver, besides other mettals, as tin and cop∣per, whence they get an earth which makes the most pure violet colour in the world, wherewith they make their houses very gracefull to the eye, neverthelesse their fancy is to paint their arms and legs, specially the nails, and hang pieces of old iron in their ears. A Portuguese one day shewed them a piece of gold against the sun, which charmed them so, that they immediately made it known to their king, who resolved to have it at any price to hang in his ear, as a thing miraculous and sacred, and gave for it half a tun-weight of cinamon. As concerning the Articles of their Faith, they have no Idols in their Temples, but on solemn feasts being assembled they dance round, and sing hymns in honour of the sun, abstaining from suste∣nance till his setting. They acknowledge a place where sinners are tormented after death, and some more grievously than others, proportionably to their offences. Further they have no speculation, being Masters neither of li∣terature nor characters, a simple people easie to deceive, content with a bare sufficiency for livelyhood, not studying how to make use of their national commodities to the best advantage: besides so kind, they give freely to one another whatsoever they are pos∣sessed of, and so grosse, there are many things amongst them they know no name for, and are absolute forrainers at a mile distance. Their onely traffick is for honied wine, which is brought them from Suechan and Calasen, in truck for wild beef-hides, and Ele∣phants, which they sell to Biguen. They are of such fidelity in their commerce, that they are really ignorant what 'tis to lye, and keep their promise with religious observation. 'Tis true the In∣gresses to the Countrey are very dangerous, by reason of robbers of diverse nations who rendezvous there, but the King executes most severe justice on them that are apprehended, condem∣ning them to the jawes of wild beasts, which he keeps in Parks. This Princes court is governed with good policy, and is most commonly attended with four hundred tall men at arms, drawn out of his Provinces called Marac, which on the South confine on the kingdom of Couran, small Countries, but the Inhabitants have a particular renown for their fidelity: Besides he hath constantly near him 400. horsemen well mounted, and in his stable a thou∣sand able horses at rest, because being generally bare-foot, they are apt to batter their hoofs. To march before him he hath 50. Ca∣valiers whom they call the Joarmamir, that is the chief Guard, cloth'd in cotton cloth, with bow and arrow in hand: then follow
fifty Cavaliers more in cotton Cassocks variously painted, with a short silk Cloak, not unlike Meca Tapistry, wearing on their head a cap in fashion like a Miter, at their girdles hang little balls of steel with three pikes, wherewith they seldom misse when they strike, and at their Saddle bow a sharp'ned iron like the head of a lance. These they call the Kings Champions. These two troops march in the field about a bow-shoot before the Prince, having between them fifty Elephants richly trapp'd with Tapistry of silk, each bearing three or four men with strong bows, and arrows three ells long, Ethiopian bonnets on their head, and Alparyates, or open shooes on their feet: them they call Jourles, that is Archers. Then 50. Cavaliers mounted on white horses, bearing balls of silver richly wrought, in white short cloaks with silver buckles, on their head a red bonnet hanging over their shoulders, like a Chapperoon, they term these Gouaique Soumi∣mara, that is, the Princes Councell of strangers. Then a hundred more well mounted, stuck with abundance of feathers, their hor∣ses covered with cases of Beares, Lions, or other beasts skins frin∣ged with little coloured feathers, a bow in a scarfe, and a club in their hand of a sufficient length. In the last place comes up the troop which is called Mameiteque Ebaulbic, or the Guard of the Bo∣dy armed with long lances pointed with certain stones keen as any razor, which next fire-pikes is the most dangerous arms I ere be∣held. One amongst them bears the Standart, which is the figure of a Sun, and the King marches next after, habited much after the sort as the Gouaique Soumimara, a bonnet on his head, band∣ed with a white Taffety hanging over the horse cruppers, with many devices representing the high atchievements of his Prede∣cessours, to satisfy the humour of the people, who glory in gene∣rous Princes, whose fame may live with posterity. Amongst other the fundamental lawes of this Nation, there is one whereby the King is obliged to marry three wives all of his own quality, without regard to their being forrainers, or of a contrary religion, holding that a good wife ought to make her husbands will her rule in all things. If they conform not precise∣ly to this law, they render their children incapable of succession, and must be content with a bare pension, and become subject to an elected King, who possibly he might have raigned over him∣self. But this difference seldome happens amongst them, and Tradition makes mention only of one Cbapoularin son of Jazal∣ga, whom his mother had instructed to adore the infernal spi∣rit, which was ground of much combustion in the State, so as the mother and nine of her sons were massacred in a sedition, and they elected for King a son of the last wife, from whom the people received so prudent a Government, that being dead, they erect∣ed a statue to his memory in the middle of the Market-place, in the town of Biguen, where it stands at this day. This is a town
of exceeding strength, mantled with good Bastions, every street provided of chains for case of necessity, girt with good ditches, scituate upon the fair River Gambir, abounding in fish, which they fish for in little boats made of reeds, capable only of two men. The King hawks at river in those boats, as 'tis the ordi∣nary way of the country. They use bridges of straw to crosse the rivers, as they do in the kingdome of Garamel, which straw they call Ingar, as in the West-Indies they call it Tortora. The wo∣men appear freely in the streets, their garments are a short gowne after the Arabian cut, sleeves to the elbow onely, linnen hose, hanging on the left side a rich girdle colour'd in devices, to di∣stinguish maids from married women, upon their head a linnen vaile curiously wrought, hanging down their shoulders. Three times the year they admit commerce with the Suecheui∣ans, for their civility at Memite, when they took away all their women, and by expresse command of their King, restored them without the least injury to their honour, a most heroick action of a barbarous Prince. From this country of Suechen they receive very considerable commodities, as likewise from Couran and Ma∣rat, countreys where they have plenty of honied wines, corne, cattle, fish, and excellent fruits, which they transport to Biguen without the least tribute for any thing whatsoever. When the Kings wives go abroad, they are seated on Chariots, in such manner as the Chineses or the Geneses are, all three together, in the same dresse like three sisters, and with like affection. The Prince keeps a perfect amity amongst all the three, a thing much to be admired. Three principal noble-men called Genelcoulbre ever aecompany them, walking seven or eight paces before them, with staves in their hands. The Ladies wear crowns of flowers and stones won∣derful refulgent, their face open, with pendants in their ears of rich pearls, and bracelets of the same. If they meet the King, they descend from their Chariots, and im∣mediately ascend again without further complement, as if they had never seen him. He makes a turn towards them, then passes on; and three of the chief of his train alight from horse, and come kisse the Queens Chariots, who deliver some certain words to them, and so the Gentlemen remount. I often enqui∣red what it might be they spoke, but I could never be satisfied for the several relations told me. The Princes royall are educated in the Province of Marat, with prudent persons well warn'd to in∣struct them in obedience to the King, whom they visit once in the year, which they divide into four seasons as we do. The Daughters remain near their Mothers, where for their exercise they are taught to work the short coats, which resemble the Ta∣pistry of Meca, which the King bestowes as presents on the Prin∣cipal of his Court, to whom he marries his daughters: these Per∣sons by priviledge may have two wives more, but of inferiour de∣gree
to his Lady-Royall, and so may be elected Bene-Chayc, an honourable office next his Majesty. The Court is well governed, and very polite, but the vulgar are exceeding grosse and ignorant. Daughters of the Nobility marry not but with husbands of vertue and valour. The King uses all endeavour to civilize the People, but to no effect. Upon a time the King met a clowne carrying fish, and asking him what he was, received but a slight answer; but being told 'twas the King spoke to him, he was so overjoyed, he would needs give him all his fish, which the King refused, but out of love he would needs force it upon him, and kindly threw it all in his lap, whereat the King laughed heartily, and caused one to give him a thanks of a better price, and made him come to Court, whence he would part no more. Some dayes journey from Bilguca towards the Province of Marat, Westward there is a mountain to imagination surpas∣sing the highest steppe of the Ceuares in altitude, which ne∣ver wants snow, no not in July when we surmounted it, which is the end of Winter there. At the foot of the Moun∣tain there is a gentile towne called Moulgas, the inhabitants whereof are Jewes, tributary to the King of Mongibir: one of these Jewes was our Hoste, who gave us good entertainment, and falling into discourse upon the Old Testament, he took us for Jewes, and presently we had a whole Synagogue about us to congratulate, but they were soon scared away, when we as∣sured them we were Christians. Our Host presented us for a dainty with the flesh of Crocodile, but not being used to it, for my part I could not taste it, for the apprehension I had of that furious creature, though I were sufficiently satisfied the meat was wholesome, white, and sipid. He shewed us two Ducarfs, the least I ever saw, who for pastime he had hors'd upon a sheep. Having gotten an Elephant for the remove of our baggage and commodities, we left Moulgas, and came to Suarin, the first Town in Marat, a place of strength scituate upon a little Mountain, whence there sallies a stream of wa∣ter that turns three Mills. The people are kinde and courte∣ous, but Idolaters, believing the Sunne to be the maker of all things, and like them of Mongibir, that Heaven is onely for the Gods, and not for men. Thence we came to Moucal, an uniform Town, having eight ports, which are all perspicable from the middle station of the Town: Before the Palace-Royall stands a Pyramid, upon which there is the statue of a King named Soualin, who once rescued this Town out of an enemies hands, by the ayd of the Towneswo∣men, who in the action attested an un-heard of Magnani∣mity, for a monument whereof, he enacted a Law in their favour, that they may have three husbands, but the men
for their basenesse, onely one Wife. Some few dayes journey from thence, we entered the king∣dome of Couran, a good and fertile countrey, but full of Forests, infested with very dangerous wilde beasts, and amongst others with a sort of fierce and ravenous dogges, by which ma∣ny Passengers are devoured; as by the way we met with suf∣ficient evidence in bones, apparel, and bagges of Pearles and Emeraulds. Afterwards we passed through divers countries, as Sou∣chalbi, Choucay, and others. In all these parts we far'd at a cheap rate, for it cost us not in two dayes the value of a far∣thing; the good people bringing us share of what prey they had in hunting, came themselves to eat with us: for our exhila∣ration, they used certain strange instruments which they play∣ed on. The women are reasonable faire, very chast, but ill apparelled. The maids at twenty yeares of age, may marry whom they will, without hinderance of either Father or Mother. When they solemnize matrimony, they go to the Temple, where the Father sayes to the young man, I give thee my daughter for thy spouse, and the other Father sayes the like to the maid. Then they take two sheeps hearts, male and fe∣male, and present them to the Priests; who saying certain pray∣ers, burn them on the Altar, then kisse the married couple, and joyn them in mutuall embraces: then they feast with musick, and deprive the maid of a lock of haire growing on the hind∣part of her head, as is the custom for all maids and widowes, they religiously observe marriage all their lives, in perfect peace and concord. See Al. cap. 58. and 59.To give account of the Mountain Amara, whereof I made mention before, which is in four degrees and a halfe of the Me∣ridian, where all the Princes of the blood are enclosed, and carefully guarded, 'tis a large Province, adjacent to Belequan∣ze, Zoa, and Ambian, containing a good number of Towns, Vil∣lages, and Castles, and is above 150. leagues in circuit. Much about the middle, there is a high risen mountain of the same name, directly under the Equinoctiall line, which is the proper Mansion of the Princes. There are some who relate wonders of the height, extent, beauty, and richnesse of it, making it a terrestri∣all Paradise, but there is more probability in what I learnt of some inhabitants beyond it, who say the Mount is round, of but few leagues compass at the top, exceeding high, constituted of a rock cut like a wall, of difficult ascent, but onely by one certain way. There are Palaces and Gardens for accommodation of the Prin∣ces and their People, besides a Monastry of S. Anthonies Order, with corn, fruit, and cattle for their sustenance, without any other water then rain, which they preserve in Cesterns.
Franciscus Aluarez neverthelesse saith, this mountain is not to be rounded in lesse than fifteen dayes, but I suppose he means at the very bottom: and that upon this huge mountain where 'tis exceeding cold, there stand lesser which compose valleys, where there are both Rivers and Fountains, with some hamlets and ha∣bitations; but having not been an eye-witnesse, I report but what I have heard, for 'tis death to a stranger to come there, and the natives to have their hands and feet cut off. The Monastery is called Zio marina Christos,This is Domine mi∣serere nobis the religious whereof employ themselves wholly in the service of their order, which some report to be of huge number, others lesse. All of them betake themselves to labour, every one having his little cell apart for his devotions, not entring the Church but on Festivals, when they celebrate but one Masse onely. Their fasts are stu∣pendous and incredible. The women receive the Communion in the porch or entrance, not within the Church it self, except on the feast of the Visitation, when they have priviledge to enter.Aluarez cals them Debiteres. The can∣nons of Ethiopia. Of this Abraham See Al. ca. 54. The chief of the Monastery is called the Barnagaz, and by ano∣ther name the Lebetera, which means a Devote or Sage, as 'tis called also the Church of Sages. Here the Princes of the blood are kept secured, since the dayes of a king called Abraham, who ha∣ving many children received a vision in his sleep, to this purpose, for prevention of civil wars in the State. 'Tis forfeit of life for these Princes to come out of their enclosure, except him who is immediately to succeed when time falls: then he comes forth and takes with him one who is most in his favour, presenting gifts to all the rest, to whom he sends a rich Crown set with stones, which is given to him, whom by unanimous consent they acknowledge chief, and next to succession, who is honoured next to the Negus himself: for there the succession goes by proximity of blood,Israelites is as much as Princes of the blood-roy∣al, or offi∣cers des∣cended from those Jews who came thi∣ther in the daies of Salomon. Al. c. 61. & 138. ex∣cept power carry it as it hath often happened. Some say they call all of the blood-royal by the name of Israel. For the rest of the Province of Amara, 'tis very mountainous and very fruitfull, the air good and temperate enough, without discommodity, but ex∣cesse of rains from mid-May to the middle of August, according as other Countries all along the line. We had most of this relation from the Spanish Embassadour I mentioned, who had great fami∣liarity with Prince Gabriel, who came out of the Mountain when David the last of that name deceased, at the election of Nabur his confident friend, who freed him from that Princely confinement, and admitted him to live in his presence, so long as in no sort he medled not in affairs of the State. Many other particulars of the Mountain we learnt of one of the Religious of the Monastery there, who amongst other things told us, how he once attended the Negus against the King of Geret, assisted with the Kings of Abat and Eri, who denied the customary tribute, whom this Prince invaded as far as the Countries of Ganfrila and Drafrila, who o¦therwise
the Negus had absolutely lost, for the Barnagaz who was Governour, was then come to Court, to do homage to the new Prince, who understanding that his Countrey was seiz'd on, with all possible expedition, repaired thither with fifteen or sixteen thousand men, and brought a seasonable relief, assisted by a Prince called Lulibella Abelicano esteemed a Saint, and in effect with a handfull of men in comparison of the Enemy, they got but little lesse then a miraculous victory. This religious man told us many more very remarkable things of the death of the late Negus, father to him who reigned when we were there; a Prince so vertuous, and so beloved of his people, that after his death many of his chiefest Noblemen left their Fortunes and stately mansions, and becoming recluse religious spent the remainder of their dayes in pennance. Amongst others a Prince who had espoused a sister to the deceased, mourned with such passion, that he fir'd his Palace, and got himself to so uncouth and solitary a place, that no man knew where to find him. 'Twas in a Cave in the wild of the woods, where he concealed himself, and this by the consent of his Lady, who on her part with two of her daughters became a recluse Nun, in a Monastery of women called Aranatingil, to whom after decease of the Mother, the Negus sent to perswade to become secular again, and prevailed with the one who was married to the Prince of Dafila, but the other called Agaria, persisted in her devotion, and proceeded to such sanctity, that, as they say, by revelation, she understood the Place where her father was retired, and sent her Confessor to visit him, whom he found in the hollow of a rock, to which one must ascend by many steps, and in one corner of the rock he had a lit∣tle garden with a fountain, and some Coco Dates, which the A∣bissins call Miguel, and other trees set round. There the Prince spent his daies with one onely servant, living on the fruits of these trees. He was exceedingly beloved and lamented by the whole Court, as well for his valour and vertue, as for that he was of the bloud of Tigray, being descended from the Emperour of Tigray: and the Negus himself, holding wars with the King of Deli, felt special want of him; and coming to understand where he was concealed, took the pains to go in person with his whole Army thi∣ther, to entreat his assistance in a businesse of so main importance, to the preservation of the Faith, promising him that the wars en∣ded, he should return to his hermitage; whereto the other would not be refractory, but leaving his grotte, and appearing to the Army, they conceived so great a confidence of good successe in the war, that with a generall shout they cryed out victory. 'Twas a noble pleasure to see the kindnesses wherewith the whole Court welcom'd the Prince, some embracing his knees, other casting themselves at his feet, so great is the devotion of these people. Then arming him with arms of the skin of Coscuma, back and
breast, and mounting him on a gallant horse with an azure Crosse in a white standart before them, as on the day of battel, they have a red Crosse of the colour of the Emperours tent, they marched into the field, and the war was prosperously ended to the wishes of the Negus: whether this Prince returned to his grotte or con∣tinued at Court I cannot tell. But to proceed, the Province of Amara confines upon Angote, divided by the River Ancona, 'tis true that Olabi lies betwixt, through which the River Cabella passes, rising out of the lake of Amara, abounding with Sea-hor∣ses, by them called Gomaraes, and by the Arabians Garmaran, and another like to a Lamprey, which being boiled in water, makes pottage white as milk, but red being boiled in milk. The Negus is esteemed one of the richest and most potent Princes in the U∣niverse. His ordinary Army consists of thirty thousand horse and fifty thousand foot, partly of tawny, partly of entirely black peo∣ple, by reason of the heat of the Countrey, though notwithstan∣ding they have both winter and summer. The Prince never stayes in Town above three dayes, and ever hath a well ordered Army in the field, amply provided of all sorts of military ammunition, and his Court walled with a strong and magnificent Guard. When any one sues for accesse to the Prince, there is a Noble∣man whose office is to question him, what he is, whence he comes, and what he desires of his Majesty, and holding him constantly by the hand at the gate of the Tent-Royal, he speaks in a loud tone after a manner of singing, and so gives the King notice of this persons arrivall, who immediately receives a dispatch of his businesse in few words and short time. When the King marches into the field, which is never without his Court and Army, of above fourscore or a hundred thousand men, he removes not above four or five miles a day, ever lodging at Churches or Monasteries. The Army marches foremost, with all the baggage packed up in baskets instead of coffers. This Court is not hung upon by such a rascallity as ours is, nor is the Countrey harried and eaten up by such a rabble, the villages con∣tribute nothing, but the whole is discharged out of the treasure and revenue of the Prince. After the Army is passed, comes a∣bout three thousand Officers, who carry the provisions for the Kings table, wine in Barrels, and meat in Panniers, every one car∣rying his proportion on his head, those who conduct them are called the Seraif: Then the Lords called the Serami follow a∣foot, a javeline in their hand, and a guilt falchion like a short sword by their side, and the Priests bare-headed, whereof four, who serve by the Quarter, carry the sacred stone for cele∣bration. The Prince marches under a Canopy, in an Apostolike ha∣bit of white silke, with wide sleeves, and a broad large hat.
When the Court marches they are all well mounted, but ill-armed, for their Armes are neither so neat nor so well wrought as ours: The Prince hath one compleate suite of Armes which he puts on but seldom: The King of Spain presented him with a suit by his Embassadour, which was mus∣quet proof. Their ordinary Arms are half-pikes, and battle-axes, of which they know how to make good use. Their tents of thick strong cloth: the Prince's of white linnen lined with leather, so spa∣cious, 'tis capable to comprehend twelve thousand persons, do∣mestick Officers, and Servants, as I said before, and the La∣dies of Honour to the Queen, besides the Cavalry who serve by Quarter, and are those who wear the Lions skin. In the middle of the Tent there stands a Church of vast circumference, near to which the King and Queen onely inhabit, for upon oc∣casion of any conference, they come into other apartements. His Tent alone is like a little Town, containing within it his very stables, all regularly composed, and well governed. He hath his musick singing day and night, the Musicians discharging their duties by turns; though he be not in his Tent, the same reverence and respect is observed as if he were present. He who hath the office to expostulate and induct those who make ad∣dresses to the Prince, after he understands the businesse; if he cannot of himself give satisfaction, he repairs to the Prince, to whom he relates the whole upon his knees, without presuming to behold his face, or rise up while the King speaks, then returns and exacts the like reverence from others to himself. As touching Justice there, 'tis equally and speedily admini∣stred, without any tedious processe. If any man either in court or Army be found guilty of a crime, he is immediately punished with bastinadoes, the ordinary chastisement, but they use also buf∣feting as the Turks do. For the tributary kingdoms and dominions under the Negus, the Law is such, that no one can confer the succession on his Children without expresse licence, and 'tis seldome that the Sonne succeeds the Father, but where he hath done some sig∣nall service for the State: insomuch as they are as it were Go∣vernments for life, nor have they assurance to continue so long; for sometimes the Prince to reward their services will deprive them of their Crown or Government to advance them to a higher. If he be displeased with any one, he sends but a meer Serami or Lord, with a verbal command onely, for letters they have no use of, and the subject Prince having notice of his arrivall, puts on his Lions skin, in token of obedience, and meets him with all submission and civilities: whom the Serami having told that the King commands his presence, without reply he immediately prepares for his journey, with his treasure, wife and children.
The King afterwards disposes of him at his pleasure, either de∣taining him at Court, or sending him to the warres, till he shall think to bestow on him some other government or domini∣on on better or worse according to his desert; for this King is a be∣nigne and equitable Prince, exceedingly beloved of his subjects, which supports the state in happy justice, peace, and tranquillity, every one observing his duty: whence it proceeds that they re∣gard not to erect any State by buildings, having no assurance they stall descend to their heirs. The Crown revenues consist in corn, wine, cloth, linnen, silk, silver, not coyn; but counted by weight, for here there is no mint, no more then in China. He hath also an impost upon salt, which is a deer commodity here, and in some places is used as mony. The Prince hath these payments out of the necessaries to livelyhood, and hath his receivers in every town. His revenue is extraordinary great, which he dispenses part in payment of his Army, part in support of his family, and the rest to the Church and Poor. The countrey abounds in all commodities, except spice and salt, which comes from very forrain parts, and are exceeding deer, insomuch that for a little bag of salt, you shall have what you desire, weight for weight; for what salt they have comes either from Egypt, betwixt whom and them there are immense deserts, or from other places seven or eight hundred leagues re∣mote, which sets such price upon it: As again they have their spices by the red Sea from Cochin Narsingue, and elsewhere, and as far as the West-Indies. All the Towns of the country are ill built and little, and the rea∣son is, because the Prince resides so little in them, and the Court is continually upon march and change of station. The principall are Barra, Tiena, and Barua, whereof the greatest is not by a third part so big as Florence: They are all strongly wall'd, and some well moated, but Bastions with them are not used. The Fort or Citadel is commonly upon the gates of the Towns, where they keep their Artillery, whereof they have great store, and say as well as the Chineses; 'tis two thousand years since they first had the invention. I saw a piece upon a Chinese vessel of 800. years cast, and 'tis no small question, if they had the invention from us, or we from them, as 'tis more likely, if it be of such antiquity with them as they say, or whether we happened upon it upon the like accident as they, I transferre to more curious inspections. Amongst other things I observe it as most singular and laudable in these people, that they bear a passionate affection to their Princes, and so firm a fidelity that they submit to all sorts of tor∣ments, yea to death, rather then fail in their duties; and will consent sooner to the destruction of their proper Parents, then of their Princes: It being unheard of, that any one ever con∣spir'd
against his Prince, and if it should ever happen, they would extirpate him and his, even to the child in the cradle, saying; there can be no lawful or valuable excuse for the subject that conspires against the King. A Tenent strange enough to the per∣versity of nearer nations, and in particular to our unfortunate France, who out of I know not what furious enraged and diabo∣lical zeale, hath too often dipt her paricide ands in the Royal blood. God grant her grace to imitate these loyal Abissins, bet∣ter Christians in this then she. In all crimes they use a most se∣vere and exemplar Justice; and a man once observed to be nefa∣rious, is hated and avoyded by all men: so as if for any fact he once fall under the hands of Justice, he shall be so bastinadoed, he shall feel it all dayes of his life. And on the contrary, men of good lives are beloved and favoured by all men, and if any misfortune befall him, he shall finde every where assistance. The Prisons commonly are full of prisoners, maintained at the Princes charge, and 'tis but rarely that any suffer death in publick, but com∣monly within the Prison where they fell the condemned with a club. They have likewise a most remarkable Rule for Creditors and Debtors: for if one sell, or lend to another any thing, upon con∣dition of payment at a certain day, and after the day past, the Debtor hath not paid it, the Creditor goes to the President or Judge, to whom he opens his case: The Judge gives him a faire hearing, and having given sufficient testimony, the Judge delivers him a wand, wherewith he goes to seek the Creditor, and having found him, with the end of that wand draws a circle round about him, with command in the name of Justice not to stirre thence, till he be satisfied; then he must either discharge the debt, or to prison without excuse or delay: and if he endeavour to escape, 'tis death. Being in prison, they assign him a day of payment, on which if he perform not, he must endure the cudgel; then they assign him another day, and so forward, till he either pay the debt, or dye with stripes; or render his person slave to his Creditor, till his service hath made satisfaction: Sometimes they have the favour to go get their bread abroad. So severely is Justice executed, without respect of persons, or bribery; for in such case the Judge is both degraded, and punished: but it happens very rarely because they have but few suits amongst them. If one be found to have accused another wrongfully, he shall suffer the bastinado: again if one deny a fact whereof there is evident proof brought against him, they put him to rack, by screwing his fingers between two planks, and in case he confesse not then, they break his arms and legs. Their prisons are very large, and capable to hold many, where every prisoner labours for his living. The offendors by day have freedome of the house, but at night are shut up in a room so close, they can scarce stirre. In Ethiopia there are many Churches, but of mean architecture,
though something after the Roman way, with bells with wooden clappers, which yield a very sweet sound. They have very little iron and very few fountains; I remember not I saw above five or six throughout the countrey where I was. Their pictures are ve∣ry course, Statues ill proportioned, without any figures of relief.Alu. saith the Priests & Cannons are single, Monkes married. There are Monasteries of all sorts, more or lesse austere, yea they have Religious that marry, but no more then once. In the Church they never sit down, but stand upright, leaning at certain times on a kind of Crosiar, or Crutch. They consecrate the Sacrament in a piece of bread according to the Greek rites, and then in imi∣tation of David before the Ark, they use a motion in a manner of dancing in time of prayer, then bow themselves very low: When they go forth of the Church, they hang those Crutches out of the Gate in a place covered for that purpose, and every one knowes his own again. Their Priests live very exemplarly, and in great austerity: In the Church they never demand any thing, every man gives to whom he pleases.Instituted since Al. time, who speaks not of them. They have some amongst them who never eat flesh nor drink wine, living on no∣thing but fruits, hemp-seed, such as we feed birds with here, and other seeds unknown to us, and on certain roots. Others there are of an order not so austere, but every one, upon pain of most rigorous correction, observes the rule he hath made choyce of. There are Icronimites who ever go barefoot and bare-headed, sleep upon the boards, wear hair-cloth, never taste wine nor flesh, and are as 'twere continually in prayer; Their Con∣vents are in woods, where with leave of superiours, they walk at liberty, without any communication, but at confession. Their office holds from Mid-night till an hour before day, then it rings to prayer, then they repose an hour, and return to sing the office of the Church; which done, they say Masse with extraordinary devotion, then take their Sandals, and sit down to a very innocent meal. They confesse not at all, have commonly their eyes fixt on the ground, and are much in solitude. A man when his wife is departed, loses the repute of honesty, if he become not religious. They rebaptize as often as they please, and ever after confessions they go to a Priest in a corner of the Church to be baptized, and you shall see those of the greatest age go to the Font like little infants. Some have said that they baptize in fire, but 'tis nothing so, for they use water onely as we do, though their words are some∣thing discrepant. They have long precept-fasts, and keep lent very strictly, dis∣pensation being allowed neither to Soldier nor Infant, therefore this is the time the enemy chooses to invade them, supposing they shall finde them weak. At Easter they communicate after the Greek rites, and force the sucking infants to receive it, giving
them the Teat after it, so that the Church is filled with the cries and bawling of children. Obstinate Hereticks they condemn to the fire, but this hath not often occurred, but with Moores who dissembled Christians. In summe, the Ethiopians, though Christians, retain many ceremo∣nies, superstitions, and heresies, both of the Jewes and Grecians, as Circumcision, Purification, the Sabbath, abstinence from Swines flesh, from Hare, from blood, from all things strangled, and from certain fish. With the Grecians they deny the Procession of the Holy Ghost, the two-fold will of Christ, repeat Baptisme, condemn the Councel of Calcedon in favour of Eutiches and Dios∣corus, hold that the soul freed from the body, enters not into hea∣ven till the dissolution of the world, and many other errours at∣tributed to them, denyed by some of them: but of this the Mo∣dern relations of the Jesuites, afford better information; who live amongst them, and bring in a plentiful harvest to the Church, by the conversion of these people to the Catholick and Ro∣man Faith. Concerning the Prince he hath divers appellations, as Senap and Negus which signify Emperour and King, Belulgian or Beldigian, that is, excellent or precious Lord, and with the vulgar, the Pre∣steian, whether the name came from an ancient Persian word which signifies Apostolical, or whether in imitation of a King, who sometime raigned in Tartary, called the Presteian of India a Ne∣storian Christian, who was vanquished, and cast out by the Tar∣tars, and had this name from having a Crosse borne before him, when he appeared in publick. Afterwards the Portuguese by the same name called the King of the Abissins, either for a parity, or because they apprehen∣ded him the Presteian of Asia and India, so high in history for these three or four last Ages. But of all I have said, and of all other particulars of the Empire of the Abissins; their Manners,Look Al. Ges, Go∣dagne, and the mo∣dern rela∣tions of the Jesuites. Religion, Speech, and Power, I referre my selfe to the more ample discourses of such as have written expresse∣ly, whose residence and observation was of higher growth then mine, content onely to have touched upon that little I observed passing through the Countrey, and now I will revert to the Town of Barua, which I left for this short digression.
CHAP. XV. Of the Town of Barua, Bagamidri, and others. Stories of Sorcerers. BArua is a Town, that for bulk and scituation may stand in Pa∣rallell with Samacara in Arabia the happy, whereof I spake in the first part. It is raised upon a Mountain, at the Foot where∣of slides a lovely River called the Arabic Arat, by the Abissins Morato, which yields abundance of fish, but chiefly store of Crocodiles, which are excellent meat, and they eat them chiefly in lent, at which season there comes more plenty then at any time of the year besides. They come up from Nile, and so disperse themselves through all the Rivers of Ethiope, that fall upon it. This creature lives both on land and water, is a great destruction of cattell, chiefly of sheep, where∣of he is very licourous, and will devour one at a morsel, for want of them will break into gardens, and eat the fruits. This crea∣ture is so subtle, that he will hide himself near to houses, and vent most heavie sighs, to entice people to him and devoure them, as it had fortuned to a poor woman at Barua, who had been so taken and devoured, but for the timely rescue of her husband, howsoever was mutilated. The like happened to us going by night from Alexandria to Roussete, for we saw one, which we took for a block, and as a servant belonging to the Consul of Alexandria, stept before to take it up, he was caught by this beast, who with his tayle drew him under water, and was never seen more. In fine having wandered to and fro amongst these townes of Ethiopia, selling or trucking our Merchandizes, we resol∣ved to fall again upon our way to our country. In the compa∣ny there were some Nubian Merchants of the town of Casas civill persons and good Christians. We consulted together of our way, if we should take towards the River Falucia, or make to Gayuelle, along the River Morabon, which runs to Barua. But our company being composed of persons of divers interests, according to their affaires, there arose some dispute; but at last 'twas determined we should go by Gay∣uelle, whither we had seven long dayes journey, to avoyd the danger of robbers, who are very infestuous to those parts; as also the Tigars, whereof there is store through∣out all Ethiopia, and so at length gaine Zuama, or Bagami∣dri, where we left our vessels, and part of our goods.
Then we travailed along the river through diverse wild and dis∣inhabited places, being ever ready upon our guard for robbers that might way-lay us to ransack what we had, and so crossing Areal and Chaussabir two Provinces, we met with Heardsmen of exceeding bignesse, who kept tame goats, which furnished us with milk and cheese, and venison as much as we would have, for a small quantity of salt in exchange, being of opinion we had given them something of high price. Not long after we beheld Gazuelle, and other small Townes, where the greater part are Christians, though they hold something of Judaism, as I said before. As we thought to go take our dinner at Moradar, about a league from Almina, a stormy wind under a cloak of thick black clouds pursued us at the heels, which made us keep near our boats, that if the rain should surprize us we might have shelter at hand. At the instant, two men and a Priest in a gray habit accosted us, the Priest with his hat in his hand, saluted us in Italian, saying he was of Cagliari in Sardaignia, and that 'twas his desire to re∣turn for his Countrey, whence he came into Ethiopia with a Ro∣man Bishop, who passed to the other world at Magadeli: and un∣derstanding of some Italians that were travailing through Ethiopia for Egypt, he had sought us out to be admitted into our company, intending to take ship at Alexandria, and steer the course for Italy, and so for Rome. The two men that were with him gave us high commendations of him, assuring us he would pay well for his passage, for that the Bishop had left him threescore Doublons for his voyage. We made little answer, but at the same time, two Noblemen overtaking us in Palanquins, or Littars born by slaves on their shoulders, this Priest made to them and asked an alms, and one of them gave him a piece of silver, then presently returned to us, and as familiarly as we had been acquainted all dayes of our life, told us, by asking one could loose nothing but the deniall. At length we came to Moradar, where we stayed our boats, as we had often done, since the losse of Monsieur de la Courbs man, in hope to find the body, for he had rich things about him. Being at our Inne we smelt a strong sent, and found 'twas some musk cats this Priest carried with him, which he would have trucked with us for other commodities, but we were loth to be troubled with such unwholsome things. There they brought us to table a dish of raw flesh, well seasoned with salt and spices, which was of delicate taste and an excellent meat. After dinner we ob∣served certain people, looking stedfastly in a bright shining bason, and asking the reason, they told us they were looking to see a troop of Devils that were going to a battail, that was presently
to be fought. We replyed if it might be without danger we should be very glad to participate with them, and would content them with a piece of money, which they accepted of, and the Sieur de la Courb gave them what we promised. Hereupon one of them cast a kind of grease upon a chafing dish of burning coals, which flamed and went out again, and there arose a thick smoak, then they perfumed the bason, and oyled it with a sort of oyl, and in an instant a formidable darknesse involved us, and we saw pas∣sing in the air, as it were great swarms of knats, not being able to discern directly what likenesse they were of, we desired the Ma∣gician he would stay them, and ask these Demons or hags whither they went with such celerity; then renewing the fumigations and muttering I know not what incantations betwixt the teeth, we saw as 'twere swarms of Ants, which removing on his command, in imagination we saw the form of a body covered with linnen, with∣out being able to distinguish more: but this Phantasme drawing near us, such horrour seized us, that for my part the hair of my head so started up, that it threw my cap on the ground, and strait a most loathsom stink, as 'twere of carrion, filled the room: this thing gabbled something which the Magician understood, and told us he learnt by these demons there was a battaile at hand, to be fought by the king of Barma, and thither they were travelling, to receive the souls of the slaughtered, that they had crossed a Sea of darknesse and horrour, and the confines of a land where the Sun never shone, nor Creature lived, and things of the like kind which this man related. At last all vanished, leaving a scene of such lovely trees, that from thence-forward we were bewitched with no such un∣lucky ambition to see Diabolicall delusions: But to our busi∣nesse, after many daies travaile we arrived at Bagamidri, where we learnt the rest of our Company, who would not come along with us, stayed for us at Zambera, or Zambre, a gentile Town upon the lake of Zuame. We were thirteen dayes travelling this shore, where we found many villages or hamlets, but few good dwellings:Abibli∣cains. from Zets to Casera which are the best Towns, 'tis three dayes journey, and from Abi∣ari, which is the Bishoprick of St. Abiblicano, three more, and to Cafata four: we had extraordinary rains all this way, which neverthelesse hindered not our journey. We made five dayes from Cafate to Girat,Bilibranos the name of a Mo∣nastery. Dragoyan or Dora∣gila in sum. See Mark Pol. l. 3..17. and two to Gisara in the Province of Ambian: from thence in six dayes we rea∣ched to Samodera a very neat Town betwixt two Rivers, and in two and a half to Cosiana, where we found the Princesse of Bilibranos, with eight Almadies, in whose Company we reached in three dayes to Cabestane, in two more to Ca∣besera, and in a day and a halfe to Ambadara, or Amba∣dora.
From thence we went to Albias or Albian, a small Town, but full stocked with people, here we lodged at a Dragoyan merchants house, who was married there, and he let us want for nothing. At this Town, in the River were abundance of tame ducks, and a number of displumed geese, as likewise most part of the ducks were, the rest frizeled, which caused a laughter amongst us; to see these poor birds so ill apparelled, which some of the Town observing, and amongst them some of the Consuls or Ma∣gistrates themselves called the Abiari, they told us, when these should come to our table, they would bring us a double pleasure both in eating and sleeping, and at last we understood 'twas usual to pull their fowle alive to stuffe their beds with the fea∣thers, making little cases of tender Osiers, which stuft with feathers, compose a very easie lodging, then for the meat 'tis both wholsom and delicate: for this purpose they fleece them twice a year: Sheep they have in abundance, which are of ad∣mirable increase, bringing young ones two or three times a year, and very often two at a fall. They constantly coat them un∣der covert by night, holding for certain that the two stars which predominate in these parts in June and July, which the Indians call Zobana,Or Zabano as the Per∣sians call them. See the first part, c. 37. which must be Medusa's head, or the dog, or one of Orion. rising in the East, are mortiferous to their cattle: they have a custom they teach their heards to feed so as they turn their heads from them as they passe by. In this Town of Abbiar we had good entertainment for no∣thing, all upon the Princes account; But wheresoever we came we distributed some grains of salt, which is very acceptable in those Countries, as indeed throughout the whole Empire of Preste John, being in effect their most currant money, for that is ready truck for any thing. In this place we staid two dayes, at the instance of the Magi∣strates and others of Quality, and left our Almadies and goods in charge with some of our company, to take the way to A∣mina, and so upon a branch of the Tecassin, visit the Town of Saba or Soba. We made it about nine miles before we arrived at Amina, by a road carassed with the sweetest folliage in the world, that is of dates, citrons and oranges, which grow there to a very great harvest. The fields are full stocked with cattle of all kinds, and wild poultrey, leaving their eggs upon the earth, which the shepherds and others will not stoop for: we had good sport to catch these fowls wherein no one hath propri∣ety; amongst them some have combs like cocks, and many other kinds there are. At Amena, which is a pleasant Town, there we agreed with a man to furnish us with two Bungi, or barks, to carry us to Saba and back again. The Bungi are little close boats like the Gondolaes of Venice, toed by two Bibaries which are small bulls trained to it, who go a constant trot. We went off in the
morning and breakfasted above ten leagues off, by reason of the swiftnesse of our Bibari. This branch of Tacassin is much about the rate of the ditch or channel of Pisa at Liuorne; but towards Amina it runs soberly e∣nough, where fish is plenty and cheap, as all other necessaries, by reason of the fertility of the Countrey in all things. The whole Island or Countrey of Saba, called by the Natives Ma∣guedan, or Soba, is environed with two large Rivers, Sabalete and Morabo, washed with the Tecassin, who runs thither to joyn with Nile, of large extent, very populous and fertile. The Inhabitants are Christians, except some strangers of severall Religions, there being liberty of conscience, and freedom to enjoy their own Temples. There came in our company a man and his wife in a boat of his own, both decently habited, he wore a large two-corner'd cap of Chamlett: many discourses passed betwixt us, his wife being very reserv'd and discreet in her husbands presence, but in his absence more free and jolly. The evening brought us to a fair Town called Salete or Ca∣leta, a different from that which is 'twixt Barra and Barua,Al. sayes they call it Berene∣gus c 46. Sabalete a river. Al. ca. 52. be∣ing 300. leagues distant from one another: we landed in a spaci∣ous place, much resembling the Tambou of Peru, one house being reserv'd for entertainment of strangers, where we beheld many gardens of pleasure, and amongst the rest one appertaining to the Prince of Sabalete, who is as 'twere Vice-roy, or Governour of the Countrey. This garden in my judgement was the most pleasant I ever saw in any place, full of all sorts of trees, fruit trees and o∣thers, with Bird-cages, and trees bearing berries for the birds.Saba cal∣led Sabin by Al. c. 41. Thence we went to dine at Saba, where we staid some time, as well to view the Town, as for our small commerce and traffick. CHAP. XVI. Of the Queen of Saba, and the kingdome of Caraman. THe Town of Saba or Soua, and Soba and Sabin, is not the same which is in the Isle of Meroe, near the 15. or 16. degree beyond the line, whereas this is onely in the 7. or 8. Some will have it the Queen of Saba came from hence, others from the Saba in Meroe, others from that in Arabia. This Queen, by name Ma∣cheda, or Nictoeris and Nicaula, and with the Arabians, Belchis, they have it that she went from Saba to Mazua, a port upon the red Sea, that she went from thence to Mount Sina, and thence in eight daies to Hierusalem, that she presented Salomon with gold, silver, aromaticks, precious woods, and the true
natural Balsome so much ever since esteemed, growing onely in the gardens of Jericho. That she had one Son by Salomon, whose name was Melilec, from whom the Kings of Ethiopia are derived to this very age; That Judaisme was at that time planted in Ethi∣opia, whence 'twas afterwards driven in Candaces time, when the Christian faith was established: but till then 'tis probable it kept footing there, in that the Eunuch belonging to Queen Candace or Judith, was travelling to Jerusalem, to adore, when he was con∣verted by Saint Philip; and indeed they retain still many Jewish ceremonies, as I said before. There are those who recount several things of the Queen Saba, which savour of the Talmud fables, and the ragings of the Rab∣bins, as her having intelligence how Salomon was building the Temple, she made a visit to him with a numerous train, a multi∣tude of Cammels, Elephants, Mules, and other beasts of burthen, carrying great treasures. That she travers'd Nubia, Cansila, Dala, and Tamatas, and arriving in the lower Egypt, she dismissed her Cavalry, as incapable to travail the Deserts, and crossing the red sea, landed at Ziden a Port in Meca, came to Medina, and thence to Sina, and in forty five dayes journy upon the Deserts to Palestine, that being to passe over a river, upon a piece of timber, being informed by the prophetick spirit what it was, she chose ra∣ther to wade through the water in her clothes, then set her foot upon that wood, wherein the Maker of the Universe for us, should consummate his death and Passion, and how of this beam then buried in the ground, was afterwards fram'd the Crosse on which our Saviour suffered; and many other things of like mettle they relate; which they say come to them by tradition. Of Candace they say more, she built the first Church in Ethio∣pia, by the Title of S. Mary of Sion, and that the sacred Table of the Altar was brought from thence. But reverting to Saba, the ayre is temperate, and the soyle exceeding fruitful, loaded with Oranges and Lemons, and covered with birds of game. They are a good natur'd people, kind and civill, of long life, and not subject to many maladies; and 'tis not improbable these are the Ethiopian Macrobees so much celebrated by the Ancients for Longaevity. They delight in good horses, and chiefly in those brought from Persia and Arabia, which they esteem the best of the world. They affect to go handsomely apparelled, wearing two corner'd hats of Chamlet lin'd with cloth of cotton or silk, their garments long, their doublets and hose of the Mariners cut, like them of Goa. The women are decently dressed in silk, their face open, with little round bonnets exquisitely wrought; at the crown whereof, which is slit, comes out a lock of their hair, deck'd with gemmes; of pearls they wear abundance, especially the No∣bility; others wear a vaile of linnen over their face. They have an hearb they call Amatura, which makes the best Carnation and
Nacar dye in the world, and being washed, becomes an excel∣lent crimson which never loses colour. The town in prospect may be aptly said like Tauris. Directly over against it on the other side the river, stand two other towns and a spacious Village. The kingdome of Saba is stor'd with many other good towns, as Ma∣drara, Ambadarae or Ambadora, Mathida or Machada, Betma∣ria, Madraneli or Manadelli, and others of great trade, the people Christians, of devotion enough, but with some mix∣ture of Judaisme. They worship Saints, but above all the bles∣sed Virgin, and when the Angelical salutation, or Ave Maria is rung, the Prince, if he be on horse-back descends to say the prayer on his knees, otherwise he should be mulcted. They have a Legend of a Paralitick, who being on horse-back, and hearing the Bell ring, without excuse presently alighted, and was cured; whereupon he became a Monk of S. Abiblicanus gi∣ving all his wealth to the poor. 'Tis death to blaspheme the name of God or the blessed Virgin, and all both men and women, as they are generally addicted to labour, while they work sing pious songs to cheer them. Curtesans and publick Harlots are there expressely prohibited, and severely punished. A Shooma∣ker seeing one who was very beautiful, (for lewdnesse) led to punishment, took her to wife, and saved her, for which he had a general applause of all men, and she ever after lived vertuously and modestly during her matrimony. They bear great honour to the Crosse, and salute it on their knees, as oft as they finde one on the high way, insomuch as one shall scarce see a Crosse without divers kneeling about it: When a Church, Chappel, or Oratory is to be erected, they ring the Gadapi, which means the bell of cha∣rity, the bell made of baked clay, and the clapper of wood, which calls them together; and a Calsena declares the necessity of the structure, to which they make a general voluntary contribution. I have seen the very principal Ladies along the river, carry, two and two, the necessaries to it, as Stones, Lime, Sand, and other ma∣terials, which some will carry on their heads. The Princesse her self leads the way on such occasions, and all the other Ladies fol∣low her example. The men likewise do their parts, and in cer∣tain stations stand religious persons, with musical instruments to recreate the Lady-taskers; on the other side 'tis the Princes part to provide fruits and other refreshments for them, with tables set here and there, furnished with all sorts of diet, and wine of honey in large hornes, for they seldom use other wine, except some of Dates; wine of the vine being forbidden by Law to all whatsoever. In this town is the Church of S. Mary of Sion, of which I spoke before, which they will have to be the first in Chri∣stendom, built by the Queen of Saba, wherein they deceive them∣selves; there being more probability, 'twas the Queen Candace, or some other after her: for in the dayes of Salomon, and long
after, there was no Temple but that of Jerusalem, whither they resorted from all parts, to the services and sacrifices at certain so∣lemn feasts. There are 300. Debeteres or Cannons belonging to this Church: There is likewise a stately Palace for the Tribunal Justice called the Macabate, where they judge the Processe, and Appeal to Tigray, whereon they depend; the Province being tri∣butary to the kingdome of Tigray. The Town of Saba or Soba is properly upon that Nile which comes from Zaire, for the other branch called Tecassin, or Tagazzi, descends from the Lake Baret∣na in high Ethiopia, and they joyn about Ermita. From Saba, be∣fore we went aboard, we had a desire to go see the Town of Cara∣man, the Seigniory whereof confines upon Gianamora, or Giana∣mara towards the East and North, towards the South upon the Kingdom of Cauas, and on the West upon the Province of Sieto, which touches upon Nubia. Here is a Church dedicated to the sacred Virgin, which is one of the most famous in the country, for that by exquisite artifice 'tis cut out of the natural rock. Candaces Eunuch is said to be the Founder of it. Within we saw thirteen Domes or Niches excellently wrought with fine columns, and drawing near the Altar in one of the Niches, the picture of the Virgin with her in∣fant Jesus crowned, and a crescent at his feet, then in the middle of the Church the figure of a Bird, signifying the Holy Ghost, without any either image or figure in the whole Church: The Ni∣ches made Seats for the Priests, in representation of the thirteen Apostles. They have many Sects amongst them. The chiefe Pre∣late wore a long garment close girt to him, at which is fastened a picket capouch. The man shewed much gravity and Majesty, and stood amazed when he saw us on our knees before the image of the Virgin, whereof he desired to know the reason. But as there were but few amongst them of the ancient religion, so omit they not to sing the Prime, the third, the sixt, and other Canoni∣cal houres, singing the Psalmes standing, Interjecting many sen∣tences, and prophane ceremonies. They much rejoyced at our devotion to the blessed Virgin, and began to cry out with great joy, Anderi, behold people of the farthest point of the world of our religion, then shewing them our Primmers with some pictures in them, they could not contain from kissing our garments, wel∣coming us with such profound humility, that in tendernesse we melted tears. May be the Mo∣nastery of Abba Ga∣riman.The Prince of the place having heard of us, and that we were entertained by these Priests, conceived well of us, and imagined we were Priests, travailing towards Saba in Meroe, to visit the chaire of a holy Prophet of the great God Magoura, which they hold to be the Chaire Saint John Baptist preached in, by them called Nabi Asista, and the Robe King David danced in before the Ark, preserved as a venerable Relick, with a ring presented,
as they say, by Salomon to the Queen of Saba, a very splendid one, and seems like a burning coale. Now being lodged in the Priests apartment, he entertained us with excellent fare, variety, and well-dressed, but the first dish seemed strange to us, for 'twas flesh raw, seasoned with spices; 'twas of no ill taste, but rather procuring appetite; then we were served with all sorts of good meat. At this feast many came to accompany us, and I suppose every one brought in a share, for the people understanding us to be of their religion, used us with great kindnesse, and as we came out of the Church, kissed our garments, and presented us with birds of divers kinds, for which we shew∣ed a gratitude, but accepted nothing. While we were at Supper, we had every one an Inhabitant sitting by him with a cup of Date wine in his hand, others waiting to fill again when occasion was, and not one of those who sate with us eat a bit, but sate onely to entertain us. More we observed, that in all the meats, there was not one bone, but so neatly ordered, one could not perceive how they were taken out. There was no fruit for the last, though they have great abundance; but Plates full of little fryed cakes, like fritters, to which none of us had any great stomack, yet to comply with them, every one took one for a taste onely, but for my part I liked them so well, that two dousins scarce served my turn. After supper a great concourse came in to look up∣on us, and some amongst them modestly desired me to shew them my Primmer, for a picture of the blessed Virgin which was in it, which I did, and they took it, and shrunk away so in the throng, I could never hear more of it. After this they brought us to our lodging, our beds were mats,Bernusse a sort of African cloth. and Bernusse instead of sheets. That night we slept very well, and on the morrow we went to hear their Church-service: where there was an extraordinary con∣gregation. We sung a Salve before the Image of the Virgin, and interpreted the signification to them, wherewith they were extremely edified, weeping for joy to see and hear us, and learnt by heart what we had taught them, for they are a very docile people, and proclive to Religion.
CHAP. XVII. Of some particular Towns in Ethiope, visited by the Authour in his Peregrination. HAving stayed there some few dayes we returned back to Al∣biar, where we found our company, with our Almadies and goods, then together we held our course upon the Nile for three dayes journey, meeting neither with Town nor Village of any importance, but we saw abundance of Cattle, Bufflers, Cam∣mels, and a sort of Goats, which have hair soft and delicate, as white silk, then steecelesse sheep; others all white but the head: Swine of extraordinary greatnesse, which quietly carry boyes who guide them, and travell them like horses; but for Apes and Monkies, 'tis incredible what number and variety there is in those parts, besides many other Specieses of beasts un∣known to us. The third day we passed by a corner of a wood, which is in the famous desert of Goran, whereof we had the prospect fifteen days before. There we found Tortoises of such prodigious great∣nesse, they will travel with a man upon them. The fourth day we came to a gentile town called Camissan, where amongst other sin∣gularities; their women are of extraordinary beauty, who enter∣tained us with many kindnesses, and the more freely, because there were but few men in town, the greatest part being in the Princes attendance, who at that time made a new entrance into Casila, another Province upon the Nile. Then we came to Cassoudra three leagues from thence, where there is a Colledge, and a School of the Syriack language, which the Mahometans of Dalascia, as sub∣jects to the Negus, are obliged to maintain for their tribute; at night we went to bed at Baza, and were exceedingly molested with knats or cousins, by reason of a little coppice of Cassia, by which we came, and after that by another of Orange trees, which kept us company as far as Baza. These knats breed in the fruit of the Cassia trees, which is sweet, and falling upon the ground soon corrupts, as I said in another place, speaking of Arabia. From Baza we made three dayes to Hermita, a pretty town, only one mile distant from Nile, which comes not to it, because the Channel is choaked up. The scituation is very pleasant, standing in a thicket of Orange and Lemon trees: there again we saw those huge Tortoises, which men ride on, and 'tis a wonderful thing of those creatures, they, their heads cut off, will live four or five dayes, retaining their blood, as we several times experienced.
On the morrow, holding on our journey, we came to lodge at Fougira, which stands in a wood of Orange trees, that perfumes the air with a sweet odour. There we saw Archers so excellent they will shoot as directly as a Gunner: and they told of one that set an apple upon his sons head, and shot it off with an arrow: we went to see the Governour of the Town, who was lately married to a wealthy Lady; and having made our respects to him, he had little regard of us, wherewith we were no more satisfied, than we were with his Physiognomy, which was very ill-favoured, but well matched with his Ladies. We spent most part of the night to see the devices and sports the people made, in honour of their Governours nuptials to delight his spouse. Leaving Fougira we went to Fougiara to bed, a small but a pleasant Town, having all the day had a violent storm at our back, and happy it was our Almadies were well covered; but here befell us a sad misfortune through the fault of the steers-man, for holding too close to shore, a torrent of water from this deluge of rain falls upon the open part of the vessel, with such weight and force, that in an instant we were all under water, and all our gold, silver, and mer∣chandize lost, with our Interpreter, and two servants. 'Twas a most deplorable thing to see a shipwrack so near the land. Yet I had notwithstanding the good fortune to save a woman, who with her husband came aboard with us for Casiane, but with this I had the hard fate, that by preserving her I lost a little pannier of the chiefest curiosities I had, which was a losse of importance to me, and much grieved the good woman, since it happened upon her occasion, so as she beg'd of her husband to take it into consi∣deration, and to give me something in recompense when we came to Carsiane; but he who was a subtle companion gave me good words, which produced nothing. The truth, is in this mischance, if we had not been relieved by another Almadie, we had all been cast away, besides that the shore is infested with robbers, and beasts of prey, as Lions, Tigars and others. 'Tis true the Lions here are not altogether so dangerous, for they will not meddle with a man except they be first assaulted: but the Tigars are bloody and ravenous of mans flesh, so as if they once compasse a man he is lost, venturing upon horsemen them∣selves, giving most stupendous leaps and assaults, yea they will fear∣lesse break into the midst of a troop of horse. By night we got to Fougiara, where we had a good supper provided, but we could eat nothing for the terrour our late danger had left in us, and the affliction for our great losse, but for the men above all: For the Sieur de la Courb lost a servant that had serv'd him twenty years, besides a thousand Spanish doublons, and a pound of pearles, by estimation of great value, with great store of other rich commo∣dities and curiosities. Notwithstanding 'twas our duty to embrace all with patience, with praises to God that preserved our persons,
and in this misfortune the Sieur de la Courb had a bason full of gold, of Pepitas, (as the Spaniard calls them) or seeds given him by one of the Lords in our travaile, which was in another Almadie with the rest of his people, and now stood us in good stead. On the morrow we went to Carsiane, and lodged at her house who was saved when our bark was lost, she made us a free entertain∣ment, and upon her account we were visited by all the principall of the Town. There we rested our selves two daies, and the good woman in acknowledgement of her obligation, thought no treaty sufficient for me, taking so much care for me that next morning she brought me a clean shirt, and gave me other presents as she was able, amongst the rest, a peice of very sine cloth of Calicut to make me shirts. Thence we went to Saraboma or Saraboesun, that so famous Island, which the Ancients called Meroe, and now Caeguere, be∣tween the line and the Tropick. Some say 'twas originally called Saba, and took the name of Meroe from a sister of Cambyses king of Persia. This Island is em∣braced by the two arms of Nile, the one anciently called Astaboras the other Astupus, or Astusapes, which is on the west side. Saraboma standing betwixt two rivers like Saba, is quite hidden in trees very pleasantly. There we saw not so much as one Trades-man, or pub∣lick shop, but every man in his own house works by himself. The greatest part spin wool or silk, and dames of the best quality make stuffs of silk. In brief, they all work except those of base repute. They are a people of honest and religious life, where there is not a Malefactor, nor a person in the hands of justice, no Lawyers, nor no Pettyfoggers. They celebrate Masse after the Georgian rites, with some ceremonies of the Jew or Abissine. Through all the churches they say but one Masse a day, as through the rest of all E∣thiopia, and all, men, women, girls and infants, must hear every day one: there cannot be a people better, nor more devout. They generally observe lent, and the greater part fast it entirely. They give the Communion to sucking infants, use extream austeri∣ties, are of very reserved life, timorous to offend God in the least, grounding themselves on the words of the Evangelist, who saith, Hardly shall the just man be saved. From thence we passed by many habitations of tents, composed in the form of Tremisen, or Ducalia, where throughout, the peo∣ple were very large of person, and stoutly armed, and waited on with fierce dogs. Then we travailed five dayes, not meeting with any Town but Guelba, a place inconsiderable: nor durst we lodge there for fear of some injury, but lay in our barks. As we passed a∣long, we enquired stil of the Country-men if they saw by the banks the bodies of any drowned men, but in vain, for we could learn no tidings. The fifth day we came to a fair Town called Essere, in the same Isle of Meroe, seated on a soyle covered with dates, oranges, and other fruit trees. They have likewise Coloquintida, but make
no account of it. We had sight of a wild Rhinocerot, that was cros∣sing a thick wood, that with breaking the boughs as he went made the woods ring, afterwards we saw the female follow him. The peo∣ple of the Country venture not to destroy them, for that he is so dangerous, and his natural armour impenetrable. From Essere we made towards Bigan, having taken in provision because we had four dayes journey thither. The way is something dangerous by reason of certain Cafies, assassines who murther the passengers, and live onely upon pillage.Tamatan. There they call them Tam∣matans, because they are of the kingdom of Tamatas: They can subsist three or four dayes together, without eating any more then a little butter, and two dates a day: They are of a large size by a good span taller than the ordinary, but very megre and lean, and they never lie down. As we passed we saw vaste Countries but few inhabitants, ex∣cept some shepherds. But before we arrived at Bigan, we came to a great hamlet, called Carfouran, where we went on shore to refresh and recreate a little: There we bought a barrel of wine of honey, which barrel was made of a cane of one piece, all but the ends. They have of these barrels that are wonderful large; towards the West we saw a great field covered over with capers, of which they make little account: we boiled a young calf, which they gave us, I think, for fear we should do them some harm, seeing us go in company, and well appointed, and every where we took passes of the Princes and Lords. Neverthelesse, when we came away we gave them some few dragmes, which are little square pieces of silver, currant all along Nile up into high-Egypt, and are taken by weight. Thence we came at night to Bigan, and we neglected not as soon as we landed, to go visit the Governour, whom they call the Basira; we shewed him the Negus's pasports, which with great ce∣remony in token of reverence he laid upon his head, shewed us great kindnesses, and invited us to supper. He sent us to our lodging four great hornes of date-wine, exceeding strong and searching; for drinking it without water one would think himself on fire, and I believe it passes through some distillatory: We kept it to take in mornings in the manner of strong-water. We returned the Governour some sweet-meats in exchange, which were very acceptable, and he gave us besides certain birds which are good meat, in Province we call them Fransons, with six turkeys, and four white partridges. Departing from Bigan we came in one day as far as Casima, directly over against the desert of Goran, which lies on the East and South of it. This was a day of great pleasure to us, passing still by Lawrels and other sorts of lovely and wholsom fruit-trees, and meeting with many Towns and hamlets, where they have horses in abundance:
We saw there a great troop of Munkies passing by a lake in the middle of a Plain, and a Gentleman fishing with Hawkes, which took great store of good fish, and carried them to their Master. The sight of this fishing retarded us above an houre, though we had seen the like in several places in India. When the people saw we were delighted with their sport, they brought us a good part of their fish, as Eels, Trouts, Carps, and Barbels, and we returned them two fine horns excellently wrought, full of Date wine. They walked by us upon the River Bank, and desired us we would stay and drink with them, mean while one of them wrote a note to the Lord of Casima, whereupon when we were arrived, he or∣dered us very noble accommodation, sent us divers sorts of fruits, and a dozen of rabbets black and white; exceeding small, but of excellent taste. With great courtesie, he offered us any thing we had use of, and on the morrow, he invited us to dinner in his garden called the Motochon, which word is vulgar Greek, though used in Nubia. This garden was made at the Princes charge with great art, full of abundance of trees, graffed with several kindes one above another, which to the eye is delightful to see several va∣riety upon the same stock, as amongst others two several sorts of figs. The like I have seen in the Isle of Chio, and at Zaure, at the Convent of S. Francis, for there on the one side I have seen fruit ripening, on the other side fruit decayed and rotten, out of which corruption, certain knats take life, which immediately go and peck the others, which makes them presently perish, which otherwise would endure for ever, an admirable thing in nature, neverthelesse most true. There were besides certain trees which bear nuts as bigge as Estridge egges, full of cotton, as fine as silke. There were other sorts of fruit which I never saw but there, and one amongst the rest, leav'd like the Siccamore, with fruit like the golden apple, but no gall more bitter, and within five ker∣nels as big as Almonds, the juyce whereof is sweet as sugar, be∣twixt the shell and the nut there growes a thick skin of Carnation colour, which taken before it be throughly ripe, they preserve with Date-vinegar,Lacque sanguine colour for Painters. and makes an excellent sweet meat, which they present to the King as a great curiosity. Another tree bears of the finest sort of Lacque for Painters. Also they sow here Ori∣ent Auil or Indico, an hearb that makes a dye of great price; whereof they make great traffick, and profit. Besides, they have another grain from which they draw an ex∣cellent oyle, beyond that of Cinamon, which they use for restorati∣on of the spirits. Then they have a tree like a Pomegarnat, which bears a most soveraign balme, as I have had the experience: for I brought one of these nuts from thence, which I had of this Go∣vernour in truck for a Turquese, wherewith I did great cures amongst my friends.
I should never conclude if I should write but half the curiosi∣ties of this garden, where there is a collection of all the Oriental singularities: But that which seemed of all most rare and artifi∣cial, was two hands of transparent Marble at the Fortal, which held a bow bent; when any one knock't at the gate, the hands dis∣charged arrowes upon them, but the arrovves had no piles, and the danger vvas not great: all this done by springs dexterously set on vvork. The beauty and excellence of this garden stay'd us tvvo vvhole dayes here in contemplation of the rarities. In fine, we took our leave of this worthy Lord, whom they cal∣led Lebetera, and bent our course for Misan, through which vve vvere to enter Nubia, a kingdom vvhich confronts the Deserts of Goran, Egypt, Ganga, and Borno, the bounds of Preste Johns Em∣pire, vvhich confines on that side on Nubia and Egypt. We crossed many countries in a short space, because Nile is more rapid and svvift here then in any other part, for having reunited all his vvaters, and meeting sometimes vvith open plain coun∣tries, vvhere he spreads himself at length and breadth, some∣times vvith rocks and mountains, vvhich gird and straighten him, he cannot so properly be said to glide or run, as to precipitate himself headlong, with falls that make such noyse, it deafens the people round about. There are the Cataracts so celebrated in antiquities, the great and the lesse, not far above the ancient Townes, Elephantina, and Siena, or Asna. CHAP. XVIII. A prodigious History of a young Abissin Prince, by name Joel, by enchantment transformed into an Ape. AS we passed along Nile in our Bark, entertaining the day with various discourses, one shewed me a book of many prodigi∣ous histories, and amongst others, this of Prince Joel, of whom I had heretofore heard at Pegu, where the story is represented in a Tapistry of the Kings, after this manner. In Janamira a Province of Ethiopia, there lived a Prince called Rostan Sofar, otherwise Fafarin, who by a first wife had a son named Alarin Sofar, but usually called Joel; and by a second wife two, Aman Sofar and another whose name I know not. Not long before his death, he made his will, and left to Joel his eldest sonne, his principial do∣minion, and all his treasure; betwixt the other two, he divided the rest of his dominions. The guardian-ship of young Joel, he committed to a friend, to whom he discovered the place where
the greatest part of his treasure lay hid, which he had inclosed in a stone that was laid in the bowels of a wall. Three dayes after his decease, this friend dyes with grief, so as the treasure, toge∣ther with Joels person, were left in the power of Rostans widow, Joels step-mother: who, ambitious the succession should come to her own children, out of a frantick malice, resolved to send Joel upon a specious pretence, far enough from his Palace, to a sister of hers, a most powerful Magician, who to raze out all remem∣brance of him, should by vertue of charms, transform him to an Ape, giving out that he was lost, and could by no means be heard of.The same we read in the Histo∣ry of Gan∣fredi. They say the work was executed after this manner. This Sorceresse was blind, but on the Sabbath that darknesse left her, and she could see as others do: a: On a Sabbath day she took Joel with her to sacrifice to Sathan, and do him such homage, as his professed servants use to do. But he refusing to perpetrate such abhominable duties to the Prince of darknesse, she resolved to dispatch him by murther; but again moved to com∣passion by the gracious sweetnesse in his face, she changed her de∣signe. She composed a Bath wherein she put him, and by power of her inchantmens, transformed him to an exceeding pretty, and tractable Ape, superinducing an Apes skin over his humane shape, so abstracting his reason and sence, that little more remained in him then was proportionable to a meer sensual creature, notwith∣standing which a knowledge was something more perfect, though he had not the use of articulate speech, and with a marvellous addresse to render those little services to them of the family, who cherished him, and fancied him exceedingly. The deplorable Prince lived divers years in this condition, at length he made his escape into the woods, where he suffered great acerbities, and often perplexed with illusions of the devill, but was still assisted by an extraordinary flame of grace, and the vigilancy of his guardian Angell, who for his consolation appear∣ed to him sometimes in the form of a dove, sometimes in some other shapes of like quality. Mean while, it being generally belie∣ved Joel was dead, Aman Sofar his younger brother had possessi∣on of his fathers estate, and enjoyed those wide dominions with∣out contradiction. Upon a time as he progressed with a magnifi∣cent train towards the Province of Dafila; he sate dovvn to re∣fresh himself under a shade, and caused the green bank of a cool fountain to be covered for his table, the pretty Ape being at hand, presented himself before his brother, and addressing him∣self upright upon his feet, by mute expressions seemed to beg some bread. Aman observing the quaintnesse of his dapper guest, with a neat white flaxen beard, soft as silk, and his-body powder'd with Orange colour'd tufts, bad some bread and meat should be given him on a Plate, which before he would touch, he went and washed his hands at the waste of the vvell. Aman vvas so taken
vvith these Mimick civilities, that he gave him drink in his ovvn cup of gold, and entertained him as one of his train, taking him along upon one of his Elephants, 'Tis scarce imaginable hovv di∣ligent and officious this poor creature vvas in their voyage, hunt∣ing for vvater for them, and climbing trees to get them fruits; but 'tvvas observed he would be Cup-bearer to none but his brother. Aman had married a Lady of high Descent, and besides had a Concubine whose name was Amer, and by both had many chil∣dren. Joel being arrived at Court, failed not to go kisse the hands of all his little nephewes, and Neices, and of his brothers lawfull consort, which he did with so courtly a grace, that Aman laugh∣ing, said, you are very imperfect in your courtship to Ladies, if you complement the children, and forget the mother, upon which hint he immediately tender'd the like respects to the Concubine, he had before performed to the wife. In a word, there was not the least offence of bruitishnesse to be observed in the pretty Al∣singe, for so they named this little Ape, insomuch that he himself in imitation of people would pare his nailes; would still his Ne∣phews when they cryed with plums, and fruit he would have in a corner, did all kind of offices for his brother and sister, except such as were sordid and inferiour, which he left for inferiour Officers. In Court there liv'd a Lady of Quality, widow to the afore∣mentioned Tutor of Joel, with a most beautiful daughter of thir∣teen or fourteen years of Age called Eugenia, or as others say Ozania, who falling sick, entreated her mother she would desire the Ape of Prince Aman, to be some exhilaration to her with his blan∣dishments he used to shew her when she came to Court to visit the Princesse, which was easily granted. The Ape being brought, as he had been some learned Physician, immediately found the nature of her disease, and presently applyed himself to make her merry: which divertisement betrayed her into the hands of sleep, then he stept back to the Palace to communicate him∣selfe, and play with his little kinsmen, and returned not long after to visit the sick Lady newly waked, stroaking her with his little hands, which had something I know not what of finer make then other creatures of the same Species, as I my selfe observed in the figure I saw at Pegu. By little and little, so firme a friendship grew betwixt Joel and Eugenia, that they could not be asunder, especially the Lady who was astonished to reflect, she should have so strong a passion for an Ape, without knowledge of any cause or ground: That caused her greatest admiration was, that one day paring her nayls, she would needs pare the Alsinges also, and viewing them attentively, she observed some part of them to be co∣vered with a thin skin like that of his armes, which were bet∣ter shap'd, and more solid then his fellows. This put her often
into musings, till sleeping on a night in a vision, she be held a venerable Matron covered with a white vaile, who spake thus. Ozania my daughter, wherefore protract ye to relieve my sonne Joel, who is the selfe-same Ape you so tenderly cherish, reduced to the deplorable estate you see him, by the infernal cru∣elty of a Step-mother. But as it pleased the Creatour of all things to suffer this trans∣formation, and in this forme to preserve him to this houre; since 'tis Heavens Decree he shall one day be your husband, I re∣commend him to you. Faile not to soak him in a bath of those hearbs I have properly collected for him, and laid them in such a place (she told her where) and you shall see his natural humane form restored him, and he shall be your Spouse, as I have alrea∣dy commanded him, having appeared to him in the same posture and habit you now behold me. And that you may have no sus∣pect of these my words, as soon as you awake, go to such a place of your garden, where you shall find a stone, which you shall break, and within you shall finde a key of Treasure, my hus∣band put into your Fathers hands to keep for Joel. In uni∣ty may you both live long: And with these words she em∣braced and vanished. The Lady affrighted wakes, and with a suddain shreek wakes her mother, who suddainly ranne to know the matter, to whom Eugenia relating her apparition, the Mother soon called Prince Joel to remembrance, how about his nine or ten yeares of age, by the malice of his Mother-in-law, he was lost, no one knew how. Hereupon they both em∣braced the Ape Joel, who had received the same vision, and was as 'twere out of countenance to be so indulged by these Ladies, to whose hands he paid his kisses, but chiefly to his dear and best affected Eugenia. Together they went then to councel what was to be done in this conjuncture, that they might not be liable to the indigna∣tion of Prince Aman Sophar. The Mother thought best, be∣fore he reassumed his shape by vertue of the intended Bath, that he should return to his brother, and after some dayes of himself get away, and then they would advise of what was to follow; But in the first place they fetched the stone in the gar∣den, and putting it in a strong fire, as they were directed by the vision, it burst, and they found a key, and descending three steps in a little Arch, they found a door, which they open∣ed with the key, and found a great iron chest, with a Masse of Jewels, and Treasure, with some notes of what Joels Father desired after his decease. This done, Ozania's mother led back the Ape to Aman, acknowledging her obligation, for that the Ape had recovered her daughter. Joel then stayed some dayes at Court performing his wonted offices, and application, and as he went one day to gather some fruit for the children, the
peevish Gardener threw a stone at his face, which fetcht some lit∣tle bloud: upon this hurt he presently run away, and was seen no more at Court, for which all were much troubled; Aman caused him to be sought for, but they could find him no where, not with Ozania her self. This while the Ape lay close in a bush, til at night he stole secretly to the Ladies house to his fair Mistresse, who suffered torments for him. There he found the bath in readinesse, and being in it 'twas an admiration to behold how the skin which masked him over, no sooner felt the heat of the water and vertue of the herbs, but it dissolved to nothing like a mist, chased by the wind, or dissipated by the Sun. They then cloathed the Prince in splendid and rich apparell, and the Ladies entertained and feasted him with an excesse of joy, which he embraced with an affectionate tendernesse, all three weeping for joy of so suddain and unhop'd for a blessing. The joy was generally through the house, they to whom the secret was undiscovered, supposed him to be some young Lord, kinsman to the Lady who called him Nephew. Then they entred into consultation what course was best, but Prince Joel in the first place, would assure his faith to fair Ozania, to whom he promised solemn Matrimony in fit time and place. After this they perused seriously the Testament of Prince Rostan Sofar, father to Joel, who in preference of Joel, had disposed him all his treasure, and the dominion of Chasubir. To his second Son he had given the Seniory of Sanat, and other Territories, with other subsequent disposals. All this they found signed and ratified by their Soveraign Lord and Emperour, the Grand Negus, for they found diverse letters, many rich presents, amongst which a cimeter with curious hangers. Now Christians of the Ethiopian rites, they celebrate the marriage 'twixt Joel and Eugenia in the open Church. And after some dayes of felicity, they were of advice, that before he discovered himself to Aman Sofar his best way would be to make his addresse to the Emperour of the Abissins, that by his authority he might have restitution made him of the estate and treasure left him by the last will and disposition of his Father, possessed for so long time by his Brother. In prosecution of this resolve, he took his voyage in an ample and magnificent equipage, and came to Barra, where the Court then lay, then having erected his Pavillions he advanced to the Palace gate, and having caused the trumpets sound according to custom, two principall Noblemen conducted him to the Princes presence, where plac'd on his knees, in few words he delivered the story of his fortunes. The Emperour with extream wonder called him to remem∣brance, how he was lost in his youth, and that rumour went,
his Mother-in-law had caused him to be strangled and cast into a River; how she had been called to Court, to answer these accu∣sations, and could hardly justifie her self. Prince Joel brought most rich Presents to his Majesty, in a vessel of gold, amongst the rest, a delicate Clock with weights to it, a most rich collar with a stone inchased, of admirable vertue to stanch bloud, as was experienc'd upon a goat, which they wound∣ed in three severall places, and not a drop of bloud issued. The Emperour received Joel and his Presents with indulgements, and desired his Lady who was come in company with him should visit the Queen, who received her with exceeding kindnesses. The Emperour was seated on a Throne, under a Canopy, with large curtains, called there a Mandilate. Princesse Ozania presented the Queen with chains of corrall, a crosse of rich Rubies, a Chrystall looking-glasse, set in a fine Emerald, and other beautifull presents out of the Treasury of Joels father. The customary Ceremonies of the presents performed, the Emperour at the request of Joel, dispatched a Calsena, to summon Aman Sofar to come answer the matter at Court, which strangely amazed him, both for the demande and re-appearance of his brother Joel, whom he thought dead long before. Notwithstanding to Court he came with all diligence, and found the Negus removed many dayes journey from the place, where Joel found him at first, for the Court resides not above three daies in one place, by reason of the numerous train which followes the Prince, and at that time was in the Province of Gi∣anamora, a Countrey of Mahometans, who were in rebellion for their imposts or customs. Assoon as Aman arrived, he pitched his Tents, and before he presented himself to the Emperour, enqui∣red for Joels quarter, who having intelligence of his arrivall, though the elder Brother prevented him with a visit, and knew him exactly, whereas the other had not of him the least know∣ledge: Neverthelesse at first sight, as right bloud cannot dissem∣ble, he saw his Fathers face in Joel's, and his heart melting, he fell at his knees, and wept. Joel raised him up, kissed him, and with mutuall embraces gave demonstration of joy and affection, then supped together. Supper ended, Aman with exemplar deference assured his Bro∣ther he ambitioned not to detain any thing from him that apper∣tained to him, but preferring his love before all worldly wealth, since by divine providence he was returned, after so long an ab∣sence, wherein all gave him lost, with a free heart he surrendred all he possessed into his hands, beseeching he would have conside∣ration on him and his children. Joel embraced him upon the same, and told him he would
share so with him, that he should rest content, and he desired to live with him in peace and amity: Then shewed him his Fathers Testament, which was to regulate them both, wherewith Aman was exceedingly satisfied, onely he had a little regret for his Brothers matching with Ozania as inferiour to his quality, beside that he had an opinion she used some surprizall or art to gain his brother; for the present neverthelesse he dissembled it, especially upon Joels relating the history of his life and trans∣formation, and recovery of his form, manifesting the obligation he had to this good Lady was so great, he could do no lesse than marry her daughter. Hereupon they resolved to go together to the Palace, through the middle of the Army or Court, which is ranked in Pavillions, as a fair strong Town in streets and publick places. Then with accustomed ceremony they tendered their reverence to the Emperour, to whom they signified the agreement and ami∣cable accommodation betwixt them, wherewith he was exceed∣ingly pleased; and looking on the sword by Joels side, he told him he knew it to be the sword he heretofore sent his Father, and if he would employ it in his service, he should lose neither time nor la∣bour. Then he called for two battle-axes for horsemen of an ex∣cellent temper, and perfection, enriched with precious stones, in scabbards of silver guilt, then drawing them out, told them he de∣sired they would both keep them in remembrance of him, and that at the Palace gate stood two horses ready sadled, which he gave them, and exhorted them to live in peace and fraternall love. The Negus gave moreover to Joel, in requital of his Presents, two Ele∣phants loaded with Matirals, a kind of silver money not stamp'd in Ethiopia, for there they make no sort of coin: one of which Joel gave to his brother, together with the burthen. Likewise the Em∣press when Ozania or Eugenia came to receive her dismission, pre∣sented her a chain of fair pearls, of an exceeding size, and a pair of ear-pendants, of rubies which to the eye were two coals of fire. Having parted with the Court they sent all their baggage by land, to return the same way they came, and went them∣selves to Vangot, and thence upon Zambre, cut their voyage shorter by the half. At their arrivall Joel was welcomed with the joy and ac∣clamations of all the Countrey, and Aman surrendred into his hands all that he possessed of his till that time, and reti∣red to those Seniories that were allotted him: And Joel had by Ozania two sons, Gabriel and Aman, who succeeded after his death. Here ye have the Tragie-Comedie, I mean the deplo∣rable and afterwards happie adventures of Prince Joel, who during his Apes life suffered all sorts of miseries, seek∣ing his Victuals with a thousand hazards and troubles, often
brought to events the last, with hunger, thirst, cold and heat, wandring through forrests and deserts, often exposed to the ma∣lice of weather, but more to the malice of men, who proclaim a most mortall war against these creatures, for spoyling gardens, pil∣laging their trees before the fruit be ripe, and committing many outrages on their poultry, connies, and domestick fowl, for which cause they pursue them with stones, bows, and guns: So as he was forced to use his best providence and dexterity to evade these in∣conveniences: and told his Mother-in-law Isania, he was often constrained to live on rats, moles, mice, snakes, worms, and other vermine, to prevent dying for hunger. Isania enjoying now a perfect tranquillity, took great delight to hear the particulars of the afflicted life her Son led during his transformation, and captivity. This life being properly a most cruell slavery, when Magicians shall have power to transform a humane body, contrary to his consent and will. And indeed he affirmed, it often brought him into strange despairs, even to cast himself from some precipice. So as one day being in this furious resolution, another huge black Ape came to him, and leading him to a dark deep well, perswaded him to leap into it, but terrified with the vacuity and darknesse, he retired; then a pure white bird came to him, who freed him from this temp∣tation, and led him to a place where he found a pocket full of bread to satisfie his hunger. Again he related, how following on a time a beast he saw at some distance, it brought him at length to an assembly of people of all sexes and ages, dancing to musick with their faces outwards: amongst the rest he saw a nurse of his, who bestowed a garment on him, for then he conceived he was returned to his pristine shape of man. That in the midst of all this he saw a Beare to whom all these people made adoration, and that the nurse perswaded him to do the like, assuring him this Lord was infinitely power∣full, and could restore him to his estate and dominions, and give him all sorts of content and pleasure, upon condition he would do him homage as others did. But as a Christian, he had a horrour of it. In apprehension he saw Tables brought in, and covered with all sorts of dainties, whereof they all eat, and he amongst the rest, but thought the meat very ill dressed, and of an unsa∣voury taste. In the end all vanished, and he staid behind like an Ape as before, and in a vast solitude, whence he had much dif∣ficulty to get forth. Telling this story, dame Isania much admired to hear that Joels nurse who was her kinswoman should frequent Magicians Sabbaths, and resolved to search the truth. Whereupon they went to visit her, for she lived not farre off, and found 'twas truth, as the poor wretch confessed her selfe;
and Joel was of such abilities, that by argument and eloquence, he reduced her to the right way, leaving that life of abomination, and went to S. Mary of Sion, one of the most celebrated Churches of Ethiopia, the chief residence of their Abuma or Patriarch, of whom with penance and contrition, she received absolution, and was exorcised together with a son of hers, whom she had seduced to this accursed sodality. Her neighbours adde, that there were about her certain marks where her flesh was insensible of pinching or piercing, as we re∣port of our witches here, which shews the devil is every where the same. In summe, their memorials in particular relate this sto∣ry of Joel for a truth, which I had also by relation from the people. 'Tis no small difficulty, how these transformations can be made by the work of the devil; for though sacred history mention the like of the Babylonian Emperour, that was done by the plenipo∣tentiary power of the Almighty, and if the devil do the like,See if this may be, in S Aug. l. 18. c. 18. De civitate Dei. 'tis but by meer illusion, or by applying Actives to Passives, and this no further then he hath permission from his soveraign Master, who executes his just and secret judgements, how, and when he pleases. We have plenty of examples both ancient and modern of An∣thropolychi, or men turned to Wolves, whether really, or in ap∣parance only by distracted fancies, which doubtlesse is the ordi∣nary way Magicians transform themselves into several sorts of beasts: and these Anthropolychi have been known to come into Villages, and divers women and children have been murthered by them, and that their teeth were short like a mans. I my selfe was present, when my associate Cassis apprehended himself trans∣formed to an horse at Transiana. In reference to what I have said, I remember at the great Caire, I saw a Jugler or Magician rather, by name Harafit, who had an Asse would do strange and supernatural feats, and many opinion'd 'twas a young man so chang'd to get money, which they call Ca∣rabit, and the beast understood both the word and the matter very well. For my part I thought him to be some reasonable creature, or at least some beast possessed and agitated by a Demon; for amongst other things he had judgement to distinguish the fairest woman in the company, though they go all as 'twere masked and covered with an Huke that hides their face, and a thousand other tricks, far beyond what I saw of the famous horse Morace at Paris, long agoe. Some would go further, and have it to be the Magicians own proper son: so as the Clark of our ship, another, and my self, out of curiosity would needs go see this Mountebank at his station at Brillac, on the other side Nile; where having wound him up with
good chear, and given him a handsome piece of money to unlock his secret, the Clark told him if he would transform a young Grecian they had redeemed out of slavery, they would give him an hundred Sequins, for they had a design to make a benefit by selling him to the King of France, whereto he consented, and promised to effect it, so that he who was to own the Asse and the Grecian both, would renounce their Faith: and hereupon shewed him se∣ven Figures for that purpose, in every of which, there was one name of these seven principal Demons, and a book wherein there were most funestous and execrable things. But with horrour we were satisfied with the discovery of so much wickednesse, and left him. As concerning the Androlychi, I have not heard of any thing so strange, as that the Governour of Bagaris related one day to me. He told me, that going with some of his company from Lio∣nac to Montpelier, they overtook an old man with a sack on his shoulders, going a great pace towards the same town, a Gentle∣man of the company out of charity told him, if he would, one of his servants to ease him, should carry his burthen for him, at first he seemed unwilling to be troublesome, but at length accepted the offer, and a servant of the Commanders chamber called Nicholas took the burthen, and being late, every one doubled his pace, that they might get in in good time, telling the good old man, they would goe before, and he should finde them at the White-horse. The servant of the Chamber coming in with the first, had a curi∣osity to see what was in the sack, where he found a Wolfs skin, so properly accommodated for the purpose, that he had a strong fancy to disguise himselfe in it: whereupon he got it on his back, and put his head within the head-piece of the skin, as 'twere to shew his Master a Maskarade, but immediately a fury seized him, that in the Hall where they supped, he made strait to the compa∣ny at table, and falling on them with teeth and nailes, made a dangerous rude havock, and hurt two or three of them, so as the servants and others fled to their swords, and so plyed the Wolf with wounds, that they laid him on the ground, and hurt in several places. But as they looked upon him, they were amazed when they saw under the skin a poor youth wallowing in blood. They were fain to lay him presently on a bed, taking order for his wounds and hurts, whereof he was covered; and was long before he could be cured: but this cured him of the like curiosity against another time. The company by this means had but a bad season∣ed supper, and many of them were sick either of hurt or appre∣hension. For the old man Wolf, 'twas not known what became of him, but 'tis probable, that hearing of this tydie accident, he was cautious to appear.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Desert Beniermi, and the Townes Dangala, Machida, Georgia, &c. IN this Navigation, which I have interrupted for this prodigi∣gious story, we met with a countryman upon a Mare, who went aboard a Bark, to crosse the river to the Province of Da∣fila: but the man never observed a Colt that followed him, and leapt into the water to come after his damme, which the man seeing, he besought the Pilot to turn back and take him in, but the Pilot would not be perswaded, so as he was constrained to leap into the water himself to save the Colt: But had not we by good fortune been at hand to help him, the poor man and his Colt had perished together, the violence of the water carrying them both away. Being in safety, he was so amazed and out of breath, that he was not able to speak us thanks: But he told us afterwards his Master made him pay for the Colt, because he had not tyed him fast. After this, for four long houres we cut through a Desert, they call Beniermi, where we saw several kindes of wild beasts; amongst the rest two Lions lying in a shade, with their muzzles all bloody; they stirred not at all at the sight of us, though some were afraid, they would have leapt into the Bark upon us. But others better ex∣perienced, assured us no, except they were disturbed; for the no∣ble and generous nature of the beast, who are only dangerous to those that hurt them. Joyning upon these deserts, we saw fair till'd fields, some sow'd with Lupines and Beans, others with su∣gar Canes. Being come to Misen we rested there one day, then about two miles further we had sight of Cafa a gentile town, and passing fur∣ther into the country, we went on shore at a gallant town on the coast of Nubia, they call Hami, to take in Melons and Potatoes, the best of the world. And from thence steer'd towards Dangala a very good town; but bearing so much upon the land, our Almadie was so fast gra∣vell'd, we were forced to unload our goods, which hinder'd us at least two hours, and made us lye at Bisen, four leagues short of Dan∣gala, whither we went on the morrow in the company of conti∣nual rain, thunder, and lightenings: which was the cause we could not go on the other side of Nile, to see Dafila the chief town of the Province of the same denomination, where one of the gallantest, and most valiant Princes of the Negusian Empire reigns. Touching Dangala, 'tis subject to Barnagus, who at first had it in
exchange for Cassina, and since hath both by help of money. 'Tis in Nubia the opposite of the Province of Dafila, which extends as far as Danfila. Thence in five dayes we came to Mara, a neat town, opposite to the Province of Ganfila, on the other side of Nile. The country is well peopled, and plentiful of all commodi∣ties; amongst the rest there is a mine of the finest silver. Thence in two days to Bergan, and in one more to Tiruti, a town abound∣ing in all things, but very dirty. On the other side of Nile is Gourage in the kingdom of Tamatas. Then in two dayes seven∣teen leagues to Daerue, where there is a mine of Lead and Antimony, whereof they make great profit, sending their mettals every where, they mixe brasse in their money and call it Cazec. We had the pleasure there to see a morall representation of the Magdabens conversion, which was full of delight and contempla∣tion. Thence we had a desire to walk under the shades to Ma∣chida, a town they will have to be built by the Queen of Saba, who was so called; and they told us we should see in the Church a very antique statue of this Queen; but being arrived, we saw no∣thing but the ruines of a town, which neverthelesse shewed, that in times past they had been something of noble. For there we saw the ruines of a Castle, which we must needs judge to have been a place of great strength, for that all the avenues were of difficult accesse. The day following we went to Fuingi or Fungi, and thence in four dayes to Rifa, then to Sania, Asmona, Canan, Asna, where there is a Castle called Asiar. Some will have it, that the ancient, and so much renowned town of Siena, was there scituated di∣rectly under the Tropick on this side. Thence in four dayes to Banaa; and on the other sidetowards the red sea is Georgian, a town inhabited by Georgian Christians, who have licence with fly∣ing banners from the Turk, to visit the Sepulcher at Jerusalem, without paying Toles, or Imposts, as others do. They recount a mi∣racle upon these people, when they were once persecuted by an In∣fidell King, Almighty God covered the enemies with a continual darknesse, whereby they were delivered: upon which subject the Arabian great Poet and Historian, wrote some verses. But I have heard others say, 'tis the same that happened to the countrey of Georgiane or Albania in Asia the greater, in a part thereof called Bonhainson, where the Christians were pursued by Saure King of Persia a Mahometan, and being reduced to save themselves by flight, he invironed them with his forces, in which extremities they had recourse to their prayers, and an obscurity came over the King and all his, whereby the Christians had means to save them∣selves. Some say that a darknesse ever since continued in that part of the countrey, and that no man dare come upon the ground, and that the cries of men, and neighing of horses are continually to be heard, without knowing any ground for it.
Having staid one day in the Town of Georgian, or Georgia, on the other side, we passed in two dayes to the town of Erir, thence to Cosia, then repassing Nile we came to Pemin, the first Town of high-Egypt: Here they are all Moores, but yet people of consci∣ence, and very courteous to us. Thence we went to complement the Sultan, or Governour of the Town of Almona, and to have his passe, because we were to enter into a Countrey all Infidels, and subject to the Grand Sinior. The Sultan favoured us with many testimonies of affection, and sent by a Frigot to the other side of Nile, to a garden in the Town of Tima for fruit for us, a∣mongst others Peaches of extraordinary size without stones, but not so sweet nor good as ours in Europe. Thence in two daies we came to Grandole, a very Mercantile Town, and in two dayes more to Manucat, a great Town of a∣bout a thousand fires; but about a league from thence there is one more large and fair, called Bazuelle, or Bazielle, which was heretofore esteemed the Suburbs of Caire. Here are the most sumptuous Mosquees of all Egypt, which they call Gemit Azore,See Leon. Afr. l. 8. or Hamore, where the Mahometans go to render their vows, with diverse offerings, and hold this Mosquee was erected in the ho∣nour of a holy woman, called Nacisse, kinswoman to the false Pro∣phet Mahomet, people of a most austere life: within they give entertainment to divers sorts of Marabuts, or hermites, who are there to do penance. They recount many fabulous miracles, a∣mongst others, one of the resurrection of a dead person, pretended in the time of Soudan Saladin, who had a servant called Aliaze, married to a fair and rich young maid, but she behav'd her self so ill towards him, that her love was fixed on another object, where∣fore in despair he complained to the Cherif, or Priest of the Mosquee. This Cherif bade him be of comfort, and advised him for some dayes to conceale himself, to see how his wife would take it. In the mean while the Cherif visited his wife, and enquired most earnestly of her husband, telling her if he were dead or lost, through her occasion, she was damn'd without hope: being trou∣bled hereat, she told him she had not seen him of fifteen or sixteen dayes, and that she was much afflicted for his absence, but that she would make a vow to God and the Prophet, if she could have him again she would be more dutifull to him. At the same time, by fortune, there was taken up the body of a young man who was drowned in Nile, so disfigured that he could not be known. The Cherif taking this opportunity, and having conferred with her husband, they concluded to take his body, and cloathing it in a suit of his, and putting his ring on his finger, lay him in the Mosquee, covered with a cloth, and say 'twas the corps of this wo∣mans husband, which was done, and the woman hearing the news went presently, and knowing the cloaths and the ring, fell into a
most passionate lamentation, whereupon the Priest to comfort her told her, that on condition she would make a 9. dayes visit in the Mosquee, the most blessed Prophet would restore her husband to life, and told her something of a certain vision he had, while he said the office of the dead. In brief, with subtlety and authority he so prevailed with her, that in the morning she went to the Mosquee to make her prayers and sacrifice, to this purpose, upon the Tomb where the Cherif the night before had hidden her husband; and then the egregious Priest pronounc'd his conjurations over the dead, that in the name of the great God, their Prophet and Saint, he should rise and comfort his disconsolate relict: which was no sooner said, but the good fellow began to stir, and cryed out, behold I am here: then the Cherif rejoycing opened the monument, and out marches the husband, who embrac'd his wife, overcome with joy for so great a miracle, which was blown immediately through the world, and ever since this Mosquee hath been devoutly frequented where every one makes their vows, to obtain their wishes: and these are the goodly miracles of Mahomet. CHAP. XX. Of Grand Caire, of Balm of Egypt, of Nile, of Crocodiles, and the particulars of Egypt. HAving had a view of Bazuelle, and the stately Mosquee, which in perfection of architecture is not notwithstanding to be compared with our Churches of the better structure, we came in four hours to the great Caire. First we arrived at Bebelot, or Bebelloch, which is but a Burrough or Suburbs of 20000. fires; then one league further, to another called James Talon, or Gemeth Tailon; thence to another called Garafa, or Cha∣rafa, joyning upon the Grand Caire, and at length to the people of Bebzuailac, or Bulac. This great Town treads upon the ruines of the ancient Baby∣lon and Memphis, the residence first of the Pharoes kings of E∣gypt, then of the first Saracine Emperours, and the last Soudans and Califes of Babylon of Caire, distinct from the Babylon of Chal∣dea, who in our histories are called the Soudans, and Califes of Balda, or of Baudas, or Bandas, the same as Bagded. The Town of Caire, or Alcayr, writes six hundred yeares erection, the first stone laid by a slave of Calife Elcaine, by name Gehoar, or Chetiq, where the Califes of Egypt
fixt their siege, whilst they maintained another at Bagded, and one at Cairoan, a hundred miles from Thunis. This Towne having been long under the Soudans, was as at last, in the year 1517. taken by the Turks, who extirpated the Empire of the Mamelues. 'Tis seated upon a good place of the Nile, and known by four principall divisions. One stands upon a rising or eminent place, the other along the Nile more low, where some say Memphis was heretofore, and there Nile composes a sweet Isle full of lovely gardens. This part may be of eighty or nine∣ty thousand fires, inhabited by the wealthiest merchants. About two miles from thence there is another part, of little lesse extent, by the Inhabitants called Mubacar. Next is the ancient Town, which the Inhabitants call Bezuela, whereof we spoke before, where there is magnificent and stately edifices, and Mosquees, and amongst others one very fair hospitall. This part consists of about twenty thousand fires, stretching it self about half a league to∣wards the West, towards the South touches the Palace of the Sul∣tan, or Bascha, and toward the North a little Suburb which they call Bebesor, which runs bending towards the East, to ano∣ther of like greatnesse, Jemet Taulon, the name of the Soudan who founded it. In this part there is a spacious Palace, and a sumptuous Col∣ledge well founded, whither they resort from all parts to study the sciences. About two miles from thence, there is another well-built part Carafa. The ancient Town Bezuela, or Bazieles, other∣wise called Mifuletif, or Mifruletif, is that where the famous Sepulcher of their pretended St. Nassisse, the neice of Mahomet by his son in law Haly, stands. On this side lies the garden which bears the plant of the true Balm, so much renowned there, which they call Almatria,Truebalm Pe Mar. in his Lega. babil. l. 3. who sayes 'tis in the year 1502 this plant was lost. and Christians Materea. This plant hath a leaf like Lentisk, or Mastick tree, which they prune every year as a vine, as a Gardener told me, who kept it, 'tis but small, and there is but little of it. Ethiopians say the Queen of Saba carried this plant to Salomon who caused it to be set in the gardens of Jericho, and after∣wards was transplanted to this place by the Sarazins; but others say that 'twas first brought from Arabia the happie, where all the balm that grows there at this day, is of like vertue and quality. About the end of May they slit the bark, not with iron, but something else, and the liquor distills out, which they receive in a glasse. They adde that this plant will prosper with none but Christians, and that it dyes in the hands of In∣fidels. In some places of the West Indies, in Nova Hispania,See Mo∣nardes. and Carthagenia, there is some of no lesse esteem than this of E∣gypt; it grows in the middle of a fountain, which is like a
draw-well. The Mahometans say when the blessed virgin was in Egypt, she rested at this fountain, and here washed the linnens of her child Jesus. A little on one side is an Island, with a fair Palace, where the Bascha goes sometimes for recreation, 'tis called Michial. Here lies the head of the Channell, or Aqueduct, on which there stands a Column, to foreknow the fertility or ste∣rility of the year, according to the heighth of the inundation of Nile. The Part of Caire which lies upon Nile is very large, cal∣led Boubacon, or Bebesoe, and Boulac, here land the vessels which come from Rosete, or Alexandria, and other parts. In sum, this Town consists of many more Towns, or Burroughs, or Suburbs, full of people, and I believe in this Town there are as many souls, as in all the rest of Egypt throughout; and he had need of a good horse that would survey all these habitations, in two, nay in three dayes. The Basha's Palace is the same where the Soudans was, and that while the Empire was in glory, was one of the most rich and magnificent in the Universe, as a French Authour describes it who was there in those times: There being many Courts, every one with a guard, Porches, Galleries, and Columns of Martle, guilt vaults, various-coloured pavements of Mosaick work, frets, car∣vings and sculptures, pleasant large gardens, fountains, viviaries, bird-cages, and other singularities: All sorts of rich moveables, stones, gold and silver. The Calife or Soudan had a throne of massy gold, and rarely was seen to any except Embassadours. The Ladies for the greatest part are attired in white, with coats, and a mask of the same colour, a silk smock of diverse colours, a little bonnet on their head, of some rich stuffe, with a band or wreath about it, and over all a large vest or huke, which covers the whole body. Touching the Inundation of the River Nile, it advances mode∣rately, not doing any dammage: and when it comes they make a generall triumph; then they run at the vest, a certain game of prize amongst them, and prepare ditches expresly to receive the water, certain persons being substituted of purpose, who ascend four or five dayes journey towards the Channell, to see if the wa∣ters flow with vigour and violence, and thence return with poste-haste, and acquaint the Basha to what degree; and when there is notice that 'tis arrived within half a dayes journey, the Bascha with the whole Nobility mounts on horseback, clo∣thed in their apparell, with the robe of Mahomet, born by a Marabou, in great triumph before them; and by the way, running the Masse, shooting with a Bow at a golden apple upon the end of a Pike. First they ride three or four rings, then running at high speed in a full career, they let fly at the apple, and he who do's best bears away the prize.
And so they solemnize the arrival of the flood, every one clean∣ses and prepares their cesterns, to store up water for the whole year; for they have neither draw-wells nor fountains, that ever I saw: and it never rains there, only every evening there falls a dew, such as if one should sleep abroad, he should be as wet, as if he came out of the River. The like is in Peru, where they never have rain. But instead thereof, they are visited with a wind that fannes and moystens. The Paraguary, or the River de la Plata at Brazill, hath the like inundations as Nile, but with more violence and ra∣pidity, and lodges full three moneths upon the land it wa∣ters, whereas Nile comes quietly, and retires with the same ci∣vility, not staying before any town above 15. or 20. dayes. They contrive to build their houses upon hills, and rising grounds, to secure themselves from waters and humidity: In the countrey, the houses for the greater part are built of loom, of beast-dung, and earth, and there are some which have no other then tents of strong cloth of a reddish colour; but they who live near the sil∣ver River by reason of the impetuous stream of the water which overturns, and carries all before it, are constrained to forsake their houses, and for a time betake themselves to their Canoes, where they lead the Ducks life, till the flood retiring within its bounds, leaves their dwellings to their possession again: But I am not certain if this happen by a constant annual course as in Egypt. The custome of triumphs at the arrival of the inundation of Nile, we finde to have been amongst the ancient Egyptians, amongst others they celebrated the great feast of Niloa towards the Summer-Solstice, holding the River for a God, whom they worshipped under the names of Osiris and Orus, giving him the appellations of the Saviour of high Egypt, Father and Crea∣tour of the lower, who water'd and manur'd their soyle. Now for the Crocodile, there are great store in this River, as there are in many other places of the East and West-Indies, as I ob∣served before. The Indians call them Caymans, they have so lustful a greedi∣nesse to Mans-flesh, that they will venture for it with unspeak∣able outrage and vigour. A man walking by the River side with a little child in his hand, a Crocodile leaps suddenly upon him, and tore the boy out of his armes, not being able to save him. If any one by chance fall in the water, there's an end of him, there∣fore 'tis exceeding dangerous to refresh or bathe there without good caution; the very boats loaded with people have often pe∣rished by them. These creatures generally make cleare work, their assaults being so forcible, that from some they crop armes and legges, others they devoure intirely: They hold a fierce and rude war with the Tigars, 'tis a creature without tongue, moving only the other chop, contrary to the nature of all other creatures;
the Egyptians made him a part of their Idolatry. Some observe that they were not pernicious to the countrey hertofore, as they have been particularly since the Mahometans usurped it. Again, some say the ountrey hath been much the more infested with these creatures, since a Governour of Egypt deprived them of a leaden Crocodile placed by enchantment, like a Talisman, in a certain place. From Caire down towards the sea, they are not so dangerous, as in the higher Egypt. Besides Crocodiles, this River breeds Hi∣popotumes, or Sea-horser, with divers other Monsters and Fishes. About four leagues from Caire, and one and a halfe off Nile, stand the famous Pyramids of so prodigious a height, and admi∣rable structure, erected heretofore by the ancient Kings of Egypt, either for ostentation and monument of their greatnesse and mag∣nificence, or for custody of their treasure, or for sepulture of their bodies. This structure is by so much the more stupendious, for that the stones of such immensity and hardnesse were trasported so far with such cost and pains, as some say from Arabia and Ethi∣opia: and these bulks not rear'd to that height, with Cranes, Scaf∣folds, or other Engines as then not known, but by Cavaliers, and Platforms of earth, by strength of arms, and extremity of labour, as 'tis related of the wonderful edifice of Jugas, of Perou at Cu∣sio and other places. 'Tis not without wonder to be consider'd, that the greatest of the three which, as they say, was erected by Chemmis King of Egypt, with the employment of 360. thousand mens labour for twenty years together, is at this day perfect and entire, though three thousand years since the raising of it. They say on every side of the square near the Basis, it is 200. fathomes over, and 800. foot high; 'tis hollow, and within there are walks, and a fair room where the Sepulcher may be. The other two are lesse and Massie, one built by King Cophus, the other by Mycerine, or the Curtisan Bhodope. The bulk of these structures hath put them in the number of the seven wonders of the world, and some say the children of Is∣rael were employed at the building of these enormious Fabricks. There is yet to be seen some remainder of a monster, wonderfull both in form and quantity, which they call a Sphinx wrought in Numidian or Serpentine marble extraordinary hard, with hu∣mane face, and the body of a Lyon, as the ancients represented this monster. There is yet left a kind of Obeliske or Needle, the work likewise of the Ancients, which some attribute to King Phe∣ron, others to Philadelphe; Howsoever those great Obelisks which are at this day at Rome,Hierogly∣phicks. were brought from thence; as the Hiero∣glyphick letters engraved upon them testify; for 'twas the holy and sacred Scripture of the ancient Egyptians. A side off those Pyramids beyond Nile Eastward towards the red Sea, lyes the famous countrey called Ehebaida, and her de∣serts,
where so many Christian Hermits and Anchorites lead their lives, as S. Paul, S. Anthony, and others, adorned heretofore with so many Towns, filled with religious communities, where there were more Monasteries and Churches, then other houses, and no cor∣ner where one might not hear day and night the Almighties prai∣ses. Amongst the rest 'tis said of Oxininchus, that at the same time had in it ten thousand religious men, and as many women, who with emulation kept a marvellous hospitality for poor tra∣vellers and strangers. Here in Thebaida flourished heretofore the famous town of Thebes, with a hundred Ports, nothing whereof remaines but ruines. On the other side Westward lye the Deserts of Barea, towards Barbary and Lybia, where was the celebrated Temple and Oracle of Ammon, visited by Alexander the great. In brief, all Egypt is surrounded with Deserts, and Sands, except on the Sea coast. For on the West they had deserts of fifteen dayes over, on the East the Thebaidan deserts for three or four dayes up to the Ara∣bian Gulph: Then on the other side the red sea, the great desert as far as Palestine, where the Israelites were forty years, of many dayes travail over. From Caire to Delbequi, 'tis all Desert, where Mummy is found,Mummie. or bodies dried in the Sand. Of it there is another sort, which is of embalmed bodies found in ancient Sepulchers. These Deserts are above 18. or 20. dayes over, and they who travail them, ride upon Cammels in Wainscot cabbins for the great dust and heat, with small holes for ayre and light, where they both eat and sleep. For there is no greater danger then the winds in that place, bearing and removing mountains of sand from one side to the other, under which Passengers are often over∣whelmed, and lost (as heretofore whole Armies have been) with∣out the least possibility of assistance to one another in the convoy, which sometimes consists of ten or twelve thousand persons and more, every one striving to save himselfe, and go with the greatest speed they can without stay night or day, there being no possibi∣lity to know a track, though one should have passed a thousand times, by reason of the continual variation of the sand, which lyes to day in one manner, to morrow in another; so as through this sea of sand they must use their Pilot and compasse, without hope of refreshment during the journey, onely about fifteen leagues from Delbegut, where a fair fountain proceeds from a neighbou∣ring river, which is thought to be an arm of Nile, the water whereof is warm like Niles, but something better. Afterwards they must again passe over Deserts and dangerous moveable mountains of sand, which put me in mind of the gray Tents or Adonars; with the Moores of Fez and Morocca, which you shall see in a numerous heap upon a field, and on the morrow no such thing, but removed to another station: for so it is with these
walking mountaines day by day still in motion, differing from a mountain of sand of excessive height; I saw since near the Town of Lima or of Rois in Poru, which exalting to an extraordinary height amongst many other hills, never alters or diminishes for any wind or storm that can assault it; a thing much admired by all men, and for this the Indians adore it as divine; but of this we shall with Gods leave speak in another tract of a voyage to the West-Indies. But returning to the sands of Egypt, 'tis thence the greatest part of Mummy or flesh buried and rosted in the sand is gotten, which the wind uncovering, the next passenger brings to town for trade, it being very medicinable. Here you see a dead man is often more serviceable to the living, then the living them∣selves; yet some approve not of the physick: But howsoever em∣balmed flesh is prefer'd before it, for the Aromatick drugs the Egyptians used for preservation of dead bodies, wherein they were at great charge and study, whether for their hope of resur∣rection, or for the opinion of some Philosophers, that soules should so long live after departure, as the bodies remain intire and in∣corrupt: for which cause they seasoned and embalmed them with Bitumen, Salt, Frankincense, Myrrhe, and other Aromaticks; and bodies thus embalmed and preserved for many ages, by the Ara∣bians are called Mummies. To proceed, the land of Egypt is high∣ly renowned for a very potent and wealthy kingdom, where some say heretofore have been reckoned 20. thousand wall'd towns, to entertain the infinite multitude of Inhabitants she had in those dayes: but now there remaines but little of all this. The first Kings of the world were their Rulers, from whom they derive their lines of so many thousand fabulous years. Their first and kings were called in the Scripture by the generall name of Pharoes, then the Persians became their Masters, afterwards the Greeks, then at last the Romans, till the Saracins got them under their Califes and Soudans, and the Turks for this last age. The ayre is good and temperate, the soyle fertile, and abounding in all commodi∣ties, but so plentiful of corn, that 'twas held the Granary of Rome in her chiefest glory: in medals of antiquity, Egypt was still figur'd with ears of corn. The country about Caire they call Sabida, heretofore Sais, and Egypt, taken together Chibib, in Heibrew Mitfraim by the name of the son of Chus who first possessed it, thence the Arabians at this day call it Mesre. The region called Delta from the triangular form, is the fertile part of it, because 'tis water'd, and cut through by seven branches or armes of Nile; This country is exceeding fertile throughout; but the rest from Caire to Ethiopia is not so, but only along the Nile for three or four leagues on each side, where the river flows, the rest is sandy, parched and waste, except some places where the river comes in channels, which they say were heretofore the work of Joseph, son of Jacob.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Town of Alexandria, the Isle of Malta, and the Authours return to Marseils. WE staid some dayes at Grand Caire, where in the advance of my voyage I staid many moneths; but before I go away, I will tell you how we met there with a brother of my compani∣on Guillen Cassis, whom he had so basely abused at our coming from Meca, as I said in another place, when he cheated him of seven Cammels, under colour to go to traffick in the red sea and Ethio∣pia, and we passed into Arabia the happy, to Persia, the East Indies and Affrica, where in all we were forth in our travailes six years and a halfe. But as soon as he perceived at a distance his bro∣ther Marat, he got slily into a company, that his brother might not take notice of him; at length he passed by us, with a fixed eye, but said nothing, no one thinking of him; for my part I knew him not, yet me thought I had seen him before, till at last I called him to mind, and told the whole story to our company, who condemn∣ed it for an unworthy action. In fine, the good fellow by this means scap'd a bad encounter. Being departed from Grand Caire we went to embarke in our Almadies which staid for us at Boulac, which is the Rendezvous of all Merchants, Christians, and others, who are bound for Alexan∣dria. Thence we came in a day and a half to Auas, where we met with my friend who had made all speed for fear of his brother. From Auas we came in a day and a half to Rousette, called by the natives Raschill, a town by the ancients called Metilis, or Canapus, upon an arm of Nile called Heraclettick, which Historians call Rexi. At Roussetta we sold our Almadies, and imbarked by night in a Germe, and the next day were in Alexandria. Alexandria is a town half ruinate, of little pleasure,Alexan∣dria▪ a most re∣markable example of the inconstancy of worldly things; that this town should now be brought to so lacerate a condition, that was for many ages one of the most ample, fair, populous, rich, and flou∣rishing towns of the world, chiefly renowned for excellent and commodious scituation, for her Founder Alexander the great, for having been the Seat-royall of the Ptolomis, for her so famous and frequented Haven, for her proud buildings; amongst the rest, Pharoes tower, one of the wonders of the world, for her Acade∣my renowned for all Sciences, for being the mother of so many fa∣mous Philosophers, great Doctors, and holy Patriarcks who kept the christian faith so long flourishing in those parts, briefly for so many ornaments of art and nature, from which glory she fell after she
was taken with the rest of the country by the Sarasins, and their third Calife Homar, so as after this consternation she never recove∣red any thing of her pristine splendour. But she remains a good Haven, and a good landing place for all Merchandizes of the Le∣vant and Indies, where all Levantine Merchants, Africans, and Europians come to traffick. Heretofore the Romans, afterwards the Ptolemies made it the greatest Mart in the world, by the means of the sea and Nile, drawing thither all sorts of drugs, spices, and other Arabian commodities from India by the red sea, then by land to Nile, and so to Alexandria. Since again under the Soudans this course was continued, where the Venetians, and all Europi∣ans fetched their spices, till the Portuguese found out another way as we said in another place. I will say no more either of this town or Caire as places suffici∣ently understood in these parts by the ample relations of divers accurate travailers: only I shall observe, that in this town when the Nile flowes, they preserve sweet water in their Cesterns, and make Channels to water their gardens. There is resident a Consul for the French Nation, Le sieur de Rhode, was then the person who shewed us much kindnesse, and much admired our tedious and painful peregrination. He had his wife there with him, by whom he had two twin daughters, which for devotion he sent to take baptization at Jerusalem, and twenty years after my own natural brother married one of these daughters called Lucretia, by whom he had many children at Marsels. We travell'd all Africa to Alexandria, in eight moneths. Having stayed some dayes in Alxandria, we departed for Tripoli in Suria, without accomplishing my vow to go to Jerusalem, for which I had gone so much ground, and there we went aboard the Christina of Marsels, and were five monthes intire before we could arrive there, for that having touched upon Malta, we stayed some time to see the sports of their Carnavalle, which stayed us awhile. By the way it happened that the Saylers having rifled a little ves∣sell of Greek wine, drunk so freely, that one of them amongst the rest, climbing the Mast to do his office, knowing his own condition tyed himself for fear of falling, and lay down in the scuttle, where he slept two dayes before he waked. In the mean time, the others calling for him to come to dinner, and not hearing any answer, they apprehended they had heard something fall into the sea the night before, which made a great noyse, and that 'twas the poor Marriner, who was drowned in his drink, whereupon the Stew∣ard of the ship rung the bell thrice; then, as the custom is, threw a fire-brand into the sea, and said aloud, Gentlemen Mariners, pray to God for the soul of poor Veran (that was his name) because through Gods mercy, he rests with the soules of the faithful. Then every one kneeling down prayed for him, then presently what goods he had were inventoried, and prized. But the day following, the Master of
the ship, whose name was Pier de Soulier for discovery of the land; like a careful Marriner, climbed the Maste himself, but he was ama∣zed, when he found there the supposed dead man fast tyed, and yet in a profound sleep; but upon the Masters call, he awaked suddenly, which made the company very merry. That night we lay upon a dangerous sea, and feared we were upon the Asquequi, or Seques, which towards the land is a bad bottome,Seques Sbelus heretofore Syrtes. that which made us judge of it, was certaine Mosse swimming upon the water, which hangs to the rocks, which made us very apprehensive. In the evening a huge Whale followed us as the Pilot told us, who had discovered him, and at last minding to leave us, as he turned, brushed so rudely upon the ship, that it shook all over, as it had dashed against a rock. At the instant every man affrighted, cryed out for mercy, supposing we were lost, for we were in the middle of a vast sea, where there was no pos∣sibility of safety. The Master presently ran to the Hold, to see if the ship were founder'd; on the other side the Pilot from the Poupe discovered the monstrous fish had left us, and was gone with a hideous noyse, so as we were safe, and by Gods good∣nesse freed of a desperate fear. After some dayes sayling on, we came to touch at Malta, and being Shrovetide, we resolved to stay awhile to see the celebration of this feast, and there we put off some pieces of fine cloth, which they call Calicut, but the mischief was, that the Courtizans, of which they have there very subtle ones, had good share of them, cheating us of some crowns under colour of treating us at our own cost. Of this Island I will say no more, then that at this day 'tis the Residence of the Knights Hospitallers of S. John of Jerusalem insti∣tuted in the year 1134. in the time of Baldouin of Bourgos the third French King of Jerusalem, for the security of them who went to the Holy-land, and in the year 1309. their great Ma∣ster Villaret took by force of Armes the Isle of Rhodes from the Sarasins, who usurpt it from the Greek Empire, and there esta∣blisht the Residence of his Order, and maintained it stoutly against the many attempts of the Soldans of Egypt; but in the year 1522. Turk Soliman carried it from the great Master Philip Villers, and by the license of Pope Leo the tenth, this great Master with his order retired to Viterbo till better times; and divers places being propounded for their Residence, as Sasda in Candia, Serigo, Elba, and others: in conclusion they resolved to petition Charles the fifth for Malta, to whom it belonged, as dependant on the kingdome of Sicily; against the French, English, and Italians, who would have had no such obligation to the Emperour, but at length they consented, because it had good Havens, and was near to Barbary; so they got Malta and Goza, in the year 1529. without other tribute or condition, then a solemne
Masse annually, and a Falcon every yeare to the Viceroy of Naples, but withall that they should have free transport of corne from Sicily. This in effect was more advantage to the King of Spain then the other Nations of Christendome, the Isle of Malta being a guard to all the Spanish and Italian Coasts under his dominion. The Order at first was divided by seven Languages, three of France, which were France, Avernia, and Provence, then of Italy, Germany, England, and Spain. Afterwards an eighth was added, Spain being divided into Castile and Portugall, and England being left out, they took in Aragon. Of these eight Languages, every one had two Electours for election of the Grand Master. These Grand Masters have for the greater part been French, and the greatest part of the Order consists of our French Nobility, but I shall speak no more of it, being a matter so generally known. Having left Malta, we set sayle for Marsells, where we landed within few dayes, setting a period to that long voy∣age, which had cost us so much time, paines and danger; God be glorified who guided us to so safe a Port, at the time of the great Commet, whose extent was thirty degrees, the taile pointing to the West, embracing Sagittarius and Capri∣corne, and appeared not in the Sublunary Region, but the Celestial, so as 'twas seen throughout the Indies both East and West. But I cannot omit to relate how, when I came to my Fathers house, who was then sixty five yeares of age he knew me not, but thought me dead, and had made my funeral six years before: so as seeing me in the Greek habit, he took me for some stranger, and asking me who I was, I answered him in language barbarous enough, I was a Grecian, and 'twas but truth, I had almost forgot my native language, being very young when I left my countrey, and for that I had discontinued it so long time. Some vulgar Greek I un∣derstood, which I learnt at Canea in Candia, where I staid six or seven moneths after our first shipwack. Then my Father who spoke good Greek, having traffick'd a long time in that country, asked me what was my businesse, and telling him I came to dine with him, he told me I was wel∣come, and bad me draw near the fire, as I did. Then he de∣manded who, and of whence I was, and telling him I was a Marsellian, the sonne of one Raphael Blanc, he was amazed, and troubled, and calling my mother, told her a son of his was come from Sicily to visit him, my father having had a former wife in Sicily, by whom he had two children, who lived there up∣on their mothers means: whereupon they both afforded me great indulgements; but at length I declared my self to them, and then there was amongst us such a tyde of tendernesses, there was not
room for words, nor could we contain our tears of joy. After∣wards I related to them at leasure the strange and various adven∣tures of my voyage, shewing them divers curiosities I had brought along with me, amongst others, Asbeste linnen, which is made clean with firing, being incombustible linnen, used by Indian Princes, and Lords, and are wrapt in it when their bodies are committed to the pile, as the bodies of Roman Emperours were in ancient time. I have often shewed the experience of it to per∣sons of quality in Provence. I shewed them the herb Falacit, ha∣ving this property, that laying it under a bed all those loathsome Chemisses worms stock to it, and so are killed. I brought it in a box, but I was ill advised, I brought not the seed to plant in these parts. I shewed them divers other things of singularity, admired by many both of knowledge and quality. But before I conclude I shall tell you in order, to this re-acknowledgement of my Father and Mother, Brothers and Sisters, what long after happened to me at Palerma in Sicily, after my Father was dead. For calling to mind he had often told me he had a Son and Daughter there, I made diligent enquiry for them: at first no one could tell any thing of them, for that they were called by their Mothers name, whose heirs they were; and my Brother who was called Nazaro Bianco, was called onely de Nazara; but at length I enquired by so many tokens that I found out his house, and go∣ing thither I was told he was sick, which hindered me not, but I went confidently up into the Chamber, meeting a young maid upon the stairs, blood which cannot lye, told me that must needs be my Sister: neverthelesse without further notice, desiring to see her Brother, she led me to his Chamber, and seating me near the bed where he lay, I observed in him the very pattern of my Fa∣ther, and asking if he had not Brothers at Marseills, he told me yea, and asked if I knew them: whereupon many discourse passed, telling him divers news and recommendations. During our discourse, this Sister of mine looked stedfastly up∣on me, as she were ravished to see and hear me, and I presenting my hand to her, she kissed hers, and took mine, a thing not usuall in Italy, and lesse in Sicily. Hereupon my Brother having caused a little daughter of his to be brought in, I kissed her hand as I did my Sisters, and taking a ring off my finger of an orientall fauset emerald, one of the best I ever saw, I presented it to her, wherewith she was quite con∣founded, and in doubt whether she should take it or no; but tel∣ling her her Uncle sent it her by me, with leave of her Mother who was present, she accepted it; and at the same instant I gave a fair table Rubie to my Sister. But as we were in the middle of these complements and discourse of our friends, who should come into the chamber with a French garb and alacrity, but the Gover∣nour of the Bastide, nephew to the grand Prior of St. Giles, and
other Cavaliers my friends, who knowing I was there came to seek me, and by their calling upon my name my Brother and Sister knew me, and confessed they had some suspicion of me when I gave the rings: my Sister told me at the instant she met me on the stairs, she felt something extraordinary, which made the colour rise in her face. Then we fell to embraces and rejoyces, like the American women, who when they will bid their friends welcom, sit on the ground and weep, and entertain them, embrace, and feast them weeping. So I staid there some six weeks in jollity and con∣gratulation with my friends. I was willing to relate this passage, as well to shew the various encounters of mans life, as the in∣stinct of bloud which will discover it self be it never so concealed and unknown. CHAP. XXII. The Authours voyage to the kingdom of Mo∣rocca, he is taken by the Spaniards, an accident befell the Authour at Ara∣che, The battel of Sebastian King of Portugall. BUt let us come back to my return to Marseills, where I felt the custom of change to be of no small force, which was so prevalent with me, that I had scarce rested six moneths there, but I grew weary, finding neither the air, customs, nor man∣ner of living agreeable, I was so moulded to change and va∣riety. As this inquietude possessed me, it happened fortunately that one Don Guillerm passed by Marseills, sent by Henry the 3. Em∣bassadour or Agent to Fez and Marocco, and being very much a friend to my Father, dining one day at our house, he heard me speaking of my travails, and was pleased with my conversation; he asked me if I would go along in his company: And I was in a humour so well disposed that I accepted very willingly, so he en∣tertained me. This Don Guillerm was a Chirurgion born at Nice, who travailing to Marocca, was so happy as to cure the King of a pestilence, with which he was visited at Constantinople, which brought him in great esteem with the Prince; Insomuch that he sent him to treat of an alliance with King Henry the third, who re∣turned him with presents to Molouco and Abdelmelech. Being thus agreed, we parted from Marseills about sixty in
company, and imbarked upon a well-arm'd vessel, within six dayes we came by night near upon the streight of Gibraltar, but the stream was so violent it held us back till day, and well-nigh cast us on shore near the Tower called the Devils mansion, where no body ever lives: for they have a tradition that the master Mason which built it, being not paid his price by him that set him on work, gave it to fiends who have kept it ever since. Being thus driven on shore, against the mount of Gibraltar, as we endeavoured with strength to shove her off, the vessel over∣turned, and the mast and sails lay in the water, which much ama∣zed us; but by happy fortune a Pilot of Marseills, John Saffoulo, being aboard with us for his private affairs, seeing our danger, and that every one was fled to the other side the deck, fell to work and with an ax opening the side of the ship let in the water, so as the weight set her upright, and by Gods assistance we scaped this imminent danger, being driven by a gentle gale to a point where we cast anchor. But notice hereof coming to the Spanish Gallies, which lay at anchor not far thence, they sent out presently to take us and bring us to the Town of Gibraltar; while they were towing us along, we cast into the Sea above two thousand cannon bullets, and a great quantity of powder. The Spaniards hereupon accused us of treason, for carrying ammunition to their enemies, for they had found some barrels of powder which were left behind. Then coming aboard us, like right ravenous wolves they ransack'd every where, seizing all the merchandizes, and opening the chests eat all that was good: amongst the rest searching a Physicians chest they found some purging lozanges, whereof some of them eat in great quantity, and found so sudden an effect, they had scarce time to untie their breeches, whereof two or three died, saying, we had poysoned them. Mean while they put Irons on our legs, and removed us into the Galley, with rude treatment and rough menaces, till at last sentence passed upon us, by which the Embassadour, and ten of the chief Gentlemen were to loose their heads, all the rest to the Gallies for ever. The Embassadour hearing this sad sentence, appealed to the King of Spain, who confirmed the sentence, saying no more than Loque es hecho es hecho. But by good fortune the Marseillian Pilot that was with us, when he first saw the Galleys coming upon us, cast himself privately into the Sea with some moneys, and so gain∣ing the land went to Madrid, and this in consideration of one a∣mongst us, to whom he had promised his daughter in marriage. Being there, and understanding the King had ratified this sentence of death; he addressed himself presently to the most Serene In∣fanta Donna Isabella, and so handsomly laid before her the in∣conveniences would ensue upon this execution, which was suffi∣cient
to break the peace between the two kings; that she moved with these reasons, went immediately to the King her Father, to petition for grace, which was granted, and we released, to the dis∣content of them who thought to make a good booty of us and our goods. Being now again Masters of our lives, goods, and vessel, after two months time, which was spent in these proceedings, we put to sea again upon our course to Arache, a fort of importance in the kingdom of Fez, about 70. or 80. miles from Gibraltar, where there is a Port made by a River, as at Goa in the Indies, which is crossed with a bar of sand, so as there is no coming in but at high water, which is here every day, but at Goa you may expect a month. Coming on shore there we were very well entertained, and the Embassadour provided of horses, and other necessaries to go to the King of Fez Abdelmelech, who was then in great vexation for that Mahomet his nephew, who disputed with him for the kingdom, and whom he had defeated in many battails by the assi∣stance of the Turk, was newly scaped towards Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, to crave his aid. Being come from Arache to Miguine ten leagues from Fez, seeing the Embassadour was to hold on his way to Morocca to the King, we resolved four or five of us to go see Fez, the capital Town of the Countrey. Having walked through Meguine, beyond the Town we came to a Church-yard of the Ma∣hometans, where two of us making water, it happened to be near the Sepulcher of one of their Marabons, or Santons, and being per∣ceived by some of the Moores, they would have stopt us, but we defending our selves stoutly with fists and feet, I got out of their hands; but my heart failed when I saw fifty Archers of the Town∣guard about us, who paid me well for the blows I had given their fellows, for they beat me most outrageously, as they did the rest of us, the very Children crying after me, Tarasti Nazarani, that is kill him, at every word calling me Quichequet, dog. At last I was brought before the Cadi, or Judge, to whom I kneeled, but he made me lye along on the ground, and gave me thirty lashes on the back, with a whip of o-sinews, and as many bangs on the belly with an Indian cane, so that I was almost dead, with the blowes which had quite benum'd me; yet again for these threescore bangs I must pay as many miticales in gold, which are worth four franks a piece, after all they laid me in prison, with another bath'd in blood at the same time. Then they used all art possible to perswade me to renounce my faith. Amongst others came in one in scarlet, and under pretense of some compassion on my youth, spoke softly in the Spanish tongue, I should be advised and have a care how I lost my soul. Not content with this they sent a young Spanish damsell to me cloathed in white, with a Huke which covered her all over, who after salutation, expressed her resentment of my misfortune, and
with some words of consolation, told me she was come to in∣struct me how to save my self from death, and to set her at liberty immediately. I bent my thoughts upon the woman, not as yet comprehending what she meant, till she explained further that I should marry her, and renounce my faith for a time, and when the King of Portugal who was upon point to give battaile to the Marocco should be victorious, we should have means to escape amongst the Christians. I must confesse ingenuously, the words of this young maid made a strong assault upon me, and made me take the matter into consideration, but God gave me the grace to hold firme to my self, and at last to satisfie her that neither for her beauty nor enjoy∣ment of all the world, would I ever renounce the faith of Jesus Christ my God, so she took her leave. But after this the Judges themselves attended with the Executioner, with his heading-knife at his side, came to me, and speaking to me, told me I had com∣mitted a hainous crime, but that there might be some reme∣dy found, that we had all one God the Creatour of all things, and the benign common Father of all men, who had sent di∣vers Prophets for our instruction, and to shew us the way of salvation; but they having one more excellent than the rest, they were obliged in all they could to augment the number of his Disciples; so as to save my life there was no other way then by deniall of Jesus Christ: not that they e∣steemed his law nefarious, for they knew he was likewise a great Prophet, the breath of the Almighty, and a great friend of Mahomet; but because their law was the best and the most perfect. To this, God assisting me with his extraordinary grace, I with courage answered, that rather then deviate voluntarily in the least from my Religion, I would sacrifice a thousand lives if I were master of so many. Perceiving my constancy, they told me I was ill advised, never∣thelesse to testifie their affection and consideration of my youth, they would make me another offer which might conduce to the securing of my life: whereupon there was a sumptuous tapestry spread upon the floor, with rich bracelets and pendants of value, all this stirred me not; so as seeing they gained no∣thing upon me, the principall of them, the Ermin,Ermin a Judge. pro∣nounced sentence of death, and at the instant the Execu∣tioner seizing on me made me lay my head on a block of wood, and without further Ceremony with his weapon na∣ked in his hand prepared to give the blow: but as he was hastening me to pull my doublet off that the collar might not hinder the blow; God inspired one amongst the rest, that told them they committed an errour to cut me off being so young, for that 'twas against their Law to execute any one for
that crime being under 17. years of age, and that they ought to inform themselves precisely of it: For in the Alcoran the severe law is, that whosoever shall commit Formicat, that is, pollute a holy place, he ought not to be put to death, onely chastized with bastinadoes, and absolved. But this punishment was exceeding cruelly and fully inflict∣ed upon me, for I stood the fury of a multitude, who in the instant came in, and asking, Chate quei feuti houat Romi, that is, what hath this Christian done, and being related, they said, haley, that is, make room, then they all fell upon me, and laid on till they were weary, so much as a decrepid, horrid, squalid old man, who while he bestowed his labour on me, told me, that as I had presumed to pisse upon the head of one that waited on their great Prophet, so after death the Saints should shit upon my soule, which should feed upon that ordure till the Judgement-day, and then be cast into flames amongst her fellowes. His opinion was approved of, but the execution sus∣pended. Mean while my Companions were escaped severall waies, and crept into caves, where one of them lived three dayes upon snailes, so as they could no waies help me. But my misfortune coming to the eares of some Christian merchants, who lived in Town, they went immediately to supplicate the Judicature to have consideration of my youth, that I was a Gen∣tleman belonging to the Embassadour of France, who would re∣sent the affront, and acquaint their Prince with it, whence incon∣veniences might accrew. They were not so moved with these reasons, but some bribes must be given, so as the Merchants entring caution of a vast sum with me, and obliging themselves for my re-appearance when time should be, I was set at liberty: Of all those there was not one of my Countrey nor acquaintance. Being at large, I was quartered in a noble house, with a rich Portuguese Merchant, who spared nothing for my recovery, out of this sad estate. This Merchant, by name Andrieto Gasparo, born in the Island of Corsa, had two Brothers at Marseills, and knew my Father very well, to whom he gave speedy intelli∣gence of my misfortune, and received an answer with expresse order, to worke my delivery at what rate so∣ever. Hereupon these worthy people advised together, and re∣solved to send two men to court on dromedaries, there called Ba∣cambal, which are beasts of extraordinary velocity, that will go their hundred miles a day, with the principall Rider, and one to guide him, with their baggage and necessary provisions for their journey. But by the way, the Riders had need be well swath'd back and
head for the extreme shakings they give the body, as likewise to have their ears well stopt, for being deafened with the hideous noyse they make by the way. They dispatched these two Cour∣riers, one strait to Marocca, whither 'twas reported the King was gone, the other Francisco Maria a Portuguese, towards the Sea Coast to Alcasseur, where he met with Muley Moluco, to whom he was well known, and laying himself at his feet, related the proceedings to him. Whereupon the King caused the Embassa∣dour of France who was there, to be called; in the end he resolved to return this Messenger with all speed, with order and command to the Ermin of Mequine, to discharge me without further cau∣tion. Upon Estradiors return, he presented these letters to Er∣min, and the rest of the Judicature who received it with great ceremony and humilty, laying it upon their head, and so I had my freedome, and my life saved, with sufficient marks to remem∣ber, and for the future be better advised at my cost; for I felt the stripes longer after: and indeed this is the greatest danger we ranne amongst the Infidells. Besides, it cost me deere, for I was fain to present the Gentlemen of the Judica∣ture, with a barrell of Safron, and some Tapistry hangings for their curtesie, who afterwards in testimony of their Amity, sent me to Fez a magnificent present of a fat sheep, and some other comestible things, as bisquet, sugar, cheese, and abundance of dates, and that was all I got. At my departure with these worthy Merchants, one of their wives called Causabonna, in return for a bladder of Musk I pre∣sented her, gave me six fine shirts, with caps, and handkerchers. At my return from Africa, going back for Arache this way, I failed not to visit my good friends these Merchants, and was likewise to see the Ermin Mahomet Mustapha, who by reason of my change of habit and countenance, at first knew me not; but afterwards gave me noble entertainment, for his heart was Christian▪ and made us taste his good wine, and eate with him, offering me gold, but I refused it, notwith∣standing I must needs take them, saying they belonged to me; being some Duckets given him for the Mutton, and other things that were sent to me, so as he made the account but even: which shews how just this man was. And he it was that in my suffering came to advise me to stand firm, and not renounce my faith, and religion. He had two wives of most perfect beauty, and he told me if any occasion should oc∣curre to draw him out of Barbary, he would embrace baptiza∣tion, there being throughout these parts, no meanes to ex∣ercise Christian Religion, for I heard not one Masse so long as I was here, neither at Fez, nor other townes where there are abundance of Christians. They will not allow of Priests, which is otherwise at Constantinople, where there are above
twenty Churches, where they celebrate divine service, both in Greek, Latine, and Abissinian, and is free exercise of Religion for all Christians: and if the body of a Christian be to be interred at any distance from thence, the Priests with the crosse go publickly for it, and carry it whither they please, without the least injury from any one, upon pain of being well punished. During this progresse of affairs, King Mahomet had agitated so with Sebastian King of Portugal, that he was upon the march with a potent Army, and that many vessels were already arrived at Ar∣zille, Oran, Tanger, and Cerote, forts on the African coast in the Christians hands: whereof Muley Malouco being advertized, made diligent preparation, and first takes a march into the mountains against the Arabians, whom he distrusted to be of his nephews party. He took course to dis-arm them totally, and disabled them of sixteen thousand good horses, for which he promised good pay∣ment, and mounted on them so many musqueteers with red caps; thus securing the Arabians, and blocking up all avenues that they might not come upon his back. By this means having raised an Army of sixty thousand horse, he advanced to Alcassour, or Al∣casquinir, about fifteen leagues from Arache, with his Brother Muley Hamet. Don Sebastian on the other side appeared there with about sixteen or eighteen thousand horse and foot, Portu∣guese, Castillians, Italians, and Germans. On the 4. of August the battaile was given, wherein the King of Portugall was slain, and his Army wholly defeated: Mahomet fly∣ing to Arzille to save himself, was drowned, fording the River of Mucazen, which runs by Arache, though bravely mounted. Above twelve thousand Christians fell there, besides many priso∣ners, amongst whom were 00. women, and 200. sucking infants. I was my self at this fight, with about threescore Marseillians more, whereof few came off. Malouco dyed of sicknesse in his time of triumph, and his young Brother Muly Hamet succeeded, whose race continues to this day. I saw the body of the King of Portugall carried away in a chest, filled with unslack'd lime to preserve it, begged of King Muley Hamet, by Andrietto Gasparo Corse, his great favourite, who sent it to Lisbone, for which the King of Spain sent him a rich present in recompense, and interred it in the Church of Belen. 'Tis true, I understood since by some Portuguese slaves, that this was the body of a Swisse, and that the King being beaten from his Horse escaped: and indeed some years after one appeared, who said he was the King of Portugal, and shewed severall testimonies, but howsoever he was executed in Spain as an Impostor, after so many who described this battle at large, and faithfully, I will content my self to say onely what I saw. Thus then, the whole Portuguese Cavalry being landed, drew up in two squadrons. Don John of Cordoua, Commander in chief of the one advanced towards Alcassar, where the Moores
attack'd them severall times, and standing obstinately to their pikes broke their ranks, but the Christians falling on with their pistols, Azimut their Commander in chief was slain, then the rest made no great resistance, so as the Moores not used to this sort of arms, fell into disorder and fled, which put such vanity in the Christians, that they lay in the field, in hope to take Alcassar, five leagues from Arache, being both between two Rivers, a league distant one from another. Don Sebastian to prevent surprizall by night, surrounded his Army with waggons, carts, baggage, utensils barrels, and all the train of Artillery. Don Aluaro Perez led the Van, with five hundred horse, and twelve hundred Landsquenets, guarded on the right with the River, on the left with pikes, barely armed with a corslet, and a thousand Musqueteers in the head, who marched the faster to get at some distance from the Army, to provoke the Moores to fall upon them with hope of being releived by ten thousand Arabians under the command of Armabachi then with the Portuguese who suspended to declare themselves for hazarding their fortunes, wives, and children they knew not how, for they had intelligence how the King of Fez had drained their Countrey, and blocked up the avenues to hinder relief coming to his Nephew. Hereupon they made a stand, resolving not to declare themselves, advertising Soliman the son of Armabachi, that they would stand Neuters, till time should advise them what to do, under the conduct of Amet Sarran, a prudent Commander, who had engaged to Malouco, that he would be ready at his command. But Courco Abrahin who led five thousand Moorish horse being young and gallant, ambitious to do something of noble, sent to Sarran, that if he would second him he would give battaile, but Sarran answered 'twas no policy to attack an Army well rang'd and defended with Artillery, without more possibility: so that day he did nothing, onely four Moores well mounted made a bravado. I went along with one Hercules, a Cannoneer, and John Sassello a Marseillian, to view the Portuguese Army, which was a noble prospect, all we disliked was the burthensome number of women and children. The 13. of July, Aluarez about day break spied Courco Abrahin with his five thousand Moores: and with a grand stratagem drew them under shot of all his Musqueteers, and five field-pieces, that made a great slaughter. These Moores were all defeated, and their Leader slain, to the great glory of Don Aluarez, and Captain Balliotin, Commander of the Lansquenets, Don Sebastian view'd all the combat with exceeding delight, embraced Aluarez return∣ing with victory, and gave him a rich Rubie in a Jewel, set round vvith diamonds, which he tied himself in his hat, and to Banastarin and to Baliotin Captains of the Lansquenets, and Arquebusiers, to
each a rich Diamond. The Moorish King gave likewise to Al∣varez his Cimeterre of an excellent temper, and a scabbard of great price. Of these five thousand horse, not above three hundred escaped; of Christians, there dyed not above twenty, and fifty wounded. Malouco hearing of this defeat was exceedingly troubled, and blam'd Sarran, that he came not in with relief. Hereupon he draws his Army towards the Sea side; but the French Embassa∣dour advised him rather to take course with the Arabians, who had engaged to bring in to Mahomet fifty thousand horse, and to fall upon them before they got into a body. He accepted the Councell and marched against them, and put the country of Loy∣assan and others to fire and sword: The Arabians submitted, and promised him all obedience, but he being cautious, and fearing their perfidiousnesse, took all their horses, and left the men for the next harvest, so with dexterity he prevented that danger. Thence he returned towards the Sea-coast, and began already to be ill disposed, which proceeded from excessive constipation or Melancholy: from the beginning of his sicknesse he never came on horse-back, but went ever in his Littar. He was a benigne and courteous Prince, affectionate to his friends, without state or distance, speaking affably to them, and rendring salutes with great civility. But on the other side he was cruell to his enemies, in ju∣stice rigorous, but chiefly to such as injured the Sutlers, as to a boy who putting his hand into a pannier, stole three dates, the Sutler complaining, he caused three of his fingers to be cut off. Some who had intention to turn to Mahomet, he made them be ram∣med into a Cannon, and fire set to it. The fourth of August, at that time when the prodigious Planet menaced Portugal and Marocca, the King of Portugal having made his prayers, and received a benediction from the Bishop of Co∣nimbria, mounted on a white horse caparison'd with gold and green, of about five and twenty years of age, with something a ri∣sing nose, a good stature, his lip a little hanging, went through all the Army, to animate and encourage the souldiers. Some say the Bishop of Conimbria dreamed the night before, that the battel was lost, and that they were all slaves, as it came to passe; and that upon this alone he sent his treasure, and all things he had of value to Arzille, which served for his ransom afterwards. Malouco the same day about eleven in the fore-noon, left his Littar and mounted on horse-back, vested in a rich robe of cloth of gold, wrought with a folliage, a Cimeterre at his side, his saddle set over with precious stones, and thus went from rank to rank, encouraging his men to combat. His Army marched in good order like a half-cressent, drums of the Morisco very small, beat, and the Fifes founded a shriller sound then the Trumpet. 'Twas thought the battels should have been given on Sunday the third, but 'twas
defer'd to the fourth, and Sebastian and Mahomet were advised to stay battel till the approach of night, because the Arabians pro∣mised to come over to them, and leave Malouco, which proved false, and they were so disappointed. King Sebastian was armed, as the day before, in green Armes, upon a white horse one of the best in Portugal. The Moores Army was rampar'd on the left hand with the Ri∣ver. Sebastian thought himself sure of the Arabians assistance, and specially of Melouco's Van-guard, which was all of Arabians, and for this reason stayed till night, that they might not be perceived. 'Twas in a field of above two large leagues every way, without ei∣ther tree or stone. Before the Van-guard marched, the Light-horse-men mounted on the Arabians horses, composing the point of the Cressent, and were wholly cut off with the Cannon. The Arabians seeing this rout, thought good to do the like; but not perceiving a man of the other Battalia's fall, they set a good face on it, by force Muley Hammet being at hand to instigate them. The battail at length grew hot, and the Arabians performed nothing of what they had promised: Molouco employed the re∣maining houres of his life in giving order for victory: The King of Portugal and the Moor remained on the ground as well as Mo∣louco, the one slain, the other drowned, and the third dead of in∣firmity in his Littar, Hamet remaining only victorious, and heire of all. Don Sebastian did wonders in his own person, but overpowred with number, he hung his handkercher on the point of a lance in token of yeilding, but the rascally Moores ignorant of this pra∣ctice, run upon him, and those that stood with him, and put them all to the Sword. The slaughter was great, but chiefly of those who went along with the baggage, who were as many or more then all the Army. There were some mingled themselves amongst the dead, to save their lives. 'Twas sad to see 200. sucking children, and above 800. women, boyes, and girles, who followed father and mother, think∣ing to inhabit this country, who had loaded chains and cords to fetter the Moores, and served for the Christians themselves, of whom there are 17. thousand prisoners, the two hundred infants, and the eight hundred women not reckon'd. As to the kingdom of Fez or Marocca, heretofore Mauritania, or Tingitania, 'tis of vast extent, and amongst others hath the two potent towns of Fez and Marocca. Fez is the Capitall of the kingdom, strong in scite and people, seated on two great hills, being able upon occasion to raise sixty thousand horse: of sumptuous edifice, of the Persian building, embellished with Folliages of gold and azure, their walls strong, streets cleanly kept, being a Captain for every one, with strong gates at the ends for their security, and crossed with chaines; a
fair river called also Fez passes through the middle. This River is divided into two channels, one towards the South, which waters Fez the new, the other towards the West, water∣ing Fez the old, besides divers fountains which creep through Subterranean channels. The houses for the greatest part are of brick, with Towres and Tarrasses, where the women prune themselves in the evening, for they seldom stirr abroad. There are Mosquees of fair building with their Marabouts for their service; the Principall called Cai∣rimen is of as large circumference as the Town of Arles, with 31. principall gates, sustained by 38. large Arches in length, and 20. in breadth, every night 900. lamps are lighted, and on festivall dayes, as in their Romadan, the feast of S. John, the Nativity of our Lord, more Lamps without number upon brasse candlesticks, where after Mid-night they sing Mattens. Sixty leagues from hence is Marocca chief of all other kingdomes under that Empire, as Hea, Ducalea, Gusula, Hascora and Trelle: as Fez hath under it, Tesmenia, Asgar, Flabat, Errif, Garet, Escaus, &c. This Town was built, or rather augmented by a Prince, called Mansor in the year 1024. scituate in a Plain invironed with Date-trees. He built there a Magnificent Mosquee; there is the high tower with three Spires, on which stand three balls of gold, of twenty thousand Miticales, or two hundred and twen∣ty five pounds weight a piece, Muley Malouco would have had them for his warres, but the Inhabitants would not permit him, whereupon the Janissaries that came from Constantinople to as∣sist Malouco, made some Musquet shot, and pierced them in divers places. He promised them that after a time he would set the like there again, but the others answered, if he should dye, all was lost; as his great Grand-father who sold the foundation rents of the Hospitall of Fez, and dyed before he could restore them, so as 'twas lost to the poor.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the Kingdome of Marocca and Fez. MArocca stretches it selfe very farre, and the parts North∣ward joyn upon the countrey of Asgar, crossing the Mountaines of Gouraigoura, thirty leagues from Fez, whence there flowes a lovely River which runnes Westward, and joynes with the River Bar, where there are vast Plaines and Pastures without stone, like the Camargue of Arles. The Arabians call this countrey Suambiz, a countrey a∣bounding in Cattell, and fronts upon another Nation of the Arabians called Aluzar, and betwixt these two people, there is ever a mortall warre and hatred. The People of Asgar confine Northward on the Ocean, Westward on the River Buragray, which cuts through Fo∣rests full of Celoquintida, and Oranges, rendring a most plea∣sant odour, Southward on the River Bonazar, inhabited by those wealthy Arabians called Alalur, whence come a brave company of Cavaliers. Here there are many faire Townes, as Argac, Larais, and Casar, Alcahir, or Elcabir, that is the Grand Palace built by the great Mansor, upon an encounter hee had, being lost a hunting, and Northward the countrey of Habar. The Region of Habat, or Elbabat, ends also on this side the Ocean, beginning from the South to the River Gonar∣ga, or Orga, and Suerga, and from the East to the Straight. The Principall City is Azaget or Ezageu, which stands up∣on the hanging of a Hill, neare to the River Gourga, and hath many other good Townes, as Agla, Tonser, Merga, Omar, and others upon the Straight, conquered by the Por∣tuguese, as Arzile, and others; and joynes to the Province of Errif, which beginnes at the Straight; and Eastward stretches as farre as the River Necor, Northward to the Me∣diterranean. The principall town of it is Targa, or Terga, up∣on the said sea, who traffick with the People of Tunnis, and Bisette. There are besides the Townes of Jelles, Gebba, and others. Garet joynes to this Province, which reaches as farre as the Deserts of Numidia, and the Cities there
are Mazelle, Megger and others, where there are many Mines of Iron. This Countrey joynes upon the Region of Chaus, which Westward runnes to the River Barnagara, that goes to the borders of Lybia, with her townes of Teurere, Besornin, &c. It extends as farre as the Kingdome of Telesin, exceeding rich, which on the West bounds upon the Rivers Moluia and La, South upon the deserts of Numidia, comprehending from West to East near four hundred miles, environed with many great deserts, confining on the blacks, and hath two remark∣able Havens, Marzalquibir, and Oran, besides the townes of Gualdida, Hauan, the great City of Nodroma, and Telesin the capitall, where the King resides, who keeps a magnifi∣cent Court. There is also Constantina, the Walls whereof are black stone polished, scituate upon a Mountain at the foot where∣of the River Sufamar runnes. About it are other Provin∣ces, whereof some joyn to the desert of Barqua, which bor∣ders upon Tenez, a City of Numidia, and on the North em∣braces the Province of Daro, which joynes upon Sequelme or Segelmesse, taking name from the capitall towne, and ex∣tends to the River of Zez, which confines on the Deserts of Lybia. All these countries are inhabited by severall barbarous peo∣ple, as Zonetes, Azonagia, Zabara, Egilefe, and runnes to the Province of Chenega, which joyns to the Mountaine of At∣las. This Mountaine reaches to the Deserts of Numidia, a∣mongst which there is one countrey terminates upon the kingdom of Bugia, called Zeb, on the North having Biledul∣gerib, or Numidia. Lybia is of great extent, and Numidia larger. In Lybia are the vast Deserts of Zonzaga and Zuenziga, almost all inhabited on the skirts, with Arabians, who have the blacks on the West and South called Galata, confining upon Tom∣bur. In the middle is the Desert of Zarat, which is two hundred miles over, without any habitation: but the desert of Aroboan affords some comfort, and it joynes upon Tombur. Then next are the deserts of Hair, over which lyes the pas∣sage from Tombur to Telensin. We leave the Desert of Gosde on the right hand for the numbers of fierce beasts that resort thither: then to the de∣sert of Gir, which on the North confines on Tuas, Tegerin and Damesab, which hath the kingdome of Agades on the South, a countrey plentifull of Herbage, Fountaines, and Manna, which they use much in their Diet, and Potta∣ges; they have such abundance of it, it renders them ex∣ceeding strong and agile, they likewise, boyled with water,
make drink of it. They are subjects to the King of Tombur, and border upon Cano another kingdome tributary to Tombur. The people are all black as pitch. Near the Town of of Masar in Arabia Salban, there was once a Gulph of the Sea. There was for∣merly a Temple dedicated to Venus, where maids did prostitute themselves for pleasure or profit, they report: but a famous Courtisan, beautiful and rich, by name Ameliga, being court∣ed by divers Princes and great persons, would accept of no∣thing from them, only obliging them to give something to the poor, using these words, Honour the Goddesse Ameliza to whom you offer this; which made her famous through all Africa, so as they came from very forrain parts to see her, and the King of Bodumal sued to have her to wife, which she refused: a∣mongst others there was a Maraban who visiting her, erected a magnificent Temple to her, which was immediately fre∣quented with a concourse of people, and everyone repair'd thither to obtain their desire, provided they were able of member, otherwise 'twas not to be looked for. The People of Guiner, Tombur, and others were of this devotion. The Priests of the Temple received the word, and render'd them at certain houres. For the kingdome of Melli 'tis very wealthy, by reason 'tis cut through with the black river or Senega, or a branch of it, or rather a channell made by hand, so as 'tis very fruit∣full in Dates, Raisins, Cotton, and other commodities; for 'tis said this River flowes as Nile does, and at the same houres: They have abundance of Canoes, or boats of one piece, in which they travaile upon their little negotiations, passing from king∣dome to kingdome, moved out of the History of Jonas, who they say came on shore there. They make great benefit of Whales, and believe no Whale can passe that way without bursting. An ancient Gentleman of Siban told me, that in the yeare one thousand five hundred seventy one, walking on the shore, he saw three great Whales, which being entered the Gulph, made a most horrid noyse, and on the morrow one of them was cast up with his belly slit, as it had been done with a knife, the other two were carried away with the streame of the water. Whether this be a miracle or magick, I will not judge. Melli borders upon Gago; and Gago is the better countrey of the two, and though Melli have the better townes, yet the other is of much more esteem for many things, but chief∣ly for the quantity of gold, brought thither by the Moores from all parts, and this gold is very exquisite, whereof they make most part of their pieces of a crown and halfe, which they call Miticales. But Melly hath the glory from all her
neighbours for a fair Colledge of their Prophet Haly, where all the other kingdomes come to study the Sciences: there being many learned Doctors of their kind. Thither for this purpose repaires the youth of Cambre, the chief town of Tambur, as also from Gago and other place. Gago is a Town of great traffick where there is a great Mart for pepper, and slaves of all parts of Christendom, whom they employ in Mines, there being some who for avarice bring their own children for this purpose. Gago bor∣ders Eastward on Cober, and the capital towns of these two coun∣tries are 200. leagues distant. They are also under the inundation of Niger, which manures the countrey, and makes it plentifull in cattle, and provisions: the reason the people apply themselves more to husbandry then study, and so are grosse and rustick. Westward from thence lyes the great Cape Serrelyonne, on the East the kingdome of Agades, then Cano, Zegeg, which breeds such store of horse, then Zanfara and Guangara Northward, whose King hath a Guard of 7000. men, foot and horse, with bowes and Cimeterres. Then comes Borro which runs above five hundred miles Eastward, having on the South the Deserts of Get, and on the North those of Barea. They are a brutish people, and enter∣tain their wives in common. Towards the Piroc are the Deserts of Goran, towards Ethiopia: there are people in abundance, and a party of Giloses, who come thither by reason of a sedition, and a party from Zenega who came thither by reason that a daughter of the king of Azangues being married to the King of Gambra, find∣ing she was no maid, repudiated her, whereof arose great warres amongst them. The people of Temesne say they were the Founders of Marocca, they use a finer language then others, which they call Aquela Ma∣rig, that is, the noble language, the other kingdomes of Afri∣ca speaking but a rude language in comparison. Another cal∣led Sigay, which goes in the kingdomes of Galatas, Tombut, and Guinée, Meli, Gago different from the rest: another at Juber, which cannot be written, because of the gutturall pronunciation, and goes as far as Cana and Casena: Again at Hea, Gangara, Borne, they use other languages. At Sena, Terga, Gueziga, and Lenta, they expresse themselves well, something like the African, and pronounce in the throat, but distinctly. They are much contented to see a stranger learn their language. I was acquainted with a Physician learned in all these Lan∣guages, as likewise in Latine, Greeke, and Italian, and French, reasonable well. One night being in bed in the same Chamber with him, and Captain Thomas Martin, on a suddain enters a Moor, mine Host having brought him in, with a slave carrying a Torch, cover'd from head to foot with woollen cloth, who saluted us in French: seeing him so black I blessed my self, taking him for a devill, whereat he laughed, bidding
me I should not be afraid, for there was no danger. He kissed his hand, and took mine with many kindnesses and expressions, that he could not have slept if he had not seen me, entreating me to come to him on the morrow, to communicate to me a matter of impor∣tance. Asking how he came so perfect in our tongue, he told me he was once servant to one Charbi at Marseills, that he had had businesse with my father, whom he named, and my brother: that he had been a slave 9 years, then redeemed himself. On the morrow he was with us at our first stirring, and we took a walk together, and then he invited us to dinner to his house, which was very noble. I demanded of him how a person of such quality had remained so long in slavery: he told me that for five years his ransom being a thousand duckets was lost. He had four horses in his stable, his lodging chamber was gilt, and had many other very fair rooms. He had one wife only, and he would never marry other, but would live like a Christian. His wife was fair in perfection. He gave me high commendations to his wife that she might be courteous to me, and she was therefore very civill to us: He shewed us all his house, and a fair Library of well-bound books, and shewed me how the Africans had been Lords of a great part of the world, shewing me a Book titled Albazer full of curiosities, and histories of the renowned Africans, as Hannibal, Massinissa, Septimus Seve∣rus Emperour, and many other Kings, Princes, and Bishops, as St. Augustine and others. I asked him why he followed not the Law of so many holy Bishops. He told me he was not so far divided, and that in their Alcoran Mahomet confesses that Jesus Christ was greater than he: that he met him in the sixth heaven and humbled himself to him, beseeching him to pray to God for him, which he never did to other Prophets, who all beg of Mahomet to pray to God for them. So as this man wanted nothing of a Christian but Baptisme; and told us that having paid his ransom, if his Master Churbi the Con∣sul had not pressed him to marry a young widow whom he dear∣ly lov'd, he had willingly become Christian. He was a man very upright, wise, and vertuous, and if he would marry other wives, of the chiefest in Town he might have plenty. He told me as a secret that the Governour of Arzille, who was in heart of the Spa∣nish opinion, would have given his daughter in marriage, if he would have become Christian, he had likewise a particular affection for Christians. This is that Arzille which in the year 1421. was conquered by Cordoue the Moor, which Don Alphonso, King of Portugal regained from him. But to return to Marocca, I shall speak of what I have often seen in Mountains of Ziz, that is, how the people have a familiarity with serpents, and very infants will play with them. The Mahometans having it by precept of Law, to kill none of these pernicious crea∣tures,
insomuch as I was once reproved by one of them for throw∣ing a stone at a toad. Being departed from Sequeline, we crossed the Mountains of Ziz, which takes beginning at the skirts of Mezetazu, towards the West, and terminates at Telde, towards Numidia. The Arabians call it Segelmesse, which are fifteen Mountains where these Serpen∣tine people inhabit, which the people call Zanaga, who keep com∣pany with serpents, and have their gardens full of toads. 'Tis true there are amongst them Magicians of divers kinds, whereof some can charm these reptile Creatures, as in the Indies they charm the Caymanes and Tiburons,Leon. Abr. l. 3. that these fish-monsters devour not them who fish for pearls, they call these Magicians Malurman. In these Mountains of Ziz there are other Magicians, who boast they can cure all diseases,Mahazin. Zaira. them they call Mahazin, and are in great esteem. Another sort called Zairan conjure tempests, lightenings, hails, and other Meteors, which are hurtfull to fruits. I remem∣ber I there saw a Magician, who perceiving a horrid tempest ap∣proaching in a thick black cloud, which would quite destroy their Seytume, or olives then in flower, he made a hole in the ground, and with certain words urined in it, which diverted the storm to another part: yet they have another sort they call Machabell, who say they can cure all diseases in cattle. Others called Sadahachar, who have power over devils, and can compell them to any place they command them: They have alwaies one amongst them, and they call them white devils. Others very skilfull in Geomancy, who can shew spirits in a bright bason like a looking-glasse, which re∣presents what is desired: Others they have that cause beasts or men to languish and die; but this last sort is not onely amongst Infi∣dels, I have seen them likewise amongst Christians. For being once at Seville in Spain, I knew a Flemish Limner excellent in his art, who languisht by this means, betwitch'd by a famous strumpet cal∣led Segnora Maria de Villara, who would have served a Comrade of his in like sort, with certain biskets wherewith she entertained him, whereof one was charm'd and the other not; but he suspect∣ing some villany, cunningly conveyed it to her own plate, and took another. Afterwards she doubting nothing gave him one to pre∣sent to his wife, with a curious purse. But he returning home made triall on a dog, who immediately fell to howling, and dyed. Mean while the Bisket which the Curtizan had taken unawares, began to work, whereupon perceiving her self lost, she sent for her friend, who acknowledged he had given her the morsel, ignorant what it was. Hereupon she desired him for a last service, he would go to a certain place in a garden out of Town, and cut a cord which he should find tied to a tree; which taking some friends with him he did, and found a toad tied by the leg at the end of the cord, and he had no sooner cut it but the Curtizan died. I was
in Sevill when this happened, and seeing the body of this woman going to buriall, he who was the principal actor told me the story, for we lodg'd in the same house. And his wife upon this strange ef∣fect durst no longer wear the purse she sent her. In order to this I will relate you two other examples of Sorce∣rers, which happened in our Countrey of Provence, one of a Shoe∣maker at Aix. On the day he was married a witch tied a knot up∣on a point, with certain words, and laid it on the Altar in time of Masse, and afterwards put it in a hole. For five or six years these people could never live together, till the witch being apprehended before her death, confessed where the point was, which was found together with crosses, caracters, and sacred words: The witch was burn'd alive, and the shoemakers wife afterwards became with child. The other of a Marsellian, who being in love with a maid, whom her friends would not consent should marry him, was advised to go to Baile de Luc, a grand Sorcerer, who made him make an offering to Sathan, then drawing a circle on the ground, he divided it in seven parts, and in each placed a character, signifying the name of a Devil, who should appear to him in what form he would, and carry him whithersoever he desired. But the other not being over confident named the form of man, but the Sorcerer would have the form of a beast. In fine, the other for money procured him to let him have the caracter of a Demon with him to his own home, to make tryal of, and made choice of the name Leviathan, and about midnight went to do this work at his Mistresses door, the Magician having told him 'twould work the more forcibly. He then laid the Caracter upon a stone and on his knees made his pray∣ers to Leviathan to assist him in his enterprize. He said this prayer five times, then on a sudden the devill ap∣peared in a hideous and horrible form, which the poor man having not courage to endure, fell in a trance on the ground for three hours together. Afterwards returning to himself, he got up, took his ticket, and returned home sad and vext at his want of courage. He cast the Caracter in the fire, whence broke three such claps of thunder, as if the house should have sunk to hell. The Father, Mother, and Sisters ran to see what the matter was, but he seemed to know nothing. The poor man being in this distresse, came to me, for he was my friend, and telling me the proceedings asked my advice, with most desperate speeches, saying, that to gain his love he did not care to be damned. Whereupon I advised him in the best sort I could, telling him that this way though he should gain his Mistresse, nothing but misery could befall him; then I made him promise me to go together to a Capucin of my acquaintance to reconcile him, and receive his diabolical renunciation; but this miserable man came not according to appointment, persisting in his accursed resolution.
Mean while the maid having knowledge of all, married honou∣rably with another, and left the wretched man infamous and dis∣graced, to a Tragick death. Now to conclude this discourse of Africa, I saw there certain beasts, the like whereof I never saw in India East or West, they call them Pachacou, like foxes, and are of so strange and ravenous a nature, that if they wind a dead corps before it be interr'd, they will scrape and mine till they get to it, and eat it to the bones, some call them Chicali, they live onely on flesh. And I remember that a poor boy, servant to one of our com∣pany, being dead, we buried him in a sandy ground, and as deep as we could, but the day following we found him drawn out of the earth, and knawed to the bones. Not imagining how this came to passe, we went next evening to watch, and found 'twas those beasts, who came in a troop to hunt after such booty: We hit one of them so with a stone, that he lay for dead, and as we were view∣ing him, as a strang thing, on a sudden he leapt up and ran away, which made us think this Creature is exceeding crafty, that can dis∣semble death so naturally. The Arabians call him Duburh, the Africans, Ilef. A while after this battail, I went aboard at Lareche, and came to Calis, a hundred miles from thence, so to San Loucas, then to Seu∣ille, 16. leag. from Calis, going thither by the Gadalquivir: and re∣ceived some money I had a letter of exchange for from Fez, I went to Grenado, two dayes journey from Seuille, so down to Cordoua, and Guadix, and meeting with a waggon loaded with wool, I came to Cartagena, then following the coast to Malaga, Valencia, Barce∣lona, and at last to Marseills.
THE THIRD PART Of the Famous TRAVAILS OF VINCENT le BLANC His Voyage to CONSTANTINOPLE. REturning from Africa, I embarked in a Scette at Arache, and together with John Safolt, the Navi∣gator that preserved us from wrack at Gibraltar came to Cadiz, and thence to Marseills, where after three or four moneths rest, with the same Master I went to sea again in a vessell fraught for Constanti∣nople. We set saile at Marseills the twenty fourth of January, and arrived at this great town, the capitall of the Western Empire, on the twenty second of February following, having crossed the Ar∣chipelagus, and touched in at the Isle and Town of Seio, or Asion, where we heard a sad disaster, of a Lover, that in despair killed himself, and bequeathed his whole substance to his Mistresse, the ground of his destruction: There at a Convent of Fran∣ciscans, we saw the Fig-trees; the fruit whereof never ripens, till certain knats ingendered of the corruption of another, they call the Sicamore Fig, bites it; and then it ripens immediately, and is
exceeding delicate. Constantinople hath been the subject of so many ingenious pens, who have and daily do pourtray both the Town, and the Empire, the Court and State of the Grand Senior, his Officers, Religion, Customs, and other particulars of the Turks, that I shall enlarge my selfe no further, then to say 'tis admirable for pleasant scituation, and beautiful aspect at distance, though the intrinsick corresponds not; for the streets lye extremely sor∣did, out of the negligence or rusticity of the Inhabitants, who think of nothing but gain, and avarice, without regard to decency either in their houses, or streets. The Grand Senior, Bashaws, and such, have magnificent Palaces painted with gold and azure, after the Persian. Her Founder Constantine the Great dismantled Rome and all the Province of the Empire to adorn this his new City, which in imitation of ancient Rome he seated on seven hills: af∣terwards Justinian erected the magnificent Church of our Savi∣our, or S. Sophia, of circular Modell, by which pattern the Sara∣sins built their Temple, or Mosque at Meca, though there be much difference betwixt them, that at Meca, being only brick building, supported with abundance of Pillars. Constantinople hath within nothing graceful, but the Princes Seraglioes, the Mosques, Hospitalls, and the Bashaws Palaces built by the art and industry of their slaves, as heretofore at Rome: likewise these Bashaws for the greatest part are Renegado-Chri∣stians, or Christians children, of more elegancy then the natu∣rall Turk, the most avaricious people of the world, who with∣out mony, afford not the least civility imaginable. Constantinople is scituate on a Promotory environed on all sides, except the West, with the Sea, with a Gulph or Channell on the North, and Port Pera, or Galata secured with a chain as Malta is. Pera is as 'twere a Suburbs beguirt with Walls, rai∣sed in Anastasius the Emperours time, who fortified it. Within the circumference there are four good Ports besides this. On the Land side 'tis double wall'd, with good ditches equall'd, slan∣kard and rampar'd, no work of the Turks notwithstanding, but the ancient Christians, who possessed it, and since repaired by them. 'Tis of triangular form, one point towards the West, the other two declining with falls and windings towards the sea on the South side. From some houses in Pera, one may take a view of the scite and precinct of it, and perceive how it opens it self into three Angles, the one towards the Port of the Islands, a second to the River Port, and the third points upon the Grand Siniors Se∣raglio, which takes up the side of the hill, that embosoms the Gulph towards Pera, the height whereof is a shelter to the ves∣sels that ride on that side, and here the Sultans, and Sultanesses Gardens are. The Seraglio is of a noble and delightfull Fa∣brick, for it hath both land and sea for prospect, which from the Mount surveyes the champain. There are long ridings adjacent,
enclosed with high walls, and beautifyed with columns of dis∣colour'd marble, and tall trees ranked in walkes. Within the Se∣raglio is the Temple of S. Sophia, since the demolishment of a number of goodly Churches, made their Mosque: having left none for the Greek Christian service, but those of S. Peter, S. Thomas, S. Theodoret, Saint Luke, S. Lazarus, Saint John, and S. Seba∣stian; now in the Patriarcks hands where Christians celebrate with permission. The Turks practice a Religion in Part and countenance meer∣ly, without regard to law either divine or humane:The Turks Religion. relying for their faith upon others, without further indagation, and con∣ditionally that their Prophet were not mistaken: Their principal care is the manage of their affaires, to be esteemed wise, and en∣joy the pleasures of the world. They esteem Christians far short of them, yet notwithstanding they allow Christ to be born of a Vir∣gin, that he was a great Prophet, and the Breath of the mighty God. There have risen amongst them some Sectaries, who held him a greater Prophet then Mahomet: but some being so bold as to publish it, were dragg'd by the heels, had their brains beaten out, and were made food for dogs. The prohibition to dispute of their law they observe exactly, for manifesting the imperti∣nence and absurdity of it, and for the diverse interpretations of their Alcaron, which would intangle them in a thousand confusi∣ons. They place their Paradise intirely in sensual pleasure, as in gustfull and delicate meat and drink, in fair women, and the like; and doubt not salvation, if they abstain from wine and swines flesh. Their Talismansat and Cadileschers, their Doctors preach them this wholesome doctrine: telling them the Paradise promi∣sed to Christians where there is neither meat nor drink, is for poor and wretched creatures; in theirs they make good cheer, so carnal, and below spirit are these people. The Priests must be a little learned in the course of the Sun and Moon, for the knowledge of their Feasts and New-Moons: they go daily upon the steeple of their Mosque, and proclaim the hours of prayer to God and their Prophet. They have Religious of several orders, some like men in despe∣ration, counterfeiting the ideot, others dissembling simplicity, others that most frantickly torment themselves to death, women who ring themselves with wire, as we do Mares, but of this I have said sufficiently in my Treatise of Persia. The Mufti is their Grand Patriarck, who decides all differences in Religion and disputes a∣mongst the Priests, and the Grand Sinior himself cannot wave his sentence, who owes him such respect, that he rises from his seat to receive him when he makes a visit to him, and seats him by him. The determination of civill and criminal causes is com∣mitted to the Soubassi or Gadilescher Basha, Armin, or Ar∣cair. This Mufti as of the line of Mahomet, weares a green
Turbith, the Emir wears it also; not for holinesse, but for autho∣rity. These Emir are egregious Hypocrites, as are the Deruis, who wear the Cimeterre, and under colour of executing divine Ju∣stice, commit a thousand murders in the country. There are others who go in troops, and coming to a Village beg almes upon their knees, which Turks give them liberally, and they eat it in the place, neverthesse having done, for all this charity, all they can meet alone, they omit not to pillage and murther. During my stay at Constantinople, there died Basha Zabahim, a person of worthy repute according to his law: Being departed, his death was notified to all the people, who came in a multitude and wept for him, and according to custome he was interred without the town. Persons of such quality at their decease ever bequeath to pious uses, as to the foundation of an Hospitall, or Mosque, or the like; officers clad in duskish course rugs, give notice to the people to pray for the soule of this pious Lord: His nearest kindred covered with fine white linnen from head to foot, go to the house and attend at the gate, no man entring in but the Ma∣ster. Such as are more remote, are only vail'd over the face with a fine cloth, which hangs down to the girdle. They are known by their wailings and lamentations, which they duplicate when they come together. Then come forth all the Domesticks in gray Ash-coloured cloth, next come twelve horses, with clothes of the like drawing on the ground, the leaders clothed with the same. These horses seem to weep, and by intermissions to sigh and sobbe, which they are brought to by rubbing their nostrils with a certain drugge, while the people thinking them to weep really, accompany them with tears and lamentations. Then follow four in gray with four banners trailing on the ground, then four more trailing Arms, Pikes, Javelins, Cimeters, Bowes, and Arrows, all with like lamentation; next comes the Corps contrary to us with the head foremost, clothed in a rich garment, born by six men well habited, six more holding up the Pall of the same colour; with the robes, with a black Turbant, upon which there is a green ribband of a finger breadth, signify∣ing the heaven promised by their Prophet, and upon the Turbant a bundle of feathers of great value. All his Allies and Friends follow after weeping covered with white, by the head of the Corps walk four Talimassans, reading prayers for the dead, these assisted at his departure, and are obliged for some charity bestowed on them to pray for him all the yeare; when they come to the crossing of a street, the Corps stayes, and a Talimassan with a loud voyce cryes, Ala Ramani arban Muhis la ala ila ala ale Huma ala. Which meanes, God is mercifull, pray to God for him; and with that the Priests, with Tallow Tapers walk round the Corps, repeating the same words, and thus conduct him to
his Sepulcher, lin'd with thin boards and roof'd over: for nine dayes all his kindred visit the tomb with lamentations, whither they bring provision for the Priests and poor; for whom there is almes assigned, and this, they say, maintains them till the resurrecti∣on; when the breath of God will judge in favour of the Prophet, who gives testimony of their good works before the divine Tri∣bunal. Meanwhile the widow of the deceased layes out for birds kept in cages, which she buys and sets at liberty, that the merciful God may so free the soule of the departed, as she hath shewed mercy to the birds, and poor: With the Turks Processe is decided,Turksh justice. according to the letter of the Alcoran. Near the Seraglio gate is the Diuan, where the Principals sit in scarlet robes. The second Tribunall or Diuan, is within the Seraglio hard by the other, where sit the four Bachats, with the grand Seniors Secretary, three Cadeleschers and the Beglierbeg, who is as high-Constable. Here are criminall causes determined, and all that concerns the Militia, and pay of Janissaries and Souldiers, attended by the Dragoman, one skilled in all languages, for the benefit of strangers; for people of all sorts come to these tryals, and 'tis allowed to any one to see Justice executed. The Dragoman takes perfect information, that no man may be surprized in his cause, and then makes report to the Diuan. The Judges are ever of a graceful presence, holding for a principle, that a fair mind was never covered with a foule face, or very rarely. They afford a fair attention, and as diligent to a child as to the grand Senior. In the Diuan there is a pri∣vate window where sometimes the Grand Senior, stands to hear the Justice of the Court, which keeps him in awe and remem∣brance. They have an equall and speedy Justice administred by the States gratis, nor can they admit either of presents or mediations. Bad causes are rewarded with good bangs, all done with weight and measure, for to the Judges 'tis death to proceed otherwise. In affairs of importance where the grand Senior ought to take cognizance, the Cadileschir makes the report to him, and he sen∣tences as he pleases. There are other Courts and Judicatories in severall places of the Town, for multitude of the Inhabitants, who for the most frivolous things appeale to Justice. The Cadis, Armis, and Soubassi, are the Judges, who for transgression are discharged of their office. The high Court of the Seraglio sits all day, from morning to night, where they are provided of three meals a day; before they enter, at nine, and in the evening, no man being allowed to stir out, but the Visier, keeper of the seale, who before he can seale any dispatch, must acquaint the grand Senior. Three dayes a week these grand Sessions are held, Sa∣turday, Sunday, and Monday, and sometimes Tuesday, in occur∣rence of great affairs, or of strangers: the other four dayes are
assigned to the Courts of the four Bachats, who dispatch the rest, and sit in places appointed, whence on the Saturday they faile not to be at the grand Sessions, where all attend, seated with cros∣sed arms, and their feet close together, till the grand Basha ap∣pear; to whom they addresse themselves with great reverence, then to their seats with rigorous silence. The Basha with a list of papers in hand, looking round, observes him who prepares to plead, then with his hand gives him a sign to speak, and having heard the complaint, then hears the adverse party, and with great prudence judges and gives sentence. In case of murther they make particular inquiry of all accessa∣ries, and they scape not without a good fine that could, and hinde∣red not the murther: For all that are present are bound under fine and penal punishments to apprehend the murtherer, and bring him to the Soubassi, the Cadi's Lieutenant, who having heard the mat∣ter gives judgement. I was at Constantinople in the time of Amu∣rath grand Son to the Sultan Soliman, where by one Bernard Na∣dal a Marseillian, I learnt many particulars of the Court: He was taken by the Turks in his youth, and presented to the Soliman, who made him renegado, and his page. He made me an exact relation of the whole Court and Seraglio, out of which I collected some memorials that I lost. I can humbly say, God made me an instru∣ment to regain this man, who came back to Marseills, while his Father and Mother were yet alive, where he was reconciled to the Church, but sometime after going to sea, was by the Turks retaken, and put to death. Of the Seraglio I remember he told me that within the second gate upon the left hand is the Princes kitchin, not comparable to those in our Royal Palaces; he reckon'd all the Officers to me, which I set not down. Beyond that is the great hall, or chamber of the Agas Capigis, or Cadun, the door-guards, a different office from the Chaous, who are exempt from guarding. Of this guard there are a great number, divided by thirty to a Company. The third gate opens into gardens, set with dates, and trees of other sorts; at the bottom whereof is a fair Subterranean apartment, sumptuously stored with riches, on the top stands a golden Mund, and on that a Cressant. Here the Prince bathes in hot seasons, and sometimes eats; here he gives audience to Embassadours, conducted through divers gates and Courts, for ostentation of the State and magnificence of the Pa∣lace, the rich columns, Mosaick Tapestries, &c. He gives audience to Embassadours onely twice; when they arrive, and when they depart, and then for a speciall favour reaches them his right hand to kisse. In the middle of the chamber stands a great globe of Chrystal,A descrip∣tin of the Serag∣lio. exceeding delightfull to the eye, for the diversity of co∣lours it presents, enriched round with fair diamonds, rubies, and emeralds. At one end of the Chamber is a door where the grand Senior goes to visit the Sultanaes, while the Basha's entertain the
Embassadours; for the second room is for his wives and Ladies, where none enters but Eunuchs. Nadal that I spoke of as a Fa∣vourite, went in often with the Prince, and was fortunate in this that the Sultan excused him from castration, for fear of loosing of him, many loosing their lives by it, though when 'tis done they are cast in a sleep, by vertue of a stupifying water. He told me the Ladies would blandish him exceedingly, and that there was one who daily said the rosary of the blessed virgin, and was daugh∣ter to the Prince of Natolia. The Sultan keeps ten pages, as grooms of his chamber to dresse and undresse him, who serve not by quarter, but attend the Prince continually, as Pages of honour: They are cul'd out of many more, and ordinarily are chosen by their Physnomy, or good face. 'Tis the office of one of these to go every morning to the Chasna, or Treasurer for fourty duckets to put in the Grand Seniors pocket for his charity, and bounty; at night when he goes to bed, all the money left in his pockets the Pages of honour divide amongst them, where they often find the sum compleat, the grand Seniors affairs not allowing him leisure to think of it. They fetch every day the like sum for his sports. These Pages watch all night by the Prince, two and two by turns, and have Flambeaus burning, till Sun rising that the Prince rises: for then from a high steeple the Dalliman calls every one to pray∣ers. The Prince assoon as he is ready goes to the Mosquee, and if he please, takes his Pages of honour to attend him; sometimes to take the air he goes on horse to a Mosquee more remote, and then is attended in handsom order. Furthermore the Porter or Capaigis,Bashaw Abrahor the master of horse. hath authority to punish any that shall raise any broiles in the Palace, and suffers no man to go in with armes. The Querriship comprehends 300. goodly horses, twelve whereof are reserved for the Princes saddle alone, on which onely the pages of honour may ride: there are other stables for above six thou∣sand horse, as 3000. palfreys, called there Deuagilar. There are a number of horses besides, and the Master of horse they call Bashaw Abrahor. In my time 'twas thus, perhaps things are altered since, I onely touch upon this Court passing by, with reference to more ample relations extant of this subject. I was not forth in this voyage to Constantinople above eight months, but I returned the same year to Marseills, where I found the Town in much inquietude, for apparition of certain spirits in the house of one George Trian, who had had two wives both de∣ceased. These Goblins made strange noyses, and presented strange illusions, as Tiran reported, in effect it much disturbed the neigh∣bours, at last all was set at rest by a neighbour that discovered there remained some things unsatisfied, by one of the wives, which she appeared to reveale.
Going one day to visit Monsieur, the Count of Carsa, living then at Marseills, discoursing of this accident, he related to me severall things of this kind; amongst others, that being on a time with two friends at Susa in eemont, they were told at their lodging how there was a Chamber haunted with spirits, and strangely molested with horrible rumblings: hereupon they were taken with a curiosity to lie in this chamber, whatsoever their host could say to disswade them; their evenings discourse was onely of apparitions, which one amongst them absolutely denied, saying 'twas all but fables, and phantasticall imaginations: But lying all together in the same bed, about midnight the Count wakes, and by the light of a Flambeau they had left burning, he saw some Monks both black and white, reading their Breviaries by the blew light of a Taper, that made the whole chamber of the same colour: he could not understand a word they said, though he observed them diligently: he was seiz'd with such horrour he could not speak to his bed-fellowes, onely jogged the next with his elbow, who slept as he were charm'd; and when he saw the Monks with grave steps draw nearer the bed, his fear redoubled, and though their swords lay hard by him, terrour onely possessed him. He thought the Monks muttering some words, turned off the cloaths, took one of his companions out of the bed, and burnt him to ashes in a great fire; and in effect one of them was gone and never heard off more, and none but himself and one more left in the bed. I remember also that being at St. Bauma, while Godfrey the accursed sorcerer was there, as they carv'd him fish, being Lent, and laid it on his trencher, he seemed still to eat, yet there was nothing lesse on his trencher; and Father Michaelis exorcizing Magdalen de la Palu, asked her what it meant? who answered he could not eat of all things; and that the Devils brought him human flesh, of which he fed and left the rest, And divers Sorcerers exe∣cuted at Aix, have confessed that in their Sabbaths, most common∣ly they feed on such fare. This makes me doubt whether those Goblins or Sorcerers, seen by the Count, carried not the poor Gentleman away for the like provision; for he was never seen more, and the other two remain∣ed frighted and astonished almost to death. Notwithstanding de Carsis, so he was called, was a prudent and valiant person; and the third that scaped with the Count, was called Vieramont. I made the same year a journey into Italy, and coming to Pecholi to visit some friends, being in bed at an Inne, I heard a strange noyse, and a voice that called me by my name, which I took to be the voice of my mother, who told me she was dead: frighted wherewith I fell into lamentations, till my Brother-in-law over-heard me, and came with a candle, who understanding the matter reassured me. But continuing in sadnesse, about six dayes after going from Pe∣choli,
I fortuned luckily on a Marseillian Merchant, my acquain∣tance, who came but four dayes before from thence, and assured me he left my mother in health, so I found 'twas but a meer illusi∣on. Afterwards in the same voyage going from Rome to Naples, betwixt Aquila and Abruzza, we lodged in a village called Chelana, where mine host having seen us well accommodated in bed, reti∣red to another room, for fear of spirits that haunted that: and in good earnest we had a very troublesome night of it, not able to rest for ratlings and jinglings, both upon the stairs and in the Chamber, without perceiving any thing, much ado to comfort one another, and 'twas to no purpose, we called mine hoste; who in the morning excused himself the best he could, and all passed in laughter; but coming back that way we found the house pulled down, and a Church building in the place. Then returning into France, we passed by Beaucaire, where we supped with the Sieur de St. Andre, Governour of Montpelier, and telling him of these spirits, being a Protestant, he made a scoffe at it; but the best was, that in the night as he lay in bed, he was wa∣ked with such a noise, that leaping to his sword, he cryed out, and raised us all; supposing thieves were robbing the house, but find∣ing doors and windows all fast, he was amazed, and made an oath he would never jest at spirits again. The Authours voyage into Italy. REturning to Marseills in a time of sicknesse, I went to sea again, in a vessel bound for Brasile, under the command of Captain James Varin. Our sufferings in this voyage were great, specially in our return, when we were glad for food to eat all manner of leather, Munkeys, Parrots, and Rats, which passed for plovers. I was the most troubled with a young Marsellian I brought along with me, one William Vias, a neighbour, a most malicious unto∣ward fellow, who did me not the least service, though I laid in provision for him, and paid his passage. He quarrelled with every one, and was beaten by every one, without any amendment, grow∣ing worse and worse. Once he was soundly bang'd for saying he would kill the Cap∣tain, and had my advice been followed, they should have made a Fricassee of him, as I saw one served at Brasile, as I shall relate in my second voyage to the West Indies. At our return, we came a shore at Haure, where I dismis∣sed him, and came alone to Marseilles, where I married the most perverse woman in the world, so as when I thought to have spent the remainder of my life in repose, I was constrained
to wander again for quietnesse, and in effect made a voyage to Portugall, to barter some pearls. I laid in Merchandizes proper for Cadiz, as Camlots of the East, cloth, corall, and two hundred crowns in gold, upon let∣ters of exchange to Hierome Viguer of Chativa, and an hundred pistols, I deposited with Noe Menestier, which I lost; yet he an honest man; for this Viguier a Spaniard, used such sleights and delays, that I was constrained to quit all, by a misfortune which befell me. For waiting for my money at his Bro∣thers house one Emanuele, one evening coming out of a Church, there stood discoursing a companie of Cannons, who seeing me in a French dresse, according to that degenerous cu∣stome of the Spaniard, began to affront me, which I waved with patience; and telling them how injurious 'twas to abuse a stranger thus meerly passing by them, they wanted not much to come from words to blows with me and my man: Here∣upon I complained to the Duke of Gandia, who gave me no other satisfaction than to refer me to the Bishop, from whom I returned with as little satisfaction. Thus discontented I left the Town, and removed to Cadiz, by the way I lighted upon one of these venerable Cannons travailing for Valencia, well mounted, and glasses before his eyes to pre∣serve them from the wind; now I having this opportunity for my revenge, gave him such a buffet that I broke his glasse, and sent him senselesse to the ground: then upon the spur doubled my pace to Guadix, where 'twas my hard fortune to loose a bill of exchange I had for cloth I sold at Valence. thence by Granado I went to Cadiz, where some small negotiations be∣ing dispatched, I returned for Provence: But having some prick in conscience for my treaty of the Cannon of Gandia, I went to a Priest to confesse my self, who considering the spe∣cies of my fault, turned me over to the Bishop, who absol∣ved me, and for penance obliged me to make a pilgrimage to Rome: I performed it, and coming to Saint Peters Church, to confesse me to one of the Penitentiaries, with long slaves, by ill luck he prooved a Spaniard, and understanding I had beaten a Cannon of Gandia, was much concerned, howsoever gave me absolution. A History.At this time there was an Almner of the Popes, who had the disposing of ten or twelve thousand duckets to the poor year∣ly, and as they say, reserved a good share for himself; so as in few yeares he became exceeding rich, but very avaritious: Whereupon some good fellows there, were resolved to shew him a trick, and partake with him; for this purpose one of them opens a shop of small commodities, with some curiosities and antick me∣dals of gold and silver. This Almner as he came from Church, went every day to
converse with this new Merchant, who still shewed him rarities, whereof sometimes he bought, sometimes not. At last when their familiaritie was confirmed, behold another of the pack, disguised like a slave, an iron plate about his neck, and a red cap, stands to beg at St. Peters porch, and as the Alm∣ner came by, besought a charity of him: the other see∣ing him of a good aspect, asked him what he was? who answered he was a poore Gentleman newly come out of sla∣very, and having his conscience burthened, desired he would hear his confession. So entring the Church, this Gallant told him a long story, how he had been divers years captive to Dragut Rais that famous Pirate, that at length he made him groom of his Chamber, and trusted him with all his money and jewels, and that his Master being slain at the siege of Malta, he took a jewell of extraordinary value, and a sum of duckets, and came with the Fleet to Constantinople, where he met with means to get into Christendom, and return to his Countrey with his wealthy prize. The Almner was on fire, to have a sight of the rich piece, and told him if it were a thing of that value, he would pro∣cure his holinesse to buy it: The slave then conjuring him to secrecy by the name of God, shewed him a fawcet Chrystall, arti∣ficially coloured with Dragons bloud, which made it of an admi∣rable lustre; wherewith the Almner dazled, desired him he might shew it to a Merchant a friend of his, of knowledge in such things, so they went together to the Merchant, who viewing the jewell, made unusuall admirations, as at an excessive treasure, telling him 'twas worth many thousand duckets; whereby his longing growing stronger, after many offers and refusals be∣twixt the slave and him, they at length bargained for two and twenty thousand crowns, which he paid upon the naile: Whereupon the Merchant shuts up shop, packs away, and vanishes with the slave, never to be heard of. Meanwhile the Almner was so swell'd with his purchase, that he could not contain himself, imagining by this means he might arrive at any office or dignity whatsoever, and fancied himself Pope already, with this Carbuncle in his Tiara: For some dayes he concealed it, not discovering the least to his very nearest friends. At length meeting with two Goldsmiths of his old acquaintance, he shewed it them, and would know their opinion of the value, or near the matter; who perceiving it a counterfeit carbuncle, laughed heartily, and said 'twas a pretty Chrystall, and might be worth some few realls, which so stroke the good man, that overcome with grief and vexation, he betook himself to his bed, whence he never rose again. Thus was the good man abused by the knavish cheats. To second this, I shall tell you of an exploite was put
upon me in this very voyage. I intended for Naples, to buy some horses, for which purpose I had a good handsom sum of money I had taken for pearls I brought from Lisbone, and sold to the Mar∣quesse of Oraison, which I had put in two bags, whereof one I ever carried about me. One day passing through the market Co∣lonna, I observed a Goldsmith well furnished with jewels, and ha∣ving cheapned a good diamond of about four or five carrats weight, and a good luster, by reason the Bishop of Marseills desi∣red me to buy him one if I met with a good bargain; we agreed for threescore and odd pistols, which I laid down; but he re∣canting and demanding more, I withdrew my money. Upon this comes in a man in good fashion, his beard white, and a black vel∣vet cap, and told me in private if I would buy a good diamond, or other jewels, he would shew me those were good, and at a reasonable rate. I took the man for some Senatour, or per∣son of quality, and followed him, though the Goldsmith pul∣led me by the sleeve, to come into his shop again. As we went along, my Gentleman entertained me with discourse of severall jewels he had at his Chamber, without Port Popolo, at last he had brought me to a place out of all wayes, near the Palle Malle, by the wall side; I began to suspect some mis∣chief when I heard a Faquin by the way bid farewell, such a one calling him by his name; and as I was thinking to take my leave of him, and go back again, I was seized upon by four or five Ruffians, who set a dagger to my breast, and made me deliver my purse, and the bag I had about me, and my guide vanished so as I could see him no more. In this miserable condition I came back to Rome, full of shame and sadnesse, and though I spoke not a word of it, yet my misfortune was immediately divulged through all Rome, how I had been cheated by one in such cloaths, who was known and famous for such a one, he was not long after apprehended and meeting me I knew him not at all, having cut his hair and changed his cloathes, and stoutly denyed the fact. They shewed me some pieces of gold, which I claimed as my own, but that was all I could get. Notwithstanding he was within few dayes after, with two of his Comrades hanged, convicted of divers other robbe∣ries. Being upon return to Marseills I made a digression towards the river Genes, and Malta, and by reason the plague was at Martigues, I could not without difficulty be admitted into Ville Franche, to take a bill of health to crosse the River Genes, where they are ex∣ceeding severe upon such occasions. The day after I arrived, coming abroad two houres before day to take fresh ayr, I heard a doleful voyce coming, as I thought, from Capo Ferino, that cryed, Alas, kill me not, and take all I
have; and after some profound groanes cease. The day brought the matter to light, and it appears a poor man was murthered by some of Nice, persons of quality, and free from suspition. For these people with the Castle-Frigot went aboard a Bark, and having put all to the sword, and pilladged, sunk it: but God for his just judgement permitted him, who sate at helme to leap into the water, and being ignorant of swimming, they say a Dolphin came betwixt his legges and carried him to shore, then knocking at the Castle Gate, he was brought wet as he was, be∣fore the Governour, to whom he related, that some with the Ca∣stle Frigot had boarded their vessell, and used them as I told you. The Governour amazed at the matter, called for him who had charge of the Frigot, to know to whom he had delivered it, who told him that such and such had taken it without asking, because he had ever allowed them the priviledge. The Governour put on his clothes and went to the shore, where he found his Frigot drawn on land, and a boy washing away some blood which was in it; for it seems one of the Bark en∣deavouring to escape, they took him, killed him, and threw him into the sea. The Governour quietly asked what he was doing, he cunningly answered, they had in the night taken a great Fish, and that he was washing away the blood. In the instant came he who had taken away the Frigot, to give good morrow to the Go∣vernour, whom the Marriner immediately knew, and cryed out, that was he who had done the fact; whereupon the Gentleman, with two others, were brought to the Castle, and upon triall ex∣ecuted; two more escaped, but being taken afterwards, paid the same rates, confessing many more murthers, and vessels sunk; a∣mongst others, one wherein were 22. Religious, Jesuits, and Ca∣pucins, whom they wrapt all in a saile, and cast into the sea, ha∣ving pilladged what they had. Thence we went to the Town of Genes in company of one Ala∣ri, who had brought Hawkes to the King, and was going towards the Dutchy of Ʋrbina, and being at Vay about three or four miles from Savona, they would not suffer us on any conditions to passe further, and of necessity we must turn our course to the moun∣tains of Mountferrat a country pester'd with Bandits, and such other; in which passage we were rob'd, and poor Alari lost above two thousand franks which he had in his Valice. We met with many difficulties in this passage, crossing through narrow passages, fill'd up with snow by Alcare to Casoanta, Alex∣andria, Placenta, Parma, Bolonia, Florence and Rome, where we arrived against the canonization of some Saints. I got Letters from Sieur Guileo Falio Embassadour of Malta for some of the money owing me by the Grand Master. Thence we came to Naples where such a famine raigned, that the women in mutiny threw stones at the Governour in his Coach, the Cardinal
and Sapata, whose heeles saved his life. Then we took a Frigot for Messina, and by edict we were to take no more bread aboard then for half a day; I brought halfe a crowns worth, which I hid under the Planks: we had been un∣done if it had been found, and the souldiers were exact searchers; we suffer'd some hardship when we had no bread to our meat, yet so we passed two dayes intire: and putting in at the Pouilla, we could not amongst all the Fisher-men for any money buy a morsel, nor could have any thing amongst them but fish, which we after∣wards trucked with a youth for bread, he had in reserve; coming to Asilla, there we got bread; thence to Messina through the Straight, so dangerous for three or four leagues, where violence of the winde cast us on the Rocks. I got as well as I could to land, but seeing some women left in the Bark, and ready to perish, I perswaded a young shoomaker to assist me, nnd in effect, carry∣ing them on our backs through the boysterous waves, we got them safe to shore, for which afterwards they vouchsafed us not so much as thanks. At Messina I understood the Sieur de Mantis was with his Gal∣lion at Saragossa, being dispersed from his Admirall, and seven or eight more that put to sea together at Marseills, and lighting up∣on Sanson the famous Pirat, with his six ships they maintained a long fight, at length the S. Katharine torn with the Cannon sunk, and had it not been for Monsieur de l'Isle Captain of the Admiral, things had gone worse, but night parted them. De Mantis, his ship repaired, intended to put to sea to seek his company, but there was news brought that Sanson with six tall ships waited his com∣ing forth within Cannon shot of the Haven mouth. Notwith∣standing the oddes, de Mantis resolved to fight him single. 'Twas the admiration of all that saw him hoyse sayle, looking on him as a frantick man, leading two or three hundred men to the Butchery, but this censure was changed into applause, when they beheld him environed with six Turkish ships, whose Cannons made the sea seem on fire▪ of which engagement he cleared him∣self, and restored them a bloody requitall. His vessel endured seven hundred Cannon shot, he lost twelve men, and the Turks above three hundred, besides what wound∣ed. Thus victorious he returned to Saragossa, where he was sa∣luted with Cannon from all the Forts, and received into the town with an eminent honour and endearments, for his boldnesse to attack these six men of war well mann'd and commanded by an English Renegado, the most daring and desperate Pirate on the sea, who on the other side incensed with his disgrace, new mann'd his vessels, and reinforced them with two Gallies, and three hun∣dred Muskettiers: The Grand Master de Vignacourt had intel∣ligence of it, and de Mantis arriving at Malta, with his torne vessel, he repaired it; and at the same time the ships of Marseills
coming from Suria, put in there. Sanson having put to sea, rode in sight of Cape Passaro, whereof the Grand Master gave notice to the Marsellian vessels laden with Merchandises. Mantis with his Admirall design'd to fall upon the Pirats, whereupon I had some doubt if I were best go from Malta to Sicily, for 'twas ten dayes since I had my dispatches from the grand Master, who amongst other things had given me order to procure him three Gallies, built with all possible expedition: I was loth to imbark with de Mantis, for the hazard he was engag'd in, though of favour he promised me civill usage, and I employed my best art, with the Master of a ship, to carry me to Ligorne, and thence to Marseilles, promising to load him with Gally timber for Sicily, so as he resolved accordingly, and that we might passe unpercei∣ved of the Turks, we set not saile till towards the approach of night. The grand Master being advertised of our intention, sent the Galley de la Religion, to call us in again, to my extream vexa∣tion, having attended so long for a passage; But after I with my goods was set a ashore, the Master had liberty to go whither he pleased: The grand Master blam'd me exceedingly, for that the Turks lay then in the Channell, which was true, and in effect the vessel was taken next day, so as I had the better luck to escape. Mean while the Gallion of Malta was making ready to execute the Kings command, and within fifteen dayes 'twas ready to be brought to the key, where de Mantis, with the Marseillian vessels staid for it, to put out together for the coast of France▪ at the same time the Gallies of Malta were departing for Sicily, and de Mantis, being in the Kings ship, where he commanded for his Majesty, saluted them not as they passed by, whereat the Knights were much in∣censed, looking upon it as a point of honour, advertising the grand Master that he ought to fire all the Fort artillery upon him, and sink him: But the prudent Lord managed the affaire with more moderation; and three dayes after the Galley being made rea∣dy to launch, and being brought to the key, they asked de Montis who lay before the Palace, if he would salute the Galley of Mal∣ta, when it came to the key; and answering resolutely no, there passed tart words from both sides, with menaces they would make him do it per-force; but he persisted, that he would lose his life first, and that he had no such Commission; and when they demanded to see his Commission, he refused it in plaine termes. But the grand Master desirous to accommodate all this, found out this expedient: 'Tis an order of Malta, when the grand Ma∣ster comes upon the shore, all the vessels in the Haven salute him, with three volleyes of Cannon: now he gave order that about seven next morning the Gallion should fall down to the key, at which time he exactly contrived to appear upon the shore, under pretence of going that way to Masse at a sumptuous Church he had
built with a faire fountaine before it, that cast up waters a Pike high. His coming was no sooner discovered, but all the vessels pre∣pared with haste to salute him, and de Mantis the foremost, as a thing not to be deny'd gave him all his Cannon as well of his own vessel as of the Admiralls commanded by the Sieur d'Isle, and at the instant, all the other vessels did the like, so as nothing was to be seen but smoak and fire. At that very point the Gallion with her blazing Standart, a S. John upon her poop, enter'd the mouth of the Haven, and thought this discharge of Ordnance was a sa∣lute for her, who returned them the like with her roaring Ord∣nance, and thus by the prudence of the great Master, the difference was composed. All this while Sanson lay at sea waiting for de Mantis, but having intelligence that the Gallion was of the company, he was better advised, and knowing himself too weak to close with us, hoysed sayle and went his way, leaving a Galley to round us, and view our equipage, which came one morn before the Gallion, and made a turn in the head of the whole Fleet, the Gallion gave him two culverins, and de Mantis one, and with this salute they parted, and we came safe to Marseills. The Authours Voyage to Guinea. BEing at Sevill for traffick of stones and pearles, I met with some Marseillians, who had bought of the English a vessel at a good penny-worth, they had taken at sea; they invited me into their company, and from Sevill being bound for Cadiz, by that we got some sixteen leagues at sea, they had so prevailed with me, that for trade I was resolved to joyn with them, whose de∣sign was for the white Cape, by others called the Cape of fishing, to load themselves with fish, which there they have for taking, there being such abundance, that but for salting they might lade many vessels in a days space: within ten days we came to Cape Nona, where we took in fresh water, and seven dayes after we arrived at the white Cape, a main shelter in the winter season, where the fish lye so thick, the ship brushes, and rubbes upon them as 'twere sayl∣ing through a shelf of sand. There we found two vessels, a Fleming and a Marseillian; the Master whereof was John Baptista le vust called Servat, who for his Merchant employed Aurigues: the 15. of November we were upon a River of Guinea called Senega. I ever carried with me a little memorial or diurnall, where I set down all the curiosities I met with, for which purpose I inform∣ed my self of the scituation of the countrey, the quality of the Prince and government, of which I will make a brief relation.
Guinea on the West is bounded with the River Senega, which ingulfs into the Ocean at sixteen degrees to the North, and the borders of Angela are at thirteen. Guinea is divided into the high and the low; the high Guinea inclines to the North, the lower lyes along the Senega, which they call Jeni, and reaches to the kingdome Manicongo, that begins at the first degree of the Line. Upon the coast of Cape Verde, are many Islands of one appellation, the principal is of S. James, in the hands of the Portuguese, since the year 1446. where they have a well-fortified town, and a Bi∣shoprick stil'd Civitad: an Island of 60. miles in length, and 36. in breadth, a mountanous country, where they have never rain but in September and October, which comprehend their winter. The valleyes are fertile, and afford excellent Melons the year round, Dates and Sugar-canes in abundance, flesh of all sorts, Fowle and Venison, with beards of horses and special good. 'Tis inhabited as that of S. Thomas, by a conflux of all nations, and the ayre be∣ing unwholesome, they transport their infirm to an Island two leagues distant called Praya, under a fine climate; the ayr healthful, and a commodious Haven betwixt two fair Rivers, which com∣pose two gulphs for harbours, one whereof is capable to containe many vessels in security, having before the mouth of it a little Island, which guards it from the Maritime gusts, and the land lying high, defends it from windes by shore. The other Islan∣ders affect to land at this Port, for that the rest are pester'd with sands; and chiefly, Borlouento and S. Thomas, where there is ever some vessel cast away. This Isle lyes close upon the Isle of Mago, otherwise called Barlouento, and near to Bona Vista, Saint Nicholas, Saint Anthony, Saint Vincent, Saint Lucie, and Fell, Islands plentifull of Cattle, and Venison, the inhabitants applying themselves onely to the chase, powder∣ing the flesh to sell to strangers, as the skinnes like∣wise. A little Eastward lyes the Isle del Fuego where they get as good wine as in the Canaries: next is the Isle of Braua, full of Venison, and wilde Beeves, whereof the Hydes are much sought after, as being thick and tough. But to Guinea, the kingdome of the Jalofes is the first, which beginnes North∣ward at the River Senega, hath the Ocean on the West, the Jalofes called Fonlogageias, on the East, and the kingdom of Barbessin on the South: 'tis above a hundred and fifty leagues in length, of several commodities there is abundance; as gold and silver, which the natives conceale with all care from strange∣ers, though in dealing with them 'tis plain they have store, for that by whiles they produce some unfined. Taboucaton is their chief town. They are Blacks, but of good shape, the women comely, round-faced, with eyes lively and attractive. The men are martial, dextrous in throwing a Javelin, which
they will throw with as exact arm as we shoot with our Gunnes. They ride on good horses, clothe as the African, in short bree∣ches; a large Harnus, like a sheet of wollen covers them from head to foot, shod with Date-tree Sandals. Vpon the coast they have the good and well-fortified Haven Beziguche, whose entrance is skreen'd with a fair Island, much frequented with strangers trading for the Indies. Here are many Portuguese setled amongst them, some married, others who think of no∣thing but to heap up gold, living something after the Barba∣rian. Many of the Blacks go naked, painted with dissolved gold, their bodies carved, and drawn with a various tincture, as azure, red and yellow, which hold their life-time. There are amongst them maids adorned in the same manner, with great pendants in their ears, and their lips pierced like the Brasilians, they are generally libidinous, and given over to lu∣xury. They who are thus engraved and inlay'd with paints, or juyce of hearbs, most commonly do it for want, and this curiosiry is their attire. Throughout the coast we find abundance of leather; wax, gold, silver ivory, and Amber-gris, which is the reason the English, Hollanders, and Flemings, visit them so oft. The Jalofes are easie of belief, and inclined to Christianity; when they behold the Moon, they make strong ejulations, with sorts of adoration: They adore yet some other Idols, which neverthelesse fixe not their faith, the Mahometans on one side who impugne them with their law, on the other the Portuguese preaching ours, and their own Priests charming them with their delusions, and Idolatries. They make their sacrifices in the woods, making large hollow trees their Temples, where they keep many Idols to which they sacrifice pulse, Mill, Rice; and the blood of beasts, whose flesh they eat. The countrey of Bracala confines upon the rapide River of Gambra, which in the mouth is five good leagues over, ships cannot enter it without a direct wind, with which they may advance three hundred leagues within the Countrey. This River cuts the great kingdome of Mandinga in the middle, peopled with Blacks, Idolaters, and abundance of Sorcerers, wicked, treacherous, and base people. When they hold a counsel ,tis in a cavern under ground to secure them from the prying of strangers. They have store of Brasil wood, as good as they of America, and upon the river many townes and villages where they mantain many vessels of Warre to encounter with any whatsoever, but upon advantage. This countrey ends South∣ward at the Cape of S. Mary 30. leagues from the river Chougala, by the Portuguese called S. Dominick. There are two nations of the same quality, the Barbachins called Ariates, and Falupes who trade in nothing but fish and cattel. They have an excellent
way to take the sea-oxe, the skins whereof they make great use of. They apply themselves to till the soyle, and get Mill, Rice, Pulse, and other graine. Out of this countrey comes the River Casamanca, bounded Northward with the Jabundos, on the South, with the people of Bemum, who on the East have the Casangas. Of late yeares the Portuguese have discovered a way by an Arme of the Sea to Casangas, and for this purpose have erected a good Fort upon the cheek of it called S. Philips. This kingdome reaches North∣ward to Jaren, and together do homage to the Sultanship of Mandinga, rich in gold and silver, having excellent mines. The Prince keeps his Court in the Town of Senrigo, more Eastward by a hundred leagues, then the Cape of Palmes; all the Blacks, as well of high as low Guinea, acknowledge this King, whereas the inhabitants along the Rivers, Faraca, Nigrate, and Budomel obey the King of Tombut, Lord of three kingdomes of Blacks. This countrey is called by the Protuguese Mandimanca, where they adore the Moon, called by them the Bariamari, that is, the God of night or darknesse, and offer sacrifices to it in the most obscure woods, in hollow trees, at midnight; as they do likewise at Cassanga, who have one China for their principal Idol, in whose honour they goe on procession the twenty ninth of No∣vember, about Midnight. One of their Priests or Magicians with them called Acacani, bearing a banner of silk, with a faggot of Vine branches, and divers bones of dead men. I believe they are bones of such as have made voluntary sacrifice of themselves to this Demon, who appeares to them after divers manners; this Ensign weares a garment of woven twigges, at which there hang divers heads of little dogs, Munkeys, and other small creatures. Procession ended, they repose the Idols with∣in the same tree, and burne most sweet perfumes to it, sa∣crificing Mill; then make their prayers and depart. In their dealings these people are lawlesse, trading in slaves with the Portuguese and others, which they rapine from all parts, and make their Market of them, to a miserable slavery. The Cassangarians neighbour upon another Nation called Leboura∣mos, who live along the River Saint Domingo, by the na∣tives called Jarin, full of fish, but a dangerous Haven, for the Sands and Rocks which lye before it. Towards the North is Guinalla, another River; in the mouth whereof, the Portuguese have built a Fort they call Sancta Cruz, and the Haven Guinalla. They are Negroes, which they term Beafares, abominable thieves, making prey of one another, to sell to the Portuguese. The King of Guinalla keeps a great State, hath a numerous guard of Archers, besides fifty huge strong dogges, all armed with
skin of sea-oxe dressed for the purpose, and made of proof, to every one a keeper. In Townes by night they have no other guards then such dogges, who once turned loose, spare no man, so as there is no stirring out of dores, without dan∣ger of being worried. This they do to defend themselves from such as by night come to break their houses, which are onely turfe covered with leaves, to carry away Negroes for the Mar∣ket. The King hath a mutiplicity of wives, and believes that such wives as dye with him for company, meet him in the other world, and become his wives again; but since they heard the true doctrine by some Fathers of S. Francis, who shew'd them their folly, they have not been so extravagant. Some of them were baptized, and went along with the Portuguese. At the side of Guinala comes out a branch which runnes to Port Begama, and a few leagues higher divides again in two, and upwards, delivers it self to the Sea. The Portuguese hold this Port, which they call Balola, and the people on this branch are called Lansados. Both these are good Havens joyntly inha∣bited by the Portuguese and the Natives. For from the Meri∣dionall point of this River to Cape Vergas, there are three nations mingled with the Portuguese, the Malus, Ebagas, and Co∣solins. Now from the South of that Cape begins a fair well-peopled Pro∣vince they call Gatulia, and the Portuguese Serellionna, that is a point throwing it self into the sea by the side of a great river of the same appellation, by reason of a hollow concavity roaring like a Lyon. This is a very pleasant country, full of Groves of Brasill trees, and Vines which they have not knowledge to dresse, abundance of Midian Figges which they call Ban∣canes, Sugar-canes grow without planting; Besides, they have good conveniences, as Mills and Engines to make their Sugar; for they have Mines in all parts. There is Rice, Cot∣ton, Cattle innumerable, Fish, Pepper in abundance, and more keen and pure then other; but there is prohibition upon life to carry any to Spain or Portugal, for spoyling the sale of that which comes from India. Likewise there are Mines of Gold and Silver, Ivory, Am∣ber-gris white and black; in brief, 'tis absolutely a land of promise and delights. This Pepper the Portuguese call Dimi∣enta de cola, one would take it for a Chestnut, it growes in a shell, though without prickles. Other strangers who come to traffick for it, lade with it, but the Spaniard dares not take a grain. In this country there is variety, and abundance of Birds; a sort of Ape they call a Baris, he is great and strong, the inhabitants take them with nets, traps and other engines, entrapping the sire and dam, with the young ones set in cages. They use them but
rudely, and beat them till they cry like children; make them walk upon two feet, tying the foremost in their pole to a stick: besides make them do many offices, as fetch water in a pitcher, wash dishes, blow the fire, draw wine, fetch meat from the But∣cher, and any other domesticall charre: But amongst all they will still be committing their petitlarcenies for meat and drink, but are well corrected for it. The sport is, when they turn the spit, to see how he will smell the meat, and turning his great shaggy head with hanging hair, flyly watch if any body see him, and they must be very vigilant, or he shews them a trick for the roast. As it happened to a Portuguese, who had invited certain Merchants; but when they came to take up dinner, Mr. Jack-turn-spit, had made use of one of the legs of a Turky-cock. His Master for the present beat him not, for the necessary use they had of him; who filled them wine and washed their glasses, and still at last took his cup when it came to his turn, and with his rogueries made them very merry. To proceed, the Portuguese make a good time with these Ne∣groes, who bring them unrefined gold for things inconsiderable, and to facilitate their traffick upon a point of the Sea called Corco, five degrees North, they have built a Fort near a Town, inhabi∣ted by the Natives and Portuguese together. The whole Coun∣trey of Serri Lionna is exceeding populous, and watered with fair Rivers, bounded with tall dates, and great orange trees. The first River from Capo Verga, the Countreymen call Piterones, the Spaniards di Pietro, dividing into many branches, which inter∣weave the land, and compose many Islands, by the Negroes called Cagasian; where at an ebbing tide they find Amber-gris: for which cause the Portuguese built a good Town there, co-inhabi∣ted by Portugueses and Negroes; where they live so strangely, 'tis hard to know a Christian from a Pagan, nor is it easie to judge who lives the better; there are at least two thousand, Christians onely by name, living and dying like Pagans. After this River there are two more, Capor and Tanabasira, des∣cending from a high Mountain, called Machamala, where stands a great rock of Chrystal, with divers Pyramids of the same, hanging from the top downwards; almost entirely in the air, two or three spans distant from the ground, which seems a great wonder, for touching it with the least fillip, it sounds like a bell. They say 'tis a congelation, made so by the heat of the Sun, which melting the foot of the Rock, left these points hanging in the air. 'Tis for a truth that certain Magicians on a feast, carried their Idols thither, whither they ran from all sides to the sacrifice, two thou∣sand notwithstanding lost their lives, and the Priests in the first place; for making their sacrifice and suffumigation at the foot of the Chrystall rock, the roof at which these Pyramids hung, shook, so as they broke and crushed to pieces the greater part of
them. The Devil having not power to hinder the extraor∣dinarie heate of the Sacrifices from dissolving the con∣gelations, since which time no one comes near this Chrystall grotte. Something farther North there are other great Rivers, which render this Province of Serrilyonna as a pack of Islands▪ particu∣larly over against the mouth of one of them, there are two very pleasant and good, the one called Toro, where are rocks called St. Anne, which bear pearl oysters, yet they go not to fish for them, by reason of Sea-monsters, which have swallowed some who ventured. In one degree to the South, lye the Islands Dolos and Tan∣sente, inhabited with Dates, Sugar-canes, Citrons, and a∣bundance of Cattell, covered with Rice, Millet, and long Pepper. To conclude, these Blacks are governed by a King, and have Judges who administer justice to them, whom they call Foncos. At certain times the King in a various coloured robe, comes into a room hang'd with mat, set round with seats for Counsellours, whom they call Seitequi, and Advocates to plead for both parties. The Counsellors speak their opinion, and the King gives sentence, which is immediately executed. When the King of Guinalla dies, who governs many kingdoms, there go twelve Seitequi, in long gowns of divers colours, made of feathers, with twelve trumpetters before them, sounding the more dolefully, by reason of a certain skin they make use of, for rendering the note more sharp, and proclaim his death: where∣upon every one comes out of his house; mussled in a white cloath: while the allyes of the deceased assemble to elect another. They take the corps and wash it, burn the bowels before their Idol, and preserve the ashes to be embalmed with his body. His Funerals are not celebrated till the next moon, when the people assemble from all parts of his dominion, bringing balm, incense, amber∣gris, white and black, musk, and other aromaticks, to burn and perfume his body; which then six principall persons, in robes of white silke, bear to his Sepulcher, flutes and hoboyes sounding mournfully, and attended with a concourse of people cloathed in white cloth, sadly singing and lamenting. The Princes who are in election are mounted on horses caparisoned with white, and themselves cloathed with the like. The corps laid in the monu∣ment well closed and cimented, they return to the Palace to feast and make good cheer. On the morrow is the election of a new King, and as they say, 'tis made according to divine inspiration, without favour or affection. Then four Bacharin, or twelve Sei∣tequi go to his house, bind him and lay him upon a Palanquin, four carry him to the Palace, where the chief Bachir unbinds him, gives him three rude lashes with a whip, he being on his knees
makes a speech of remonstrance to him; then takes him by the beard or ear, and sayes to him, If I deliver you this Scepter will you bring such a shame upon me, as to be a Tyrant to your peo∣ple? whereto he answers nec Bachir, that is, no my Lord. The other then striking harder sayes, do you promise this by the li∣ving God, he answers Nec Bachis Ameleichina, which is, before the Almighty God, I promise it. Then they vest him in Royall robes, put a triple Scepter in his right hand, a lance in his left; then that person casts himself at his feet, and craves his pardon; this done, he goes in triumph through the Town, where all re∣joyce and bring him presents. CHAP. I. The Authours voyage in the West-Indies, The description, length, and distances of America. THe coast of America taken intirely as it lies on the North Sea, from end to end, containes near upon six thousand leagues, as I have found it in two severall voyages: the first when I went from Marseilles in the Salamander, laded by one Boudar, under the command of James Varin, and the other with John Andes, who carried me from Marseilles to Cadiz. This new world is a continent from the Northern Sea to the Southern, and Northward extends to Groneland, Island, &c. from Island they e∣steem it 200. leagues to Ronevado, thence 110. leagues to Cape Maluas, the Countrey of Labrador, opposite to the Isles of Divels: frō Maluas to the cape of Marcos 60. to cape Belgado 50. This coast is of 200. leagues in right line, lying on the same bound, and buts upon the River St. Laurence, where Captain Velasco a Spaniard landed, who found it to be a good air, the Countrey well peopled, and full stocked with cattle: in the middle of the River he went upon an Island so covered with pidgeons, they could not passe for treading on them. He sayes the people called Piperons were giants of ten foot high, but kind and affable. This Captain Ve∣lasco thought this gulf had been an arm of the Sea, and sailed upwards above 200. leagues, meeting with divers habitations, where they live meerly upon venison and fish, butter and cheese. They presented him divers sheep, goats and kids, and in lieu Ve∣lasco presented Cacique a rich sword and poniard, and a watchet-Tassata coat. The people wear short cloaks of skins, neatly made up, and
instead of bread have another substance which is very tastefull, 'tis a root whereof being dryed they make meale, then taking odoriferous flowers, they boile them together in earthen pots, scum them, and put thereto a good quantity of milke and salt, then binding this close in goat-skins, they lay it for two or three daies in the sun, and it becomes firm as Parmasan cheese, which they eat for excellent bread. The disclosure of this River frames a square harbour, extend∣ing as far as Bacalaos: From this harbour or gulf to Florida, is 6000. leagues, from thence to Baya del Rio 60. leagues; thence to the Islands 70. l. in 40. d. to Rio fendo 75. l. in the River of Gama 70. l. 43. d. Cape St. Maria 50. l. Cape de Baco 50. l. Rio di Sancto Antonio 100. l. Cape di Arenos 80. l. passing by the harbour called in those parts Ariousa, the Cape whereof is in 23. degrees, thence to Cape Alegano, or of the Princes, 75. leagues, to the River Cam∣binga or Jordan, and 70. to the Cape St. Helen in 32. degrees, to Rio secco 40. to La Croix 20. (Berugon in the Indies) thence to Cagnoval or Cannaveral 40. leagues, People of Cano or Cagnoval, the point of Cagnoval in 28. degrees, and to Florida 40. leagues, the tongue of Land extending it self 100. leagues by Sea, over a∣gainst Caba; on the East Behame or Lucaros, the point of Florida in 15. degrees, thence to the Angle di Baccho, 100. leagues, Ancon du Baxos, and to Rio Nives, and Rio di Flores, 20. leagues, and 20. to the harbour of Spirito Sancto, by the Indians called Caula∣tan, 70. leagues in 28. degrees, and from thence 200. leagues to the River di Palmo, 30. leagues over, thence to the River of Pes∣cadoros, (Ind. Sotassi) under the Tropick, thence to Panonco 35. leagues, to villa ricca 70. to San Jouan de Loua, a famous port, 5. leagues, from the Shallous of Vega to the river Aluarado 40. leagues (Ind. Papa Jouapan) to Cauacalo, fl. 50. and to Guisalua fl. 50. 18. degrees, thence to Cape Rotundo 80. leagues, by the way stand Chagraton and Lazaro, thence to Cape Catuco 90. leagues, (Ja∣catan) 21. degrees, thence to Florida 900. leagues, from the gulf of Mexico 60. leagues, where there are strange currents and falls of water; from the edg of the gulph to Rio grande 120. leagues, passing by Punto di Mugeres, and the harbour di la Ascension: Rio grande bosomes it self in the Sea in 17. degrees, thence to Cape Cameroze 150. leagues, thus 30. to Queras, 30. to Caualles, thirty to Trionfada, 30. to Honduma, and 20. to Camzone, thence to Agata, or Gratia dios 70. leagues in 14. degrees, Cartago is in the middle of the coast of Gratia a dios, to di San Guadero 60. leagues, which is a great waste out of the Lake Nicaraga, thence to Zan∣bara 40. leagues, and to Nombre di dios 60. Vetagua is the mid∣way. From Nombre de dios to Sucatan is good 500. leagues, the Isth∣mus is but 5. leagues, but from Escarpoucos 'tis 17. from Nombre de dios to Faralones 70. leagues, 8. degrees, there was a design to
cut this Isthmus, but some were of opinion that the South-sea ly∣ing higher would fall in and drown all. By the way we meet with Aola and the Porto de Missa, so called, for that the Prince that dis∣covered it, caused Masse to be said there in thanks for the success. The harbour of Ordea, thence to Carthagena 70. thence to St. Mar∣tha 50. leagues, by the Port of Zembra, and Rio grande: thence to Cape de vello 50. leagues, and thence to Sancto Domingo 100. leagues, from Cape de vello to Guiboucas 40. leagues, then the Gulph of Venusuela, extending it self 80. leagues, to Cape St. Romano: thence to Gulph Tuste 50. leagues, in the middle of the Gulph is Curiana: thence to the Gulph Cariari 100. leagues, the coast is in 10. degrees: There is Porto di Cassia Tistula Chiribichi, and Cumana fl. the point of Areya, Cubaga, or the Isle of Pearle, or the Margarite: from this point to the Salines is 60. leagues, thence to Cape Anegades 8. degrees, 80. leagues, where in a bosome lies the harbour of Paria, from Anegades to Ric dolee 50. leagues, six degrees: thence to Ore∣glane, or di Amazonas fl. 110. leagues, from Nombre di dios to Oreglane 800. leagues, a river that in the mouth is 50. leagues over, there the first that arrived to traffick were massacred by the women. Douglane and Onaragnen, which is 15. leagues broad in 4. de∣grees, are held 100. leagues distant, thence 'tis 100. leagues to the Angla di S. Luca, and a hundred to Cape Promero: thence to Cape St. Augustine, in 8 degrees, 70 leagues, the next land to Ʋfo, for from thence to Cape Verde, is 500 leagues, thence to the Gulph di 'Todos Sanctos 100 leagues, in 13 degrees; by the way is the river St. Francesco, and the river Reali: thence to Cape Abraloso∣ios 100 leagues, a Coast full of shelves, conceal'd rocks, and bars of sands, very dangerous, wherefore they must hold 20 miles off to sea, in 13 and 18 degrees, from de Fue to the point bono Abrigo, thence to the Point St. Michael 50 leagues, and 60 to the river St. Francisco, six and twenty degrees, thence to Ti∣biquiri one hundered leagues, in the road the Port Patos, Port Fariol, Sigaro, Toubanaco, &c. Thence to Plata fifty leagues, five and thirty degrees; from St. Augustino there is six hundered and sixty leagues; from the Mouth of it to the Point St. He∣len sixty five leagues; thence to Arenas Gordas thirty leagues; to low Anegado fourty; to Tierrabaxa fifty; to Baya sin fondo sixty; a Gulfe in one and fourty; to Arifices de Loubos four∣ty, to Cape Saint Domingo five and fourty; to Chiquera, or Cape Bianco twenty; to the river Saint John Serran twenty; called Agova de Trabaios nine and fourty degrees; thence to the Promont, at the thousand Virgins, the Streight ends. The summe is twelve hundered leagues, from Venosuela to Desrado, a Cape in the Mouth of the Streight from North to
South. From Cape Desrado to the mouth of the Straight not far from the Bell, a Rock which seems to cover the mouth of it, to the South sea 70. leagues; the bounds are first Cape Promero, 49. degrees; thence to Salmas 44. degrees, and 165. leagues from Salmas to Cape Hermoso, 110. leagues, and 44. degrees; thence to the River S. Francesco 60. to Rio Sancto 120. leagues, to Chirinaca 100. leagues, 31. d. not farre off Gest and Rio de Plata to Chinca or Rio de Plobados 200. leagues, 22. degrees, to Are∣quippa, 18. degrees, 90. l. to Lima 12. degrees, 140. leagues, to Cape Anguilla 100. leagues, Truxillo and other Ports are upon this coast: Thence to Cape Bianco 40. leagues, and 60. to Cape Helena, 2. degrees; thence to Guegemir 70. leagues, the Cape Saint Laurenzo: They finde it to be thence to Cape S. Augustine, 1000. leagues; thence to the River of Peru 100. leagues, the way lyes by the Gulf S. Matthew, the River S. James, and S. John of Peru: to the gulf S. Michael 70. leagues 6. degrees, extending 50. leagues, from thence to Panama 8. degrees 155. leagues, the 17. of Novemb. de dios: Perou of 1000. in breadth, and 1200. in length: Corrcalatron 4065. leagues, from Panama to Teouentepée 650. leagues, adding 70. leagues from the coast of Panama to the Point of Aguera: From the Bruche 100. leagues, from thence 100. to the Cape Bianco, where the Port Heiradura, and 100. to the Port of the possession of Niqueraga, 12. degrees; thence to the gulf Fonseca 15. to Cortega 20. to Rio grande 30. to the River of Guali-Mala 45. to Sitoula 50. joyning to the Lake of Cortes, which is twenty five long, and eight broad; from this Lake to Porto Pourado 100. and 40. to Crantepee, which runnes from North to South, with the River Coasacalco in 13. degrees; and there compleat the 650. leagues, from Tecoantepee to Colima 100. leagues, by the way is Escapulio and Zaca∣tula: from Colima to Cape Coruentes 100. leagues, 20. de∣grees; betwixt them is the Porto de Nativitad, thence to Chiamelan 60. under the Tropick, where are the Havens Ca∣listo and Vanderas, from Chiamelan to the deep River, or R. de Miraslores 250. leagues, 33. degrees. In this space of 250. leagues, they passe the River of S. Michael, Logagaual; Porto del Re∣medio, Cape Vermego, the Port of Ports, the Passe of Mira∣flores, to the point of Balenas 200. leagues, or California go∣ing to Porto Escondido: By the way you come to Belen Port del fuego, the gulph of Canoas; the Isle of Pearles called Tarrarequi: from the point of Balenas to Cape Courantes, 'tis 80. leagues, where comes in the sea of Cortez, like to the Adriatick, being something coloured from the point de Valenas 100. leagues to the point of Abad, and as much to the Cape Lingano 30. degrees, from thence to the Cape of Bruz, fifty leagues, and one hundred and fifteen to the Port of Sar∣dinia.
On this coast is the Crick S. Michael and the gulf de los fuegos, and the white coast resembling the coast of Brasile, so as one would think white linnen hung there: from Sardinia to Terra Nevada 150. l. passing by the Port of Todos santos Cape Gabeca, Cape Nevado, Golfo, Primero: Sierra Nevada in 40. d. This is the last country, which runs North to Labrador. Thus we find the South sea to contain 3375. l. and the Notth 5960. l. together 9300. l. new Mexico, 1000. l. in circuit: comprehending 15. large inhabited Provinces. CHAP. II. The Authours Departure, Particulars of Demingo. FRom the Port of Sancta Maria, in 37. degrees we steer'd the ordinary course of the Canaries, whither 'tis 590. miles, the gulf de las Yegas lying in the way. The Canaries, hereto∣fore called the Fortunate, had that appellation from some terrible and sanguinary dogs which were there, going in packs like sheep, and at this day there is abundance of them exceeding fierce and dangerous. Of these Islands there is the grand Canari, Tenerif, Palma, Gomora, du Fez, Fortaventura, and others lesse, to about 28. degrees. They afford divers curiosities, amongst which Mount Pic in Tenerif; which I esteem to be one of the highest on the earth, Libanus it self is not so high by halfe, much lesse Mount Gi∣bel in Sicily, for it may be discovered at 120. miles distance, and is the first land the Marriners discover at sea, when they come from Spain. This is not to be ascended but two moneths in the year, July and August, for the extreme colds, and because 'tis commonly covered with snow, which cooles the ayre to such a degree, that one cannot breath upon it without iminent danger of life. From the top of this, the rest of the Islands are all discovera∣ble, and amongst them one which seems rather an illusion then a reality: For one plainly views the Isle, and go to the place you find nothing. They have three names for it, the Fortunate, the Inchanted, and the Not to be found: and there is no more to be learned of it, only the common people say 'tis an Island inhabi∣ted by Christians,The fortu∣nate Island and that God prohibits they should be discove∣red: for my part I have seen it as I have the others, and I believe 'tis conceal'd with clouds which are exhal'd from the abundance of fresh water there, which render it so obscure to be found out.
In the Isle of Tenerife there is a cave in a firm Rock. where the heardsmen in bad weather shelter their cattle, 'tis some 5. leagues from St. Christophers. They report that heretofore there was an apparition of extraordinary splendour, with an image of the bles∣sed virgin, which wrought many miracles, and was the reason of a Church built by the title of Nuestra Sennora de la candelaria, where there is a monastary of Dominicans. In the Island of Iron is that miraculous tree, the leaves whereof distill water, which suffices the inhabitants for drink. The tree is alwaies hooded with a thin cloud, of colour between gray and white, and never extenuates for wind nor tempest, nor suffers any motion, whence is deduced all the liquor, which the tree emits so plentifully into cesterns placed for the purpose, that it waters both the Inhabitants and the heards of the whole Island, there being no other water at all, so as without this 'twould lye waste and desert, and by this is rendered inhabitable and fruitfull. Having taken in provisions at the Canaries, we continued our course towards the Desseada, crossing the great pacifick gulph, which may be said one of the calmest Seas of the world; for during the fourty dayes we were upon it, we perceived not the least alte∣ration, but an air or gentle gale blew equally and constantly with∣out ceasing; so as vessels are there almost alwaies driven by the Poupe, without scarce ever using saile for above two thousand four hundred and ninety two miles to Desseada; which takes name from the desire they have to get thither, there being no other land betwixt that and the Canaries, passing the gulph, the voyage ta∣king up sometimes thirty two dayes, sometimes thirty five, as it happens. Desseado, one of the Antillaes, was the first Columbus discove∣red in his second voyage, where from the Canaries he arrived in twenty dayes, 'tis in 15. degrees towards the North. Thence they come to Domingo, a good and a fertile Island in eighteen de∣grees: The inhabitants are sanguinary, and man-eaters, pra∣ctising all sort of guile, to betray strangers to their broach. They are dextrous archers, and seldom misse their mark, their bow ten or twelve foot long, and their arrows will pierce a corse∣let good sword proof; they are made of a hard and strong wood they call Sourgar, whereof they poyson the pile. They live upon venison, grapes, and fruit, both men and women go absolutely na∣ked, adore the Sun, have little stock more than a few garden u∣tensils, a bed made of cotton in the manner of netting, hanging from one side of the house to the other, which is round, made of straw, called Tortora. Their goods are all in common, and what they have they eat together. They are not injurious to one ano∣ther, are very Martial, their armes, clubs of eight foot long, made like Bel-clappers, which they will mannage very effectually; but
they affect their bow more than their club. They have some Priests in their Gentilism, whom they call Chaouris, who solem∣nize certain ceremonies and feasts. There being a necessity of ta∣king in fresh water, some of the ship of Cape Moulini, would needs go on shore, and but that some of the Company disswaded him, the Captain himself had gone with them, howsoever he sent the Masters mate, with twenty resolute men and twelve Musqueteers. Our Captain Noguena seeing this rash enterprize, knowing the hu∣mour of the Countrey, immediately sent a shore thirty of his men, whereof twenty were musqueteers to assist them: but they were no sooner at the fountain, but they perceived two hundred Sa∣vages making towards them, and had they not by the perswasions of some cast up a bulwark, the successe had proved worse with them. The musquetteers playing on them, the Sauages with ter∣rour began to run, having lost four or five of their men, whereupon ours thought they had been freed of them, but were amazed when they perceived them rallyed, and advancing from another side came on with such fury, that had it not been for good conduct ours had had the worst of it; for our Musqueteers were so ama∣zed they knew not how to give fire, and for all ours could do, they left seven or eight of our men behind them; for with main strength they bore down our Barricado, but by Gods assistance ours repulsed them so vigorously, that some of theirs remained on the place, and we were relieved very seasonably. They had a resolution to fetch off their fellowes, but seeing they could not, retreated, and left us in peace; one that we pre∣served alive was quite amazed, and made us good laughing, with his mows and monkey faces. He was stark naked, round visaged, and flat-nosed like a dog. We asked in whom he believed, he an∣swered in Toquilla and Toupan, that is the Sun and the thunder. He was instructed in the Faith, and afterwards baptized. These people know not what tillage is, and eat no bread, but of a root they call Taquen, whereof they make meal, in Brasile they call it Caouin, they dry it, and grind it, and boyling it with water, make drink of it, 'tis in taste like sowr milk. The root in the mouth is more sharp than unripe chesnuts. They have a tree called Sarboul, growing naturally in the woods bears fruit all the year, 'tis firm as a Meloun, and looks like those golden apples which in Spain they call Berengenas. A kind of flower they also make of fish, as they do in Brasile, drying it a∣gainst the Sun, 'tis sharp and grates the throat of those that are not used to it. Beasts they have abundance of all kinds, which they call Pascous, that is sheep. They are great Fishers, their boats of that straw they call Tortora, and have likewise some of timber all of a piece, like Canoes. At their nuptials they use some Ceremonies, their Priests put on them a kind of open shoes, the Spaniard calls Aspargates, the
Indians Otrya. They shooe them both with these shooes, then change them, and afterwards restore them to their Chaouris. While a maid, she is free to her pleasurc, but married she is lyable to death if she transgresse. They are neither avaricious nor ambi∣tious, saying as the earth was sufficient to feed their Fathers, so 'twil them; and 'tis a folly to waste our shortned life with care: the meanest is as good as the best amongst them. The Spaniards who live in the Town of St. Domingo use them very harshly, for which cause they call them Salbini, that is Ty∣rants. Abundance become Christians, and the rest are most zealous adorers of the Sun and Thunder, and offer a kind of Sacrifice to them. CHAP. III. A violent Tempest, The Isle of Cuba, and Hispaniola, The customes of the Inhabi∣tants, and their Kings. FRom Domingo about 336. miles, lies Nauasse in 17. degrees, a very small but a good Island, and neighbouring to it another called Jamaica, in length 150. miles, in breadth 40. These Islands are lyable to a wind the Indians call Ʋracans, or Foracans, most violent and dangerous to Saylors, who do what is possible to a∣void it, and when they discover it rising, rather then be surpriz'd at sea, they lie in harbour two or three months together. Betwixt these two Islands were we overtaken with one of these stormes, which assaulted us with such fury, as if all the Infernals had been broke loose, for it bore away sailes and yards, tore the cordage with other most prodigious effects; it rose all in an instant, and before we could think of it, cast away a vessel of our Company laden with Souldiers, going to relieve Truxillo, infested by the English. We saved divers of them by a bridge of planks cast into the Sea, and fastened to the Ship with a strong cable. The first time we saved twenty six men and a woman, whose coats had kept her floating on the water: But the second time we cast it forth when there were more upon it, close by the Ship side the cable broke, and all these poor people so near recovery perished; and we had not strength to make another we were so num'd and strark, with the cold this wind brings along with it, so as 'twas lamentable to behold these poor people perish for want of help; and no assistance could be had from the other vessel, being in the evening so driven from us that we could hear no more of it. All
the night we heard the sad cryes of people, calling for help, which we knew not how to give them, and when day came, we saw no∣thing either of ship or person. Some of them died as soon as they got aboard our ship. Amongst the rest they had a Capuchin Father worthy of re∣cord for his constancy and resolution,A violent tempest. who in the very sea ex∣horted them, and called upon them to dye well, and recommend themselves into the hands of God, heard their confessions, and gave them absolution, and at last died amongst them encouraging and giving consolations to the very last. This tempest consists not of a single wind, but of all the four together, which so in∣cumber a vessel, that it cannot stir neither forward nor backward. The day brought us some comfort, but we were still persecuted with the tempest, and waves that flew upon us with such violence, that at every blow we thought we should have perished, as I believe we had, had we not resolved to cast all over-board. Then without further dispute, or more words, seven or eight of us taking a draught of wine, a little to re∣invigourate us in our extreme feeblenesse, we betooke to cast our fraught over-board, Cloth, Tapestry, Camlets, Moc∣cadoes, Corrall, Hunney, Wines, &c. with such celerity, that in an houre we cast more over-board then was laded in a day; and twas happy we did so, for immediately we perceiv'd the Vessell to be more lusty; and I and my partners had the happinesse to see the goods we laded to beare our charges, cast into the sea in the first place, which as little troubled us, as if they had been none of ours, being satisfy'd with the fruition of our lives; after all we were constrain'd to cut down the maine Mast, one of the sayles was un∣furl'd, which made a strange noise, and exceedingly annoy'd the Vessell; wherefore the Captain commanded the saylers to go up and furle it, but at that time he was ill heard, and worse obey'd;Aroucane. thereupon one who was more obedient and resolute then the rest, undertook it, as he mounted they called to him to encourage him, but by that time he got to the middle of the Mast, the winde had seiz'd him, and he cryed out Juro a mi vida Senior que el Viente me despega las manos de las cuerdas; I sweare to you Sirs, the winde teares my hands from the ropes, and with that crying Santiago, he fell down upon the Deck, he had better have falne besides it, for he dyed within three houres after. The Tempest continu'd, and the Vessell being light, could not uphold the Mast against the stu∣pendous force of the storme and the waves, which took some of our men over-board: whereupon we down with the main Mast, but in the fall the cordage broke, and is tumbled into the sea, and carri∣ed some men along with it, the vessel reeling quite down on one side with the weight of the mast was immediately filled with water, and recoyling to the other side, very many were lost, without possibi∣lity to relieve them, the rest of us left desolate to sorrow and di∣stresse.
The vessel being assaulted by so many several winds, cannot move any way except some one wind be mightier than the rest: For these vessels are not by half so able as ours are. Besides these winds cause so unsufferable a frigidity, that one cannot endure to look into the air, cut like a razor, and make ones limbs stiffe and immoveable as a piece of wood. For my part my face was hard and strark as any stone. I am of opinion the Devill comes in it, for I believe that naturally no wind can break a strong cable, as 'twere a thread. At last as it pleased our good God the tempest ceased, and the ordinary Breezes return. By good fortune we had one sayle left in reserve, which we used to our advantage in the best manner we could, scarce finding rope sufficient for it, the tempest had so broken our cordage, so we then sayled on. 'Tis true the sea was yet so turbulent and con∣tumacious, that we were as fearful as ever; for this kind of storm is more dangerous in the end then the begining; and we might be∣hold the waves, like two engaged armies plying one another with continual assaults, without intermission. But in fine, it became a little calmer, and we came in view of Cape S. Anthony, a point of the Isle of Cuba discoverable a long way off; till we arrived there the storm left us not: nor do I know that I had so famous an en∣counter in all my voyages in Asia and Africa, though in my tra∣vail to Alexandria, three leagues off Candia our ship sunk, in the depth of Winter, and about mid-night: which was nothing com∣par'd to these diabolical Ʋracanes, for there we contest but with one wind, here we are surrounded with all the winds at once, whence it comes, that few escape. Cuba an Island.Cuba is one of the principal Islands of the Indies in 22. d. in cir∣cuit 630. miles, 120. miles over. 'Tis the most fruitful in all Ame∣rica, full of fruits of all sorts, Mines of gold and brasse, and hath Ravana, one of the fairest and securest Havens of the world, the coming in being narrow, flanked on both sides with strong Tow∣ers, and a town with an impregnable Cittadel. Where the Fleets of Peru and Nombre de Dios put in for provisions, the Isle abounding in all commodities, and plentiful of all properties for maritime travail. 'Tis as 'twere a suburbs to the Indies, having not above 130. leagues off sea to S. John de Loua on the firm land in Nova Spania. The Island abounds particularly in fish, and amongst the rest in a sort of sea Breezes, which Spaniards call Besée Espada who is very sanguinary, and greedy of mans flesh. So as no man dare bathe himselfe for fear of these ravenous crea∣tures, the teeth whereof cut like any rasor, and upon their back have three Pikes like Partisans. He is so greedy of mans flesh, that he will follow a vessell three hundred leagues out∣right without appearing, in hope of a corps. They likewise call them Taburintes, or Tiburins, a Captain told me, that
coming from Florida one followed him 500. leagues without ap∣pearing, and that arriving at Poro Rico, the fish was taken with a sheeps head, & horns in his belly, which he had brought from Flori∣da, where 'twas cast into the sea. They go likewise up into the rivers. As to their Crocodiles, they are covered with skin so firm, 'tis impossible to pierce it, except under the belly where he is easily vulnerable. As I said before, in the East Indies Ethiopia they make meat of them, the flesh being very good, but here they do not. In like manner here is abundance of all other sorts of fish, as well such as breed in our seas, as others. This Island was discovered by Columbus in his second navi∣gation, and called Juane, afterwards Ferdinand and Isabella; from Ferdinand King of Spain, as before of Juane his daugh∣ter. 'Tis in length 230. leagues, on the East it hath the Isle of Hispaniola or Hairi, on the West Jucatan, and the Gulf of Mexio, on the South Jamaica or S. James, and Northward the Lucayes, and the channel of Bahama. There we finde many townes, and habitations of Spaniards, who began to plant, or rather to supplant in the year 1511. For they used such abo∣minable cruelties, that in a short time they almost extirpated all the Natives: beginning with the King or Catique Haiuey, whom they burnt alive for publishing to his subjects the cruelty used by the Spaniards in the Isle of Hairy or Hispaniola. The Mines destroyed many of them; and Las Cafas sayes, that being there, he saw in four moneths seven thousand children starved to death; for both their fathers and mothers were held so strictly to their labour in the Mines, they had not freedom to look af∣ter their families. The Isle Hispaniola was discovered by the same Columbus in his first navigation in the year 1492. began to be inhabited in 1494. and was otherwise called Hairy Quisquera, and Cipaugi,Espaniola. or Cibai, being in circuit about 400. leagues: It abounds in fruit, su∣gar, cattle, and Mines of gold and copper. This Island had many Caciques or potent Kings, amongst them the King of Magna or Magana, that is, Champion, or the field, was Paramount, who is called Guarionexi. These Kings lived peaceably, without any great State. Their chiefest expense was in Dancers, Musi∣cians, and Wrestlers, who were for his Majesties recreation both in his Palace and progresse. He was carried by men upon a frame set with feathers of divers fine colours, and those dancers dan∣ced before him. The people held their King for a God, and the meanest of them could raise an Army of sixteen thousand men armed with skins of wild beasts, Clubbes of wood with a keen stone at the end, which they called Courcoumachi; they had like∣wise bows and arrows pil'd with bone. Together they were able to raise fourscore thousand men, holding good correspondence with one another, interchanging visits at 80. or a hundred leagues
distance, without other businesse then to be merry. They are a strenuous people, docile, and capable of religion, were it not for the unsufferable Tyranny of the Spaniard, who of four hundred thousand soules found on this Island, have left scarce the hundreth part, which is the cause you meet scarce with any thing but desolation; and dead mens bones. The first of these kingdomes is called Mangna, a fertile soyle with many good and large rivers, in length 80. leagues, from the South sea to the North invironed with mountaines, amongst which are these Cibar, where are gold mines of 23. Carats and a half, the second kingdome is Sigouaya: the third Magana or Magnane: the fourth Xantiga: the fifth Hegay. Magana.Magana abounds in gold and sugar, and, different from the rest, the King is created by election. The King dead, foure Tabusamin, who are principal Peeres, assemble the peo∣ple at the Palace of Bibical, a Conquerour, and establisher of the state. This Bibical was the miracle of his time for strength, who came hither from Mecheoarin on the Continent in Mexico to visit his brother, servant to the King of Mangna, and one of his chief dancers; being here, would needs see the other dominions of the Island:The Hi∣story of Bibical. at Sigouaya, where the exercise of wrestling is much in request, he made some stay, as indeed in war it self the matter is decided as much or more by vigour of arm as weapon, and being very perfect, he entered lists with the best amongst them, and in the Princes presence came off with such advantage, that he gained the honour of a Lions skin, a matter so considerable with them, that in warre, 'tis worne by none but persons of quality. Invited by the King he stayed at Court, but the King of Mangna, with whom his brother was, having notice, he sent ex∣pressely to have him return, and that he would find an honou∣rable employment for him; withall, sent him an ample present, not in wealth, but Mexican curiosities as Jewels, to hang in the ears and lips, and the like; the people not prizing so much gold, as in∣nocent and simple gaity; and with great reason liberty above all. All the Kings civilities, nor his brothers entreaties, could draw him from the Prince of Sigouay,King Bib∣lical. who had designed him to march with a hundred Indians into the kingdom of Magana, and take a strong town called Saalan; for that it maintained it self a free town, and would submit to no Prince. With much joy Bibical re∣ceived the Commission, and by his valour reduced the place to his Princes obedience, with many famous gallantries, putting num∣bers to the sword, and the rest to flight. Their Bastion called Courcoumeca barrocadoed with timber twice mans height, he took by assault. By this means not the town alone, but the whole countrey was
subjugated to the King of Sigouaya, who repayed Bibical with collation of honours, and erected him monumental trophies of stone with this inscription Aray jourcoumac Bifical, that is, a man worthy of principality. Gibbeleca the Kings sister became so passionate a lover of him, that she resolved to marry him, though her brother in displeasure secur'd her in a secret prison: Biblical freed her, married her, and carried her to Magana, where he made himselfe King of the Countrey, which so incensed the brother, he used all meanes to destroy him, for which purpose he suborned an Indian, who from an ambush shot him on the high way with a poysoned shaft: this so moved Biblical, that he invaded him with a vigorous and violent warre, assisted by his brother Gouayquibal, and at last overthrew him; but the venome of the wound he had formerly received, by de∣grees so prevailed over him that he dyed, swelled and black as a coale, leaving no child behind him. The people peti∣tioned the Dowager she would marry again, that they might have a Prince to govern them, whereto, though with difficul∣ty, she at last condescended, and called a Councel, where 'twas ordered that the most strong and active should succeed and marry the Queen. Then they proclaimed an Assembly at all exercises of strength, as leaping, wrestling, and Clubbe-fight, in which amongst them all one Calips prov'd eminent, and was made King. For his chief Councel he elected the deceased Kings brother, to whom he gave his sister in marriage; and since that time the Kings have been elected by strength, which custome con∣tinued to Moulsamberc, who died at the Spaniards invasion. This Island was heretofore exceedingly vexed with the Ca∣nibales of the Antilles, and other neighbour-Islands, who come to hunt men and women as others do savage beasts,The Isles of the An∣tilles. Canibals hunt men and wo∣men. the men to eat them, and the women for procreation. This Island, though under the torrid Zone enjoyes a tempe∣rate ayre, and almost a perpetual spring by meanes of Mountains which shelter it from the North, and refresh it, as in most parts under the Zone. The Fecundity of the soyle is such, that corn sowed produ∣ces most great and long eares, of above a thousand cornes in an ear: Besides, it yields Gold, Mastick, Aloes, Cotton, Silk, Sugars, Spices, Pepper, and Ginger; with Jucan and Cassaue, whereof they make their bread. 'Twas from hence the Spani∣ards first took and brought into Europe the Morbus, and remedy, Guaicum. Here chiefly raign the furious winds called Ʋracans or Foracanes, furies that rend trees, dash the waves against the sky, destroying Navies, and other prodigies. But as these people were delivered from the cruelty of the Canibales, they fell under that of the Spaniards, a hundred
times worse, who laid the Island with the rest of her neighbours desert and depopulate, though the Natives at their landing used them with all humanity; but they fell presently to bloudy butch∣ery, carrying them slaves to other Countries, and reduced them to such despair, that the wretches thought better to use violence on themselves and children,Cruelty of the Spaniards. then to be led slaves under these Sal∣bins, thieves and tyrants. Indians aversion to the Spaniard.As one of these miserable Kings was going to be burnt, a Father of St. Francis, exhorted him to baptism; he liked well of all he told him of eternal life, and heaven, but understanding the Spani∣ards went thither also, he lost his vocation, saying in his language, Heiti siltiba Salbin, Spaniards in heaven and I with them, fie, fie: adding he had rather live with the Yares, the Devil, and so dyed; they destroyed all generally, & being glutted & weary with slaugh∣ter they made markets of the rest, as of Cattle, to toyle and carry burthens, not regarding any countermands of the Spanish King to keep them slaves. These new guests at first they called chil∣dren of the Sun, but afterwards they changed their stile and called them Solbins and Devils, and with good reason, when these new∣comes would lay insupportable burthens on them, and when they failed or fainted, cut off their heads to save a labour of unlock∣ing an iron collar about their neck to put upon another. Not∣withstanding they were a people very capable of religion and doctrine, as appeared in such as were converted, who proved very pious Christians; but these unfashionable Doctors had mind on no∣thing but to satisfie their insatiable avarice and ambition. CHAP. IV. Of the coasts of new-Spain, of the torrid Zone, and winds which blow there. HAving staid some dayes in Cuba to recruit, we took ship a∣gain to continue our voyage. Noguera Captain of the vessel we came in, was very sorry to part with us, and made large pro∣fession to one of our Company for the service he had done him, and gave him three hundred Reals, offering if he would return to Sicily with him, he would give him the command of a vessel, share equally what was gained, and ever esteem him as a brother. Our comrade engaged himself at his return, accepting but the half of his money, and that upon importunity, which he present∣ed to a Lady the Captain had brought with him from Spain, and she returned him a Crucifix set with emeralds, and so they parted with much resentment; the Captain protesting he had perished
but for God and the Levantisks; with particular acknowledgment of what we did in Domingo at their going for water. He recom∣mended us to a Captain who was very civil to us, and would ac∣cept of nothing for our passage. We came to the Cape of St. Anthony, and thence with good advice steer'd the course towards Foudora or Houduras: 'tis not the ordinary way for Fleets, when they go directly to St. John de Loua in new Spain, having seven hundred miles to crosse, sayling in view of fruitful Campeche, in the land of Jacatan. The Port of St. John is a well-fortified Town, and amply provided of artil∣lery: in 19. degrees from thence to Mexico, they hold it seventy leagues, and fifty to vera Cruz, a place hot and unhealthfull,Coast of Mexico. but plentifull in provisions, about two hundred miles from Mexico. This quarter is called La Vega, a shallow, not a haven; these two places so neere neighbours, differ exceedingly in the ayre, for at Vera Cruz 'tis extraordinary bad; and at St. Johns tis excellent∣ly good; as indeed thoroughout all Mexico, a good Country, and well inhabited both by Natives and Spaniards: temperate enough, and contains sixteen great Provinces. Then there is the new Mexico, lately discovered, and whereof there is further disco∣very every day, and is of wonderfull extent, as likewise the Mex∣ican language goes very farre. From St. John de Loua Coasting along by Jucatan Hunduras, and Nicaruga, we came to Nombre de Dios, in the Northern sea; and on the other side, in the southern to Parama, and thence to Peru, &c. Now tis necessary to understand there commonly blowes a winde they call Brizes, which carries Vessells by the Poope, from the east to the Indies, which winde rises in 28 de∣grees of Artick altitude, towards the Torrid, following the Mi∣nense and rapid motion of the Heavens in that Hemisphere, more like a gentle blast, or a breathing of the ayre, then a winde, so quietly it beares vessells along, without any alteration, or contra∣ry violence; as in other Parts among the Tropicks, where the strongest carries it his way, and where diverse Raigne according to the diverse times and seasons. The other windes are Tramontone, or north, south, east, west, south-east, north-west, north-east, south-west. The Brizes come east-ward, and serve very well from the Canaries to Cuba: from Spain to the Canaries the voyage is more difficult, by reason of the diverse windes, which blow in the Gulfe de Las Yequas; and betwixt that and the Continent are other windes, which blow opposite, and often force to lye along in the Haven in expectation of a faire gale. But as these Brize windes in going, afford a delightfull accom∣modation, so in returne they prove our vexation: for we must go without the Tropicks to fetch the south-west, otherwise we
have the Brizes in our teeth, which force us to beare up higher for others, and be perpetually tacking about to the roade of Ter∣retta: In so much that one may sooner go twice, then return once from the Indies; the return is so labourous, I meane for them who come from new Spain to Seuille; for from Peru they have the same Navigation, as the ships that go by the Brizes from the Canaries to the Indies, and by the south sea. Coming from Peru, they have the winde in the Poope as farr as Lima, in twelve degrees, which carries them to 17, to the Port Guatulio in new Spain. Then they must go fetch the south-west in the elevation of 27 degrees above: nor is there any certainty of it, for some∣times these windes raigne there; sometimes the north-west, and Tramontane invade the Regions: They call them neverthelesse Brizes, as coming from the motion of the same Hemisphere; sometimes they bring along with them so exceeding a frigidity, that though the sea ever naturally yeild a certain warmth of it selfe, I never felt so much cold as in these parts; and but for the Wines we laid in at our return, we had suffered much more. Admirable windes.'Tis then certain, that they who go to the Indies must make use of these prosperous windes, and to gaine them must keep in the lowest elevation possible, for the neer∣er they come to the Equinoctiall, the more certaine and constant are these Brize windes, as nearer to the moti∣on. For this reason the sea from the Canaries is called the Ladies sea; from this benigne Winde, as is also the sou∣therne sea beyond Peru, and so along westward. Notwith∣standing this rule is not so generall, but in the Torrid of the East-Indies there are two anniversary principall windes, east and west, which by turnes raigne six moneths together, more or lesse, called the Mousons, or Mnessons, as I said in another place. The Tor∣rid Zone.As to the quality of the Torrid Zone, contrary to what Antiqui∣ty delivers, that it is impenetrable, and absolutely disinhabitable for the excessive heae of the perpendicular rays of the sun, I have spoken sufficiently in another place; and shewed it to be the most temperate place of the world, and best inhabited, full of large lakes, rivers, and showers at certain seasons and houres, and windes which refresh and fertilize in an admirable man∣ner. According to naturall Philosophy there was reason to believe these parts disinhabitable, and scorched with the fervour of the sun, who is verticall to them; but experience had not acquaint∣ed them with the lakes and rivers that lye almost all along this same Zone, and chiefly in America, so cooling and moist∣ening, that they allay the heats to a moderate temper;
and by a mystery at the extremity of winter produce drynesse, and in summer rains and humidity; so as in many places they are forced to retire to their Canoes to avoid the emanations of the ri∣vers, Orlano, Plata, Paraguay, and others which lay the circumja∣cent Countreys like seas, to which the spacious lakes are a second meanes; like as the Egyptians in time of Niles inundations, re∣tire to their field-houses of dung, loome and straw set upon the highest points. But the people, upon Portogay and Plata, they quite abandon theirs, and betake themselves to their Ca∣noes, or Piragoa, upon the water like Ducks, and returne not till the floud is sunk, so that the extreamest heats of the Torrid produce their rains, and when the heate slack∣ens, it rains not at all: But out of the Torrid and the Tropick, these qualities change, their raine coming to∣gether with the cold of winter, as here with the heat of sum∣mer: For the Sun where 'tis most forcible exhales vapours in more abundance, which breaking fall in plentifull showers. They who live in towns and plantations built on grounds of advantage, pass these flouds and rains with satisfaction, and their fruits of the earth, no more than in Egypt are not destroyed and lost: But the more vulgar and savage sort who live in the Countrey, that can neither sow nor plow, retreat to their barks with a heap of roots, and such fruit as the earth affords them naturally: They have a∣bundance of Cattle likewise, which they feed with the Josni they call Tortora, which they eat also themselves, cover their houses with it, make their boats and fewell of it. True, the air throughout the torrid is not of one quality, there being some places burnt for want of lakes, fountains or rivers, or by reason of the huge barren mountains, as in other parts of E∣thiopia, Guiney, deserts of Africa, the Andes, mountains of Peru, and other places. And hence it comes, that according to the diverse constitutions under the same line you have blacks in one place, and whites in another: and as the extremity of these qua∣lities hot and dry, render some places dis-inhabitable, so the a∣bundance of water, lakes, marshes, and great rivers, with their constant inundations, render others as little habitable: as in the greatest part of America, where this inconvenience is such, that the rivers swel'd with the summer rains, at every turn break out of their limits, with such impetuosity and violence, they force and carry all before them, nor can one travaile for dirt, and mud of marshes.
CHAP. V. Of South and North America, The Qualities, and Discovery. AMerica for the greatest part is not inhabited, by reason of the huge barren and cold mountains, and little plain for a long way, abundance of sandy and barren forrests, as in Egypt and Lybia, where there is neither habitation nor commodity of living; huge trees bearing nourishment neither for man nor beast; onely in some parts there are trees yeild some refreshment to passengers, with a leaf like the vine and fruit like the Quince, but more soft, and in taste like the apples of Italy, called Mele Rose, but sweeter. The tree is high and fair like a mulberry: The fruit never heats upon the tree, and very little being gather∣ed, but quenches thirst, and refreshes more than any fruit in the world;A mysti∣cal fruit. wherefore the Indians will go fifteen or twenty leagues to look it: and being extream hot, lay pieces of it on their fore∣head and cheeks, which refreshes as well as eating it, be the heat never so violent. But 'tis exceeding dangerous for strangers; for the Indians are so jealous of this fruit that they will suffer no others to eat it, but beat their brains out, as they did at Curaufour, where they killed a number of Spaniards for eating them, which they after eat themselves. To conclude, the fruit, how long soever it continues in the sun, looses not its freshnesse. Three re∣gions of America.Of the three Regions America may be divided into, there are the two outmost, the high and the low, and the interiour. The lower is along the Sea coast, hot and moist, having few or no rains in many places unpeopled, by reason of the deep sands, marshes, and standing waters, which make the Countrey unwholsome. But the plains from Peru to Chila are more temperate, by reason of the fresh and fruitfull vales, whereof there are store. The second is the land of Hamen, cold and dry, well peopled, plentifull in herbage, and rich in mines. The interiour is the best, and 'twas the Spaniards kind fortune or rather Providence, that landed them there at first: for had it been any where else, they had never or with more difficulty at∣tained their design, for the scarcity of commodities to live upon after their diet, very different from that of the Natives. But at the very first they fell upon the best parts, as the Isles of Hispaniola and Cuba: and on the continent on the one side new Spain, on the other Peru, and many other, all good Countries, full, and temperate, which yeilded them such plenty of commodities for livelihood, and rich mettals. For this middle division abounds
corn, fruit, cattle, pastures, and forrests, the air wholsome, and the Countrey pleasant and commodious. They have cattle in great abundance, as sheep, goats, beeves, horses, and others. They preserve a stock of wild beeves for their hides, wherewith they lade ships for Europe; and make a good traffick of them to supply our vanity for coaches boots, and other uses of leather. The soyle in some parts is proper enough for vines, but the Spaniards will admit no plantation of them, for taking away the profit of the wine brought from Spain, for which they carry back good gold and silver. But notwithstanding their prohibitions in New-Spain, they have planted them for ease of their burthensome tributes; for they made no conscience to impose fifty or sixty crowns upon a tun of Spanish wine; which they get at a better rate upon the place, where they prosper excellently well. Mexico, or New-Spain, where one still ascends unperceivably, is a good and fruitful Countrey, rather better than Peru towards Cusco and Gouamanga, and Aroquipa, which is likewise very fertile; but this is without comparison, and would be yet better if the Mountaines were nearer, to mitigate the excessive heat. Notwithstanding the Spanish women affect it so much that they will come two thousand leagues by sea, leaving their Native Countrey to settle here, and this in no small number: For in the Fleet that went one thousand five hundred ninety two, they reckon that in thirty vessels that were cast away, there perished above 800. women, and many small infants: Some were going with their husbands, others with their friends, and others of their own inclination; and not a year but they transport a great number. And 'tis no wonder they expose themselves to this dan∣ger, living exceeding miserably in Spain, where there are abun∣dance of single women that work or worse for their living. America, the new world is divided into two principall parts, North and South, both as 'twere Peninsula's, fastened to by the streight or neck of land, of Nombre di dios and Panama, and betwixt them is comprized the great Archipelagus of all those Islands, An∣tillias, Luccaes, Barlouente, Sotauente and others, whereof we spoke already, towards the great Mexican gulph. The North part might be taken to begin very near the North pole, and according to some at Groenland, which they will have to be upon the Continent of America: from thence we come by the streights of Hudscas, Davis Forbisher and others, which are thought to crosse to the Orientall and Tartarian sea; but here they appear rather gulphs and arms of the Sea then streights: Then we come to the Lands of Estotiland, Labrador, Cortereal, New-France or Canada, and Bacaleos, Norembeck, Virgi∣nia, New-Nideoland, or the New-Low-Countries, Florida, and New-Spain, or Mexico, as well the old as new, and the lands above
new Granada, Mar Vermeio, California, Quiuira, or new Abion, and Anian to the famous Streight of land, or sea of the same name, which joynes, or divides North Asia, or high Tartarie, from this part of America. And 'tis probable that this way for many Ages men and beasts have passed, who have peopled this new World, whether from China, Tartarie, Moscovia, and other places, or as farr as Scandia, or from elsewhere carried by the windes, cast up by shipwrack, or coming upon designe, or for ease of people, alwayes growing onward: But this dispute I leave to be decided by better abilities, being out of my reach, and no part of my design. South A∣merica.South America from Jucatan, Honduras, and Nicanagua to the Streight of Panama, proceeds by Ʋraba, Dariena, Castilia, Dor, Ve∣nesusla, Paria, Cabagna, Cumana, Curibana, and further up into the famous Land of Guinea; then comes the vast Territory, or Coast of Brasile, of above 1000 leagues; Patagona, and Chica, to the Streights of Magellan and Maire; and at last ascending towards the South-sea, by Chila and Peru, to the Isthmus of Man∣nama. As for the Parts southward, beyond the Streights, towards the Land of Fou, or Queinos, to the Isles of Salomon, new Guinea, and others, 'tis not yet knowne what they are. As to the Discovery of this New World, leaving that com∣mon question, If our Ancestors had any knowledge of it, twas first made by Columbus, in the yeare 1492. afterwards successive∣ly, by Americus Vespasius, Cabot, Cortercall, Cupral, Verazan, Cor∣tez Pisarra, and at last by Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter Rawley, Forbisher, Davis, Hudson, and others. Towards the Lands of Labrador and Canada, one Captaine Ve∣lasco, a Spaniard, passing that way, entred the river of Canada, or St. Laurens, and taking it for an Arme of the Sea, having a faire winde, sayl'd up about 200 leaugues, where he found ma∣ny Townes and Villages inhabited by people called Piperones, of an extraordinary stature, as ten foote high, or more, people kinde enough, and tractable, spending their time only in hunting and fish∣ing: their ordinary diet milke and cheese. Upon a Sunday, coming on shore to celebrate Masse, there came innumerable Savages to admire our Sevice and Ceremonies, as a thing altogether new to them. They presented the Spaniards a∣bundance of sheep, Kids and goats, and they might have taken off the common what Cows and Cattel they would. A people otherwise not very Military, but exceeding simple, and use Barkes, like the Brasilian Canoes. The Captaine, in gra∣tuity, gave to the cheife of them a handsome sword and dagger, who by signes let him understand, he had nothing to re∣turne him but 50 Cows, and 200 sheep, desiring him to ac∣cept
them for accomodation for his company. Part of them he took, and gave him a Coate of Azure Ta∣feta, which he highly esteemed and admir'd, and went confi∣dently abord them with a score of his men; and at severall times came little boats loaded with fruit, which this Lord had provided to present the Captain with; at his departure he fired some Can∣nons, which strangely amazed these poor people, who thought the World at an end; they go cloath'd with skins, commodiously sew'd together. In the Land of Labrador, and beyond Northward, are abundance of Mountains and Forrests, where there are numbers of wilde beasts, and amongst others huge beares, and great Griffins all white, which are nothing like those of the East, or Africa, which are gray, only a little red under the belly, but both of them have but two feet, and not foure as they are pain∣ted. They have also Partridges, and other sorts of birds all white. A little higher lies the frozen sea,The fro∣zen Sea. which some say is not a sea frozen, but land covered with ice. An Indian, one Irica, told me that in his youth he had been in the Land of Labrador, which the Natives call Ʋchacara, which borders on a Countrey called Al∣fringa, and that crossing from Province to Province, he saw seas of Vast extent, all frozen, and the people assur'd him twas not a Sea, but Land, covered with fresh water-ice, a thing hard to be cre∣dited. They have not any Townes, but Villages, where on little hills they live in timber houses, covered with hides of Beifes, and o∣ther beasts. The people are Whites, kinde and affable. This Coast extends to the space of 400 leagues, there is a large river they call de tres Hermanos, which some Spanish were about to crosse, but could not for snows. Some imagine here is a streight, that goes into the Orientall sea, others that tis an Arme of the sea only. Some take this for the river Rio Neuado, which on one side coasts this Countrey for 200 leagues; on the other side, to the Bay of Maluas, and by the Gulph Merosco lyes the Isle of Devills, so cal∣led because they hold it to be haunted with spirits, as many of the eastern Islands are, as I observed in another place. There are Tawnies amongst them, they weare in their eares rings of gold and silver, their cloaths lin'd with Martins, and o∣ther furrs, amongst them there live some Britains and English men. Next lies the Countrey called Bacaleos, or Bacca-Lao,Bacalao Codfish. so called from our fishing for Codds there, to which the Seamen give that terme. That place is so thronged with this sort of fish, that sometimes they cumber a Vessell in say∣ling. The coast from thence to Florida is about 900 l. The Country is
cold like Flanders, and under almost the same climate. The peo∣ple are Idolaters, and bruitish, void of civility, except along the shore where the French inhabit; there they live better, and eat not mans flesh as the rest round about them do. They live in o∣bedience to one they elect out of the most potent amongst them, many Islands adjacent are possessed by the French. Not far from thence lyes the Countrey called Chicora, the people whereof are of extraordinary size, they wear their hair down to their girdle, the women much longer: They believe the immortality of the soule, and that after death they transmigrate to a better Countrey than their own. They keep stocks of tame Deer, which they drive to pasture as we do Cows and Oxen; from them they make excellent cheese which mingled with a sort of clouted cream, is a very delicate dish. The English say the land of Bacalaos was first discovered by one Cabor, sent thither by Henry the 7. King of England; to which the Spaniards consent not, much lesse the French, who trafick'd here long before any other Nation. Chicora lyes upon the Continent a little above Bacalaos, and according to some is part of it, as likewise the Country of Hari. The Spaniards say that Licenciado Ayllon going from Hispaniola, run along all these coasts, and amongst others visited Chicora. They feed here on the roots of Jucca, Casabe and Potataes. They have variety of Idolatries, and Idols, with a thousand ceremonies, superstitions, and feasts. Their great God they call Mateozunga, the lesser Quexuga, and fancy a Mahometan Paradise, of all sorts of pleasures, musick, dancing, feminine embraces, &c. They believe the rotundity of the earth, and that 'tis in the middle of the Universe, and that by consequence there are Anti∣podes. Their Priests abuse them with a thousand prodigies and impostures: widows, if their husbands died naturally, marry not again, but if by Justice or other violence they may. No man hath more than one wife, except the King, who may have two. They compose their year of 12. moons, all their commerce is in exchange. They have excellent remedies for all diseases, by means of their patriot herbs, wherein they have good knowledge, amongst others they have one called Guachi, against choler. The Spaniard Ayllon recounted many other particulars of Chicora, that 'twas of great extent, and contained many Provinces.
CHAP. VI. Of Canada, or new France. CAnada, or new France, was discovered, and frequented by the Brittains and Normans, in the yeare 1504, and before that also; since again by Verrazn, who took possession of the Coast and Continent for King Francis the first, which hath continued from time to time to this day. The Countrey hath not any Mines of gold, as they know of, but white Corall it yeilds, called Esurqui, and some Jasper and cassidone stones, with abundance of Beavers, wherein consists their traffick. They have discovered a tree, called Aneda, or Zuaboya, much like our nut-tree, the decoction whereof is a soveraine, and pre∣sent remedy for a disease, common in this Country, which infects them like a plague, from head to foot, with a violent contraction of the sinews, stinking breath, and mouth running with purtefica∣tion, as at Scurbut, and at last seizes on the vitall spirits, and with extreme torments finishes their lives: but Providence hath furnished them with this remedy Aneda, as Carter in his Voyages observes. All these Countreys of Bacaleos, Caneda, Hochelaga, are com∣prised under the name of New-found-Lands, or new France, fre∣quented these many yeares by the French for fishing of Cods. For in the exact description, I refer myselfe to Histories, and published Re∣lations; only I will repeat what severall, who have travailed it, have told me. Canada extends it selfe by a point south-west, within the Coun∣trey of Goulmaran, coming up to the River Diquero, where there is a spacious Town of the same name, otherwise called Sougoubal, where the King keepes his Court; towards the sea it joynes with Baraleol, and the New-found-Lands; the Natives of extraordina∣ry stature, favoured like them of new Mexico, heavy like a gilt Morian, they are of a cruell nature, warring upon their neigh∣bours, and there are of them that eat Mans flesh: they inhabit up as farr as the great river Hochelaga, and use boats made of the barke of a tree, at the getting of this barke, they use particular ceremonies, and prayers to their Idols, to protect them in warr in which they are assisted with Virgins dedicated to the Gods, as our Religious. Some amongst them are of more humanity and assasibility, ad∣dicting themselves only to fishing, which they will willingly do for strangers. The King derives himselfe from the first stock which peopled
world after the deluge, whereof they have some light. They bear great reverence to the Sun for the light and bene∣fit they receive. They feed on bread made of fish, and the like as in Florida; live in common, and diverse families under a roof. Men have several wives, whom they marry with little ceremo∣ny, and leave them when they please. Their King they call the great Sagamos or Sahagama, that is the great King, whom they carry upon a Sindela of cotton, mixt with feathers, very curious and artificiall: women wait at his table, nor will he trust men with any thing of his diet; as he passes by, all bow with great respect, none is capable of succession but the eldest Son, all the other Children are subjects; for which cause the other wives, rather choose abortion, then to live to see it. After the Kings decease; they live perpetual widows, and in signe of mourning immediately put on the Singaye, make incisions in their face, then laying gum on a fire, hold over their faces that smoak may colour the scarifications, with this gum, and oyle of date-stones, the meaner sort make their face black and orange-tawny, their hair hangs loose about their shoulders, having nothing about their head but the Singaye, which they wear as the Moors do their hair, appearing both under and over it. This is made of feathers of a bird they call Tanaps: the Americans esteem this bird ominous, when they meet it. The vulgar women wear other plumes with cotton, but they neither marry the second time. The men wear apparel of Deer-skins usefully contrived, one arm uncovered, and so they wear their garment like a scarf, their breeches like the Egyptians, but not so long. The Coun∣trey is exceeding cold, and lyable to earth-quakes, for which they sacrifice to their Idols, whereof they have one in figure, half a man, and half a serpent, which they call Andouagni, and adorn him in a rich habit, and their Country diamonds, which are not so good as others. They have mines, but none very good, fruits of many sorts, and amongst others a tree called Coltan, which yeilds an ex∣cellent liquor that they make drink of, their King drinking nothing else. Vines grow there in abundance, naturally with∣out labour, exceedingly loaded with grapes, but they have not the skill to make wine of them, except they have been lately shewed: they have pumpions and gourds which they eat roasted, oyle out of Date-stones, very sweet and soveraign in diseases. One tree there is which takes away any feaver in few hours. They are great hunters, and wear engines like raquets on their feet, whereby they go the lighter on the snow in pursuit of their chace. Of late years the English have changed the appellations the French gave these Countries, of New-France, and Canada, to New-England, New-Scotland,
and New Brittanny above, before called Labrador, and Estotiland. Goulmaran is the name of a river and a country, where the sa∣vages chief food is fish, of which they have abundance, and drying it in the sun make flower, which they eat without other baking: they eat the flesh of their enemies; they house in caverns or cab∣bins of straw, without either apparel or houshold-stuffe more then Gourds which the soyle produces in abundance: great store of cattle which fatten themselves without further care; they live in common, and admit no strangers to inhabit amongst them. Their mortal enemies are the Siniga neighbouring Mountaneers, covered at halfes with beast skins; and these nations as professed enemies, eat one another. For arms, they have staves, bows, and slings, wherein they are very effectual, being strong and good wrestlers. They lead into the field troops of fierce and strong dogs, and fling them the head, hands, and feet of an enemy for re∣ward; they only spare their wives to whom they yield all honour, and marry with them. There is not amongst them any sort of Science, Learning, or Character: they believe the soul immortal, and that the Sun created the world, whom they call Courcourant▪ and the Moon Beleida: live like brothers, without any Law of property, every man hath his wife, and with her is satisfied; no di∣stinction of sin amongst them, vice nor vertue: all equal, onely a particular reverence to one chief as their King, whom they call Caraybalan: They shave their head and beard with a root called Meite, which dryed at the Sun, they make into powder, and ap∣ply it plaister-wise all night. Maids deflowr'd before Matrimony, never marry, though the fact is no dishonour to them. Their Singay by the advantage of their mountains, often fall upon them; they have a sort of trunks through which they will blow their poysoned arrowes with strange vigour, and wound incurably. They are of admirable Footmanship, and will fly like Grayhounds before a pursuing enemy, and on such occasions their dogges stand them in good stead. They scatter about the fields certain poysoned paste for the enemies dogges, and lest their own should be taken with it, they hold them up tyed: he that hath two with him thinks himself secure. When the dogge winds any thing, if the Master cryes Taip, the dogge stayes till his Ma∣ster hath viewed his prey: they carry burthens like horses. Their houses are of straw, and their burrowes are fortified with Timber-Palizadoes, which they poyson against the invading enemy. Of the same straw they cover their houses, they make bridges, and never make bridge of stone; which straw-bridges are of good firmnesse. They have some houses made of earth, mingled with chopt straw. The Charaybalan or King, walks through the coun∣try with no attendance but dogges, and allowes no man to ap∣proach him. These dogges are his guard, being very fierce;Military dogs. and
when they find any thing, they first look on their Masters face, to understand if they should eat it or not, and stand for good ser∣vants: the enemy hath strong apprehension of them. These dogges have great tayles like Bulles, and it hath been knowne that they have assaulted and defeated a good body of men▪ so as the race of them is prized at a high rate. CHAP. VII. Of Virginia and Florida, Fountains of youth, dangerous love. ON the South and East of all these parts lyes Virginia, disco∣vered by Sir Walter Rawleigh and the English, and Florida, first found by Sebastian Cabot an English Navigator in the yeare 1496. as he looked for another matter: and more perfectly after∣wards discovered by John Ponce of Lyons who so christened it, be∣cause he arrived on Palme-Sunday in French, called Flowre-Sun∣day, or else because he found the land fragrant and spread with flowers. This is a country of wide circuit towards 34. degrees, having on the East the Channel of Bahama the Lucays and Virginia, on the West Mexico and the gulph Panuco, on the South it looks upon Cuba or Jucatan, and on that side extends above 200. leagues to the 24. degree: on the North lyes Canada, New France, and the Auanares, towards this point or tongue of land, in form of an Isthmus, 'tis dangerous sayling for the opposite winds and currents of water. The natives are strong and turbu∣lent, eat their enemies of war, but their friends and confederates never, not for any extremity. The men eradicate their beards to appear more lovely and pleasing to the women: pierce their nose and ears, and hang in rings and jewels: they marry not till 40 years of age, and the woman 25. holding that the children will be more robustious. Women before matrimony observe not chastity, and without dishonour: but after marriage they will forfeit life as soon as their fidelity. North they border on the Aunares, and beyond them the Abar∣daos, a cruell and wicked people, continually in warre, and use a thousand subtleties to ensnare their enemies, but especi∣ally by night, first laying their Engines or Caltrops, then give the Alarme, and seem to flye; so the enemies pursuing, are often taken in these trappes; as they likewise take wilde beasts: as they on the other side make conceal'd pits for them to fall in.
There are also the Jagares, a people so swift, they boast they can take a Deere in plain running, and indeed the Deere there are not so wilde. For they feed in fields, in Heards like Cows, whereof they make their ordinary sustenance. Ponce de Leon sayes he sent one of these people with a letter, and some provisi∣on to his company, and in few houres he went and came thirty 1. They are cloathed with skins of beasts, but cheifly Deere, which they dresse very artificially. Then there are the Apalchen and Chahamo, people intirely barbarous and brutish, who adore and sacrifice to devills, that appeare to them in diverse formes. The whole Countrey abounds in all Commodities; as flesh of all sorts, and fish, and they say there are Mines of Gold and Silver, whereof they make no great account. They have a King, whom foure of the Principall amongst them beare in the skin of a Saliabe, a beast like a Hart: appar∣relled with skins, and set with feathers; they adore the Sun, and believe the immortality of the soule: and that some go to Hea∣ven, and others to the bowells of the earth. Towards the Pro∣montory of Baxos, there is a fishing of ordinary pearles, neither so fine nor great as in the River of Palmes, and Margarita; nor do the Natives much esteem them, and value more a measure of Sperma Caetae, then a handfull of pearles. The people of Canada ma a greater account of them: for the women weare them in their eares. In many places they build their houses in forme of a Cressant, in Honour of the Moone, and cover them with barkes of trees, or sea reeds. For Armes they use Bows, and poysoned Arrowes, as doth the greater part of America. They are much given to Hunt and Fish. For more of the description of the Country, and the manners of the people, I refer my selfe to the French and Spanish relati∣ons. I will only make mention of one miracle in the Countrey, at∣tested by the Licentiados, Ayllon, Figuerra, and other Spaniards of Quality; 'tis a fountain of Youth, whereof the water be∣ing drunke, not only mitigates all maladies, but makes the old young again, restoring decayed strength and vigour, whereof they saw the experience in an old decrepid man, quite worne out, who became vigorous and lusty, that married and got chil∣dren. The Spaniards advanced not into the Country, finding the People Martiall, bloody, and violent enemies to them; which I suppose proceeded rather from cruelties, they them∣selves exercised, then the inclinations of the people, whom the French, who used them mildely, found quite other∣wise. And we see that Once de Leon leaving them by reason of their salvagenesse, one Ferdinand de Sot, in
the year one thousand five hundred thirty four for booty and dis∣covery of Mines, made a voyage thither: where he committed a thousand cruelties upon the people, and the Catiques them∣selves; so as at last, in revenge he and all his company were massacred. Afterwards Pamphilio de Naruanez brought a good Colony into the River of Palmes, where either by tempest or want, the greater part perished. Then in the year one thousand forty nine, some Religious of Saint Benedicts order were sent thi∣ther, who had but little better successe, so as the countrey remaining unplanted by any forrainers, in the yeare one thou∣sand five hundred sixty two, our French went to make a con∣quest of it. Lo here the first discovery and taking possession of these terri∣tories, by Verazan in the name of King Francis the first, in the year 1524. For Admirall Chatillon, ambitious the French should have the honour and Empire of those parts, had induced Charles the ninth to commission John Ribaut Diepois, to go plant there at his own cost and charges; advised to the designe by a French-man, who under the stile of a Levantisk, and Savoyard, not a French-man, had before made a voyage that way to New Spain. Ribaut with a good party f French souldiers, and Mar∣riners, first touch at the Cape of France, so named by him, in thirty eight degrees, and the faire River May which he so called, because he arrived there on the first of May. There the Indians and their King gave him kinde entertain∣ment, and many presents were interchanged: ours gave them bracelets of Tinne; Bills, Looking-glasses, and Knives: They returned Plumes of red feathers, Baskets of twigges fine∣ly platted, and skinnes of beasts ingeniously figured. On further they found other Rivers, to which they gave the names of Seine, Somme, Loire, Charante, Garoma, Giron∣da, Belle and others within lesse then sixty leagues off coast, then upon the River Jordan they cast Anchor, and called that place Port Royal, where they set up the Armes of France, as they did in the River May, upon a stone pillar. Ribaut upon his designe of planting, built a Fort he called Charles-Fort, in the mouth of a faire River by the natives called Toubachire, by Chenonceau; and placing in it Captain Albert with twenty souldiers, and foure pieces of Ordnance, he returned for France, bringing for a shew some pieces of Rock streaked with gold and silver, and abundance of Mun∣keys and Paraquitoes, promising to return shortly with a con∣siderable Colony of men and women. Here Captain Albert Governour of the Fort falls in love with a daughter of one of the principal Caoiques, very fair
and coming, whom he had procured into the Fort with her Fa∣thers consent;Unfortu∣nate love. the maid holding it for a great honour to be affe∣cted by strangers. But here upon a souldier one of the chiefest and gallantest of the company, becomes her servant also, and by so much the more ardent for some countenance she shewed him though in private: the Captain perceiving it, he fell into such rage, he would have killed him, but for fear of mutiny amongst the souldiers; so thought better to set him a shore in a desert Island, three leagues from thence, promising to send him provision from time to time: but not performing accordingly, the poor man was brought to such extremity, he had no sustenance but Oysters, Tortoise egges, Birds that he took with his hand, and hearbs, and was forced to creep into hollow trees, for security from wilde beasts, especially Cro∣codiles, whereof there are great store; nor did his sword and punniard stand him in small stead against them. The very Apes and Munkies were vexatious to him. Sometimes for better se∣curity he climbed into trees, and, they say, falling asleep one night in a tree, he tumbled down on the back of a Cro∣codile, that was come a shore for his prey, 'twas hard to say which was most frighted, but he pursued the Crocodile to the River side, being but slow of pace by reason of his short legges, and heavie body. Certain Indians fishing, saw the miserable condition of this poor man, and advertised his comerades in the Fort, who incen∣sed against their Captaine for this and other rigours killed him, and fetched back the souldier halfe dead with hunger: then chose another Captaine, and constrained by necessity to return into France; by help of the Indians, they built a lit∣tle Bark, nailed with wooden pinnes, and fitted with Sayles of such linnen as they had, victualled with the round corne of the countrey, they call Mays, and powdered flesh but were driven to such exigent by the way, they were fain to cast lots, who should be so unhappy, as to be food for the rest. In the year one thousand five hundred sixty four, Captain Landoniere was sent thither with three vessels, who built Fort Caroline upon the River May, and thence made some inroads upon the Continent; amongst other things he relates a flash of lightening the most horrid and prodigious was ever heard of: for it covered and burnt above five hundred Acres of Meadow, green, and watered, roasted the Fowle,A prodi∣gious lightning. and con∣tinued for three dayes without ceasing. The year following Captain Ribaut returned thither with his son, and about four hundred men and women to compose his colony, and till the soyle. He was upon opening a Mine of Gold, and in the rock
was come to fine gold, of the bignesse of needle points, about 30. leagues from the sea: but afterwards being about to go on with the work effectually; he was unexpectedly surprized by Spaniards who used him and his company with all cruelty, and treachery imaginable. Our Histories relate the passage at large, so as our Forts were taken, and all our countrymen hanged or murthered. Young Ribaut escap't, came back into France and complained to the King,French hanged in Florida. who wrote to the King of Spain about it; but he onely sent order to the Viceroy of New Spain, to informe him∣self of the matter, and accordingly to do justice: which never∣thelesse was forgotten, and so the outrage was unsatisfied, till the year 1567. that Captain Gourgues nobly undertook the re∣venge at his own charges, and bravely drove out all the Spa∣niards, and demolished their Forts. I shall make no further progresse, for that the Histories of Florida, make large re∣lations. CHAP. VIII. Of Mexico: the nature of the Inhabitants, their Kings, sacrifices, &c. FRom Florida by degrees we arrive at New Spaine, or the kingdom of Mexico. A countrey extending in length and breadth from the River Tanasco or Grisalue towards the West, or Jucatan, to the Province of Caliacan, and the river Saint Michael bounded on the North with new Granada, and the Pro∣vinces of new Mexico. On the South lyes the great gulph of the pacifick sea of Mexico. On the East the River Panuco, and the skirts of Florida. The kingdome of Mexico is otherwise called Culbuca, and Anauas by the Inhabitants, it holds dominion from Pa∣nuco to Dariene, which divides it from Peru. The princi∣pal Provinces are Guatemala, Xalisco, Chalcos, Taica, Me∣choachan, Tlascalan, Acapulco, Culiacan, Tezuco, Tescuco, Huaca-chalque, Huacachala, Claortomaca, Maxalcinco, Gisteca∣pan, and others. New Spaine is one of the most excellent Provinces of the New World, fully inhabited, pure ayre, abounding in corne, and all sorts of graine, Cattle, Mines of Gold, and chiefely of Silver, wanting nothing but oyle and wine. The principal and capital town is Temistican or Temoxtitlan,
or Temuistican, upon a Lake of thirty Leagues in circute, is contained threescore thousand Houses, at the time the Spaniards took it, under the famous Ferdinand Cortez. The lake is of two waters, salt and fresh, by reason of the rivers that en∣ter it. There are many other great Townes, but less then Mexico. Before they received Christianity, they were all great Idola∣ters, and given to strange superstitions, many whereof they con∣tinue still. Their Sacrifices were formidable, Fathers not scru∣pling to make their own children victims. The Mexicans are an ingenuous people, and of experience in all sorts of workes, particularly in Tapestry of feathers, where they have things artificially drawne to the life. The Soyle abounds in all sorts of fruits, and commodities for livelihood, as well naturall as adventitious: even vines, whereof they have ve∣ry good, notwithstanding the prohibition to plant any. True, in many parts the grapes come not to perfect maturity; by reason of the abundant rains in June and July, when the grapes begin to ripen, so as they soake raine, and corrupt, wherefore they are forced to eat them halfe green. Some have try'd to make wine, but it proves sharp, and more like wine of quinces, then grapes. They have planted olive-trees, which come to good growth, and full of leaves, but without fruit. All sorts else grow well and plentifully. The wine they drink comes all from Spaine, and is very deare, for it cost five of us three crowns a day for our parts, and a good bargaine, the plenty of mony making all things deare, for a bed 12 realls a night. In Peru tis yet dearer, though they get very good wine and figs, as likewise in the Isles of Barlouento, and Cuba. There are many Forrests by the Indians called Arcaboucos, store of Ebony Gua∣cum, or Lignum Sanctum, wide and thick Forrests of Cedars, Lau∣rells, Dates, Pines, Oaks, and hearbs of all sorts, proceeding from the nature of the Climate, being hot and moist. The greater part of the ground lies notwithstanding uncultivated,The tem∣perature of Mexico. for want of La∣bourers, of which they have none, but some Blacks of Maniconga and Guinea, lazy people, and no good workers. The Country is not very populous, many more women then men, by reason warr and labour consumes them. The extent of these Regions is admirable, nay infinite, in re∣spect of the few Inhabitants, and less agriculture; for this late dis∣covered Mexico contains above 15 Provinces, of above a thou∣sand leagues in circuite, where there are as faire Towns and build∣ings as in Europe. Good part speak the Mexico Tongue. Farther on there suc∣ceed severall unknowne Nations, without number: Some Re∣ligious went thither to Preach the Faith, but the Savages devou∣red them.
'Tis not yet found out what Territories border with Cape Mendocino, California, high Florida, new Mexico, and others to∣wards the North Pole, no more then what is beyond the Streight of Magellan, higher by 56. or 57. degrees. The Inhabitants of old Mexico, do intirely apply themselves to the Trades and wayes of the Spaniard, being grown good Weavers, and make all sorts of silke stuffs: in like manner they are docile and judicious, and such as are become Christi∣ans, follow the Doctrine most religiously. The Countrey is of such a scituation, that you ascend where∣ver you go from the sea Coast, but so easily you perceive it not. So coming from the middle of the land to the Sea-ward, you des∣cend on which side soever, but so, as afterwards one admires how they ascended mounted so high, or came so low; all the Mexican Territory is of this quality and scituation. The Anci∣ent Mexi∣cans.The Mexicans derive themselves originally from other parts, the Ancient Inhabitants were barbarous, and eat nothing but ve∣nison, which they called Chichimeques, and Otomies; then the Na∣vatalks came from the North, from Provinces, which since are joy∣ned to New Mexica, who peopled, cultivated, and civiliz'd the soyle and Nation: But withall they introduced their strange Idolatries, and horrible sacrifices of men and infants, whereof they perpetrate abundance every yeare: Whereby 'tis very probable that not only this, but all the other Coun∣treys are inhabited with people deriv'd from the North, whi∣ther the Asians and Europians may have passed by little and little by the Streights, either of Sea, or Land, as we have already de∣monstrated. These Mexicans being well setled, chose a King to Govern them, who was one Acamipixtsi, a Mexican Lord, who had mar∣ried a daughter of the King of Cublivacan, an ancient people of the Country: since which time they have ever had Kings, not by succession, but Election, continued to the ninth and last King Montezuma, taken by Cortez: under which Kings they had diverse Warrs, and tooke in many neighbors, augmenting it to a great state. The King was not Elected by the Commons, but by 4 Princi∣pall of the Court, and had the Crowne from the hands of the Tescaio. But the King Elect, before he receives his Crown, is obli∣ged to go fight the Enemy, and bring such a number of Prisoners to their Sanguinary sacrifices. If he faile in the first expedition, they excuse it, but if the second time, they poyson him, and choose another. If he returne victorious, they conduct him with great ceremony to the Temple, where they make the great sacrifice, with processions, and musick, through the Town. He was crowned with a Crown like a Miter, and every one made
oath to serve him to the last drop of bloud; then was conducted with great magnificence to the Pallace-Royal, the Electors called Laceocal, marching first, that is, Princes of the Lance, then the Lacaterret, or Thunder-bolts of men, who are the gallantest of the Cavaliers, then Hazeuocal, that is, bloud-shedders, and the Lilbancalqui, Knights of the black lance. These four orders were his Majesties privy Council: in the Town they had other Councils for administration of Justice. When the King went to the Temple, an hundred men marched before him with great bows taller than themselves; then 100. more with long staves with a hardbroad keen stone in the end, with which he will cut off a horse-head; I have seen one cut a sheep in two with it, those they call a la a tilpeo. The Kings Pallace is sumptuous and magnificent, a Parke by it stored with wilde beasts of all sorts, ponds full of fish, with boates of rich worke, and cages for Birds. The Pallace is composed of separate apartments, and severall ha∣bitations for the Courtiers, every one according to his dignitie and degree. The Mexican Kings had high esteem for men of valour, and rewarded them very amply, by which means they were so well served in their wars, and got so many victories. Their weapons were clubs with keen stones, lances, pikes, a sort of javelins, at the throwing whereof they were exceeding dextrous, bows, arrows, lit∣tle targets, and a head-piece with a plume of feathers; coats of Li∣ons, Bears, Tigers, and other beasts-skins, great runners, and wrastlers. The King of Montezuma in his Militia had an order of Knights, that from the Crown had their hair tyed with carnation ribbons, rich feathers, and a scarf of the same colour, who for every gal∣lant atchievement they have done, have so many waves fastened, and hanging over their shoulders. This King was of that order, as he is to be seen represented in his statue at Chapultapes. This ha∣bit was very stately, enriched with plumes of all colours, and makes the Spaniards deck themselves with feathers in imitation, and adorn their horses with them: another order of Knights there was called Agourlas, clad in another manner, and with other diffe∣rences; then there were the Ataroncos, the Tigers, the Blacks armed from head to foot in fight, the others half armed: Their cloaths of Combi, cotton and other things, these had license to eat in gold and silver vessels, a thing not allowed to others; who were apparelled with courser cloathes, called Nequen. These first Knights lodge in the Kings Palace, and have their apartments amply accommodated, whom I cannot compare better than to the Mayl'd Knights at Malta, distinguished in divers com∣panies, by the Titles of Princes, Eagles, Tigers, and Blacks. The rest of his Valiant Militia lodged in other divisions apart, assigned
them by the Council, and upon pain of death could not change their lodging. This Militia was so well ordered and disciplined that they stroke, terrour in the neighbouring people. And what was most to be admired, that they could keep so many different Nations in concord, for the perfection of the Country drew people from all parts thither.People of Mexica. There is one sort of people amongst them called Chalcas, that is, men of the streight, which argues them to be a people come from the streight: others called Souchimilcos, that is field men; others Tapaneras, men of the bridge; others Alcapousalcas, Couluas, crookback'd: Tsaluicas, mountain-men. All these Nations are come to inhabit, and feed on Mexica; to build Towns and Burroughs, and that as their Characters shew above seven or eight hundred years since. The Tlascaltecaes never agreed with the Mexicans, but assisted the Spaniards against them, and in compensation are eased of tributes, and have many privi∣ledges; and possesse the room the Chichimeras who fled from their homes at the approach of the Spaniards, so much they were asto∣nished with that new way of war, esteeming them children of the Sun. A strata∣gem.The Tsalcaltecaes used a stragatem to dispossesse the Chichime∣caes, who made good resistance at first, for under colour of a feast of amity, while these were drinking, the others stole away their arms, and so got their ends. The History whereof stands at this day painted in the Countrey. The original people were Gyants, as appears by bones of dead men, and teeth as big as pullets eggs. They who remained by little and little, conformed themselves to the others. The Mexicans had a most truculent custom, to sacrifice their prisoners of war, and enemies, to their gods, and in want of them their own natural children. The Priests or Papas performed the sacrifice opening the breast of the miserable victim, and with the heart sprinkled the Idol to appease it, and watered the stairs and the temple with his blood. In Peru they made the like sacrifice of children, from four to ten years old, with such madnesse that they would slaughter 200. at a time, and this for the health and prosperity of their Ingas or Kings, and the like of maids drawn out of their Monasteries. The Mex∣icans sa∣crifices.To gain their Childrens consent, they tell them they shall be immediately made Saints, and go straight to heaven amongst the gods: At Peru at decease of their Kings they slaughter a number of his servants to attend and wait upon him in the other world. This custom of bloody sacrifices was common through all the parts and Islands of the new world. What is admirable, in Coluacane, as also in Jacatan, Ʋraba, and Dariena, there are many circumcised, whence arises a question, whether they came from the ten Tribes, sent to Tarty and Arsarach.
The Mexicans chief god, or wooden Idol, was Vitzilipatzli,The Mex∣icans Ido▪ whom the Toucouacans or Tecalhuacans, the first civilizers of Mexico brought with them in a Tabernacle of Sea-reeds, who promised to make them Lords of this vaste Countrey, shewed them the way to it, and how to keep it, which at this day is to be seen in historical paintings, as I have often my self ob∣served. In prosecution they built lofty Temples, and in∣stituted their Feasts and bloudy Sacrifices, whereof I spoke before. The Devil, that Ape of the Almighty, would imitate what we read of the Ark in the old Testament, conducting the chil∣dren of Israel, and other mysteries; the stile this Seducer uses, to gain credit and adoration from these abused people. And the Indians in memory of this Ark, to this day place a case of reeds upon the Altar. Being in the Kingdome of Tabin, and passing on to the Countrey of Siton, we visited the Lord of the Territories Palace, where amongst divers figures of Princes, there was one of a King with an emerald hanging in his nose: whom we were informed was King of Mexico, and how after the decease of Montezuma, one Tlacaeler a person of high valour, was elected King, or Lord of the Countrey, who neverthelesse waved the offer, saying he had charge enough in the ordering his own do∣minions. The Mexicans perceiving his resolution, requested he would name them a King, and then he elected Ticoci, son of the King deceased, who being young was constantly assisted with the coun∣sel of Tlacaeler. This King had his nose pierced, and an Emerald hang'd in it, and hence in their books and monuments, this King is figured with his nose pierced. In the Temples of Peru they set the Image of Pa∣chacamas with a Monde under his Feet, who they said had a Spirit that he sent upon earth to execute his will; that being a potent crowned King, he went na∣ked, for their example, and that in his hand he bore a dart to exterminate those of bad lives, and called him Chinnequil, that is, the Ghost of the Great Crea∣tour. Letters they had none, onely a sort of significant Cha∣racters, figures and draughts like Hieroglyphicks, which they continue still to expresse the mysteries of Christianisme. They will form all their words and discourses in these figures and paint∣ings, as when they would say, I confesse me to Almighty God: they draw a Priest sitting, a man at his feet upon his knees▪ and over them three faces in one, signifying the Trinity, and something lower the image of the Virgin with her infant, &c. and pictures of
Saints and Angels. In this manner they expresse all by figure, which asks a long time to signifie a matter of importance, and some∣times a whole day to draw it. Wherefore in all great Towns there are those that sell papers, with all necessary and ordinary commu∣nications ready delineated. Their Records, Histories, Calendars, and Annals, were ever ex∣pressed in this manner. CHAP. IX. The Mexican year, their Paradise, Infernall, and their Dances. THe Mexican year was divided into eighteen moneths, of twenty dayes to a moneth, and the five dayes over they set apart for feasts, sacrifices, and recreations. The year began in March with the coming of the leaf, each month having a particu∣lar pourtraict. The Peruians more properly divided their year into 12. months, or moons, wherein they exquisitely compacted all the dayes of the year, which they began in January. These months they deciphered by 12. columns in order, with names signifying the feasts contained, and the seasons to sow, reap,The Mex∣ican year & month. &c. the first was Soucangae, the 2. Rayme, then Hostinoqui, Aucayqui, Arucouqui, Caualiarqui, Jurtaqui, Jouapaqui, Caya∣rayme, Payconeo, Jomarayme, Ayamara, the twelfth. They pourtrayed the Sun and Moon, and by certain distincti∣ons, knew the full and the qualities of it. The Mexicans had a mooving wheel, whereon the months, feasts, and seasons, were set with distinct cyphers. For the seven dayes are not founded upon the solary or lunary course, but with the Hebrewes upon the creation, and our number of Planets with the Pagans. The years are denoted by severall signes, from four to four, of thirteen years each division, which in 25. years contained the whole period, and concluded the circle. Chicora.So the people of Chicora divided their year into twelve Moones, in Coluacana they use the Lunary Months, and call the Months Books. The Moon in their language is Tna, the Sun Tanaric.The Mex∣ican wheel I have often enquired of the use of this Mexican wheel, but could never understand it: it moves very slowly, and goes round every Month, noting the periods, and account of years, as to say: such a thing was done in such a year, de∣yphered by a Temple, a Rose, a Rabbet, a Stone, the four
marks of the wheel. When a little needle in the middle of the wheel comes to point at the period of fifty years, then are they stroken with a strong apprehension, believing the world is to be ended, and for three or four dayes before lament, and make Sacrifices to appease the angry gods; but when it arrives at the point, they leave their Sacrifices, break all their u∣tensils, as they were to die at the instant, lay themselves on the ground with extream contusion for their bad lives, and terrour of approaching torments: and having spent a day and night thus dolefully, upon appearance of the next day, which they never thought to see, they go strait to visit the wheel, which now hath entered a new circulation; then repleat with joy they render a thousand benedictions to the gods for the grace received, whereof they thought themselves unworthy, with engagements of reformation for the future. Then pre∣pare for a solemne fast abstaining till night from all suste∣nance: for three dayes they observe these fasts, without company with their wives. After this their Priests or Papaes, with 12. men and youths in feather garments, dancing silently to musick, bear the Idol of their God Ʋriacocha, followed with a number of boyes and girls in white, decked with flowers and feathers of various colours, then the Religious in their proper habits, next come 12. sheep for sa∣crifice, then the principal persons with tapers in their hands, then follow the whole multitude of men and women, with hymns and gratifications, up to a Mountain: from whence they observantly return to the Temple. Amongst them there are some that fu∣riously lash their bare shoulders with thorns of Mangouay, so as the Temple runs with bloud, wherewith the Priests wash the face of their Idol. After this the sheep with their ears peirced, and a thousand gayties were dejugulated, and with them some Children were sacrificed, whilest others dance and sing about them, the Priests instructing and encouraging them to it. But before the Feast, they compound a meat of the flesh of certain venemous Creatures, Mace, Tobacco, and certain roots, which the Priests eating, a Devil enters their bodies, and they fall into a fury; then they begin their ball. The feast is called Procrayme. Every year they have the like Sacrifices, beginning with fasts and lamentations. They have processions likewise, and with dances and songs carry their Idols very solemnly, still concluding with bloudy sa∣crifices. When Lords and Masters dye, their Servants sacrifice themselves in hope to serve their Masters in the other world, and if through indiscretion or want they were not paid and well rewarded in this life; suppose it shall be amply done in
the next. They believe the immortality of the soule, felicity for the good, and the wicked to be tormented by the Devil, whom for this reason they adore, wearing his counterfeit in their ears, that he may shew them some favour when they come to the Abysse. They believe that after death their actions are presented and plea∣ded before the great God, who gives definitive sentence one way or other to eternity. They believe no reformation, as the Bretellians▪ and others believe no hell, but that all go to live merrily with their fore∣fathers. In some parts they embalm the Corps, and together interr their whole treasure. In other parts they lay victuals and drink by them, in opinion God sometimes confines their souls to their Se∣pulchers, so as they may want sustenance. Ceremo∣nies and Prayers.The Indians when they fall sick, present their Priests with di∣vers rarities, that they would make prayers for their health; But if their disease grow vigorous, with Brasile they die a shirt ver∣million, and send it to be sacrificed for their recovery; also they send divers prayers figured in Characters to be burned with shels, they call vila coronea. Likewise they sacrifice sheep, and the rarest of birds, nay slaves themselves terming this hurlauical: as that of the feasts contauical, wherein they mingle odoriferous woods called Jauli, resembling the Lemon tree, together with ceremonial prayers. Against their Enemies they have other Sacrifices, as to burn their Effigies, with the pictures of severall venemous and morti∣ferous Creatures, the Priest pronouncing, So perish the strength of our enemies, then they sacrifice a black sheep kept long from food, and the Priest cries, So let the heart of our enemies be weak∣ned. To Rivers they sacrifice the shels that come from them, to foun∣tains fruits and vertual herbs; holding there is nothing on earth which hath not his like in heaven, and that they hold a correspon∣dence: and that any thing of good operation on earth, is acceptable to their gods in heaven. In what condition soever, in health or sicknesse, peace or war, on all occasions they have recourse to prayers and sacrifice, even to immolation of their slaves and chil∣dren. The Mexicans dis-avow all peace with their neighbouring enemies, the Tapacques, Ilascalcans and Mechoachans, that they may be stored with prisoners of war for sacrifice, & hold these wretches for Saints and celestiall, when they go with consent. Their dances.Dancing was very frequent with the Mexicans, mixing many Ceremonies and superstitions, the Lords themselves the most grave, and of what office soever, disdained it not, and to use the Mitecos, that is, dancings in stately rooms, or gardens, with spiri∣tuall songs, rather a sort of adoration than a dance. One Indian hangs about anothers neck, then he dances to a taber or flute, others shew a thousand postures and agilities of body, like our
tumblers. They have sometimes their Muscurades called Qua∣cones, disguising themselves like Devils, and glory in this dance. Likewise dancers on the rope, standing with their head down and feet up, with a thousand Turn-overs, and Gamboles; others dance with an extraordinary weight on their shoulders, and this they call Tanquil, then comes another and leaps upon this weight, yet he dances still, though painfully. Then all weaving Arms, and singing, dance in a ring very prettily without the least trouble to one another, then in couples by turns they fall out, and dance about the ring in several manners, at last joyn all together. For this they adorn themselves with their best attire, and still sing prayers and praises to their Gods. CHAP. X. Burning mountains, the Conquest of Mexico, and some particular trees. AMongst the Mexican Marvailes are the burning mountaines, which vomit forth flames, and thick smoak, more or lesse,Burning Moun∣tains. according to the matter that feeds the fire, shut up in the bowels of the earth. The most famous of these Mountaines for height and compasse are the Guatamala, discernable at vast distance on the South sea. A Spanish Priest out of avarice would needs sound this Moun∣tain, supposing the bottom to be full of gold: This Priest was called Mossen born at Antequera who came to the Indies with Pirarow at the time of Ferdinand Cortez conquest: he had a sister living with him, who had a fair daughter, whom the Captain married to Lazart d' Almadia, Clark of the ship, promising 1000. duckets in marriage: But the Clark being jealous of his Captain, left his wife in Spain, and the Captain being come on shore with grief for his Mistresse absence dyed, to whom by his last will he ratified the 1000. duckets: Mean while the Clark took com∣mand of the vessel, and arrived in New Hispaniola, where the Priest was very welcome, Priests being there very acceptable, and was accommodated in the town of Sanda, where he lived in great esteem for sincerity and devotion, so in few years he grew very wealthy. But not content with this, upon suggestion that the flaming Mountain, not farre thence was a Mine of gold, he thought to get inestimable riches out of it:A History of a cove∣tous Priest for this purpose he caused a strong iron chain to be made, to the measure of the height of the Mountain, which he had taken by Artizans, then by
strength of men began to cut a way for portage of his necessaries; which could not be done but at great expence: a mans labour there being worth two crowns a day, neverthelesse avarice made him passe it easily: But this beginning was a mean matter, for he must continue the labourers, being yet not advanced far by reason of the height of the Mountain, and firmnesse of the rock, which he must cut through: nor though many looked upon the enter∣prize as extravagant and inconsiderate, yet the Priest every day got nearer to the mouth of the Furnace, with expence of time, labour, and difficulty. After four moneths space; the ponderous chains and chaldrons, with great cost and paine were drawne up. The good man boasted, he doubted not now to come shortly to his ends, and that he had a revelation of it in his sleep: at length all these iron Engines were set in order, and the work-men to the number of 50. began to let down a Chaldron well fastened to a strong chain of iron with other Engines secured, and the Priest himself set his hand to the work: But as they thought to draw up the Chaldron full of rich melted mettle, the strength of the fire consumed all, and they hardly escaped without burning their hands and feet, so violent a heat burst out upon them. The Priest halfe mad cry'd out, the Devil had broken his chain with a thou∣sand curses, ready to throw himself headlong into the Precipice, covered over with soot and cindars, and frying with heat, fright, and toyle, that he looked like a right fury; running like a mad∣man to and fro; the rest in little better condition, the greatest part being lam'd and consum'd with labour, and the violence of heat which had even melted them. The good man at last was brought to his lodging in extreme torment, where they laid him to bed in so much grief and discomfort, that he was the pitty of the world. Waking in the night he was surprized with such a rage, that he gave himself several stabbes in the throat with his knife, and in the morning his sister coming to visit him, found him steep'd in blood and gastly, half dead, whereupon she cryed out for help, and friends came immediately in, and a Chirurgion applyed the country balsom so fortunately to his wounds, that he was well within few dayes; neverthelesse for extreme griefe and sullen∣nesse he could eat nothing, at last he languished to death, having consum'd all he had gotten, besides what his sister had, and other friends whom he quite ruined. The poor woman lived a while after, but miserably, her Son-in law making some voyages betwixt the Indies and Spain, in the best sort he could, who afterwards had other strange misfortunes upon his wives account, esteemed the daughter of that unfortu∣nate Priest· The last King of Mexico Montezuma was so potent, that he had three thousand men for his guard, and could bring three hun∣dred thousand fighting men into the field. He sacrificed every
year above 20000 persons to his Idols. His revenue in gold, silver, precious stones, pearles, cotton, furres, and fruit was in∣finite, he had thirty feudatary Kings under him,Montezama King of Mexica. each whereof command a hundred thousand vassals. He gained nine battailes against his enemies, and was nine times victorious in close lists: He kept such State and Majesty, that none durst look in his face. He was slain in an insurrection of the Mexicans against Cortez, and his Nephew Catamazin chosen in his place; but he continued not long. Mexica was conquered by Ferdinand Cortez, born at Medelin,Ferdinand Cortez conquer∣ed Mexica. in Estremadura, who came to the West Indies in the year 1485. and 1519. went from Cuba to the conquest of Mexica, discovered before by Fr. Fermandez de Cordoua, who first found Jucatan in 1517. and by the intelligence he had from Velasco Governour of Cuba, he sent his Nephew John de Grizalua, who went as far as San Jouan de Ʋsua, and took possession of the countrey for the King of Spain. Velasco sent afterwards one Osio to relieve Gri∣zalua, but he returned without advancing further. Cortez undertook the invasion with five hundred souldiers, his Captains, Auilla, Porto Carrecco, Orda, Escalente Salsedo, Olid, Escouar, Alua∣rada, and others. He gain'd the Kingdom with great toyle and industry, defeated, and took the King Montezuma; afterwards being driven out by the Mexicans, with a neighbouring people their enemies he returned, and brought them absolutely under the yoke. The Indians called him Malnixa, as a God descen∣ded from heaven. Amongst the Spaniards themselves he had great enemies, as Garary, Estrada, Olid, and Navez, whom he routed, and compleated his conquest. The Emperour made him Marquesse del Valla. He was indued with all the qualities of a Spaniard vertuous and vitious. He was bold, valiant, suddain in execution, clear spirited, subtle, patient, and resolute; but ambi∣tious, out of measure cruell, and libidinous. He dyed in Spain, at the age of 63. in the year 1546. He conquered in Mexica from 12. to 15. degrees. The town of Mexica is in 19. degrees: about the 8. of May, and the 16. of July the Sun is perpendicu∣lar. The countrey is temperate, but rather hot then cold, clothes there not being tedious or troublesome, nor nakednesse impor∣tune, or broyling. The Mines are not so wealthy as in Peru: but more profitable by reason of the lesse charge and danger. Besides gold, silver, iron, and brasse; they bring from thence sugar, cochenell, cotton, plumage, honey, wax, balm, amber, salt, medicinable drugges, &c. and few vessels return light, which is not in Peru, Spain being enriched as well from one as the other. For though there is so much treasure to be exhausted, yet there is not so much danger. The faith hath made a farther progresse, the countrey is better peopled, the natives better ordered, more regular, better Mar∣kets
of cattle, horses, sugars, and meat, wherein Peru cannot com∣pare, which doubtlesse would be better if it had more rain. The natives wondring why the Spaniards were inquisitive of gold and silver, at first they made them believe 'twas to cure them of a pain at their heart, whereto they were subject, but in time they found it did hold them there indeed. Cortez to bring these people in obedience to his King, told them he was Emperour of all the Christians, the greatest Lord on earth, who had under him more Kingdomes and Provinces then other Kings had subjects.Spanish vanity. That his government was founded on Justice, and proceeded immediately from God, that he was ac∣complished with all vertues, and that the Monarchy of the whole Universe, was by right his inheritance, and other Spanish boasts and vanities. Concerning the particulars of this great country, besides what I have said already. In the Province of Mechoacan, there is an ex∣cellent root of the same name with the countrey, by others called Jeheurais, of the same vertue to purge, as Rhubarb, but more light and white, and purges with lesse violence, which is a great traffick in Spain, where 'tis worth three or four realls the pound, and there almost nothing. 'Tis taken by the weight of a Crown pulveriz'd in an egge, wine, or broth. I have seen greater effects of it then Rhubarb. It may be kept four or five years or longer with care, but there is such abundance, they matter it not. By information of the natives, some of the Spaniards were cu∣red of diseases by this root, and so it became famous. 'Tis called Indian Rhubarb. Amongst other trees in Mexico or the land of Caperous, there is the famous tree of Muguey, whereof they tell as many wonders, and several uses, as of the Eastern Cocos, for it yields water, wine, vinegar, oyle, honey, wax, thread, and needles;A tree yielding all neces∣saries. so as this is sufficient to keep a man. After drawing fresh water, the fruit will be like sweet small nuts. The water a little boyled becomes good wine; more boyled, like burnt wine, which coagulate again excellent honey, whereof they make Sy∣rupes: The first water set in the Sun makes good vinegar: From the leaves issues sweet milk, and out of the leaves you may draw thread, strong enough to make cloth. I brought with me two shirts of it, and some of the fruit, as perfect into Europe, as it grew on the tree, for the rind is very thick, and that preserves it. cloth made of this yarne, will ever have some dark gray streaks in it. About the leaves grow little prickles, so strong and hard, they use them for needles, and sew with no other. There are many who live on this tree alone, which puts forth leaves upon leaves continually, and in such abundance, that the tree is covered over from the root to the top, which makes it unshapely. To make it pregnant, they lay cindars to the root: the wood is of such qua∣lity, it endures twice as long in the fire as any other, and when
they will keep fire a long time, they use a piece of this wood. Balm comes from a tree something like a Pomegranate tree, and it produces several sorts of several vertues. The first is Opo∣balsamo, excellent for wounds and the plague, of gold co∣lour like Ambar: another sort is something white: another sort is press'd out the leaves and sprigges burnt; of such vertue, 'twill draw any iron out of the flesh. I brought some into France, wherewith I did most admi∣rable cures of wounds, and old ulcers which had eaten to the very bone. In a word, 'tis most soveraigne for wounds, paines in the sides, contagions, and holding a little in the mouth, pre∣serves from bad ayrs. They much esteeme another tree called Cacao, as the fruit is of great use and traffick, which passes with them as money to buy all commodities. The fruit is like an Al∣mond, a little lesse: They are never without Cacoas in their pockets, to buy what they want, for alms, or to eat;Fruit used for mony. and 'twill keep a long time. The Province of Guatima produces them in abundance, where they make a precious drink of it, that ac∣cordingly mixt cools, or heats: it makes good wine. They make Cakes of it good for the stomack, and ptisick, 'tis like an Almond tree, the leaves a little broader, and of a thicker body. To make it prosper, they plant another by the side of it: 'tis very tender, and suffers equally by cold and heat. This latter tree they call Cacaos mother, because it preserves it from the injuries of the weather. Whosoever hath this tree, they esteem him happy and pious, in opinion, if he were not such, their God would not have sent him this tree: and when such a tree dyes, they believe the Master hath committed some hei∣nous crime. In like manner they have their Coca in high esteem at Peru, which being chewed and held in the mouth, marvellously re∣vives the spirit. 'Tis of very delicate taste, whereof they make great traffick to Potossi. Of the Gold and Silver Mines in Mexico, I will speak jointly with those of Peru.
CHAP. XI. Of new Spain, the Provinces thereof, and of Peru. NEw Spain is the greatest Dominion in North America, as Pe∣ru in the South. Betwixt both lyes Jucatan, Hondura, Ni∣caragua, Veraga, or Nombre de Dios & Panama, which chain them together. Jucataen.Jucatan is a point of land which extends to the 21. degree, like a peninsula, being in the streightest place from Xicalanco to Cho∣temal some hundred leagues over: the country was first discover∣ed by one Fernandez in one thousand five hundred and seventeen. afterwards by Grisalua, who came from Cuba to the Isle of Co∣sumel, or Saint Crois, thence to Campechia, Champatron, and Tauasco. Hondura was first discovered by Columbus in his last voyage, 1502. last by one Casan who setled the Plantation of Tucillo in 1515. Pedrarias d' Avila, in 1519. planted the Colonies in Nom∣bre de Dios, and Panama towards the South Sea; the first discoverer of that sea was Vasco Muntz, coming from Dariana in 1513. who with great joy rendred thanks to God, and took possession for the King of Spain. Betwixt Nombre de Dios and Panama, 'tis 17. or 18. leagues of Marshes, Mountains, and craggy asperous rocks, full of fierce wild beasts of all kinds, and a multitude of Apes that make a very troublesome noyse. They transport their Merchandise from sea to sea, either by land with convoyes, or by the river Chagra to about five leagues from Panama,Panama. and then by land with Con∣voy. They have often thought of cutting this Isthmus in the streightest place, but the difficulty of the Rocks and Mountains by the way, besides the doubt if the seas are levell, as at the Egyptian Isthmus, hindred the proceeding. A Colony at Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariana, displanted for the unsoundnesse of the ayre: for but throwing warm water on the ground, toads, and other venemous creatures would en∣gender. Advancing towards the East, we came to the Provinces of Ʋra∣ba, S. Martha, Cartagena, Popayan, Dorado, new Estramadora, new Granada, Venecuela, Castilia Doro, Bagota, new Andolousia, Paria, Cahaqua Cumana, &c. South lyes Dariana, then the great kingdome of Peru, then Chila to the Streight. Dariana was planted by one Anchisa, there are Cowes with feet, like Mules, and hornlesse.
Peru according to some extends from Dariana to Chila others clipping it from Popayan North, to Chila South. It took name from the River Peru in two degrees Northward; the Provinces there∣of are Quito, Quixos, Popayan, Canela, Pacamores, Gualsonge, then Collao, Carchas, Anedas, Tecuman, to Chila. Popayan is about two hundred leagues in length, and forty in breadth, lying upon new Granada towards the East. The Pro∣vinces are Antioch, Tataho, Anserma, Arma, Pacoura, Catapa, Quinhaya, Calix, and Pasto. Anserma 70. leagues from Antioch is called by the Indians Om∣bra; but the Spaniards seeing the Inhabitants hold salt in their hand, and call it Anser, thought the town had been so called, and continued that name: there is a passage over the river Saint Mar∣tha at that town. Arma is of note for rich Mines: Parmoura hath also silver Mines: the Province of Arbi extends to the Mountains of Cordilleras, which runs a thousand leagues Southward: on that side which stretches to the sea, they never have raines by reason the South, and South-West winds blowing continu∣ally, drive the clouds away, whereby this part is barren without tree, fruit, or grasse. but the other side onely a league distant, by reason of the rains, abounds in fruits and all com∣modities. In Quinbaya at the end of the Cordilleras over against Andes, there is a famous burning mountain. In the Province of Pastro there is a large valley called Arris ever cold, both winter and summer. All these parts are well peopled, and the Inhabitants not so bloody, nor man-eaters as in other parts; living under a govern∣ment and obedience to their Prince, and believe in the resurre∣ction after death, and that they shall live in fields of peace, with all sorts of delights. Peru extends from Pasto to Chila,The extent of Peru. ends Southward at the Ri∣ver Manto, North at Augar Mayo: here are vast sandy Plains as far as the Indies, where the heat is extreme, while snow lyes on the Mountains, and the like diversity of the seasons; I remember when I went to Sicily, walking on the coast of Calabria in the be∣ginning of March, winter was so sharp, there was not the least sprout of a Vine to be seen, whereas in Sicily I found them a span high, young beanes, good Artichocks, and they mowed green corn, to give the blades to horses. In this part between the sea and the Codilleras called Sanaria, for want of wood, they get a certain earth out of the water, which they dry and make turfes, like those in the low countreys: the Mountains are the most desert and arduous in the world, of long extent, running from Panama to the streight: they throw down di∣vers Rivers, and compose very fertile Valleys. At the point of Sagotta at the entrance into those vast plains, betwixt the Mountains and the Sea, lyes a wide countrey,
covered with nothing but sand, like the deserts of Arabia, but not so white: some shrubs there are, or rather stalks, strong as the Caper sprigges in the deserts of Palestine, the same we call salt grasse, which refreshes the passengers exceedingly, and con∣tinues till May. The seasons differ but little in Quito Cagnales, Santiago, de porto Vieio Cusco, Cagnata, Collao, Charcas. Qito.The Province of Quito is called by the Spaniards Poblada de San Francesco, and the capitall town S. Francis of Quito. The length of Peru from Quito to Chila is some six hundred leagues, the breadth about fifty. The countrey is divided into three parts, the Plaines upon the sea side, about ten leagues over, the Moun∣tains and Valleys twenty leagues, the Forests and Lawns twenty leagues, within which little space of fifty leagues; there is such difference, that it rains as 'twere alwayes in one part, in ano∣ther not at all, and in the middle upon the mountaines sel∣dome. The Cordileras which run from Pole to Pole by the names of Andes and Sierra, are very different though in the same eleva∣tion: one side covered with woods, where it rains, and is ever hot; the other side bare and cold, winter and summer. These mountains go for a thousand leagues in view of one another, divi∣ding at Cusco, where they inclose the Province of Collao, a Cham∣paign countrey full of Lakes and Rivers. Next Collao lyes Charcas a mountanous countrey, rich in Mines. Quito is under the Equinoctial abounding in all sorts of fruit, whereof they make two harvests in the year. The spring lasts from Aprill to November, and from October to March their rains, which they esteem their winter. Here they have of those famous sheep called Pacos which serve as pro∣perly for carriage as horses: of the height of an ordinary asse, long legges, deep belly, long and risen neck, and the head like ours in Europe. They draw and do any work, the flesh is wholesome and savory, fresh or salt: these beasts are tame, and apt to be brought to labour. Out of the Province of Cognata towards the East comes the great River Maragnon, and on the West lyes the Province of Gou∣acabilcas, the capital whereof is Guayaquil, then Porto Veio, where are good Mines, as I shall relate hereafter. The Province of Santiago is South under the Equinoctial, con∣taining Porto de Passao, the River S. Jaques, Tamebamba, point S. Ellen, Valley of Chaga, Mount Christo, Cheramica, Manta, Sapil and other towns. Their houses are of timber covered for the best part with Tortota, a fort of reeds, whereof they make many uses. Then comes the Province of Caxamolca from the town of Traxillo to Gouancabanca, and it may be fifty leagues over. In this country Pizaro took King Atabalipa. Casio.Then followes the Province of Casio, with a town-royall of
the same name fenced with divers walls, 13. degrees to the South, the Countrey is cold and mountainous, but the valleys fertile. The principal Nobility of the Empire resided here, who held long ears for a grace and beauty, for the hanging of many jewels, whence the Spaniards called them Oreiones, the most magnificent in Peru. East lye the mountains of Andes. There are the Can∣ches and Ayauires, great Souldiers. The chief Towns are Houton∣cana, Chicano, Cachahurara. The Inhabitants of all these parts go cloathed, and neighbour upon the Province of Collao, the lar∣gest of all, having the Andes on the East, on the South Suchiabo. The principal Towns are, Culy and Chilane, Acos, Pamoura, Pomata, Cepita, and Tiquanaco, and reaches to Carocoles. 'Tis a flat Coun∣trey and hath many rivers: and the great lake of Titicata, that is, the Isle of Lead, because within it is an Island that yeilds lead: 'tis 80. leagues in compasse, and in some places is so many fathoms deep, many rivers fall into it, and it again discharges into another called the Oulagas. The last Province of Peru neighbouring to Chila is called Char∣cas, in which as the Town of Plata, the Capital,Plata. where the famous mines of Porco and Potossi are. Potossi of four or five houses, built at first to fine their mettal, by degrees is grown a fair Town in 2. and 22. degrees: where notwithstanding the sterility of the Countrey, all commodities abound by reason of the rich mine; of such power and attraction is wealth. Next to Charcas is the Province of Chila, which they hold to be 500. leagues over to the Streight. 'Tis an admiration to observe the quality of Peru, on this side. For here there is but one wind, not that which in the Torrid u∣niversally blowes Eastward, as we said, but this is South and South∣west; without which 'twere not to be inhabited for the drynesse of the place, but this wind renders it very healthfull: for 'tis to be observed that in this Countrey it never rains, snows,A wind of the use of rain. or thun∣ders, nor any thing that may refresh it, but this wind alone effects it. On both sides of the Countrey are the high Mountains Cordil∣leras, productive of fair trees, and there, as in other places they have variety of weather, hot, cold, rain, snow: and on both sides the mountains are bare and cold in extremity. This Countrey is long and narrow, composed of plains, mountains, and valleys: The plains are by the Sea-coast; on the other side the Mountains are reasonable good, but some hungry enough. The plain may be of thirty or fourty miles broad, from West to East, and holds the length from North to South. And 'tis strange that in some parts they never have any rain, and in others more than they wish for, being but fourty or fifty Leagues di∣stant. In the plains then it never rains, all they ever have is a dew, which is so slender it never wets at all. Their houses are covered
with straw or reeds. In the mountains they feed on those wild-goats that have the Besar stone. They have likewise store of sheep, and cows, which they call Guanacos and Pacos, abundance of Apes and Munkeys, making most exotick faces upon passengers,Munkeys. some you shall see chattering their teeth, others scratching their bellies, here one running with three or four young ones under her armes, there another upon a tree that stirs nor at all; but the mischief is, if we carry them out of their own air they die immediately. Besides there are infinite Parrots upon the trees that never shun the passengers; but the young ones for fear thrust the head under the Mothers wing; and if we take one of these without the Mother they dye imme∣diately. Some valleys are better than others, as those of Yneay Anda∣gaylas, and those that run up to Cusco, the Town-Royall, hereto∣fore great and populous, now ruined by the Spaniards. The Cordilleras, mountains of a thousand leagues long, where they divide and separate, compose the large Campania of Collao. The Countrey towards Titicata is barren, without either bread or wine, but the inhabitants live upon a root called Papas, which they dry, and make a course bread of it, called Choignos; the Countrey neverthelesse populous for the heards of cattle, goats, and sheep it breeds. There is abundance of venison, partridges, and other sorts of game. The vales of Charcas yield good ground, and the Mountains are rich in Mines. The reason they have no rain in some parts, is want of matter for exhalation, there being nothing but sand, and neither Rivers nor Fountains. There are some draw-wells of excessive depth,Temper of Peru. it being impossible to derive water from other parts, for the interposition of the mountains. Besides there blow∣ing no wind but one, without any other to oppose it, that can en∣gender no vapours. Where the Mountains are not so very high, there they have sometimes rains, as at Arica, Arequipa, and some other places. Notwithstanding, the other parts where it rains not, by means of the wind are fertilized even to wonder, and grasse grows through the sand which feeds the Cattle exceedingly, as it doth near Lima, where grasse grows on a Mountain entirely sand. In May, when we first begin to feel heats in Europe, in Peru they are extream cold, where the Toumacaui reigns, as at Potossi and through all the Countrey of Charca, as 'twere the heart of Peru; a wind more cold and piercing than any in Flanders, and at Potossi is indurable, though the Mountain be higher than Nostre Dame de la garde, at Marseills, or Mount Martre at Paris: there is a lesse Mountain at the side of it, called Guayna Potossi, or young Potossi, both of a colour, red without any verdure. The air is very intemperate, either hot or cold in extremity, so as an
hermit would scarce live there, yet the ambition of gold and sil∣ver makes it pleasant to every one.Mines in Potossi. The Mines were first discove∣red by Indians, amongst whom one acquainted his master Villa∣roel a Spaniard, who became Lord of it, paying the fifth to his King, about 1545. One of the wonders of Peru, nay of the whole earth, is the Mountain Perlaca, where the air is so cold, thin, and piercing, that it causes passengers to vomit, to that extremity they bring up bloud and kils them with intolerable gripings: and if the travailers make not all possible speed 'tis no scaping: for in this short passage of four or five dangerous leagues, men loose their senses, and often their horses or what they ride on will stand immoveable, without sense either of spur or whip, so as they are constrained to run on foot, and drive their beasts before them. Some cover their eyes, others stop their ears, and their nose, o∣thers muffle and lap their head and whole body. Others put their head in a bag of herbs, and aromatick drugs, others carry cordials to eat, others eat not of all day, that they may not have so much matter to vomit; but oftentimes this serves not the turn, when one is in this pernicious place, where there is nothing to be heard but laments and vomitings, and notwithstanding that the Sun shine never so clear, this vapour hath still its force: some go other wayes a side off, but they still find the same inconvenience, and the danger sometimes more great: all the wayes are exceed∣ing bad, and the worst by the Sea side. The whole extent of this quarter is not above five and twenty leagues, without people, beasts, trees, or grasse, so desert is the place, and beyond the Countrey extends 500. leagues: At the foot of these Mountains there are some rascally Innes, they call Tambos, where one finds but wretched entertainment. This is the high-road from Peru to Chila: At the foot of the Mountain to∣wards the Sea, one would think the passage more benign, but there reigns a wind chiefly in May, June, July, and August, which cools and penetrates with extremity, so as fingers and toes freeze and fall off with cold, the greatest part perish in passing, and the wind renders them incorruptible. Of burning mountains we have spoken sufficiently in Mexico, some there are in Peru towards Arequipa, which throw forth stones; others onely smoak, others flaming pumice stones, some vomiting flames and cinders, others scalding winds. In Mexico, near a place called la Peubla de los angelos,Earth∣quakes. there is a hill five and twenty leagues high, answerable to another on the top of a Mountain; where when it thunders it makes an Echo that shakes the whole Countrey: a formidable thing to those that are not used to it. Near Guatimala in 1586. for six moneths this hill casts out flames and cinders, followed with earthquakes, that they have thought the Countrey had been ruined. All Mexico
and Peru are subject to these earth-quakes, and chiefly on the Sea-coasts, from Chila to Quito, For above 200. leagues, the Sea-men with astonishment beheld flames rising from these moun∣tains, and afterwards learnt that the Town of Guatimala was al∣most entirely swallowed in the earth-quake. In 1587. it reached 200. leagues distance, and at St. Croix, the Refectorian of the Dominicans was beaten dead, and twenty of the religious killed under the vaults. The Inhabitants of Guatimala having notice made a timely retreat. There are of these Mountaines near Lima, and another at Arequipa, to which you must ascend two dayes in sand. Most parts of this India are subject to these furnaces, and earth-quakes, and chiefly near the Sea. Near Leon de Nicaragae there is a terrible one, where sometimes by night the flames may be discerned 25. leagues, in discourse whereof Benzoni relates the same of a Jacobin, as Acosta of a Priest at Guati∣mala. In the Province of Seiron near the Town of Bousan, is mount Malat, where is one of the most conspicuous furnaces of the Indies, next that of Guatimala; for the hill at the bottom hath five mouths, and at the top one, which is more formidable than the other five, for casting out fire, with miraculous fury; but this is by intervals, sometimes nothing but smoak appear∣ing, at other times throwing up burning stones, specially when the wind Tourmacaui reigns: during which time there is heard a most hideous tumult and tempest within. One King went a∣bout to quench it with water, but in vain, the fire encreasing the more, on which design divers perished, and amongst the rest a near Allie of the Kings, in whose memory he made a sta∣tue, adorned with plumes, mounted on an Elephant, and armed with skin of Crocodile. All that passed by it, prostrated be∣fore it with great humility, believing the Prince happy, as being deify'd by their God; this fire which they adore as a Di∣vinity. The Mexicans call these furnaces Popocatepech, Popoca signifying smoak, and tepech a Mount. The Neighbouring Inhabitants in their Armes, and Ensignes bear a flaming Moun∣tain.
CHAP. XII. Of certain Fountains, Lakes, Rivers, &c. in this Countrey. NEar Potossi at the bottom of the vale Tarapaye, there lyes a Lake, round as 'twere drawn with a compasse, and the water so hot, that but at the brims there is no enduring it, but thirty paces forward 'tis impossible, notwithstanding the Countrey round about is excessive cold. In the middle it boyles and runs round, that you would think some tem∣pest were underneath. From this Lake they draw a Channell that sets certain Leather-Engines at worke, usefull for the Mines, without any waste of the water. Titicaca in Collao is famous for largenesse, and bearing vessels of burthen: fish a∣bounds in it, whereof the Inhabitants round about take great quantity, very sweet, good, and commodious for passengers, to whom they freely give part of their fish, taking them with certain hand Engines. If a Priest come that way they will present him a thousand civilities, and he is happy with whom he will lodge. One is in perfect security amongst them, not understanding what theft meanes, and you may trust them with all the treasure of the world, while you live like good Christians. Throughout the Countrey there are abundance of other Lakes, as that of Eupama in Brasile, whence so many Rivers issue; and amongst others the great Paraguay, or Plata, which make inundations like Nile, but not so moderately, for Nile comes without any injury, but on the contrary with all commo∣dity: whereas Plata breaks with fury into the Countrey for three months together, coursing from the Cordilleras in Peru to the South Sea. They have a way to passe rivers upon floats of gourds or pumpions fastened together, which they use for all sort of car∣riage, in some places they have bridges of straw. The Spaniards have built stone bridges, which the Indians much admire, and at first had no confidence to trust themselves upon bridges in the air. Now for their Fountains, near the cape St. Helen in Peru, there is a Fountain of liquor burns like oyl: 'tis a certain Bitumen, or Gum, which they call Copey, or Copal, that never decreases, how much soever is taken out. Marriners use to liquor their cordage with it. The like is in the Isle of Lobos, in Mexico, which the Marriners can smell three miles at Sea, and more, if the wind it right. In Cusco there are Fountaines, the water whereof immediately
congeals into white salt, in which Peru abounds. In Guan∣cauesica there are hot springs that condense to stone, whereof they build their houses; but the water drunk is mortall: wherefore they stop up all high-wayes to it, for it causes a present heavinesse, and then they die immediately. They have many other fountains hot and cold close together, some where∣of cure the French disease, though never so confirmed, by reason of the Sassaparilla that grows in them. In Peru there is a sheam red as bloud, for that called Rio Vermeio. In Caramel they have another Fountain cures all feavers, and purges like Rhubarb; the water is brackish and salt at the first taste, but afterwards one feels nothing, but may drink his fill without dammage: it drives through the body all that is ma∣lignant, then passes clear. I thought I should have vomited my bowels up, but afterwards I found my self sound and cheerfull, and cured of a Rhume in my teeth I had been troubled with for a long time. I drunk three flagons a day, and still it provoked me to drink more: They come to it from all parts, and for all diseases, even for wounds. And the place is made so necessary one may bath in it. 'Tis onely hurtfull to hot livers. Round about it are tents of straw, and beds of cotton, and sheep-skins, where you shall have all accomodation for a small matter, and they will officiously fetch and furnish you with any thing you want, amongst others they bring us a fowle called Magnota, more delicate than a patridge, ano∣ther that is white and black, and eats like a capon, and a∣bundance of turtles. But of Lakes, where is there any so admirable as that whereon the Towne of Mexica is seated? whereof one part by reason of Salt-peter at the bottome is salt as the Sea, the other by reason of the Rivers that fall into it fresh as any Fountaine, each division being ten leagues in length, and five in breadth, and three dayes journey in circuite, with a delightfull Mountain in the middle, and a bath hot as that at Baleru. In the middle of the Lake is the Charnell of green Tombs, ever covered with herbs and flowers. The Spaniards have laid most of the Town dry, being before in the manner of Venice, and have made conduits that convey water throughout the Towne, and chiefly round the walls. Out of avarice the new Conquerours admit not the Indians to fish on the Lake without license, who now, contrary to Articles, enjoy not their ancient liberties, neither in this nor other things. There are three Causwayes lead to the Town, of halfe a league long. They account upon 4000. houses of Spaniards,
and thirty thousand Indians: For Rivers you have there spaci∣ous Lakes, or rather Seas, as the Magdala in the Province of St. Martha called Rio grande, then the Orenoque towards Ca∣stilia of gold, and Venesuela. The silver River in Brasile coming from Mountaines far remote from Peru, above all, the great Ozeilliana, or Maragnon, and Amasones, which cuts through the South America, from Chachaneyas, and Qui∣to, through infinite Territories and Dominions, to the Nor∣thern Sea. This River comes from the Province of Araquixo, or de los Quixos, near to Popayan, and thirty leagues from the South-Sea, discovered first by Francisco Orellano, a Spanish Captain, sent thither by Gonzala Pizarra, who had sought a long this River for the land of Canela; and missing the wealth he sought for, and finding the trees few in number,A disco∣very. and of small value; not lighting on the Country of the Prince surnamed Dorado, in 1562. he sent Orellano with fifty men to seek provi∣sion, view the Countrey, and attend his coming in an appointed place. The Captain following the stream, which still grew wider by the Rivers that every where augmented it, going fifty leagues a day; without oar or labour, for a long while he discovered no habitations: go up again he could not, and by land there was nothing but woods and bushes, after he had suffered plenty of hunger, he met with severall people, and of severall tongues, and conditions, some mild and courteous, others fierce and sa∣vage; pursuing his way without card, compasse, or guide, by many Islands and populous Countryes, amongst others of Ama∣zons the female Archers, of whom there are some Curtisans,Amazon at Brasile, not much discrepant from those Antiquity renowns in Asia, who co-inhabit not with men, and at certain times have Neighbours come over to them for procreati∣on, to whom again they transmit the Males, and keep the Girles. After a tedious Navigation, and many turns and compasses for above seventeen hundred leagues upon this River, he came to the confusion of it in the North Sea, fourty leagues over, following the Coast he arrived at Cubaga, or the Isle of Pearles, which is above four hundred leagues, whence Orellano with 14. of his men being recruited, came to S. Domingo, after∣wards made an ample relation to the Emperour, where Ouiede took his instructions, and inserted it in his History. Meanwhile Pizarra expected, and having suffered ex∣tream hunger, seeing Orellanio came not, he returned to Quito much troubled, he found not the sought for Dorado, a golden Prince indeed, who wore no other gar∣ment but pulverized Gold lay'd on with gumme, with
which he goes dayly covered. To conclude, this is one of the greatest and longest rivers on the earth, and washes more lands and people than any other. Afterwards many other Spaniards sailed it, as Salinas Orhia, and others. Adde hereto the great Lake or Ocean Guiana, Parimi, and Manoa, in Countries discovered by the English, Sir Walter Rawley in 1595, who equals it with the Caspian Sea, that containes many Islands. The capital Town is Manoa, a Countrey rich in gold, fruit, and cattle. North lies Castile of gold, Paria and Caribana, West new Andalousia, and Peru, South Omaga, Pegu, Picora, Paguana, East Tisnado, Brasile, &c. Concerning beasts in America, there are great numbers as well the naturall of the Countrey, as Europian transported, which are multiplyed exceedingly.Strange beasts. Amongst others in Mexico there is one the Spaniards call an Armadillo, armed with scales like the Rhi∣nocerot, in shape like a little pig, about the size of a Cat, and lives in Burroughs like a Rabbet. The Pacacou like a fox, that preys on dead mens carcases, and digs them up how deep soever, I have seen of them in Asia and Africa, where they call them Chicali. Birds of prodigious greatness.There are the Birds called Conderos, which the Chaca poyas of Peru adore; these will carry away a sheep, tear in pieces and eat him; they are ash-coloured like a Sea-Crow: others again so minute they seeme rather Flyes or Gnats. Tabala.Another sort that is as 'twere all feathers, and none or little flesh, and as they say never comes upon the earth. Their fea∣thers are of various colours, in perfection beautifull, when they rest they hang on a bough by the tayle, clasped round it: their plumes are worn and much esteemed. In Marseills I saw one sold for 500. crowns, in Portugall they come at 60. The Indians of these curious feathers make Pour∣traicts as artificiall as those in colours, nor can they well be dis∣cerned asunder. Plumes in use.The Guacamayes have more beautifull and curious feathers than the Paraquito. They affect plumes throughout all India, but in Mexica above others, for wear, for adornement of their Temples and Idols, and to make pourtraicts of their fashion. Feathers are there good chaffer, I saw an Indian truck pearls with a Leuantian, (so they term us) for feathers he brought with him, which cost him but five Crowns, and he had above three hundred pearls for them. This was a poor Marriner who made a fortune by it,A good bargain. for he made many voyages af∣terwards to the Indies, with a good ship, and merchandizes of his own. They wear them likewise in their dances. First one called the Tamari dances single, then makes a signe to a Lady to come dance with him, then others follow after the same rule;
but they never kisse nor touch hands, and use all respect to their women. Of fish, there are abundance of Crocodiles and Tiburons,Fish of Mexico. that are man-eaters. The Manati that suckles her young ones with teats, hath legges to walk by land, and eats fruit and grasse: the flesh is good like veale, there are many about the Isles of Barleu∣ento, the coasts of Peru, Cape Magdalen, and the Isles of Sa∣lomon. They are very good to salt, and eat like powder'd beef. There are abundance of Whales, but they are ignorant how to take them. The Floridans take them, and make their chiefest suste∣nance of them, the flesh dryed in the Sun, they make into flower, and without wetting eat it in powder, and it nourisheth exceed∣ingly. Another fish with wings flyes as swift as an arrow, they are like Mackarels, but not so good meat. The Meri that swim alwayes against stream, and the Indians say, in August, have a worm in their head, vexing them, and makes them go upward, that the water entring at a little hole, may refresh them. Another sort called Perpil streaked with divers colours, that they eat roasted, and is meat for sick persons. They have soals of extraordinary growth, weighing ten or twelve pound, but the flesh is hard. Vicognes are like Deer without hornes, greater then Goats, li∣ving on Mountains without fear of frost or snow, in their bowels they have a stone of the vertue of the Unicorne, or Besar, against poyson: they bear a wool as fine as silk, whereof they make Sum∣mer garments that refresh them. The flesh is good against di∣vers diseases, the stone is like a Pullets egge, black, or gray; this beast they say having eaten some poysonous hearbs, eats another called Capas, proper against poyson, and so breeds this stone of the same vertue. There are little wild swine called Saynes, that go in heards, and are very dangerous: others that are also very dangerous to take if the hunters have not good assistance, which are good meat, and the grease of them serves for oyle, for Spanish oyle is there ve∣ry deare. There is likewise a very heavie beast called Manaquail, cover∣ed with Pikes like the Hedge-hog, that will dart them at a di∣stance, a snowt like a hogge, but nothing so big, and a short foot, he is very good meat. There is also another sort of Crocodile, of which we found one hunting in the Forest of Caramel, and we judged him to be seven or eight paces long, and after we had viewed him a while' we raised him, and put him to flight with strange ejulations. Of Apes and Munkies there are great numbers of all sors, and sizes. Some as little as rattes or mice, with a white beard, that will imitate all they see, and are very serviceable, as I have seen
at Sevill, that seem to have a kind of reason. In Candia I saw another that the Master bidding him go stand Centinel, and look if he could discover any sayle, would presently climbe the Mast, or get upon the Lanthorne, and if he discovered any vessel, would make signs, and cry out, and was ever very certain. Their sheep called Lamas or Pacs serve for all carriages, with fine wool, whereof they make Combi and Auafra for their ap∣parel. One of these sheep will carry eight heavie jarres, nine or ten leagues a day, but like mules they are humoursome, and one must have patience to please them, and expect their good mood before they will travail. In new Spain they have the Espoulcou about the size of a Hare, with a furre so fine, 'tis not for any but persons of quality to wear it; they say the blood of it drunk breaks the stone in the bladder in few dayes. For spices, in the Isle of Barlouento there is abundance of su∣gars (as also in Brasile) Ginger, Mastick, Aloes, Cassia, Cina∣mon. In Carabana they have likewise Cinamon, and in Canela upon Orellana beyond the Quixos where Gonzala Pizarra went to look it, for he was told in form it was little different from that in Borneo, Moluccos and Leilan, that the other grew in canes and reeds, but this on certain fair trees that bore a fruit like an Acorne, and that the bark was Cinamon: the fruit is not plea∣sant, nor the bark so good as the Cane; neverthelesse they make use of both. Pizarra at length, after great toyle, found the trees upon a Mountain, in small number, and of little value. Other trees of such compasse, good dwellings may be made within the bodies of them which they call Sesbiraich, some in new Hispaniola, eight men cannot fathom about, and of a flight shot in height, on the top whereof they make Arbours. CHAP. XII. The Mines of the New World. AMongst other rarities and riches, the New World produces Mines of Gold and Silver, pearles and precious stones in di∣vers places, and chiefly in new Spain and Peru, which of all parts of the world, are most indulged with these advantages of na∣ture, though other parts of Asia and Africa have them in some abundance, and Europe likewise: but it appeares America had the principal and better portion, as well in these as other Dowries, as I have before mentioned. In divers Islands they finde most wealthy Mines, as in Hispa∣niola,
Cuba and the rest upon the great gulph; again, in Cara∣bana, Veragna, Castile of gold, the country of Dorado, or Esra∣mador. In new Spain, there are these of silver Paxuco, Tasco,Mines of silver. Zu∣pango, Guanaxato, Tumazlan, and other places in Acapulco. At the gold and silver mines they coyne not, for want of Artists, but they cut pieces and gobbits, whereon they mark the price from one reall to eight, and so send them to Spain. The Mines belong to Merchants, who give so much to the King, some four, some five per centum. For want of men that can and will work, they get the mettle with much difficulty, being the toyle wherein the Spaniards have spent the lives of so many thousands, nay mil∣lions of miserable Indians. The Mines are exceeding deep, where the workmen are much inconvenienced with water, and with damps that poyson them: few free-men will venture themselves, and the meanest slave hath his three crownes a day, who are often buried under the falls of the Mine, so as by this means by degrees,Mines of gold and silver. the generation of the Indi∣ans will be in short time totally consumed, who are constrained to undergo the work to get their livelyhood, how good Christians soever they are; and to speak uprightly, looking on the insatia∣ble avarice of the Spaniard, and the misery these Mines put them to, 'tis hard to judge who is the better, the slaves or the natives; for the slaves, for 800. or 1000. crowns may redeem themselves again; the extreme colds they meet with at the bottom, often strikes them dead, having little or no wine to relieve them: being a barren country, and the least glasse of wine at the price of a Re∣all, the smallest money they have amongst them, where they use not to stamp any Demy-Realls: if a man will live but with mode∣ration, his wine will stand him in a crown a day, which cuts their gaines the shorter: they pay dear for apparell, and principally for shooes, which rot with continually standing in water: They have the better of it, that work at the mouth of the Mine, for they hand the materials from one to another, and so have the be∣nefit to see the day light, whereas they below see not but by can∣dle-light: the depth is sometimes a thousand, or two thousand steps, which are fac'd with boards, or leather,The man∣ner of their working in the Mine. or 'twere impossible to endure it: But again, 'tis much more inconvenient to one that is not used to it, by reason of the ayre, that makes one vomit in ex∣tremity, as I experienced going in one day, though I had travai∣led all the seas in the Universe, without the least motion. Now the silver Mine containes four several vaines, (or Veta, as the Spaniard terms them) of different stone, as they are likewise dif∣ferent mettles, which run all from West to East, of not above two ells broad, and every vain is of several oares, as silver, brasse, tin, and iron. The largest Mine any Merchant may purchase, i of 80. ells, and no more; for which he hath the Kings Patent: there are some very small Mines, that are not of above 4. ells, but they
may sink down to the center if they can without incroaching on his neighbour: and if it happen that one makes the least incision beyond the direct line; mining upon another, he loses all he hath by confiscation. In the Veta or vein of silver there are 78. Mines belonging to several Masters, except some one hath rented several, the tin Mine hath 24. Masters, every one his particular Mine, they go lesse and lesse, according to the quality of the mettle, as that of brasse is lesse, iron lesse then that. There is a gate, and goods locks to every Mine, they work by turnes, otherwise they could never endure it, the ayre is so strong and pernicious. The silver Mine may be 150. ells deep, toylsome to the labou∣rers, especially the slaves, whose backs are loaded with silver, and their legges with iron. When a Mine yields five for a hundred, 'tis sufficient. Great art is required to direct the Mine, sometimes they can neither find men nor Mine, being all for want of good direction, overwhelmed: wherefore Geometry is very necessary. Silver generally lyes betwixt two rocks or mountains, the one very soft, the other as hard, and ever in the very middle. There are several sorts of it▪ the finest is called Casilla by the Spani∣ards, by the Indians Tacana, of Ambar colour, the other more black; and there is of other colours. I took all to be the same, perceiving nothing of silver in any stone, but the workmen know it perfectly. The oare they carry to little furnaces to be fin'd. When the stone is good, a hundred weight yields fifty pieces of eight, some not above thirty, nay five; but the richest of all, two hundred and above. There is not a Mine but hath belonging to it at least four thousand of these little furnaces, some five or six thousand, as that at Caratecas and Potossi. You would think you saw an Army of the bellows-blowers. Quick∣silver.They have one Mine of Quick-silver, the heat whereof emits a most pernicious vapour that destroyes them all; makes them lose their teeth, and often their senses and understanding. Staying by it but a quarter of an hour, I was almost stupified to a stone, and the rest likewise that were with me, and had sped worse, if notice had not been given us. They get an earth they call Aza∣gue, which melted yields quick-silver, with which they use to pu∣rify the silver, and have it likewise from Spain, where there is a Mine near Sevill, for this at Cacatera will not suffice. The silver being fin'd and made money, they carry it upon sheep to the Sea-side, to ship it for Spain. The fining of it is troublesome, for of∣ten it must passe the fire seven or eight times. They bring to Spain every year 12. or 13. millions more or lesse, whereof the fifth comes to the King, the rest to the Masters. There was one in few years got two hundred thousand crownes and more for his share; and when he dyed, had not a sheet to bury
him in. Of gold there is several sorts, the Popitas, or gob∣bets, or grains of gold, absolute gold, pure and neat, with∣out mixture, wanting neither furnace nor melting, ready for the stamp, being perfect by nature. The massiest I ever saw was but of three pounds, yet 'twas presented to the Spanish King for twenty pounds. Out of the Mounts of Libani in Cuba, there was one ta∣ken weighing 3310. weighs, each weigh worth fourteen or fifteen realls, which with infinite other riches was cast away at sea, going for Spain. There is no silver comes pure from the Mine except some small bit which they call Capa di plata, pure silver. Another sort of gold inserted in stone of the Mine, hard to be extracted; in breaking which stone, one discerns little lustre of gold, in some lesse, in some none at all. The most delicate gold I ever saw, was a stone tranfixt as 'twere with prickles of gold, like a Hedge-hogge, re∣fulgent both within and without, this gold is the best and finest of all. Another sort is in sees or powder, found in rivers, 'tis pure, and needs passe but one fire. Such are found in the rivers of the Isles of Barlouento, and in the Pasaguey, &c. The best gold is of Chila, Quito, and Granado. The Mine of Carauana, in Peru, and Vuldiuia in Chila, which is the most perfect, is of twenty three Carats, and a halfe, as likewise at Varaquae. Silver abounds in the rich mines of Potosi, and the Province of Charcas. Next the Mine of Porto not farre off; likewise very rich, but of little benefit for want of workmen, by reason of the unsound ayre, and extreme cold, and water which drownes it, but in Potosi 'tis not so. In the time of Jugas King of Peru, the Mine of Porto was open and wrought in, but not that of Potossi which was not disco∣vered, till the Spaniards time. This is the richer, and yields most. At the first they drew forth every week above two thou∣sand Weighs, or Castillans, whereof the gain came to forty thousand. They fish for pearle in the South sea,Pearle-fishing▪ neare Paa∣ma, and in the North sea in divers places, as in the Isle
Margareta towards the coast of Paria, where the Oysters feed upon Cubuca, and surname it so. There are very large and pre∣cious of them, I have seen one no bigger then a nut sold for three thousand duckets, there are of higher price. The Master of the South fishing, assured me he saw one as bigge as an indif∣ferent egge. There were three brought to Lisbone that paid a duty of sixteen thousand duckets to the King, as is to be seen in the Register of Contracts. There is a sort they call stars, another demi-stars, others Cade∣netas Pedreria, &c. Allofat, or minute-pearls, and seed-pearls, and those of greater price, Quilates, or Carats. For this fish∣ing they choose the best winded men, and such as can contain longest under water.Men di∣vers. At Barlouento, Cula, and Hispaniola, I have seen them stay three quarters of an hour under water, and I was told they have had some have continued the whole houre. The General of Margaita keeps many of these men, who are slaves to him called Bouze, and are ready enough to pilfer the best and sell them, though 'tis forbidden upon life to buy them. The Master must use all fair means to get them out of their hands with something else, otherwise they will sooner return them to the sea then let him have them, if he give them not wine and good cheer. The Incas make no use of pearls, unwilling out of benignity to expose their subjects to so much danger; but the Spaniards are nothing so scrupulous, they make their poor slaves dive ten or twelve fathom deep, to tear oysters from the rock: and to fortify their lungs for retention of breath, they keep them fasting, and hold them to a diet. One was brought to the King, bigge as a Pidgeons egge, valued at 14000. duckets; by some at a hundred thousand, and 'twas called a Peregrina. The Negro that extracted it from the oyster had his liberty for it, and the Master was made Arguazilmaior of Parama. For Emeraulds there is a Mine in Mexico, at new Granado in Peru, near Manta and Porto Vieio. I bought an excellent one of an Abissin Merchant, which surpassed in hardnesse and lustre, any of Mexico and Peru; Being in company with a friend, he de∣sired it of me, and I gave it him; but two dayes after, I percei∣ved it broken upon his finger, whereat he much admired, and I told him the reason: which was, he had had familiarity with a woman, but he was ashamed to acknowledge it, there being none but Idolaters, which is a great basenesse. Another time being in an Indian Town, Inhabited by the Spaniards,Emeralds enemies of incon∣tinency. I had an Emerauld, which a Lady, daughter to the Lalcayde or Governour of the place desired to buy; but on the morrow she sent for me, complaining I had sold her a broken
stone, which I disavowed; at last I asked her if her husband were in town, and answering no, I whispered to her smiling, she had then been kinde to some friend, whereat she stood amazed, and in the end acknowledged the truth, taking me to be skilled in divination. The like happened another time to another friend of mine, who acknowledged the like truth: for such is the ver∣tue of this stone if it be good and fine, and of the old Mine. There are very fair ones, and of great price, did not the plenty of them make them lesse esteemed, I once saw one weighed four ounces, sold for 6000. realls. The Emerald incorporated within a rock, is like the mettle contained, and while 'tis imperfect, the rock will be vein'd with green and white, and opening the rock, the Emerauld lyes there imperfect, of the colour of the rock, green and white; so as to have it come to maturity, they leave it there till na∣ture bring it to perfection, and go digge another place for riper: The Mexicans had a custome to peirce the nose and chin of their Idols, to put Emeraulds in them: one of their kings himselfe had his nose so bor'd and adorn'd with an Eme∣rauld, and from thence was surnam'd Nose-bord. CHAP. XIV. Of Peru, Of the Kings or Incas; and of the Country of Chila. PEru was first discovered by Vasco Munes de Balbon,Peru by whom dis∣covered. in the year 1515. and the first Haven knowne, was Porto Vieio under the Equinoctial. The Dominions of Peru under the Incas reached from Quito to Charcas 700. leagues, then to Chila 500. leagues. By tradition 'tis about 500. yeares since the Natives of Peru living barbarously, without civility, law, or policy; some amongst them esteemed, descended from heaven, and a generation of the Sun, civilized the rest, and modelized the government. The first King was called Maca Capac, all his Progeny and suc∣cessors Incas, Kings, as Manco Capac sole King. This first instituted adoration of the Sun amongst them, with their Temples and Sacrifices. Their Priests or Sages are cal∣led Amantas, who believe the immortality of the soule, after death rest for the good, and torment for the wicked, with resurrection of bodies. These Kings, or Incas, enacted good lawes, and by de∣grees extended the Empire to the state the Spaniards found
it in. And like as the Roman Empire was as the hand of provi∣dence to reunite and sweeten the rude and savage on this side, so in a manner the Monarchy of the Incas in Peru did the same amongst these grosse and wilde Idolaters, living like bruites, to modelize and regulate them,By whom civilized. and at last lead them to the knowledge of the true God, as now it hath. Notwithstanding 'tis to be admired, that in such darknesse and ignorance of all moral and and natural sciences, their Amantas or Sages, should have a sort of knowledge of the courses of the Sun, and Moon,Calander of Peru. and other stars, for they knew in some kinde the an∣nual motion of he Sun, and the vulgar counted their yeares by the harvests. They likewise understood the Solstices, obser∣ving them of eight days in the East at Cusco, and another number in the West: they reckoned the moneths by Moons, allowing twelve in the year, adding though grossely, the eleven dayes over-plus, at the points of Solstice; observed the Equinoctials, whence in September they made the principal feast of the Sun. The Equinoctial they found by the shadow of a pillar, and the Eclipses in like manner, during which time, they think the Sun angry with them, and the moon sick. The king took the Rainbow for his Arms and device. They kept all accounts by knots upon strings of various colours: and they had some harmony of Musick in songs and Instruments of Canes fasten∣ed together, four and four, in the nature of Organs, whereon they could expresse their passions of love, content, or sorrow. They had also some Poetry and verse, in measure with Meetre, and called their Poets Harauee, that is, Inventors. Their Temples were of stone magnificently built, sumptuous for gold and silver. The statue of the Sun was massy gold, which a Spaniard took and gam'd away in a night, whereupon one said by way of jer, that he had plaid away the Sun before he was up. Of precious stones, they have none but Emeraulds, and Torqueses, the country yields neither Diamonds, nor Rubies. In their golden garden were all sorts of hearbs and plants, trees, flowers, fruits, animals of massy gold, and silver to the life; In short, the Spaniard found there unspeakable wealth, yet all was nothing in comparison of that the Natives concealed, or cast into the Sea or Lakes, which could never be recovered. There were Monasteries of maids dedicated to the Sun, bound to perpetual virginity, and never beholding other person, the superiours called them Mamacunes. Incas, or Kings of Peru.The last of these Incas was Atahualpa the 14, from Manco Capac. Leon the 7. Inca, called Viracocha was a great souldier and Conquerour, who saw in a vision one of their Gods Viracocha a Phantasm, with long Mustachoes, and a long gown, of the Spaniards fashion, whom for this cause they call Viracocha, the Indians ha∣ving no beard, and wearing short garments. They say this Phan∣tasme
foretold the arrival of the Spaniards, an unknown people, who should take away their Estates and Religion. Tapangui the tenth King, atchieved great conquests, and extended his Empire to Chisa, above 1000. leagues, and built the fortification of Cusco, that seems rather rocks grafted toge∣ther by enchantment, than an edifice built by industry and strength of men; for the vastnesse of the stones of 38. foot long, and 18. broad, when they had use neither of Iron, Waggons, Oxen, Cranes nor Pullies, but fetched all from remote parts by humane strength. The 12. Inca Huaina Capat, by the Spaniards called Guainae∣cauan, that made the famous roads, with the monumentall stones and Innes from Quito to Cusco, for above 500. leagues, the one by the Mountains, the other along the Sea shore upon the plain, works far surpassing all the Romans boast of, for length, art, la∣bour, and cost; besides the rich and prodigious chain of gold, eve∣ry link wrist thick, made for a sort of dance never found by the Spaniards. This King was capable of the true Religion, for he would rea∣son that the Sun could not be the Soveraign God, but that there must be one more powerful that commanded his perpetual circu∣lation; because were the Sun his own master he would sometimes rest for his pleasure, not for necessity; whereas the Soveraign God ought to enjoy the most perfect tranquillity without pertur∣bation, which was not seen in the Sun. King Huiana now in peace at his palace of Tamipampa, in 1515. had intelligence of certain strangers, not altogether unknown, that coasted the shore of his Dominions: First Nunez Balboa discovered it in 1513. afterwards Pizarra and his Company, who first gained it in 1531. The news much disturbed the King,Presage of the Spani∣ards arri∣vall. calling to mind an ancient oracle amongst them, how a forraign bearded people should con∣quer and destroy their Empire: besides in 1512. they had divers presages that portended the same. For which reason the King dying advised his Sons, with the white men with beards that were to be their Masters, and the Indians in excuse, that they no bet∣ter defended themselves against such a handfull of Spaniards, say 'twas not for want of courage, but in obedience to the orders and premonitions of their Prince. Huiana had by all his wives above 300. children, yet but one legitimate, called Hilascar, by his wife who was his Sister, and one other by his dear Concubine, called Acabalipa; to whom he left the kingdom of Quito, and Huascat reigned soveraign at Cusco: But Acabalipa to throw off his homage to his Brother, in∣vaded him with a bloudy war, defeated him, and took him, and put to death all the Incas, and Princes of the blood-Royal,Cruelty revenged. that he might reign sole King, though according to the Sanctions of
the State not capable, his Mother being Daughter neither of Coya, that is, a Queen, nor of Palla, a Princess of the blood. He gave death to above two hundred of his Brothers, then to as many of his alliance as he could lay hands on: as well men as women, with cruell torments; and extended his tyranny upon the very servants, and officers royal, with fire, violations, and other vil∣lanies. In the Province of Canares alone, he put to death sixty thousand men, because they had held with his Brother, and covered the land with carcases, and horrible desolations. In recompense this villain was justly punished by the Spaniards, more wicked than himself, and they afterwards by themselves not finding any that could exceed them again in villany. In the year 1526. Francisco Pizarra, and Diego Almagro, being at Panarma, having lived a long time in the Indies, and assisted at the conquest of Ʋraba Cartagena, and other places, resolved up∣on the expedition and discovery of Peru, where they met with ill-favoured entertainments at their first landing. Then Pizarra going to Spain obtained the chief command in the designed con∣quest; and with four of his Brothers, Diego, Almagro, and others, made their invasion in the year 1531. with most fortunate success: Acabalipa they took, who paid a ransom of gold and silver, never∣thelesse they gave him an ignominious death by the hands of the Hangman. Thus was this mighty and opulent Empire conquered by a handfull of Spaniards, divine providence in inscrutible councels, making the avarice, cruelty, and other vices of these Victors instrumentall, to bring these people to the knowledge of the true God. Now is the time the Spaniards glut their avarice, and cruelty, perpetrate all insolencies and truculencies imaginable, which have been so fully represented, observed, and exaggerated by their own histories and Authours, I shall not need to paint them in any other colours: but they all or the greatest part paid dear for it, when by intestine discord, envy, and amutinies amongst them∣selves, they butchered one another, and so revenged the nefarious treatment of the poor Indians; and those who overstood this self-destruction were justly executed by the command of Charles the fifth, who commissioned certain Licenciados Vacca de Gastro, and Gasca, to pronounce severe justice upon these seditious Mutineers: there the Pizarras, Almagros, and others, all peri∣shed. The fifth Viceroy established in Peru, was Blasius Nuez, 1544. Lima, or the Town of Kings, was founded at this time, first by Pizarra, in 1533. afterwards the residence of the Viceroys, the seat of Parliament, Inquisition, University, and the Metropolitan Church of the whole Countrey.
As to Chila, that wide Countrey, which the Incas could never subdue, Almagro first discovered it, then in 1540. oe Valdiia entred, and over-run it, but he found such opposition of the Araucans, a small people of this great Territory, that he breathed his last there, was slain and eaten, and from that time for 50. years they held the Spaniards in play, with good order and military discipline; they had learnt of one Lanearo, an Indian, sometime page to Valdiuia, and afterwards revolted against him. This Arauco is a small division in Chila, not above ten leagues▪ in length and seven broad, upon the Sea-side, and breeds the most warlike people of the Indies, upon which account the Spaniards stiled it El estado in domito, wherein are contained the vales of Ponco, Purto, Tucapol, Angol, Cauten, &c. and the Towns of the Concep∣tion, and the Imperiall. In 1599. the Arucans took and demolished the Town and Fort Valdiuia, and others, putting all the Spaniards to sword, man woman and child, and sacked and burnt all, and had repossessed the rest of the Country had they not been repulsed. This constant war with the Araucans gave occasion to the fa∣mous Poet Alonzo de Ercilla, to make his Poem the Auracana, where he describes the Countrey, and their war with the Spani∣ard, and begins with this vanity, truely poetical and Romantick Spaniard-like. No Las damas, Amor, no gentilezas Di cavalieros canto enamorados, Ni las Maestras, regales y ternezas De amorosos a feijos y cay dados; Mas el valor, los huecos, las proesas De aquelles Espagnoles esbercadòs Que a la cermi de Arauco no do madae Pasieron duro y ago, per la espada. Here I observe a singularity amongst these people, in election of their Chief, or Captain Generall, who is the man that can carry longest a great tree like a date tree upon his shoulders; as one Canpolican who was chosen did for three dayes together, without the least rest.
CHAP. XV. Of the streight of Magellan. The strait of Magel∣lan.FRom Chila the next is the streight of Magellan, of about 100. leagues in length, and not much more in breadth, or any waies, which is not to be survey'd till you are well within the land: The tides are strong and dangerous, principally from the South sea, by reason of the narrow entrance in the mouth, and a multitude of rocks and mountains before the mouth of it, which render the passage hard to find, and being but a little out at sea one can perceive nothing of it, so as you must go cast about with the cock-boat, though otherwise you know the way and the true heighth, which is about 52. degrees. There is one very high Mountain hard upon the mouth, called la campana, being in form like a bell. The shallowest place is fifteen or twenty fathoms, and a very good bottom. The South sea enters thirty leagues within, amongst very high Mountains covered with snow, the North sea enters it seventy leagues on the other side, where they find bottoms in many pla∣ces, as on the contrary, on the South side the depth is such no ship can ride at anchor. On the North side there are expatiate plains and champians upon the firm land, and divers Rivers that fall into this streight, shaded with odoriferous trees, which shews the goodnesse of the soyle. It containes some Islands not to be ventured on without discretion. The Inhabitants on the South side are exceeding little, on the North of Gyants stature, whom in Magellan they call Paragous, for their great feet:Paragows. they clothe with skins of sheep and other beasts for the rigidnesse of the Climate. These are a people without civility,Chica a Countrey. law, or policy, wandring up and down without any certain abode, reposing in Cabins, and no other arms than bow and arrows; when we speak to them and they understand not the language, they lift their eyes to heaven. They live upon flesh dried in the Sun, enemies to none, but give themselves wholly to chase and fishing. This Streight is vexed with forcible tides from both sides, which like two Cells encounter with a most obstreperous fragour, where the danger is great, and chiefly in winter, when the winds rage there with more violence: for the Streight is never free from winds, no not in summer: divers vessels perish in crossing the Rocks, which seem an Archipelagus of Islands, both those on the South-sea-side, and those which come from Lima. The immense depth on the South side renders the sea more navigable, and on the North the length of the fall breaks the
force of the waves, so as there is no great danger but in the nar∣rowest, and in some places of not above a musket shot. In the winter the Sea is higher than in Summer, and the passage wider, notwithstanding the sailing is nothing more secure by reason of the crosse winds and colds. Some are of opinion that the Tides do not meet at the same time, but as it flowes on one side it ebbs on the other, by a locall remotion of the sea: but they are deceived, for 'tis certain that the floud comes in and goes out on both sides at the same time, like as the boyling of a pot rising from the center disperses to all parts, and cooling, ceases all together: this hath been proved by ex∣perience, that at the same time the floud came thirty leagues form the South, and seventy from the North, the Sea swelling from both parts, as the Pilots observed, following the course of the Moon, the Tides augmenting or diminishing according to her state, the Tide and Ebbe coming sooner or later by three quarters of an hour daily conformable to the course of that plannet: The Spaniards call the high-tide at the new-moon Ca∣beza de aguas, the tide at the full Aguas viuas, the low tides in the wane, Aguas muertas. This so admirable motion of the Sea seems rather a combat, or like the boiling of water in a pot over a fire, then a locall remoti∣on, which neverthelesse I refer to Naturalists. The streight begins Northward at the Cape of eleven thou∣sand Virgins, as Magellan called it, and ends Southward at Cape Victoria: in the middle stood the Towne and Fortresse of St. Philip, which afterwards, the Inhabitants perishing with hunger and cold was called the Port of Famine. The first that passed this streight was Ferdinand Magallanes a Portuguese, who had both heard and seen something of it in their cards. 'Twas in 1519. when he went to find a road to the Moluccas that way, for Charles the fifth. Afterwards one Pedro Sarmicates passed the streight from North to South; from South to North few passe, for the dan∣ger and difficulty to find the way. Since that the famous Argonautes who went round the world by Sea, as Sir Francis Drake in one thousand five hundred seventy nine, Candish in one thousand five hundred eighty five, Oliuier de Nort in one thousand five hundred ninety nine, and of fresher memory Spilberg, le Maire, Hermita, and others. But le Maire in 1618. a little further, in some fifty six or fifty seven degrees, towards the South, found the new Streight, called by his own name much shorter, and much easier than the other, not being above eight leagues in length, and the breadth wide and facile: the Spaniards came thither afterwards, and gave it the name Saint Vin∣cent. Upon the North-side the streight of Magellan are abundance
of winglesse birds,Wingless birds. that live in holes in the ground, fat and good meat, they called Pinguins. Sir Francis Drake found many good Harbours in the Streight, where good fresh waters came; but they are not easy to enter, for the strong and turbulent windes that raigne there. The Land on both sides lies exceeding high, and banked with in∣accessible Mountains, particularly on the South and East, where they are ever covered with snow. The breadth in some places is of two, three, or foure leagues, in the narrowest of one, or of two musket shots. 'Tis excessive cold, and never without snow and ice, the trees notwithstanding ever green, and laden with fruit. From this Streight by Cape Foendo, and the White Cape, they ascend again into the silver river, where begins Brasile in 35 de∣grees beyond the line, reaching to the River of Amazons, under the Line. This silver river, or Paravai Parana, and Paraguay, disgorging altogether like Cordillera, de serra, Muada in Peru and Charcas over-flow the whole Countrey, so as the Inhabitants for that time live in Canoes, fastned to Trees, till the floud be retired within the banks. At the mouth tis about 35. leagues over, but fur∣ther within the Land fifty; being streightened towards the Mouth by reason of the Mountains, and compassing a number of Islands: this River rises near the Town of Plata, towards Potossi, whence it takes name. Others derive it from the great lake called Eupania, where the other Rivers take birth, as Marag∣non, but it should rather be Parana, which afterwards falls in∣to the silver River. The first that came within the mouth of this River, was Americus Vesputius, sent by the King of Portugall to discover Brasile, in the yeare fifteen hundered and one, and supposing it a passage from the South sea to the Moluccas, satisfied himselfe, and returned without looking farther. After that, in the yeare fifteen hundered and twelve, the King of Spain sent one John Solis, who named it Solis. In fifteen hundered twenty five Sebastian Ganor made a farther advance up the River, and by reason of the silver he found amongst the people, or rather because the head of it lies near the Town Plata, towards Potossi, called it the silver River, or Plata. The Inhabitants along the River are of large stature, long-lived, light, and nimble of foot, use bows and slings in warr, and speak the Patagonick Language, or the Chicaan: of la∣ter times the Spaniards have ascended this River as farr as Char∣cas and Colao. The other river I mentioned is above fifty leagues in the mouth, and rises amongst the Mountains of Cuntisuya, near Cusco, the Indians call it Apurimac, principall, and Capacmaya,
the Prince of Rivers. It runs from South to North above five hun∣dred leagues from his source at the equinoctiall: Then it turns to the East for 650. leagues in a right line, and goes with wind∣ings and turns, for above a thousand five hundred leagues, two miles to the league. This is the greatest River upon the earth,The river Orellan. which at his infu∣sion keeps the Sea fresh for many leagues: first discovered by the Pinsons of Siville in the year 1500. then Orellana sailed it from the source almost to the end in 1543. 'tis filled with se∣verall Islands, and the Tide mounts above a hundred leagues: They find Meragnon to be seventy leagues Southward, distant from Orellana, that rises from the great Peruian lakes, which descend from the Mountains covered with snow: others put them both in one: it may be falling so close together into the Sea, they may joyn waters, and Orellana bear the name of both. CHAP. XVI. Of Brasile, the Conquest of it, and of the Brasilians, &c. BRasile is a large Province of America appertaining to the Crown of Portugall, extending from 25. degrees to the se∣cond from North to South, some ten degrees in breadth from East to West, from fort Para in the mouth of the great River of Amazons to Plata. Maragnon bounds it Northward in two degrees, Plata South in thirty five, on the East the excelse and inaccessible Moun∣tains of Peru,Brasile. and on the East the Ethiopian or Atalantick Sea, as likewise on the North. For the Country, the benig∣nity and sweetnesse of the air, and water, and the fertility of soyle is a miracle in such a Climate and temperature: which renders the Inhabitants of so healthfull and long life: and though the Climate be under the Torrid, there come fresh∣gales from the Sea that moderate it, so as it becomes a delicate habitation, having every morning some mists and dews, which the Sun afterwards dissolves into air. Here you meet with nothing but fair open fields, pleasant hills, fertile mountains, fresh valleys, green meadows, abundance of woods, rivers, and fountains of excellent waters, with infinite plenty of all sorts of trees, plants, fruits, grain, cattle, sugar, balm. In a word 'tis for necessaries and delights, the fullest Country on the earth. Of strange Crea∣tures there is the Cerigon, in shape and bigness like a Fox, betwixt
yellow and gray, whose belly is like a purse or pocket, wherein she saves her young ones when she is hunted: another the Portu∣guese call Pereza, for his slow gate, in fifteen dayes not going a stones cast, nor can any force drive him faster, he feeds on nothing but leaves of trees, and 'tis some dayes work for him to climb up and come down. There are Camelions whereof I have spoken in another place. Betwixt Brasile and the Cape of bona Esperanza, there is a Gulph of 1200. leagues, formidable and furious for winds and tempests. The Countrey is divided into nine Governments, or Captain∣ships, wherein are 7. Colonies of Portugueses along the coast, that is Tamaraco, Pernanbuco, Todos santos, or San Saluador, Puerto seguro, espiritu santo, Paraibi, Genero and others: the Capes of S. Augustine, and St. Vincent, the River St. Francis &c. Brasile by whom dis∣covered.The first discoverers were Vespusius, the Pinions Lopez, and Cabral about 1500. Pedro Aluarez Cabral made the principall discovery in 1500. be∣ing sent by King Emanuel for the East Indies; but a tempest cast him here, and he named it the countrey of St. Chrosse, and the place he landed on Porto Seguro. Cabral for that time contented himself with taking possessi∣on, and the Kings of Portugall being full of concernments in Africa and the East, neglected new conquests: till Emanuell not long before his death, sent thither one Gonzalo Cotello, who sailed on along the coast not without trouble and danger, and returned without any advantage. Afterwards King John the . sent Christopher Jago, who disco∣vered about 1100. leagues upon the coast, amongst others the Bay of Todos Santos, where in the River Paraguasu he found two French vessels traficking with the Natives; which shewes the French men traded with this Nation before the Portu∣gueses had any knowledge of it. This Jago barbarously sunk their vessels, and murthered all the men, done like the Spaniard who though he cannot discover and possesse all, will not suffer o∣thers to do it. In 1533.From that time the Kings continued sending thither, and divided the Countrey into Captainries, and Duarte Coello for∣tified himself in that of Pernanluco, assaulted perpetually by the Natives, who like the benign humour of the French much better. In like manner other Portugueses with their Kings Patents accom∣modated themselves in other Captainries, as Pedro Contino, on the River St. Francis, and the Bay de todos Santos, where they planted sugar-canes, and built Engines to make it. But the Cap∣tain at last was defeated, and had his brains beaten out by the Tpbous, his neighbours and enemies. The first Governour or Captain Generall of all Brasile, was
one Thomas de Sosa in one thousand five hundred forty nine, with a Fleet of one thousand souldiers, and some Jesuites brought thither to convert the Natives, who were placed in the town of San Saluador: one Fernandez Sardinia was the first Bi∣shop of Brasill, in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty. The French under Villegagnon,Villegag∣non. would have planted there in one thousand five hundred fifty five; about the river Ganabara, in twenty three degrees: but the successe is too well known, which happened through our own errour, and the ill usage of the Portuguese: nor was it better in one thousand five hundred ninety four, one thousand six hundred and four, and one thou∣sand six hundred and twelve towards Margnon, where our for∣mer errour, and the basenesse of the Portuguese, shut us quite out of this country: But the Hollanders afterwards with better fortune, better resolution, and more patience, have since established themselves. The French notwithstanding had most right for the commerce they had with the Nation from time to time, who loved them naturally, as they hated the Portuguese, and indeed all others. The Brasilians are said originally to have come some ages since from eru, advancing thither by progression from time to time. The Natives are exceeding barbarous, eaters of humane flesh, but their enemies onely: go totally naked both men and women, of hue betwixt yellow and green, low and flat nosed; for by custome when a child is born, they crush their noses, as we do by whelps, but females are not so served. The men are beard∣lesse, and with great care keep themselves so with small pincers. They make holes in their chins so bigge, they will thrust their tongues through them, an ugly thing to look upon, enchasing pre∣cious stones, and hold this for a beauty. The women have holes in their ears, and wear glasse pendants they get in truck▪ They wear onely a small ut of cotton upon their haire, and maids the like; for the rest stark naked. But I observe their na∣kednesse yeilds lesse provocation to concupiscence, then the ap∣parel and ornaments of ours: For going naked, they are sordid and nasty, though never so handsome by nature: they are free for any mans voluptuousness, both maids and widows, but married women are particular to their husbands▪ so long as they are alive; ut they have variety of customes, as they have variety of people. They live according to nature upon such provision as the earth of it self produces: the root whereof they make their bread and drink, is a good material: another they call Pachouqui, in taste like a Chesnut, they brought of these into Spain, where they prosper well; the Spaniard calls them Pacates. Of beasts there are abundance, and all kindes of Venison, and they are
very dexterous in killing it with their bow, wherein they shoot exactly. Divers of ours being taken, have naturalized amongst them, whether for that they had not means to escape, or voluntarily, having wife and children with them, of whom ours have learned much of their manners and language: but the misery is, divers of them have fallen to frequent their Superstitions and Idolatries: when we did inculcate to them to leave that unfortunate and bruitish life, they answered us with nothing but sighs and tears, though they knew us for French-men, nor would have discovered themselves such to us, had not one of us found it out by observ∣ing how attentively they harkened to our language, and as we told them they were Christians, one amongst them answered no, which shewed they understood us, and in effect one of them was a Rocheler, the other of Saint Malo, who were taken in one thou∣sand five hundred seventy one, going towards the Cape of Saint Anthony to look water: Five of them the Savages eat and pre∣served three for their youth; they are exceeding greedy of hu∣mane flesh, and hold it the most delicate of all other. Otherwise these people live in great innocency in little round Cabbins, without moveable or utensil, except some silly vessel of earth or wood, and a cotton bed like a fishing-net hanging in the ayre: they are very credulous, and understanding their lan∣guage a small matter might convert them. Generally they believe the immortality of the soule, and that after death they go to dance with their Fathers behind the mountains▪ for all their delight is in dancing, and dance perpe∣tually, if they have the least leisure; as they eat at all hours, with∣out observation of any order: Sometimes rise at midnight to eat, and never drink till they have quite ended: some believe that the soules of such as have lived well, according to their law of nature, transmigrate into beautiful bodies, and others on the contrary for punishment into deformed and squalid ones, which in a manner is the Metempsycosy of Pythagoras, whereof we spoke in the East Indies. The Sourons and Carmels who live upon the River of Plata, towards Paraguay have but one wife, whom they petition her fa∣ther for, who never denies her to brave and martial men, all ver∣tue and honour lying in that: at their marriages the Priests Ca∣raibes or pages, perform some ceremonies, causing them to change shooes: of houshold stuffe, they have nothing but a couch, a cot∣ton bed, and an Estere of straw, or sea-reeds. The father gives her in a basket cotton girdles, and other ribbands to bind her hair, and feathers for her hushand. All is in common except their wives, who keep a severe fide∣lity to their husbands, never transgressing, if otherwise they are punished without remission, or fly the countrey, in other crimes
they are not so rigorous: maids and widows use all freedom; and if a husband find his wife a maid, he esteemes himself un∣handsomely married, and that she must needs be contemptible, for that no man hath medled with her. Contention betwixt man and wife seldom or never happens, and when it does, they hold it to proceed from the displeasure of their Gods, and make sacrifices to appease them. The women being delivered, they swathe the child with a cotton fillet without other clothes, and when they foul them∣selves, make them clean with sand, and lay them on their faces on the ground to sleep, where they lye without further danger. They have certain experienced hearbs which they lay about them being near child-bed, which are very beneficial to them; and rejoyce much at the birth of a child, especially a Male-child; and the joy is general, all crying out, That is, the Infant shall take revenge of their enemies. They eat upon the ground, or else on a sort of reeds,Customes of the Bra∣silians, where∣with they likewise cover their Cabbins; they sleep commonly in the open ayre without the least inconvenience, so sweet and tem∣perate is their climate. Letters nor characters they have none, but are very ignorant, Mandioc a root is their chiefest diet, whereof they make flower, and eat it without baking, likewise boyled with water, it makes them drink in taste like turned milke: they make flower also of fish dryed in the Sun, are great hunters, and good archers. Brasil or Araboutan is their principal traffick, which both men and women go a long way for, and bring it on their shoul∣ders to truck for glasse toyes, little knives and looking-glasses. Brasil is a tree of more then ordinary height, with small leaves, and infructiferous. many kindes of it, yellow, white, and carnation. They make their chaffer with Merchants, without language, setting their wood an end on one side, and what they would buy on the other, and so bargaining by signes, every one takes away his own. In some places they make drink of a root called Piroua, which hath a sent that flyes into the head of those that are not used to it; it refreshes like Tisan, of Orange colour, when 'tis boyled. Being at Caramel, they feasted us exceedingly, with the best dainties they had, and on all occasions invited us to eat with them, admiring our wayes, and highly taken with our civilities: amongst other things it seemed strange to them, why we so oft took off our hats, but informing them it was to do honour, they were satisfied: they invi∣ted us to marry there, and live with them, offering us their
fairest women, and much affected our manners, and ap∣parell. Brasilians man-eat∣ers.At Feasts most commonly they make their designes of Warre upon their enemies for prisoners; and presently joyning all to∣gether, do reverence to the Sun, promising the fairest prisoners for a sacrifice, if he prosper them; then choosing four of the best experienced amongst them, they obey them without ex∣ception. They march with certain Instruments that make a loud noyse like drummes, and are stuck with abundance of feathers: their Armes are Clubbes of Brasil, which they call Sangal or Araboutan: bowes longer then ordinary, and arrowes without piles; of wood so hard, they are as effe∣ctuall as steel'd: Thus equipag'd, they will march fifteen or twenty leagues into the Mountaines, to surprize their ene∣mies, whom they seldome take unprovided, and there will they fight with a bloody obstinacy, preferring death before captivity: it being their satisfaction and glory, to take their enemies alive, and feast with their flesh. Having taken any they bind them, use them well, marry them with their sisters, or whom they will, and let them live together till the day of sacri∣fice: the evening before, they acquaint them with it in a friendly way, and the other accepts it with alacrity, feasting and dancing all together: The day come, they lead him round the town or habitation, and all the people follow him with joy and triumph, the boyes shouting and jeering him; who without dejection boasts his own feats and prowesse; reproaches them that he has done as much for some of theirs, and that his slaughter shall be revenged at full, then reckons up all theirs, that he and his party have eaten: the other still singing and dan∣cing, regardlesse of what he sayes: coming to the place of execu∣tion, they unbind him, and bid him before his death revenge himself the best he can;Prisoners of War. then he with whatsoever comes to his hand, falls on, and layes at any one he can reach, and some∣times wounds such as make not a timely evasion, then come two with Clubbes, and at a blow beat him to the ground; presently they rip him, take out his bowels, and deliver the heart to their Caraibs or Priests, to sacrifice to their Gods, the Sun, and thunder; then washing the carcasse in warme water, they cut it in pieces, broyle it upon a wooden Gridiron, never turning till it be fully enough on one side, and then feast all to∣gether. They assault their enemies in their habitations, which are surrounded with a sort of pointed Palizadoes to gore the assay∣lants: the others storme it in the weakest place, and being ro∣bustious and strong backed, ever strive to come to hand-fight.
The miserable wife of the prisoner, makes most sad moan, and specially if she be with child, foreknowing they will do the like for her infant, when it shall come to two or three years old, a strange cruelty, and so swallow their own bloud, under pretence 'tis the child of an enemy. Savages though they are, there appeares something of good natural reason in them, which by instruction and addresse might be improved, As when we reproach them with their naked∣nesse, they retort that we are the stupid and unreasonable to conceale what God hath so liberally given us, and have we nothing to doe with our money, but to cast it away upon clothes, things of no use, being borne without them. Another asked me one day why we Christians would ha∣zard our lives in so long voyages,Savages indued with rea∣son. if it were to see or pos∣sesse their countrey, to which we had no right? and saying 'twas for neither, but onely to fetch some things of gaine a∣mongst them: and what gaine, said he, a scurvy piece of wood, and other things as little worth? And telling him, that wood was of value in our countrey, and usefull to our livelyhood: And how, said he, is your countrey so wretch∣ed, it yields you not sufficient for life, and sustenance? I answered, the countrey had a good sufficiency in it to maintain us; but we desired to get wealth for the felicity of our selves and posterity. And what sayes he, will these riches advance you in Gods favour, will they preserve from death, or can you carry them with you? and replying, 'twas for none of all this, but that we took a felicity to leave it to our children: Well, said he, if the soyle were sufficient to maintain you and your Fathers before you, why should it not do the same for your chil∣dren and posterity. They alledge the same reason, when we blame them for not cultivating their land, saying since it kept their fathers, 'twill not faile to maintain them and their children. So these silly people live free from all passion, avarice, ambition, envie, and labour of body or spirit. If they get any thing that is good, they call in their neigh∣bours, and make merry together, with perfect friendship, candor, and freedome, without quarrels or calumnies, go freely to one another, and eat what they finde, with a good will. They have a drink of the root Cavain, which the Carmels call Piroa, made thus, they boyle the root with water, and when they use it, they stirre it together and drink it warm, this tastes like turned milk, but in some places for a dainty,
the maids chew the root, then boyle it, and make a most ex∣quisit drink. In some parts there is a sort of root called Elcout, of the taste of a nut, which I hold the best amongst them, 'tis of great vertues, but the excesse dries; infused with ano∣ther called Monqueil, it purges without violence: they have an herb that growes low with leaves a hand-broad, that cures all sorts of soares and wounds, of which I had once a triall. For falling from a rock, I got seven or eight very troublesome hurts, and an Indian with this leafe, cured me in three dayes. I have seen the same in Egypt, in Italy also, and believe 'tis in France. Another root they have called a Jehearit, that purges like Rhubarbe, but more gently: I believe 'tis the same that comes from new Spain called Mechouacan. Another that purges, being laid Emplaister-wise on the stomack: women lay it on the heads of their daughters, to emit their Mestruits making them stand with their feet together upon a stone, and a sleight incision, to draw that blood with∣out pain. Brasilians,, and chiefly the Toupinaba are kinde to stran∣gers, specially the French, and freely part with their victu∣als to them. A woman when she would be kinde, or entertain one, she seats her self on the ground, and weeps as she had been beaten, then on a suddain addresses her self with a thousand blan∣dishments, inviting him freely to the pleasure of her daugh∣ters. I have knowne some so base amongst us, that buckled with these idolatrous girles, a thing most detestable. They are absolutely without letters or characters, and in pronunciation use not F. L. R. So as we may thence derive, they are without Faith, without Law, and with∣out Royalty. They are addicted to Divinations and superstitions, and their Priests are sorcerers: by an ancient tradition they have some obscure knowledge of the deluge: some believe re∣ward and punishment of good and evill after death, others, not; but all believe the immortality of the soule, and that they shall remain the same they were in this life, and at the houre of their death: they interre their dead, and for several dayes lay meat in the Sepulcher, with a cotton bed: they have no King, nor superiour to command them, every linage living apart in a several valley, and change their habitation according to fancy; many families living under the same roof: great hunters, fishers, and swimmers, ex∣ceeding
vindicative: of a turbulent spirit, and inclined to Warre, the same in prosperity and adversity, endure hun∣ger with patience, when they have nothing to eat, and when they have they gourmandize, and drink drunk after their fashion. The good or evill that befalls them some attribute to destiny, others to fortune or chance. They are divided into several nations, and for the most part enemies: as the Sourons, and the Carmils, and the Ta∣pus, whom they call Savages, who are enemies to all, as more wilde and bloody then the rest. The Cariges are more soft and humane, who inhabit be∣yond the Winter Tropick two leagues from the Sea; they inhabit on high ground, and sow the Mandior: then there are the Oeuetacas, Margaiars, Toupinanbas, and others: these last are those our French have had commerce withall, of whom we have ample printed relations: and there might have had good plantations, had we made use of our time, and moderated our passions.
CHAP. XVII. The Isle of S. Thomas, according to a description made to the Authour, by Sieur de la Courb, and Cassis. THis Island is under the Equinoctiall between the Isles of Prince and Anchan, discovered by the Portuguese in their first navigation to the East. The Isle of Saint Thomas hath fifty leagues of sound land, was discovered on Saint Thomas day, that gave name of it. It beares little more then Sugar-Canes, planted by the Portuguese, but the trees are ever green. The Portuguese built here the town Pauoazan, The Haven whereof looks towards Ethiopia. At first all Nations inhabited there, but at present the Por∣tuguese will have none but themselves, and the French who are exceedingly beloved, for a French Jesuite who propaga∣ted Religion exceedingly in this Isle. The natives are some white, some black, and marry still in their own colour. The town is pleasant, and the whole land is full of Sugar-Canes, which fill the Island with flyes, as Arabia is infested with the same creatures by reason of the Cassia there: Sugar is so cheap, that for eight Realls you may have a hundred weight, but it has this fault, 'twill not easily dry; in exchange they carry thither Wines, Cheese, Leather, Clothes, because neither Vine, nor Corne, will prosper there. Upon a Vine there the grape will be green on one side, and ripe on the other; and blossoms at the same time. Their Gardens produce all sorts of herbes and fruit, but stone-fruit; but above all, Figges, and Melons. The root Igname growes there in abundance, very whole∣some boyled, or raw. Likewise Millet which they call Zaboucou, whereof they make excellent things with Sugar; the soyle is strong, in∣clining to a yellow, and in some parts reddish, where the dew of the night tempers it like waxe, so as it never comes to dust: They bend their Sugar-Canes to the East, and say they pros∣per best then: they may have there some seventy Sugar∣mills. These Engines or Mills, resemble the Samaritane at Pont∣neuf in Paris, easily rising and falling.
That which displeases is, they pour it into great caldrons, and it is like honey, then they make it in loaves hardly dry, you never seeing any so solid from thence as from Madero, nor is it worth so much though they use all possible art to refine it: They purify it with cindars. At the plantations far from water the Blacks fetch water to set the mills at work. The sugar being drawn they give the canes to the swine, which fattens them, and makes the flesh of excellent taste, and wholsome; from mid-May to mid-August they have Eastern winds where∣with they dry their Sugars, without which they could never do it; for all other windes are adversaries to them, because of the raines they stirr up in the other months. The Island is unhealthfull by reason of the corrupted ayr: their houses are good, built and covered with timber, out of the abundance of huge high trees. All nations heretofore went thither by reason of franck traffick; but now they must pay tribute, all but the French, who enjoy the same immunities as the Portuguese. They have many slaves from Guinea, brought by the Corsairs to be sold. Captain Ribaut Diepois took a vessell with diverse whole families, men, women, and children, whom he set free on land, but caused two Blacks to hang the Master and five Mar∣riners. 'Tis a cruell inhumanity to carry the Father away by violence into perpetuall slavery, while his poor family is ex∣posed to misery and starving. They marry the slaves amongst themselves, for breed, like a race of horses; who continue slaves by inheritance: whereas in the East at ten yeares end they are made free-men: they have but one day in the weeke free to themselves, which they employ industri∣ously, in making themselves fine to be acceptable to their Mistresses. The Portuguese of St. Thomas following the humour of their Nation, have a vanity to have their slaves grow rich, and walke with gravity like them, and will give them a hundred or two hundred Crownes, to buy Turks for their gain and ease. They bring the greater part to be baptized, and marry together, pro∣viding them of a livelyhood. They celebrate certain feasts like the Basks, with drums beaten by hand, and songs to them, and have their meetings under the shade of trees. The slaves yearly choose one amongst them for their Prince, to command and go∣vern at their meetings, who seats himself in the middle, and then they give him one of these drums, and with both hands above his head he makes a most harmonious musick, to∣gether with flutes, and other instruments, looking on their Mi∣stresses with a thousand munkey tricks, while they dance and
trip Moresco Sarabrands to them again. They go together to fetch their Prince at his Masters, who first makes them a colla∣tion, then bringing forth the Prince decked with flowers, a scepter in one hand, and a nosegay in the other, they carry him on their shoulders in a Palanquin, to the place of dancing, where their Mistresses meet them. The Prince first dances with his Mistresse, & then the others follow. The Prince de la' amour, called the Ar∣cadit, salutes his Lady, and then with gravity presents her the Posie, which she receives, and dances with amorous smiles and simpers. Afterwards they all attend the Prince to his Masters house, where the nuptials are consummated, provided they be∣come Christians. At that time Sieur de la Courb was there, there was a Portu∣guese Lady, widow of a Merchant, called Bornauente, rich, fair, and young, to whom the chiefest of the Island sued for marriage, and she would give ear to none, because she would not put her self under subjection. She kept divers slaves, and there arriving a vessel laden with slaves, she bought some, and one amongst the rest of so handsome garb and addresse, she judged him to be of good extraction, whereupon asked whence he was? he told her he was of Danieta, the Son of a wealthy Nobleman, who had intelligence of his capti∣vity, and would shortly free him, that he was taken fishing in a small boat; and enquiring further of his religion, she per∣ceived he was an Idolater. But the Lady taken with his gracefull behaviour, used him with all possible kindnesse, and one day her lust bearing her away, she resolved to call him to her Chamber, and receive a satisfaction from him; for which purpose having sent for him, in expectation she lay down upon her bed, fell fast a∣sleep, and in a dream thought something came that rude∣ly pulled the sheet from under her: waking affrighted, she called her maid, and related the vision to her; the maid wished her to lay by such troubles, and commend her selfe cordially to Almighty God: On the morrow she rose early and went to her Confessor, to whom she related the whole, and he gave her for penance to sell this slave, and never to see him more; promising he would be her chapman, and buy him to be his boatman, when he went to take the aire. The Lady made her advantage of his proffer, and doubting the slave to be some Demon or Magician sent him to the Priest, who bought him to his sad misfortune; for rowing along by the shore to take the air, there came a sudden gust from the land that over∣turned the boat: Now the Priest swimming well made to shore, but the slave with a pole dashed his brains out, and himself was never heard of after.
In this Island the Rats do great mischief, eating their Sugar loaves, whatsoever they can do to prevent it. Here upon a Mountain there are certain trees that distill water continually, as in the Isle of Iron in the Canaries; these trees are ever hooded with a thick cloud, which moystens them in such sort that they yield sufficient to water all their fields of Sugar∣canes, whereas that in the Isle of Iron distills but at certain hours. FINIS.
A Table of the principal, and most remarkable things, contained in this Book. A. ALexandria. Page 2. Aleppo. Page 30.5. Aman a town. ibid. Aman a river. ibid. Antioche. Page 4 The Authour preserved. Page 3 Amon a mountain. Page 5 Arnon a torrent Page 8 A sad accident in the deserts. Page 10 Apparitions in the deserts. ibid. Arabian robbers. ibid. The three Arabia's. Page 11 Aden. Page 13 Arabia the happy. Page 18 Alibenali. Page 18 Albacoure a mountain Page 23 Aden how fortified. Page 24 Asses of Dalascia. Page 26 Amarous dames. Page 56.30. Reca. Page 28 Abrazador. ibid. Amurath slain by a Tribullian souldier, disguised like a De∣ruis. Page 39 Amicabir. Page 40 Amiracor. ibid. Ageleps. Page 41 Areca a fruit common in the In∣dies. Page 45 An accident. Page 47 Anthropophage. Page 65 a vast Army. Page 72 a prodigious age. Page 86 Andreman an Island. Page 90 a sad accident. ibid. Amber Gris. Page 99 admirable obedience. Page 121 Adultry punished. Page 141 Accidents to the Authour. Page 143 Armies in the East vast. Page 148 Apes. Page 149.159. Adventures of Amador a Lim∣ner. Page 176 Asia. Page 182 Africa described. Page 177 Africans that adore the Sun. Page 180 Africa prodigious in greatnesse. Page 181 Africa as 'tis divided. ibid. Aquiloa a Kingdom, Town, and Island: Page 191 Abyssins imprint a crosse upon their flesh. Page 196 Agisimba a country. The history and strange adventure of Prince Alfondi. Page 204 A history of the amours of Prin∣cesse Abderane. Page 206 The Authours voyage into Ethi∣ope. Page 211 The country of the Abyssins known anciently by the name of Ethiope under Egypt. Page 212 The Abyssins reverence to sacred places. Page 216 Saint Abiblicanus venerable in Bagamidri. Page 218 Amazons Page 219 Arietes, Apostles: Page 226 Amara a mountain. Page 238 Archers excellent. Page 257 an unfortunate accident to the
Authour. ibid. Attire of the Ladies in Caire. Page 276 Ammon an Oracle. Page 279 Alexandria. Page 281 The Authours arrival at Mar∣seils. Page 284 The Authour taken by the Spa∣niards Page 287 The Authours hard usage by the Turks. Page 288 Alcahir a town in Morocca. Page 297 Asgar a country. ibid. Bashaw Abrahor Master of the horse to the Sultan. Page 311 The Authours sufferings at Sea. Page 313 The Authours affront at Gandia. Page 314 The Authour cheated. Page 316 The Authours voyage for Guinea. Page 320 America described; the length and distances. Page 327 The Americans upon Saint Lau∣renzo, their habit and diet. ibid. Antilles Isles of Canibals. Page 339 America how divided. Page 344 South-America. Page 346 A corruptive ayre. Page 370 Arma of ote for rich Mines. Page 371 Amazons. Page 379 A peculiar motion of the Sea, in the strait Magellan. Page 393 B. BUrning sands. Page 9 Books of the lives and sects of Mahomets successors. Page 13 Benjamin. Page 19 Biharen. Page 30 Benmir. Page 32 Babylon. ibid. Bagded. Page 32, 33. Balsora. ibid. Bacchat. Page 35 Besoart stone: Page 36 Barcas. Page 40 Batinisar, and her Carpets. Page 44 Baticola. Page 54 Bisnegar. Page 72.74. A History of the King of Bisne∣gar. Page 73 Bramins high Priests. Page 75 Barrs of gold. Page 94 Ball-play. Page 99.155. Betell a tree. Page 101 Birds of Paradise. Page 115 Beasts trained up to hunt. Page 166 A bloody battell. Page 178 Birds of strange nature. ibid. Belugara, a town in Monopo∣tapa. Page 186 Butua a Province. Page 198 Bagamidri, a town in Ethiopia. Page 218. Bagamidri called Imperial, and why? ibid. Bagamidri a kingdom. ibid. Bagamadri how bounded. ibid. Barua a town. Page 241.227. Biguen a strong town. Page 235 Bridges of straw. Page 236 Baza, a pleasant town. Page 256 Beniermi a desert. Page 271 Bazuelle a fair town Page 273 Natural Balsome, and how it growes. Page 275 Barua an Isle. Page 321 Bracala, a country. Page 322 Baris, an Ape very serviceable. Page 325 Bread made of fish. Page 333 Beseé espada, a dangerous fish. Page 336 A History of Bibical. Page 338 Breezes winds. Page 341 Bacaltos why so called, a coast annoyed with fish. Page 347 Bacaltos discovered by an Eng∣lish man. Page 348 Strange beasts. Page 380 Birds of prodigious greatness. ib. A good bargain. Page 380 Brasile described. Page 395 Brasile a fruitful, and for plea∣sure
a miraculous country. ibid. Strange beasts in Brasile. Page 397 Brasile divided. ibid. Brasile by whom discoverrd. ibid. Brasilians, their nature, their weare, and ornaments. Page 397 Brasilians Religion. Page 398 Brasilian ceremonies at marriage. ibid. The Brasilian customes. Page 399 The Brasilian way of traffick. ibid. Brasilians man-eaters. Page 400 Brasilians their arms and wars. ibid. Brasilian usage of prisoners at war. ibid. Brasilians kind to strangers. Page 402 Brasilians given to divinations and superstitions. ibid. C. CAire. Page 2 Candia. ibid. Chrysorrhas. Page 4 Carauane. Page 9 A cheat. Page 12 Cassia. Page 19 Cinamon. ibid. A Cutler. Page 5 Cassis deceived his brother. Page 13 Carauanes from Aleppo, Damas, and the grand Cair. ibid. Cassis his treachery. Page 17 Chicali. Page 19 Cosan, or Cosara, a River. Page 20 Camaran an Island. Page 23 Camara. Page 25 Camelots. Page 26 Caymans or Crocodils. ibid. Ceyfadin. Page 29 Cimites of Persia. Page 31 A Marseillan Curtisan. Page 35 Casbin. Page 36 Cusa. Page 39 Calander. ibid. Caidsidibir. Page 40 Cassandera. ibid. Christianisme in the Indies. Page 42 Cambaye a town. Page 45, 46. Children sold by Parents. Page 47.85. Calicut. Page 57 Cochins scituation. Page 62 Cinamon. Page 67 Circles of poysoned iron. Page 75 Christian faith preached in the Indians, and by whom, Page 76 Ceremonies. Page 89 Cruelty of the Javans. Page 98 Chiamay a famous Lake. Page 105 Castigay an Idoll. Page 107 Chaubanoys disaster. Page 108 Caipomo a River. Page 112 Confession amongst Idolaters. Page 124 Communions extravagant. Page 129 Cannons in the Indies from all antiquity. Page 132 Cock-fights. Page 138 Ceremonies. Page 143 Casubi a kingdom. Page 154 Casubi a town. Page 155 Cocos and the benefit. Page 156 The Cape of Palmes. Page 180 Cape of Natall. Page 183 where Christianity first plan∣ted in Africa. ibid. Crocodiles, and how taken Page 185 Christians in Belugara. Page 187 Courtesy of savages. Page 195 Courtesy of the Prince of Belu∣gara. ibid. Suguelane a town, and the en∣tertainment of that town, with their customes. Page 197 The Court of Abissina under tents in the field. Page 215 Combats of savage beasts. Page 222 Couzan a kingdom Page 238 Ceremonies at matrimony. ibid. Crown revenues of the grand Negus. Page 243 Churches, and Church-service
in Ethiopia. Page 244 Candace Queen. Page 252 Caraman a town. Page 254 A Church cut out of the natural Rock founded by Candaces Eunuke. ibid. The Chair of Saint John Babtist. ibid. The celebrated cataracts. Page 261 Christians delivered from Infi∣dels by miracle. Page 272 Caire built upon the ruines of Babylon, and Memphis. Page 274 Crocodiles, and their nature. Page 277 Constantina a town in Morocca. Page 298 Constantinople, the scituation and founder. Page 306 A stupendious rock of Christal. Page 325 Canaries, why so called. Page 331 A Cave in a rock once a Church. Page 332 Cuba the most fruitful Island of America. Page 336 Crocodiles good meat. Page 337 Canibals hunt men, and why. Page 339 Cruelty of the Spaniards. Page 340 Coasts of Mexico. Page 341 Canada, or New-France, by whom discovered. Page 349 the King of Canada whence extracted. Page 350 the Canadans nature, religi∣on, laws, habit, and customes. ibid. An example of covetousnesse. Page 365 Cordileras vast extended moun∣taines of wonderful scitua∣tion. Page 372 Cosca a Province. ibid. Charcas a Province in Peru. Page 373 the Calandar of Peru. Page 388 Cruelty revenged. Page 389 Chica a country. Page 392 D. DAmas. Page 5 A Deruis. Page 6.39 Dan Caerea. Page 7 Dalatia. Page 22 Dehir. ibid. Dalascia a town: Page 25 A strange dispute. Page 27 Derbent. Page 35 Delicacies. Page 38 Durmisar. Page 39 Diu assaulted by the Turk, Page 44 Delidecan. Page 49 Dinari, Page 50 Country dames. Page 74 A declaring of war. Page 75 Diamond mines. Page 83 the Devill adored. Page 99 Dead bodies eaten. Page 104 How drugges are brought into Europe. Page 133 Documents for Princes. Page 136 The devil's dance. Page 143 A dance in Armes. Page 164 Deserts frightfull. Page 174 Dumes a river. Page 191 King Davids robe. Page 254 Dangala a town. Page 272 Delusion of a Mahometan Priest. Page 274 Deserts of Caire, and how tra∣vailed. Page 279 a difference ingeniously recon∣ciled. Page 319 Domingo an Island. Page 332 Inhabitants of Domingo, their Nature, Lawes, Customes, and Religion. ibid. Discovery of the new World. Page 346 The Devil Gods ape. Page 361 Dancers on the rope in Mexico. Page 365 a discovery. Page 379 Diving men. Page 386
F. A Fatall execution. Page 6 Erithreos a King. Page 23 Ecade. Page 40 Ebony. Page 56 Euate a precious wood. Page 81 A story of an Elephant. Page 117 The manner of their keeping. Page 118 Exorcisms. Page 150 Number of Elephants in Pegu. Page 135 Extent of Africa. Page 178 The Empire of the Abissins. Page 180 Extent of the Abissins country. Page 212 Ethiopians descended from Chus the sonne of Cham the first Idolaters. Euate, a precious vessel, that en∣dures no poyson. Page 216 An entertainment. Page 255 Ermin a Judge with the Turks. Election of the King. Page 327 Encrease of corn admirable. Page 339 Election of the King of Mexico. Page 358 Earthquakes. Page 375 Emerald enemy to inconstancy. Page 386 F. FErragous. Page 17 Frankincense. Page 19 Forests. Page 38 Prodigious food. Page 46 The French pox in Indies. Page 51 Fish charmed. Page 72 A fortunate escape. Page 96 Two Franciscans eaten. Page 98 Strange funerals. Page 104 Faithful trading. Page 111 Fraternal amity. Page 145 Faith of the Indians. Page 154 French highly esteemed in the East. Page 162 A female guard for a King. The flowing of Nile whence it proceeds. Page 217 Fidelity in subjects. Page 243 Flesh eaten raw for a dainty. Page 255 Fougira an odoriferous town. Page 257 The fountain where the Virgin Mary rested, when she fled into Egypt. Page 276 Figs of particular quality. Page 305 A gallant fight at Sea. Page 318 Del Fuego an Isle. Page 321 A mystical fruit. Page 344 Florida discovered, and descri∣bed. Page 352 Florida, why so called. ibid. Floridans, their nature, and cu∣stomes. ibid. Floridans wealthy. Page 353 The miraculous Fountain of youth. ibid. French hanged in Florida. Page 356 A fountain of hot oyle. Page 377 A fountain congealing immedi∣atly. Page 378 Fountains medicinable with ac∣commodation for the sick. Page 358 Fish in Mexico both useful and dangerous. Page 381 French naturalized amongst the Brasilians. Page 398 G. GRots of persecuted Christi∣ans. Page 5 Ginger. Page 26 Gedri. Page 30 Gezempee. Goa Page 50 Ganges a River. Page 83.88. The Gulph Bengala. Page 84 Giraffe a beast. Page 105 Gaypoumo a strange River. Page 106 Gunnes. Page 110 Geographers mistaken.
Griffins. Page 115.152 Grages extraordinary. Page 155 Guber how bounded. Page 179 Goragues wild and sanguinary people. Page 227 A Garden at Casima, most plea∣sant. Page 261 Guinea how bounded. Page 321 Gambra a famous River. Page 322 Guinalla a Kingdom, a River, and a Haven. The king of Guinalla's State. ibid. Gutulea a pleasant country, the riches thereof. Page 324 Gold for things inconsiderable. Goulmaran, the name of a Ri∣ver and countrey. Page 351 Goulmarans their nature, hou∣sing, habit, diet, religion, warre, and innocence. ibid. Goulmarans, their armies of dogges. H. HUnting. Page 38 Hali. Page 38 Hamar. Page 38 A History of a Bear. Page 78 A history of a Spanish woman and a Monkey. Page 79 Hunting of Elephants. Page 92 Hermophrodites. Page 92 A history of Serpents. Page 105 Horses. Page 110 Holy ashes, and holy water. Page 121 Hens black of flesh. Page 127 A deplorable history of two Prin∣ces. Page 144 Horses and their breeding. Page 166 A Royall hunting. ibid. A history of an Incubus. Page 175 Horses sucked by Cowes. Page 202 Dexterous horsemen. ibid. A history of Prince Aranubi. Page 220 Hereticks condemned to fire with the Ethiopians. Page 246 A prodigious history of Prince Joel. Page 261 A history of the Popes Almne. Page 314 An accidental destruction of Ido∣laters. Page 325 Hispaniola by whom discovered, and when. Page 337 In Hispaniola, the people how go∣verned, their Laws and Na∣ture. ibid. A history of a slave. Page 406 I. Jurabi a guide uses the Com∣passe. Page 10 Jewes thieves. Page 12 Jesrab a town. Page 13 Jubara Abrahams mountain. Page 15 Saint John Baptist. Page 21 Ibram. Page 25 Ismael Sophy. Page 39 Icorma. Page 39 Inhabitans of Genoa. Page 41 Ivory. Page 47 Idolatry. Page 50 A miraculous discovery of inno∣cence. Page 53 Idoll of a Monkeys tooth. Page 69 Indian earthen ware. Page 78 Idolaters fear of Christianisme. Page 88 Idolaters superstitious. ibid. Java an Island. Page 96 Infirme eaten. ibid. Inhabitants of Sapara. Page 98 Idolatrous, and Mahometan Martyrs. Page 125 Idolls of Pegu. Page 125 Idolls destroyed by the Portugals. Page 123 The Image of the Virgin Mary in the Indies respected. Page 154 Interrement. ibid. Interrements. Page 168 Igname a delicate root. Page 182
Janiharou, a Town and River. Page 185 Joguia a root. Page 186 Justice betwixt Creditor and Debtor, severe. Page 244 Joconomites, an austere order. Page 245 Kingdome of the Jalofes. Page 321 Jalofes have person'd and quali∣fied their ornaments and na∣ture. Page 322 Jalofes in their dealings law∣lesse. Page 323 An Island seen and not known. Page 331 The Isbane of Iron. Page 332 Jagares famous for swiftnesse. Page 353 Jucatan described. Page 370 Incas Kings of Peru. Page 387 The Isle of Saint Thomas de∣scribed. Page 404 K. A Kingdome left for heaven. Page 88 Kingdomes conquered by Pegu. Page 112 Kingdomes tributary to the Em∣perour of the Abyssins. Page 213 Knights of Malta, and their insti∣tution. Page 283 L. LIbanus. Page 4 Ladamum. Page 19 Lacca. Page 26 Lawes in Narsingue. Page 74 Lagi a town. Page 113 Largaray a Kingdom. Page 177 The Isle of Saint Laurence, or Madagascar. Page 182 In the Isle of Saint Laurence, how they employ the Inhabitants. Page 184 Lacque for painting. Page 260 Lions their nature. Page 271 Saint Laurence a river in the East-Indies. Page 327 An unfortunate love Page 355 A prodigious lightning. ibid. M. MAnna. Page 4 Morets entertainment. Page 8 A description of Medina. Page 13 Mahomets tombe. ibid. Mahomets birth. Page 14 Mahomets law. ibid. Medina taken by Mahomet. ibid. Marabuts sacrificators. Page 15 Mahometan ceremonies. Page 15 Mazara a beast. Page 19 Mirrhe. Page 20 Mezua. Page 25 Machif. Page 35 The Virgin Mary honoured by the Indians. Page 50. A most admirable medicine. Page 56 Maladives Isles. Page 72 A history of the Magicians of Pegu. ibid. Merchants deceived. Page 74 Musk, and from whence. Page 81 Metempsicosis. Page 94.97 Malaca, and the traffick. Page 102 Martaban. Page 106 A miraculous delivery of a Chri∣stian exposed to beasts to be devoured. Page 116 Meat perfumed. Page 137 Mandronella a town. Page 152 A Monkey armed. Page 160 Militia of Transiana. Page 165 Mountains remarkable. Page 168 Mummy. Page 169 Mountain of the Sun. ibid. Mastiffes for prey. Page 175 Magicians. Page 180 Madrogan the chief towns of Monopotapa. Page 200 The Monopotapian Kings habit. ibid. The King of Monopotapa's Pal∣lace.
service, officers, and magnificence. Page 201 The King of Monopotapa's ac∣coutrement for the warre. ibid. The order of his Militia. Page 202 Military Mastiffes. ibid. The Monopotapian Eunuchs how clothed, and their office. ibid. The Monopotapian punishments. Page 203 Monopotapian Princes are di∣stinguished by a Lyons skin. ibid. Manica a gold Mine. Page 194 Mount Manica, and the ruines of stupendous structures. ibid. Magnificence of the Negus. Page 203 Three mysticall dishes. Page 226 The Mongibir Kings resignation. Page 230 Mongibir a Kingdom. Page 233 Mongibirians low-spirited and timerous. ibid. Mongibirians Idolaters worship the Sun. ibid. Mongibirians opinion of the Christians. ibid. Magnificence in Mongibir. Page 234 A mountain never free from snow. Page 337 Moucall an uniforme town. ibid. A passionate mourning. Page 240 The march of the grand Negus. Page 241 Monkes married. Page 245 Men turned into Wolves. Page 269 A man turned into an Asse by Ma∣gick. ibid. A magical relation. Page 270 A famous Mosquee. Page 273 Mummi. Page 279 Morocca. Page 297 Melli a kingdome very wealthy. Page 299 Magicians of divers kinds. Page 302 A cruell murther. Page 317 The Crick S. Michael. Page 331 Marriage in Domingo. Page 334 Mexico and the coasts. Page 341.345 Mexico how called and descri∣bed. Page 356 Mexicans ingenious and Idola∣ters. Page 357 Of the temperature of Mexico. ib. The ancient Mexicans. Page 358 The Mexicans armes. Page 359 The King Montezuma. ibid. Mexicans divided into several nations. Page 360 Mexicans Religion. Page 361 The Mexican year and month. Page 362 The Mexican wheel. Page 363 Their superstitions. ibid. Mappes of Africa defective. Page 178 Monbaze a country. Page 188 Monbaze in extent. Page 189 A merry passage. ibid. How in Monbaze they receive Embassadours. ibid. Melinde a town & kingdom. Page 190 Melons of Excellency. ibid. The Prince of Melinde a grave Justiciar. ibid. Mozambique a kingdome. Page 191 The Inhabitants of Mozambique. Page 192 Magnice a River. Monopotapa an Empire. Page 198 Monopotapians Idolaters. ibid. Magicians proceedings in Mono∣potapa. Page 199 Mexican festivals and dances. Page 363 Mexican sacrifices and ceremo∣nies. ibid. Mountains burning. Page 365.376 Mexican Mascarades, called Quacones. ibid. Mexico by whom conquered. Page 367 The King of Mexico's state and strength. ibid. Wealth of Mexico. ibid. Monkeys. Page 374 Mines in Potossi. Page 375 Mines of silver and gold the na∣ture and manner of working in them. Page 383
N NIcotiana. Page 39 Nahassan. Page 40 Nutmegs. Page 100 Nestorians. Page 126 Number of nine amongst the Tartars. Page 177 Niger and Gambra rivers flow∣ing as Nile. Page 179 The Negus, his triumphant en∣trance. Page 227 Service at the Negus table. Page 226 Navasse an Island. Page 334 New-found-lands, what. Page 349 O OReb. Page 11 Ormus. Page 30, 31.13.29. Outor. Page 17 Ostander. Page 40 Oyl of cinamon: Page 68 Ostridges. Page 115 An oraculous Idol. Page 123 Ordinance in China from anti∣quity. Page 243 Oximinchus famous for multi∣tude of religious persons. Page 279 Obsequies of the King of Gui∣nalla. Page 326 An order of knighthood. Page 359 Orellana the greatest of rivers. Page 395 P A Just punishment of the per∣fidious. Page 3 St. Paul's imprisonment. Page 6 Provision for the deserts. Page 9 The Prophets City. Page 10 Pecher a Haven. Page 19 Persia, and the bounds. Page 31 Pitch. Page 33 The Powerfull State of the Kings of Persia. Page 37 Plucciander. Page 40 Places in the Indies. Page 41 The Portuguese conquest in the East. Page 42 Purcelans. Page 51 A sad fate of Pirats. Page 52 Presumption of the Portugals. Page 55 A strange History of a Portu∣gais Captain. Page 63 An unheard of curtesie from the hand of a Pirat. Page 64 Punishment of the wicked. ibid. Perfidiousness of Pirats. Page 65 Pearle fishing. Page 68 The manner of pearle fishing. Page 72 Polouis the Divells Isles. Page 71 Subtle poyson. Page 85 Pirats, how taken. Page 85 Pegu. Page 112.108, 109 Peguan Armies. Page 121 Punishments for crimes. Page 124 Peguans, whence derived. Page 128 The Peguan Creed. ibid. The Peguans diet. Page 131 The Peguan salutations. Page 132 The Peguans Military exercises. ibid. The Peguan Kings Coronation. Page 133 Peguan ceremonies at creation of their King. Page 135 The King of Pegues Reve∣nues. Page 139 Peguan Justice. Page 140 A Peguan policy. Page 141 Priests dispose of war. Page 144 The Peguan yeare. Page 147 Philosophy of the Indians. Page 171 The point of St. Anthony. Page 183 Persipolis, and the ruines of stru∣ctures. Page 194 A passage Magicall. Page 199 No prison in Monopotapa. Page 200 Poyson common, and deare in Monopotapa, and the rea∣son. Page 203 Preste Johns Mansion. Page 220 Preste John's Justice. ibid. Priests singing Psalmes in state. Page 225
A Princesse prisoner restored to her lover. Page 229 A figurative peare. ibid. Perfumed meat. Page 230 Prostitution of wives. Page 233 Paraguary hath the like inunda∣tions as Nile. Page 277 Piramids of prodigious structure. Page 277 Piperons Giants. Page 327 Pit the highest mount in the world. Page 331 Peru why so called, and the de∣scription. Page 371 Peru in extent. ibid. A passage so cold, 'tis extremely dangerous. Page 375 Plumes in use. Page 380 Peru discovered. Page 387 Peru by whom civilized. Page 388 Peru taken by the Spaniard. Page 390 Paragous people. Page 392 Q. QUinsay. Page 103 Queen Tyrada. Page 104 Quiloa a town of antiquity. Page 191 A Queen, and nine sons mas∣sacred for worshipping the De∣vill. Page 235 Quite a Province. Page 372 R. RImadan. Page 21 Rivers of Persia. Page 32 Religious orders amongst the Turks. Page 39 Resolution in extremity Page 91 Continual rains. ibid. Rubarbe. Page 106 Respect to strangers. Page 134 Repudiation. Page 141 Reward of valour. Page 144 Reconcilements. Page 156 The Rhinocerot of the Escuriel. Page 260 Rivers in Suama. Page 194 Manica a gold Mine. ibid. Manica a mount, and the ruines of structures there of strange thicknesse. ibid. The Religion of the Abyssins. Page 215 Religions of several orders in Abissina. ibid. Rivers in Abissina. Page 216 Reception of the Portugal Em∣bassadour at the Negus's Court. Page 231 An heroick restoration of captive women Page 236 Religion of the Ethiopians. Page 245 Religion of Saba. Page 253 A miraculous cure. ibid. Religion and customes of the Sarabomians· Page 258 A wild Rhinocerot. Page 259 Religion of the Jalofes. Page 323 Rauana the securest Haven. Page 336 Religious devoured by Savages. Page 357 Rivers in Peru. Page 179 Good natural reasons from Sa∣vages. Page 401 S. SHipwrack of the Authour in Candia. Page 2 A malicious shipwrack. Page 3 Sahanir a mountain. Page 5 Silks. Page 5 The Sea of Sodome. Page 10 Mount Sina. Page 11 Sarazins whence called. Page 14 Black sand. Page 19 Storax. ibid. Sabea. ibid. Sequemir his state. Page 20 Salsidas devotes. Page 20.40 Read Sea. Page 23 Sabeans. ibid. Spices. Page 24 Suachan. Page 25 Santal. Page 26 Socotoro famous for Ambar∣gris.
Page 28 A Stratagem. Page 34 Sumachia. Page 35 Samarcant. Page 37 Sotismel, Sinbarate. Page 37 Seleres. Page 38 Sophy. Page 38 Sacar. Page 39 Sanosaraden. Page 49 Samorin Page 57 Seraglio. Page 85 Sartagan a town. Page 88 Siam a kingdom. Page 103 Statues of beaten gold. Page 110 Sacrifices for the dead. Page 127 Superstitious salutations. Page 128 Sacathy a mortiferous plant. Page 130 Sodomy not prohibited. Page 139 Sacrifices of proper children. Page 142 Sugar used in building. Page 150 Sinabo a kingdom. Page 163 Serpents good meat. Page 174 Sonderia an Island. Page 183 Secora. ibid. A superstitious ceremony. Page 191 The state the Negus is received into towns with. Page 224 Scanfourin, the capital town of Mongibir. Page 234 Salt exceeding precious. Page 249 Sorcerers. Page 247 Subtilty of Crocodiles. ibid. A star in Ethiopia mortiferous. Page 250 Salete a fair town, and a most pleasant garden there. Page 251 Saba Queen. ibid. Saba, or Soua, a town. Page 252 Swine for carriage like horses. Page 256 Saraboma a famous Island. Page 258 Sebastian king of Portugal de∣feated and slain by the Moors. Page 292 Familiarity with Serpents. Page 301 Examples of Sorcery. Page 303 Seraglio of Constantinople. Page 306 Temple of Saint Sophia. Page 307 Seraglio described. Page 310 Serri Leonna a country Page 325 Sarboul a fruit growing all the year. Page 333 Frozen sea. Page 347 A Stratagem. Page 360 Spanish vanity. Page 368 Seasons of the year in Peru. Page 372 Sheep for carrige. Page 382 The Strait of Magellan. Page 392 Sugar exceeding cheap. Page 404 T. TRade in Arabia. Page 23 A strange tempest. Page 27 Trade from Ormus. Page 30 Tauris a town. Page 34 Trade of Tauris. ibid. Principall towns of Persia. Page 35 Thais, Alexanders Curtisan. Page 36 A miraculous tyde. Page 45 Toumacant a Western wind. Page 63 Treason punished. Page 73 Saint Thomas his shrine. Page 76 Ternassery. Page 80 Tydes from North to South, meet in the strait of Magellan. Page 109 Tahaba. Page 111 Trienniall governments. Page 120 The martyrdom of S. Thomas. Page 126 A tempest calm'd by charms. Page 124 Testimonies of love. Page 142 Tygars hunted. Page 159 The King of Transiana his curio∣sity and affability. Page 161 Transiana a town, and the valour of the women there. Page 163 Tazatay a kingdom. Page 169 Tartary Page 163 The Tartars conquests. Page 180 The King of Tombut's majesty. Page 179 Trees that yield drink and thread. Page 184 The Isle of thieves. Page 186 The Talmassaca a garment of
difference for nobility in Mono∣potapa. Page 202 Land Tortoyses. Page 211 Tributes to the Emperour of the Abyssins. Page 213 A magnificent triumph. Page 228 Titles of Preste John. Page 246 Tortoises useful for travel. Page 256 Tamatans pillagers. Page 251 Triumphs at the inundation of Nile. Thebaida and the deserts. Page 279 Turkish proceedings against the Authour. Page 290 Temesne and the people thereof. Page 300 The Turks Religion. Page 307 Turks have religious of several orders. Page 307 Turkish Obsequies. Page 308 Turkish Justice. Page 309 Taboucaton the chief town in the kingdom of the Jalofes. Page 321 A miraculous tree that continu∣ally distills water. Page 332 A terrible tempest called an A∣roucane and remarkable pas∣sages in it. Page 335 Temistican the capital town in New-Spain. Page 356 A tree yielding linnen, and all necessaries. Page 368 Balsom from a tree of soveraign vertue. Page 369 Fruit used for money. ibid. Temper of Peru. Page 374 V. UNicorns horns. Page 15 The Virgin Peru. Page 199 Virginia by whom discover'd. Page 352 Description of Virginia. ibid. Ʋnknown lands. Page 357 A remarkable vision foreshewing the arrivall of the Spaniards in Peru. Page 389 Vanity of the Portugals. Page 405 W. WIne sold by Apothecaries. Page 9 A draw-well at Outor. Page 18 Spanish Wax. Page 26 Women chosen. Page 38 Women bought and sold. Page 47 Wives in common. Page 62 A war for a white Elephant. Page 103 113 White Elephants adored. Page 114 Winds called Monsouns cold in extremity. Page 150 Widows married. Page 155 Wood to strike fire. Page 158 Women swimmers. ibid. A furious wind called Tafon. Page 182 Winds that preserve bodies in∣corruptible. Page 187 Wine in Oxe horns. Page 230 Walking mountains. Page 280 A Whale. Page 283 A remarkable accident of Whales. Page 299 Singular windes. Page 342 A wind of the use of rain. Page 373 Water boyling hot by nature. Page 377 Winglesse Birds. Page 394 Z. ZAcharies tombe. Page 6 Zibit. Page 13 Zagathy. Page 34 King of Zeilan: Zinguebar. Page 192 Zunam an Island. Page 293 Zaflan a Lake. ibid. Zaire and Zambre two rivers. ib. Zuama a river by the Portugals called Rio del spiritu santo. Page 218 Zio Marina Christos a Mona∣stary. Page 239 The torrid zone, and the quality of the climat. Page 342 FINIS:
