M719 12789343 93926
WIT RESTOR'D In severall Select POEMS Not formerly publish't. LONDON, Printed for R. Pollard, N. Brooks, and T. Dring, and are to be sold at the Old Exchange, and in Fleetstreet. 1658.
WIT RESTOR'D. Mr. Smith, to Captain Mennis then commanding a Troop of Horse in the North, against the Scots. WHy what (a good year) means my Iohn? So staunch a Muse as thine ner'e won The Grecian prize; how did she earne? The bayes she brought from Epsom Fearne? There teem'd she freely as the hipps, The Hermit kist with trembling lipps. And can she be thus costive now While things are carried (heaven knowes how) While Church and State with fury parch, Or zeal as mad as hare in March? While birds of Amsterdam do flutter And stick as close as bread and butter: As straw to Jett, or burre to squall, Or something else unto a wall. Can such a dreadfull tempest be, And yet not shake the North and thee? Where is thy sense, of publike feares? Wil't sit unmov'd as Roman Peeres,
Till some bold Gaule pluck thee by th'beard, Thou and thy Muse (I think) are sear'd, As I have heard Divines to tell The conscience is that's mark't for hell. Ah Noble friend, this rough, harsh way May pinch where I intended play. But blame me not, the present times So serious are, that even my Rymes In the same hurry rapt, are so, Indeed whether I will or no. And otherwise my Numbers flie Than meant, in spight of Drollerie: Tis good to end when words do nipp And thus out of their harnesse slipp. Besides, the thing which men mispend Call'd Time, as precious is as friend, Tak't not unkindly, I professe None loves you better then I. S. From London where the snow hath bin As white as milke, and high as shin From Viscount Conwaies house in street Of woman Royall, where we meet: The day too cold for wine and Burrage The fourth precedent to Plum-porrage December moneth, and yeare of grace Sixteene hundred and forty to an Ace. To friend of mine, Captaine Iohn Mennis At town of York that now and then is, Or if you misse him there, go look In company of Hunkes Sir Fook;
They two perhaps may have a pull At Selbie, Beverley, or Hull, Or else you'l finde him at his quarter, Send it, and let him Pay the Porter. The same, To the same. MY doubtie Squire of Kentissh crew that ha'st read stories old and new prick up thine eares unto a tale that will un-nerve and make thee stale: When thou shalt heare how manie pears, The parliament hath had by th' eares. Comming as close as shirt of Nessus, To privie Councellors (god blesse us) The Judges they are deep in bond, And fart for fear they shall bee Connd, The Ren of Elte, and the prelate Of Bath and Wells have had a pellat And they have plac't (his grace's) cod Under the lash of Maxwoll's rod, But I am told the Finch is warie And fled after the Secretarie, And all this is, that men may see Others can runne as well as wee. I hitherto have told, dear Captain, Of prisons that our peeres are clapt in:
And all I wrote was like a groane Sadd as the melanchollie droane. Of Countrie baggpipe, now I sing Matter as chearfull as the spring, Of wine (deare freind) will make us wanton Better nere drunck by Iohn of Gaunt, one That at third glasse did mount his Launce And gott a boy whose sonne got Fraunce: Besides, the reckoning will bee more (Humble I meane) then heretofore; For now the Alderman hight Abell Has given his parchment up with labell, To no more purpose is his pattent Then that the fool had shitt and sate in't: Now may wee freely laugh, and drink, And overcharg'd goe pisse i'th sinck Then too't again, beginne a health Of twelve goe-downes to th'Com-monwealth Then mount a stall, and sleep, and when Wee rise againe bee nere th' worse men: This fitt's my freindshipp, but not mee, I must bee sober as the Bee That often sippes, yet doth not stray But to his owne hive findes the way, Soe shalt thou not blush to acknowledge Him that was once of Lincolne-Colledge, But now of Bromely Hall neere Bow Look, and you'l find his name below. I. Smith.
From spatious lodgings of Lord mine In street of female majesty, past nine; The day whereon wee whett our knives As men to eat even for their lives. He that ha's none tis time to borrow, For Christmas day is ee'ne to morrow. The same, to the same. MY note which cost thee pennies Sixe (It seeme's) still in thy stomack stick's O had'st thou but beheld how willing I was for thine to pay a shilling (For footeman forth the money layd Which must with int'rest bee defrayd) Hereafter thou wouldst not bee nice For everie note to part with sice. Thy journey to the foe with Coyne Would madded have a saint or twayne, So sillie Bee with wearie thighes Home to her master's storehouse hie's; Whence (her rich fraught unladed) shee Againe returne's an emptie Bee. I joy to heare thou raign'st in place Of the defunct Arch bishop's grace, For thou (I doubt not) wilt bee grea'st: By freind for prebendry ith' fist: Mee thinkes I fancie prester Iames In Cope envellop't without seames.
With silke and golde embroydred ore, And brestplat like a belt before: As Pedler ha's to bear his pack, Or Creeple with a childe at's back. Else when my Bettie dropp's away (That fourteen yeares hath been my Toy) Some one Il'e marrie that's thy Neece And Livings have with Bellie-peece, This some call Symonie oth'smock, Or Codpeece, that's against the Nock. The health you meant mee in the Quart I have, and partly thanke you for't, But yet I muse (as well I may) At pot so funish't, without pay, For at that time wee were told here You all were sixe weeks in arreare; Ha'st thou made merchandise, of Crop? Or solde some landes, lef't out oth' mapp? Or ha'st thou nimm'd from saddle bow A pistoll through thy troope, or so? Leaveing halfe-naked horses Crest Like Amazon with but one brest; Well, lett it goe: I thinke this geare Fitt to bee scann'd, but not too neare However, sure I should finde Iohn Thriftie, but yet an honest man, Yet tak heed in these pinching times And age so catching after crimes, It bee not given out how you quaf't Sugar, and eggs, in morning's draught;
I grudge thee not; for if I met Vulpone's potion, or could get Nectar, or else dissolv'd to dew Th'Elixir, which the gods n'ere knew: 'Twere thine, yea I would save the dropps For thee that fell besides thy chopps: But yet the needy state (I feare) May think much of thy costly cheare; The best is, if they barre thy maw From sodden drink, thou't have it raw: And reason good, the heavens defend, That thou should'st want, and I thy friend. I. S. From house of Viscount Conway, where Kenelme hath food, and Down's Count Lare, December moneth, day of St. Iohn That 'mongst th' Evangelists made one, Forty, (besides the sixteen hundred) We count yeares past since Fiend was foun∣dred, And this Bissextile, that, sans pumps, Frisk's, and is call'd the yeare that Jum'ps.
The same, to the same. I must call from between thy thighs] Thy urine back into thine eyes, And make thee when my tale thou hear'st Channell thy cheekes with Launt rever'st; Thy Landladie that made thee broth When drugge made orifice to froath, That every fortnight shifted sheet To keep thy nest, and bodie sweet; That heard thee knock at peepe of day When boy snor'de that on pallat lay; Rose in her smock, and gave thee counsell To lift thy foot for feare of groundsell, That often warnd thee of the quart And praid (in vain) to turn thy heart, This Landladie in grave is pent Now shedd thy moysture, man of Kent: Two rings shee left, for thee tone, to' ther For Andrew that does call thee brother, This dries thy teares that were a brewing; Now li'st to newes of State ensuing. Iudge Littleton is made Lord Keeper. And feeds on chick and pigeon peeper, The kings Attourney Sr Iohn Bancks Succeds him, but may spare his thankes. Herbert is thought the meetest man To fill the place of Bancks Sr Iohn, London-Recorder thence doth jogge, In Herberts roome to trudge, and fogg:
And St Iohns one that's sharp and wittie Is made winde-instrument o'th'Citty. Thus tis in towne; but in the Camp There's one preferrd will make thee stamp, For Sr Iohn Berkly's Sergeant Maior To Willmott, let it not bread Jarre, Nor can the Viscount whom Iohn putts In trust, prevent it for his gutts More shalt thou know when tis more fitt, When thou and I in Tavern fitt; Till when, and ever, heaven thee send The wishes of thy constant freind, I. S. In street of Coleman from swanne Ally Where while I stay in towne, I shall lye In house of Mistresse Street, relict Of Robert, whom for mate shee pickt: And where, with eeles, and flounders fryde, And tongve of Neat that never lyed I filld my paunch, but when I belsh, It utter's language worse than welsh. Ianus the moneth that holdes us tack, One, with a face be hinde his back: Full sixteene hundred yeares wee score And fiftie, (bateing six, and fowr) And this leape-yeare wee count to bee, A yeare that come's but once in three.
The same, to the same. THy wants wherewith thou long hast tug'd And been as sad as Bear that's lug'd, Thou'lt laugh at, when thou hear'st how odly Thy fellowes shift in Town ungodly. Commodities we took on trust, And promis'd Tradesmen payment just, To be return'd from Northern part, When treasure hence arriv'd in Cart. And, but till now of late, they crep From stair to stair, with trembling step; So modest, that they blush'd to name, For what they to our Chambers came. Impatient now, both young and old, Assault my fort with knuckle bold. And as in bed perplex'd I lie, I hear one say, The Cart's gone by. With that they all attempt my dore, With pulse more daring then before; And of their parcells make a inne Louder, then when they drew me in. Rouz'd with this rudenesse, first, I chop Upon some foreman of the shop; Take him by 'th'hand aside, and there I tell him wonders in his ear. So by degrees I send them jogging, Suppled with Ale, and language cogging. But newes of this makes Scrivener wary, And eight i'th hundred Don look awry
That we do stoop to sums as small, As children venture at Cock-all. And lives we lead, (I cry heaven mercy) Worse then a Troop that has the Farfie, While man that keeps the Ordinary, Will not believe, nor Landlord tarry. O happy Captain, that may'st houze In Quarter free, and uncheckt brouze On teeming hedge, when purse is light, Or on the wholsom Sallat bite: While we have nought, when mony fails, To bite upon, but our own nails; And they so short with often tewing, There's not much left to hold us chewing; Or if there were, 'twould onely whet Stomack, for what it could not get, And make more keen the appetite, Like tyring-bitt for Faulkner's Kyte. To mend my commons, clad in jerkin, On Friday last I rode to Berkin, Where lowring heavens with welcom saucst us As when the Fiends were sent for Faustus; Such claps of thunder, and such rain, That Poets will not stick to feign, The gods with too much Nectar sped, Their truckles drew, and piss'd a bed, And that they belsh'd from stomack musty Vapour, that made the weather gusty. Well, 'tis a sad condition, where A man must fast, or feed in fear.
I lately thee from North did call, Now stay, or else bring wherewithall, Unlesse thy credit here prove better, Than does thy friend's, that wrote this Lett I. S. Day tenth thrice told, the morning fair, The month still with a face to spare. The same, to the same. NO sooner I from supper rose, But Letter came, though not in prose, Which tells of fight, and Duell famous, Perform'd between a man and a mouse. An English Captain, and a Scot, The one disarm'd, the other not. It speaks moreover of some stirring, To make a Cov'nant new as Herring. Carr, and Mountrosse, and eke Argile: Well was that Nation term'd a Boyl, In breach of England, that doth stick, And vex the body Politick. But (whatsoe're be the pretence) Doubtlesse they strive about the pence; While English Trooper, like a Gull, Serves but to hold the Cow to th'Bull. Pray tell me, Iohn, did it not nettle Thee, and thy Myrmidons of Mettle,
To see the boy with country-lash, Drive on the jades that drew the cash? And by thy needy quarters go, Asking the way to Camp of fo? So Tantalus with hungry maw, And thirsty gullet, daily saw Water and fruit swim by his chaps, While he in vain at either snaps. Or else as Phoebus, when full fraught, And tipled with his mornings draught, Reels like a drunken Jackanapes, With bladder tight, o're soyl that gapes: And afterwards in corner odd, Perhaps lesse thirsty, empties codd. So fares it with my friends, (god wot) Whom treasure skips t'enrich the Scot. Leave then that wretched Climate, where Thy wants have rid thee like the Mare; And haste to Town, where thou shalt find Thy friend, that now hath newly din'd. I. S. ay twenty sixt, and when Iohn saies, aces about, the Month obays.
The same, to the same. WHy how now friend, why com'st no hither? Hast thou not leave as light as feather? Here have I mark't a Butt of Sack Whose maiden-head shall welcome Iack, 'Against which when drawer advanc'd gimlet I suffer'd him not, but did him let. And yet thou comm'st not; Why dost pause And there continue, keeping Dawes? Does Hostesse stay thy steed perforce, For that which was not fault of Horse? Thou haste command of more then one, For I have seen at tail of Iohn, Full Palfreys sixty in array, (I mean upon the Muster-day) Or art thou entertain'd to give Physick to one, that else might live, Some aged Sir, whose wife is bent To change him for a Cock of Kent. Well, be it what it will, I'le swear, There's something in't, that thou stay'st there Howe're, let businesse, wine, or friendship, Draw thee from out that Northern endship. If none of those provoke thy straddle, Take pitty on my riming noddle, That restlesse runs with numbers fierce, And's troubled with a flux of verse.
On that condition I'le relate, Once more to Captain, newes of State: Judge Bartlet sitting on his stall, In Westminster, with's back to the wall, Was there surpriz'd, and grip'd by th'wrist By Maxwell, with his clouter fist; Who truss'd the Judge, and bore him hot, To the Sheriff's house, but plum'd him not; For there he set him down i'th Hall, And left him to them, robes and all. As when a pack of eager Hounds, Hunting full cry along the grounds, Take o're some common moor, that's fraught With old cast Jades, and good for nought: Who, conscious of their fates, do hale up Their thin short tails, and try to gallop, Get out o'th way for life and limme, Each fearing they are come for him. So far'd the Judges, such fears wrung'em, When Maxwell spent his mouth among 'em. Then come away, man, places stoop, Yet thou remainst in fortune's poop. If thou wert set to ride the Circuit, In Bartlet's room, how thou wouldst firk it. The art is, to forget acquaintance, And break a jest in giving Sentence, Which thou wilt learn, and then be quick With Sherif's, and thou hast the trick. These lessons con, and keep in store, From S that hath an I before.
From Bromely, where I ghuess by th' Mill-Dike That tis the Moneth sirnamed Fill-Dike Which govern's now, and I beleeve The day is Tom of Straffords Eve, Full sixteen hundred yeares (I hold) And fifty (bating five twice told) Expired are since yeare of grace I'th Almanack first shew'd his face: Or (which is nearer to our trade) Twelve score and two, since Guns were made. The Gallants of the Times. Supposed to be made by Mr. William Mur∣rey of His Majesties Bed-chamber. COme hither the maddest of all the Land, The Bear at the Bridge-foot this day must be baited Gallants flock thither on every hand Waggswantonly minded, & merry conceited Ther's Wentworth, and Willmott, and Weston an Cav If these are not mad boys, who the devil would you have▪ To drink to Will Murray, they all doe agre And every one crys, To mee, boys, to mee!
A great Burgandine for Will Murray's sake George Symonds, he vows the first course to take: When Stradling a Graecian dogg let fly, Who took the Bea by the nose immediatly; To see them so forward Hugh Pollard did smile Who had an old Curr of Canary Oyl, And held up his head that George Goring might see, Who then cryed aloud, To mee, boys to mee! Tis pleasure to drink among these men For they have witt and valour good store, They all can handle a sword and a pen Can court a lady and tickle a whore, And in the middle of all their wine, Discourse of Plato, and Arretine. And when the health coms fall-down on their knees, And hee that wants, cry, to me boys to mee Cornwallais was set in an upper room With halfe a duzzen smal witts of his size▪ He sent twice or thrice to have him come down, But they would admitt him in no manner wise Though, in a full bowle of Rhenishhe swear, Hee'd never tell more, when woemen were there, But they all cry'd alou'd his tongue is too free He is not company for such as wee.
The Answer, By Mr. Peter Apsley. THough Marray be, undoubtedlie, His countrey's cheifest wit; And none but those converse with him Are held companions fitt: Yett I do know som Holland blades Shall vie witth him for it, hey downe, ho downe Hay downe downe derry dery downe! Thinke not all praises due, For some that buff do weare Can whore and rore and sweare And drink and talke and fight as well as you. Your Wentworth and your Weston Your Stradling and your Tred, I know they are as joviall boys As ever Taverne bred And can somtimes like souldiers live A weeke without a bedd, hey doune &c. George Generall of Guenifrieds He is a joviall Lad; Though his Heart and Fortunes disagree Oft times to make him sad: Yet give him but a flout or two And strait you'l swear hees mad: Hey downe, &c.
There's Sydenham Crofts and Kelligrew Must not be left behind And that old smooth-fac'd Epicure They call him Harry Wind For if you do discourse with him Such company you'l finde: hey downe, &c. There's little Geofrey Peeters, As good as any of those If hee'd leave his preventing way Of abusing his great nose Hee s witt and Poett good enough That hee can pawne his cloathes: hey downe, &c. There is a joviall Parson Who to these men doth preach: On the week days he does learn of them, And on Sundays does them teach. Of books and of good company Hee takes his share of each, hey down ho down, Hey down down dery dery down! Thinke not all prayses due For if he did not weare A gowne hee'd roare and sweare And drink and talke and fight as well as you.
The Bursse of Reformation. WE wil go no more to the old Exchang, Theres no good ware at all: Their bodkins and their thimbles too Went long since to Guild-hall. But we will to the new Exchange Where all things are in fashion And we will have it hence forth call'd The Burse of reformation. Come lads and lasses, what do you lack Here is weare of all prizes Here's long & short; heres wide & straight; Here are things of all sizes. Madam, you may fitt your selfe With all sorts of good pinns, Sirs, here is jett and here is hayre, Gold and cornelian rings, Here is an english conny furr, Rushia hath no such stuff, Which for to keep your fingers warme, Excells your sables muffe. come ladds, &c. Pray you Madam sitt, ile shew good ware For crowding nere fear that, Against a stall or on a stool Youl nere hurt a crevatt.
Heers childrens bawbles and mens too, To play with for delight. Heer's round-heads when turn'd every way At length will stand upright. Come ladds, &c. Heer's dice, and boxes if you please To play at in and inn, Heers hornes for brows, & browes for hornes, Which never will be seen. Heer is a sett of kettle pinns With bowle at them to rowle: And if you like such trundling sport Here is my ladyes hole. Come ladds, &c. Heer's shaddow ribbon'd of all sorts, As various as your mind, And heer's a Wind-mill like your selfe Will turne with every wind. And heer's a church of the same stuff Cutt out in the new fashion, Hard by's a priest stands twice a day Will serve your congregation. Come ladds, &c. Heer are som presbyterian things, Falne lately out of fashion, ecause we hear that Prester Iohn Doth circumcize his nation.
And heer are independant knacks, Rais'd with his spirits humor. And heer's cheap ware was sequestred, For a malignant tumor. Come ladds, &c. Heer patches are of every cut, For pimples and for scarrs, Here's all the wandring planett signes, And som oth' fixed starrs, Already gum'd to make them stick, They need no other sky, Nor starrs for Lilly for to vow To tell your fortunes by, Come ladds, &c. To eject Powder in your hayre, Here is a pritty puff; Would for cliser case serve too, Were it fil'd with such stuffe. Madam, here are Pistachie nutts, Strengthening Oingo roots; And heea's a preserv'd Apricock With the stones pendant too't. Com Lads, &c. Here are Perriwiggs will fit all Hayres, False beards for adisguise; I can help lasses which are bare In all parts, as their thighs. If you'l engage well, here you may Take up sine Holland Smocks.
We have all things that women want Except Italian Locks. Come Ladds, &c. Here are hot Boyes have backs like bulls, At first sight can leap lasles; And bearded Ladds hold out like Goats: And here are some like Asses. Here are Gallants can out-do Your Usher or your Page; You need not go to Ludgate more Till threescore yeares of age. Come Ladds, &c. Madam, here is a Politicus Was Pragmaticus of late, And here is an Elentichus That Fallacies doth prate: Here is the Intelligencer too, See how 'bout him they throng▪ Whilst Melanchollicus alone Walks here to make this song. Com Ladds, &c. Then lett's no more to the Old Exchange There's no good ware at all, Their Bodkins, and their Thimbles too, Went long since to Guild-Hall. But we will to the New Exchange Where all things are in Fashion,
And vve vvill have it henceforth call'd, The Burse of Reformation. Come Ladds, & Lasses, vvhat do you lack? Here is vvare of all prizes; Here's long and short, here's vvide and straight, here are things of all sizes. The Answer. WE will go no more to the new Ex∣change Their Credit's like to fall, Their Money and their Loyalty Is gone to Goldsmith's Hall. But we will keep our Old Exchange, VVhere wealth is still in Fashion, Gold Chaines and Ruffes shalt beare the Bell, For all your Reformation. Look on our VValls and Pillars too You'l find us much the sounder: Sir Thomas Gresham stands upright But Crook-back was your founder. There you have poynts and pinns and rings, With such like toyes as those, There Patches Gloves and Ribons gay, And O our money goes. But when a Fammily is sunck, And Titles are a fading,
Some Merchant's daughter setts you up, Thus great ones lives by trading. Look, &c. Marke the Nobility throughout, Moderne and Antient too, You'l see what power the Citty had And how much it could do. Not many houses you'l observe Of honour true or seeming, But have received from the Burse Creation or redeeming. Look, &c. Our wonted meetings are at twelve, VVhich all the world approves, But you keep off till candle-time, To make your secret Loves. Then you come flocking in a maine Like birds of the same feather, Or beasts repayring to the Arke Uncleane and cleane together. Look, &c, Wee strike a bargaine on the Exchange, But make it good else where, And your procedings are alike Though not so good I fear. For your commodities are naught, How ever you may prize them,
Then corners and darke holes are sought, The better to disguize them, Looke, &c. We walke ore cellars richly fill'd; With spices of each kind, You have a Taverne underneath, And so you'r undermin'd. If such a building long endure All sober men may wonder, When giddy and light heads prevaile, Both above ground and under. Look, &c. Wee have an Office, to ensure Our shipps and goods at sea: No tempest, rock, or pyrat, can Deprive us of that plea. But if your Ladies spring a leake Or boarded be and taken; Who shall secure your Capitoll And save your heads from aking! Look, &c. Then wee'l go no more to the new Eexchange Their credit's like to fall, Their money and their loyalty, Is gone to Gold-smiths hall. But wee will keep our old exchange, Where wealth is still in fashion,
Gold chaines and ruffs shall bear the bell, For all your reformation. Look on our walls and pillars too, You'l finde us much the sounder: Sir Thomas Gresham stands upright, But Crook-back was your founder. On S. W. S. and L. P. Shee that admires her servant's face, His stature, limbs, or haire, Does not conceive the moderne waies Of Ladies, wise and faire. Hee's but short, Care not for't, There be tall ones enough, Though his head Bee all redd, Let his coyne bee so too. What though his nose turne in and out With passage wide and large, Not much unlike a rainy spout, His humors to discharge, Though his back, Weare a pack Tis a toy among friends,
So by hook, Or by crook, We may compasse our ends. 'Tis not your witt nor language charme, That takes a femall eare A paire of pendants worth a farme Are held more welcom there. You abuse Your poor muse, When you write us fine fancies; For no love Can improve Without suppers or daunces. God dam-mee is a good conceit, If they who sweare present us; For that's your only taking baite Words nere can circumvent us. There belongs More then songs To a necklace or gown, When your plays And essays May be had for a crown.
The Tytre-Tues, or A Mock-Songe to the tune of Chive-Chase. By Mr George Chambers. TWo madcaps were commited late, For treason, as some say; It was the wisdom of the State, Admire it all you may. Brave Andrew Windsor was the prince George Chambers favorite. These two bred this unknowne offence I wo'd they had bine be— They call themselves the Tytere-tues And wore a blew Rib—bin, And when a drie, would not refuse, To drink—O fearefull sinn! The Councell, which is thought most wise, Did sett so long upon't, That they grew wearie, and did rise, And could make nothing on't. But still, the common people cri'd, This must not be forgot; Some had for smaller matters di'd They'd don—wee know not what: Hang'd, drawne, and quarter'd, must they be, So Law doth sett it downe, It's punishment for papistrie That are of high renowne.
My Lord of Canterburie's grace This treason brought ot light El's had it bin a pitious case But that his power and might Had queld their pride which swell'd to high; For which the child ungot May with him live e'ne till hee die As silie sheepe that rott. Let Papist frowne what need wee care Hee lives above their reach: And will his silver Mitre weare Though now forgot to preach. If hee were but hehind mee now, And should this ballad heare; Sure he'd revenge with bended bow And I die like a Deere. A Northern Ballet. THere dwelt a man in faire Westmerland Ionne Armestrong men did him call, He had nither lands nor rents coming in, Yet he kept eight score men in his hall. He had Horse and Harness for them all, Goodly Steeds were all milke white, O the golden bands an about their necks; And their weapons they were all alike.
Newes then was brought unto the King, That there was sicke a won as hee, That lived syke a bold out-Law And robbed all the north country. The King he writt an a letter then A letter which was large and long, He signed it with his owne hand, And he promised to doe him no wrong; When this letter came Ionne untill His heart it was as blyth as birds on the tree, Never was I sent for before any King My father, my Grandfather, nor none but mee. And if wee goe the King before, I wolud we went most orderly, Every man of you shall have his scarlet cloak Laced with silver laces three. Every won of you shall have his velvett coat Laced with sillver lace so white, O the golden bands an about your neck's Black hatts, white feathers, all alyke. By the morrow morninge at ten of the clock Towards Edenburough gon was hee And with him all his eight score men, Good lord it was a goodly sight for to see,
When Ionne came befower the King He fell downe on his knee, O pardon my Soveraine Leige, he said O pardon my eight score men and mee. Thou shalt have no pardon, thou traytor strong For thy eight score men not thee For to morrow morning by ten of the clock, Both thou and them shall hang on the gallow tree. But Ionne looke'd over his left shoulder Good Lord what a grevious look looked hee; Saying asking grace of a graceles face, Why there is none for you nor me. But Ionne had a bright sword by his side, And it was made of the mettle so Free, That had not the king stept his foot aside He had smitten his head from his faire bodde. Saying, fight on my merry men all, And see that none of you be taine, For rather then men shall say we were hange'd Let them report how we were slaine. Then god wott faire Eddenburrough rose And so besett poore Ionne rounde That fowerscore and tenn of Ionnes best men Lay gasping all upon the ground.
Then like a mad man Ionne laide about, And like a mad man then fought hee, Untill a falce Scot came Ionne behinde, And runn him through the faire boddee. Saying, Fight on my merry men all, And see that none of you be taine, For I will stand by and bleed but a while, And then will I come and fight againe. Newes then was brought to young Ionne Armestrong, As he stood by his nurses knee, Who vowed if er'e he live'd for to be a man, Oth' the treacherous Scots reveng'd hee'dbe. By Mr. Richard Barnslay. FAme told mee, Lady, your fayr hands would make A willow garland for me; O forsake That dismall office, it do's not agree With those sweet looks, that fair aspect in thee. Fayrest of women, canst thou bee my friend? And with thine owne hand hasten on my end? If I must loose thee, let mee loose thee so As not to bee my utter overthrow.
Time lessons sorrow, we endure our crosses, And happier fortunes may redeem our losses, But if I wear one branch of that sad tree, I shall remember it eternally, What prize I lost; and then in some sad grove Of discontent, where fearfull ghosts doe rove Of the forsaken lovers, there I'le bee And only they shall keep mee company. Untill these eyes, in some unpollish'd cave Running like fountaines, weare mee forth a grave, And then I'le dye, yet first I will curse thee Damned, unlucky, fruitlesse willow-tree Still mayest thou withered stand, mayst nev'r bee seen Clad in sweet summers pride, may'st nev'r grow greene; May every bryer, and every bramble bee, Like a full Cedar, or huge Oake to thee: And when some cankerd axe shall hewe thee down, Come never neerer citty, house or towne, But bee thou burnd, yet never mayst thou bee A christmas block for joviall company. But bee thou placed neare some ugly itch To burne some murderer, or damned witch. Cast away Willow, Lady, then, and thse, Dog-tree, or hemlock, or the mornfull yewes Torne from some church-yard side, the cursed thorne
Or else the weed, which still before it's borne Nine times the devill sees; if you command Ile weare them all, compos'd by your fayre hand So that you'l grant mee, that I may goe free From the sad branches of the willowe tree. Ad Johannuelem Leporem, Lepi∣dissimum, Carmen Heroicum. I Sing the furious battails of the Sphaeres Acted in eight and twenty fathom deep, And from that There began the Utopian accompt of years, Mor: Lib. 1. circa finem. time, reckon so many yeares You'l find Endimion was a handsome young Welshman, whom one Luce Moone lov'd for his sweet breath; and would never hang off his lips: but he not caring for her, eat a bundance of toasted cheese, purposely to make his breath unsavory; upon which, the lest him presently, and ever since 'tis proverbially spoken [as inconstant as Luce Moone.] The Uatican coppy of Hesiod, reades her name, Mohun, but contractedly it is Moone. Hesiod. lib. 4. tom. 3. Endimion fell fast asleep. And now assist me O ye For all the Orbes make Musick in their motion, Berosus de sphaera. lib. 3. Musiques nine That tell the Orbs in order as they sight,
And thou dread Atlas was a Porter in Mauritania, and because by reason of his strength, he bore burthens of stupendious weight, the Poëts sain'd, that he carried the Heavens on his shoulders. Cicero. de nat. Deorum. lib. 7. Atlas with thine eyes so fine, Smile on me now that first begin to write. There were two others of these names, Aldermen of Rome. Tit. Liu. hist. lib. 28. Pompey that once was Tapster of New-Inne, And fought with AEmathia, is a very faire Common in Northampton∣shire, Strabo. lib. 321. Caesar on th' These Myrmidons were Cornish-men, and sent by Bladud, sometimes King of this Realme, to ayd Pompey. Caesar de bello. civili. lib. 14. AEma∣thian plaines, First with his dreadfull These Myrmidons were Cornish-men, and sent by Bladud, sometimes King of this Realme, to ayd Pompey. Caesar de bello. civili. lib. 14. Myrmidons came in And let them blood in the Hepatick veines. But then an Antelope in Sable blew, Clad like the It seemes not to be meant by Count Henry, but his brother Maurice, by comparing his picture to the thing here spoken of. Iansen, de praed. lib. 22. Prince of Aurange in his Cloke, Studded with Satyres, on his Army drew, And presently Pheander was so modest, that he was called the Maiden Knight; and yet so valiant, that a rench Cavaeer wrote his life, and called his Book, Pheandir the Mailen Knight. Hon. d'Vrsec. Tom. 45. Pheanders Army broke.
This seemes not to be that King, that was Son of Amintas, and King of Macedon; but one who it seems was very lascivious: for I suspect there is some obscaene conceit in that word Club in the third verse following besides, marke his violence. Philip, for hardiness sirnamed Chub, In Beauty equall to fork-bearing Bacchus, was a drunken yeoman of the Guard to Queen Elizabeth, and a great Archer; so that it seemes the Authour mistooke his halbert, for a forke. Bacchus, Made such a thrust at This was Long-Megg of Westminster, who after this conflict with Phillip, followed him in all his warres. Iustinian. lib. 35. Phaebe, with his Club, That made the These were Lancashire-men, and sent by King Gorbadug (for this war seemes to have been in the time of the Heptarchy in England) to the aide of Caesar. Caesar. lib. citat. prope finem. Parthians cry, she will be∣cack us. VVhich heard, the Delphick Oracle drew nigh, To wipe faire Phaebe, if ought were amiss, But And therefore, the herb into which he was tur∣ned, was called Turnsole. Ovid. Metam. lib. 25. Heliotrope, a little crafty spye, Cry'd clouts were needless, for she did but piss A subtle Gloworme lying in a hedge And heard the story of sweet cheek't Appollo, was Caesars Page, and a Monomatapan by birth, whose name by inversion was Ollopa: which in the old language of that Country, signifies as much as faire youth: but, Euphoniae Gratia, called Apollo, Gor. Bec. lib. 46. Ap∣pollo, Snarch'd from bright Styropes, was a lame Smiths-man dwelling in S. Iohns-street; but how he was called Bright, I know not, except it were by reason of the Luster of his eyes. Styropes his Antick sledge
And to the butter'd Flownders cry'd out, Holla, mistaken for Apollo. Holla. Holla you pamper'd Jades, quoth he, look here, And mounting straight upon a Lobsters thigh An English man inflam'd with Cervisia (apud Medicos, vinum hordeaceum) potus est Anglis longè charissimus; Inventum Ferrarij Londi∣nensis, Cui nomen Smuggo, Polydor. Virgil, de Invent. rerum. lib. 2. double Beere, Swore nev'r to Impp. Germaniae, antiquitus solbant, aris temporibus, adire Basingstochium; ubi, de more, Iusjurandum solenne praestabant, de non viro propinando, praesente muliere: Hic Mos, jamdudum apud Anglos, pene vim legis obtinuit; quippe gens illa, longe humanissima morem istum, in hodiernum usque diem, magna Curiositate, pari Comitate conjuncta, usurpant. Pancirol—utriusque imperij. lib. 6. cap. 5. drink to Man, a Woman by. By this time grew the conflict to be It seemes this was a great battail, both by the furie of it, & the aydes of each side; but hereof read more, in Cornel. Tacit. lib. de moribus German. hot, Boots against boots 'gainst This is in imitation of Lucan—Signis Signa, & pila—&c. Pharsali. lib. 1. in principio. Sandals, Sandals, fly.
Many poor thirsty men went to the pot, Feathers lopt off, spurrs every where did lie. Caetera deiderantur. Bagnall's Ballet, supplied of what was left out in Musarum Deliciae. A Ballet, a ballet! let every Poet, A ballett make with speed: And he that has wit, now let him shew it; For never was greater need: And I that never made ballett before; Will make one now, though I never make more. Oh Women, monstrous women, What do you meane to doe! It is their pride and strange attire, Which binds me to this taske; Which King, and Court, did much admire, At the last Christmas maske, But by your entertainment then, You should have smal cause to come there agen. Oh Women, &c.
You cannot bee contented to go, As did the women of old; But you are all for pride and show, As they were for weather and cold, O Women, women! fie, fie, fie, I wonder you are not ashamed. O Women, &c. Where is the decency becom; Which your fore-mothers had? With Gowns of Cloth, and Capps of Thrum, They went full meanly cladd. But you must jett it in silkes and gold; Your pride, though in winter, is never a cold. O Women, &c. Your faces trick'd and painted bee, Your breasts all open bare: So farr that a man may almost see Unto your Lady ware: And in the church, to tell you true, Men cannot serve God for looking on you, O Women, &c. And at the Devills shopps you buy, A dresse of powdered hayre, On which your feathers flaunt and fly, But i'de wish you have a care, Lest Lucifer's selfe who is not prouder Do one day dresse up your haire with a powder. O Women, &c.
And many thereare of those that go Attyr'd from head to heele, That them from men you cannot know Unlesse you do them feele, But oh for shame though they have none, Tis better believe, and let them alone, O Women, &c. Both round and short they cut their hayre Whose length should women grace, Loose like themselves, their hatts they weare. And when they come in place, Where courtshipp and complements must bee, They do it like men with cappe and knee. O Women, &c. They at their sides against our laws, With little punyards go, Which surely is, (I thinke) because, They love mens weapons so; Or else it is they'le stobb all men, That do refuse to stabb them agen. O Women, &c, Doublets like to men they weare, As if they ment to flout us, Trust round with poynts and ribbons fayre, But I pray letts look about us; For since the doublett so well doth fitt 'um, They will have the breeches; and if they can get 'um. O Women, &c.
Nor do they care what a wise man saith, Or preachers in their defame. But jeer and hold him an asse; but I faith They'd blush if they had any shame: For citty and countrey do both deride 'um And our King, God blesse him, cannot abide 'um. O Women, &c. And when the mask was at the court, Before the King to be showne, They got upon seats to see the sport, But soon they were pull'd down; And many were thrust out of dores, Their coats well cudgel'd, & they cal'd whores. O King, Relligious King, Godsave thy Majestie. And so with prayers to God on high, To grant his highnesse peace, Wee hope we shall finde remedie To make this mischiefe cease: Since he in Court has tane so good order, The citty leave to the Maior and Recorder, O King, Relligious King, God blesse thy majestie. And women all whom this concerns, Though you offended bee; And now in foule and rayling tearms Do swagger and scold at mee;
I tell you, if you mend not your waies The devil will fetch you all, one of these days, Oh Women monstrous Women! What do you mean to do? Mr. Smith, to Sir John Mennis, up∣on the surrender of Conway Castle by the Ar, BY. ANd how? and how? hast thou cry'd quit∣tance With Mountaine, Bishop, and his Brittaines Who after all his changes, had Yet one trick more, to make John mad? Hadst thou, for this, charge of the Keyes Old as the Castle? and the payes Of Men unborne? that never took A name, but from thy Muster-Book? Hast thou been honour'd with the knee Of the Time-aged-Porter? Hee Who after reverence, humbly sate Below the Salt, and munch'd his Sprat, And after all this to be vex't Past sufferance, by a Man o'th 'Text! Well! now thou'rt come in sight of Pauls, Hast thou compounded for thy Coales And swallowed glib in hope to thrive, The Covenant, and Oath Negative
With hand lift up, like those that are Indicted for less crimes at Barre? Beleeve me, friend, it is a Burden Worse then a close-stoole with a Turd in. Yet if from Brittish rocks th' hast brought A heard of Goats, or Runts, or ought That Country yeilds; Flannel, Carnoggins, Store of Meeglin in thy waggons; Less needst thou dwindle to appeare Man At Goldsmiths-Hall before the Chaire-man: Or if th'ast plundered Pedlars-pack And truss'd it on thy knightly back, Rich in Box-whistles, combs in cases, Tape white and blue, points, inkle, laces, 'T may satisfye those hungry Kings; They'l hang ee else in thine own strings. And now I call to mind the tale, How mounted in thy nights of ale Thou rod'st home duely to thy Den On back of resty Cittizen, Still pressing as the cattle grew Weary, at every stage, a new: Some thorough-pac'd, and sure of foot Some tripping, with string-halt to boot, Now 'tis their time, and thou art ore- Ridden by them, thou roadst before. So have I seen the flyes in Summer, Yellow as was the neighbouring scummer, With shambling thighs, each other back By turns, and traverse o're the rack. Ah! worthy friend, it makes me mad
To count the dayes, that we have had; When we might freely meet and drink And each man speak what he did think. Now every step we doubt, and word As men to passe some unknown for'd. As Patridges devide their way When stoop'd at by the Birds of prey, And dare not from their coverts peep Till night's come on, and all's asleep, Then from their severall brakes they hast, And call together to repast. So frighted by these buzzards, flye Our scattered friends, and sculking lye Till cover'd in the night, they chant And call each other to the hant, Some trusty Taverne, where in bowles They drown their feares, & chirp pooresouls, What sad plight are we in? what pickles? That we must drink in conventicles? Search all the Centuries, there's none Like this fell Persecution; But when Time sorts, do but but command, At noon I'le meet thee, here's my hand. I. S. Dated, From house of Knight, in Nympton-Regis, Where one drinks, and another pledges, I meane at meales, the day is Jack, The 15 of the month that's black, Forty eight yeares, and sixteen hundred Since that of Grace, away are squandred,
And since Parliament begon (I hope you'l not forget that Iohn) Nothing remaines, but that I say, Good morrow; that's the time o'th day. An answer to a Letter from Sr. John Mennis, wherein he eeres him for falling so quickly to the use of the Directory. FRiend, thou dost lash me with a story, A long one too, of Directory; When thou alone deserves the Birch That broughtst the bondage on the Church. Didst thou not treat for Bristow Citty And yeld it up? the more's the pitty. And saw'st thou not, how right or wrong The common prayer-book went along? Didst thou not scourse, as if inchanted, For Articles Sir Thomas granted, And barter, as an Author saith, The Articles o'th' Christian faith? And now the Directory josles Christ out o'th' Church, and his Apostles; And tears down the commnion-rayles That Men may take it on their tayles. Imagine freind, Bochus the King, Engraven on Sylla's Signet ring, Delivering up into his hands Fugurth, and with him all his Lands,
Whom Sylla tooke and sent to Rome There to abide the Senate's doome, In the same posture, I suppose, Iohn standing in's doublet and hose, Delivering up, amidst the throng, The common-prayer and wisedom's song To hands of Fairfax to be sent A sacrifice to the Parliament: Thou litle thoughtst what geare began Wrap't in that Treaty, Bus Iohn, There lurk'd the fire, that turn'd to cinder The Church; her ornaments to tinder. There bound up in that Treaty lyes The fate of all our Christmas pyes, Our holy-dayes there went to wrack Our Wakes were layd upon their back; Our Gossips spoones away were lurch'd Our feasts and fees for woemen church'd, All this and more ascribe we might To thee at Bristow, wretched knight, Yet thou upbraidst, and raylst in rime On me, for that, which was thy crime, So froward Children in the Sun, Amid' their sports some shrewd turne donne The faulty youth begins to prate, And layes it on his harmlesse mate, Dated From Nympton where the Cyder smiles And Iames has horse as lame as Gyles
The fourth of May; and dost thou heare, 'Tis as I take it, the eighth yeare Since Portugall by Duke Braganza Was cut from Spaine without a hand-saw. I. S. Mr. Smith's taking a Purge. IN morne when Phoebus peep't through crevis, Bold as our Brittish Guy or Bevis I powder took, and by his beams Befreinded, made a draught for Ieames. Long had it not in stomack been But from each part, came powding in Of uncouth gear such pregnant store That gutt 'gan grumble, nock runne ore. Have yee beheld with eager haste The trewant Citts when scene is past, (As if they meant their ribs to burst While each beares up to get our first) Cloy up the doore, till passage small Into one body rammes 'em all, And then in steed of men and witt Delivers up a lumpe of citt. With no lesse furie in a throng Away these tachie humors flung,
And downwards in a rage they drew To ramble, and bid nock adieu: But when they came to portall nastie Bumme was so straite, and they so hastie, That many a worthy pellett must Into one Booming shott bee thrust, At rumbling noyse the mastive growls The fighted mice forsake their holes, And Souldiers to my window come Invited thither by my drum, Tire'd with this hideous coyle behinde Nocke layd a but him hard for winde, Hee chaf'd, and fom'd, as buck embo'st, And painted like a oad that's tost. At length he gaind a litle tyme, And cleard his Organ from the slime; Palewas his look, (for to be blunt), Arse could not sett a good face on't. But yet hee strove with visage wan To vent himselfe; and thus began. Oh dismall Dose! oh cursed geere! Will all thy body runne out here? Will vaynes, and sinnews, flesh, and bone Be gadding, and leave nock alone? Is it decreed, oh crewell fates! So Mindus at her citty gates As was suspected there about Some time or other might runne out, A Divell sure bakt, and stale Was grated in my posset-ale,
Or else 'twas powder of the bones Of some foote souldier dead for the nonce, For all the way he travailes North Through stomack, belly, and so forth. Some what he seizes in each towne, And take's it with him as his owne; Well, what so ere thou wer't, be sure Thy vengeance 'ile no more indure, Nor shall the head or stomack put More then is fitting into gutt. Why could not nostrells, eyes, or eare, By milde expences vent you there? Or vomitt, by a neerer way, Discharge what in the stomak lay? Or i'st not justice they that pas'd The pleasure, should the bitter taste? Can you accuse mee? ever came Ought in by me did body blame? Unlesse your keeping ope my doore Drew wind, to make the fabrick roare; I was contented once a day While you were temperate, to obay, But he is cur'st that's forc't to stand All the day long with hose in hand. Nor was the spincter muscle put At every turne to ope and shut, But there to stand, and notice take Who pass'd, and when, and for whose sake. Therefore bee warn'd keepe better dyet That all of us may live at quiett.
Or ile stop up the abuse'd course And send up fumes will make you worse And you (as Mayerne doth) they say Divert the vent another way, Then spight of physick, in a word, I'le make your pale tast a tourd, And when you belch I'le turne the sent To perfect smell of fundament. The Miller and the King's Daughter, By Mr. Smith. There were two Sisters they went a playing, With a hie downe, downe, a downe-a- To see their fathers ships come sayling in With a hy downe, downe, a downe-o- And when they came unto the sea-bry, With, &c, The elder did push the younger in; With, &c. O Sister, O Sister, take me by the gowe, With, &c, And drawe me up upon the dry ground. With, &c. O Sister, O Sister, that may not bee, With, &c.
Till salt and oatmeale grow both of a tree; With, &c. Somtymes she sanke, Somtymes she swam, With, &c. Untill she came unto the mil-dam; With, &c. The miller runne hastily downe the cliffe, With &c, And up he be took her withouen her lif, With, &c. What did he doe with her brest bone? With, &c. He made him a viall to play thereupon, With, &c. What did he doe with her fingers so small? With, &c. He made him peggs to his Violl withall; With, &c. What did he doe with her nose-ridge? With, &c. Unto his Violl he made him a bridge, With, &c. What did he do with her Veynes so blewe? with, &c.
He made him strings to his Viole thereto; with, &c. What did he doe with her eyes so bright? with, &c. Upon his Violl he playd at first sight; with, &c. What did he doe with her tongue soe rough? with, &c. Unto the violl it spake enough; with, &c. What did he doe with her two shinnes? with, &c. Unto the violl they danc't Moll Syms; with, &c. Then bespake the treble string, with, &c. O yonder is my father the King; with, &c. Then bespake the second string, with &c. O yonder sitts my mother the Queen: with, &c. And then bespake the stringes all three; with, &c.
O yonder is my sister that drowned mee. with, &c. Now pay the miller for his payne, with, &c. And let him bee gone in the divels name. with, &c. Mr. Smith, to Tom Pollard, and Mr. Mering. MY hearty commendations first remem∣bred To Tom, & Robbin tall men, and well timberd Hoping of both your welfares, and your blisse Such as my selfe enjoy'd when I wrote this; These are to let you understand and know, That love will creepe there where it cannot go And that each morning I doe drink your healths After our Generalls, & the Commonwealths; For nothing is more fatall then disorder Especially now Lesly's on the Border; That done we gather into Rankes and files, That a farre off we look like greeat wood piles; And then we practise over all our knacks With as much ease as men make Almanacks,
Size all our bulletts to a dram, we hate To kill a foe with waste unto the State, And for our carriage heere, it hath been such Declar't I cannot, but Ile give a touch: Here is noe outrage done, not one that Robbs Perhaps you think it strange Tom, so does Nobbs But tis as true as steele, for on my word; Their worst is drinking Ale, browne as their sword. But harke the fiendes are come close to Carlile, Lidsdale is cope't with Rebell-Scotts the while To u they send for helpe, the postboy skudds; And scoures his pallfrie in his propper Sudds, More I could write deare friends, but bad's the weather And time's as precious as you both to gether. But take not this unkindely; I professe There's no man more your servant then I S. New castle where the drouth has been That makes grasse short, and gelding thin: Iuly the fifth I wrote this letter One thousand six hunderd, & somewhat better
Upon Iohn Felton's hanging in Chaines at Ports-mouth, for killing the Duke of Buckingham. HEre uninterd suspends (though not to save Surviving friends the expences of a grave Felon's dead earth, which to the world must bee His own sad monument, his Elegye As large as fame, but whither bad o good I say not, by himself 'twas writ in blood For with his body thus entomb'd in ayre Arch't o're with Heaven, set with thousand faire And glorious Diamond-starrs; a Sepulcher Which time can never ruinate, and where Th'impartiall worme (which is not brib'd to spare Princes when wrapt in Marble) cannot share His flesh (which oft the charitable skyes Embalme with teares doing those obsequies Belong to men) shall last till pittying foul Contend to reach his body to his Soule. To Felton in the Tower. ENjoy thy bondage; make thy prison know, Thou hast a liberty thou canst not owe To such base punishment; keep't intire, since Nothing but guilt shackles they conscience.
I dare not tempt thy valiant blood to whey n feebling it with pitty, nor dare pray Thine act may mercy finde, lest thy great story something of its miracle and glory. I wish thy merit studied cruelty, Short vengance befreinds thy memory For I would have posterity to heare He that can bravely die can bravely beare. Torture seemes great unto a cowards eye 'Tis no great thing to suffer, less t dye. Should all the clowds fall out, & in that strife Lightning and thunder send o take my life, I should applaud the wisedome of my fate That knew to value me at such a rate As at my fall to trouble ll the skie, Emptying it self upon me Joves full Armoty; Thy soul before was straightned, thank thy doome To show her vertue she hath larger Roome, Yet sure if every artery were broke Thou wouldst finde strength for such another stroke. And now I leave thee unto death and fame Which lives to shake ambition at thy name, And (if it were no sin) the Court by it Should hourely sweare before a favorite. Farwell, for thy beame sake we shall not send Henceforth Commanders that wil foes defend Nor will it ever our just Monarch please To keep an Admirall to loose the Seas.
Farwell, undaunted stand, and joy to be Of publique sorrow the Epitome, Let the Duke's name suffer, and crowne thy thrall All we in him did suffer; thou for all. And I dare boldly write, as thou darst dye, Stout Felton, Englands ransome, here doth lye. To the Duke of Buckingham. THe King loves you, you him; both love the same, You love the King, he you, both Buck-in-game Of sport the King loves game, of game the Buck Of all men you, why you? Why see your luck. To the Same. SOme say, the Duke was vertuous, gratious, good, And Felton basely did, to spill his bloud. If it be so, what did he then amiss, In sending him the sooner to his bliss? All deaths seem pleasant to a good-man's Eye And bad men onely are afraid to dye; Chang'd he this Kingdome to possess a better, Then is the Duke become Iohn Felton's debter.
The Lawyer. LAwyers themselves up hold the Common weale, They punish such as do offend and steale; They free with subtill art the innocent, From any danger, losse, or punishment, They can, but will not, keep the world in awe By mis-expounded and distorted lawe; Alwayes they have great store of charity, And love they want, not keeping amitye. The Clients Transcription of the same Copy, having experienced the contrary. LAwyers themselves uphold the Common∣weale They punish such as do offend and steale. They free with subtill art the innocent, From any danger, losse, or punishment; They can, but will not keep, the world in awe By mis-expounded and distorted lawe Allwayes they have, great store of charity And love they want, not keeping amitye.
The reverend Canvase. SO lowd a lye on Sunday rung, So thicke a troupe, so grave a thrung, Assembled in a Church, to laugh, At nothing? pardon heavens; when halfe Had Gods marke on them? none so good To satisfie the hungry croud; With holsome doctrine; none so hardy With an howers talke to quitt the tardy? All silent brethren, and yet none Can speake by inspiration? Dares none so conscious of his merit, Or presuming on the sperit, With an edifying greeting Gratulate this zealous meeting? Is this a day or place (O sin!) For such to have a canvse in? Lord! how we sat like Queene Candace's Eunuch, reading each other faces! Expecting when some Philips heire Would come to ascend the sacred chaire. Whilst cousning Miles the bell still knockt T' increase the number of the mockt? But in conclusion all the cittie Was bidden to a nunc dimitte, And yet found no man to supply The office of dumbe Zacharie In our dismission, till wee tiring The bell and pullpit both conspiring,
Deprived of sound, and vesture told us The tenor onely preacht that calld us; A non sequitur, by Dr. Corbett. MArke how the Lanterns clowd mine eyes See where a moone drake ginnes to rise Satrne craules much like an Irn Catt, To see the naked moone in a slippshott hatt, Thunder thumping toad stooles crock the pots To see the Meremaids tumble Leather catt-a-mountaines shake their heeles To heare the gosh-hawke grumble The rustie threed, Begins to bleed, And cobwebs elbows itches The putrid skyes Eat mulsacke pies Backed up in logicke brecehes Munday trenchers make good hay The Lobster weares no dagger Meale-Mouth'd shee-peacockes powle the starres And make the lowbell agger Blew Crocodiles foame in the toe Blind meal-bagges do follow the doe A ribb of apple braine spice Will follow the Lancasheire dice Harke how the chime of Pluoes pispot cracks, To see the rainbowes wheele gnne, made of flax.
On Oxford Schollers going to Woodstock to heare Dr. Corbet preach before the King. THe King, and the Court Desirous of sport, At woodstock six dayes did lye Thither came the Doctors With their velvet sleev'd Proctors, And the rest of the learned frie. Some faces did shine More withale then with wine; So that each man there was thought And judged by theire hue (As it was then true). They were better fed then taught. A number beside With their wenches did ride (For Schollers you know are kind) And riding before Leand back evermore To kisse their wenches behind. A number on foot Without cloak, or boot And yet to the Court they wou'd Which was for to show How farr they wou'd go To doe his Majesty good, The reverend Deane With his ruff, starched clean
Did preach before the King A Ring there was spide In his band-string tyde Was not this a pritty thing? The Ring without doubt Was the thing put him out: So oft hee forgot what was next That all that were there Did thinke, and dare sweare, Hee handled it more then his Text. Horat. 34. Carm. od 10. ad. Ligurium. TIs true (proud boy) thy beauty may pre∣sume Thank Venus for't but when thy cheekes shall plume, When manly downe shall shade thy Childish pride And when thy locks (which dangle on each side Of thy white shoulders) shall no more remain; When thy vermilion cheeks (which do disdain, The glorious colour of the purple rose) Begin to fade, and Ligarinas loose His lovely face, being rudely stuck with haires Hard hearted boy) then wilt thou say with teares
(When looking for thy faire self in a glass Thou findest another there) Ah me! alas! What do I now perceive? why had not I? These thoughts when I was lovely smooth? or why? To these my thoughts which I now entertaine Doe not my Cheeks grow flik & young again? To his Mistris. I'le tell you whence the rose did first grow red And whence the lillie whitenesse borrowed You blush't and then the rose with red was dight. The lillie kist your hands and so came white Before that time the rose was but a staine The lillie nought but palenesse did containe You have the native colour; these they die And onely flourish in your livery. Upon a Cobler. COme hither, read (my gentle freind) And here behold a Coblers End, Long in length his life had gone But that he had no Last so long. O mighty death whose darts can kill. The man that made him soules at will.
On the death of the Lord Treasurer. IMmodest death, that would not once confer Dispose or part with our Lord Treasurer! Had he beene thee, or of thy fatall tribe, He would have spar'd thy life, and tane a bribe, He that so often had with gold and wit, Perverted law and allmost conjur'd it. He that could lengthen causes, and was able To starve a suitor at the councill-table At last not having Evidence to show Was faine (perforce) to take a deadly blow. The lover's Melancholy. HEnce, hence, all you vaine delights As short as are the nights Wherin you spend your folly! Ther's nought in this life sweet, If men were wise to ee't But only melancholly. Wellcome folded armes, and fixed eyes, A fight that peacing mortifies, A look that's fastened to the ground, A tongue chain'd up without a sound, Fountaines-heades and pathless groves Places which pale passion loves. Moone-light walkes when all the fowles Are warmely hous'd, save Bats and owls;
A midnight knell, a parting groane, These are the sounds wee feed upon; Then stretch our bones in a still gloomy valley Ther's nothing truly sweet, but melancholly; The answer, by Dr. Stroad. REturne my joyes and hither bring A tounge not made to speake, but sing; A joll ye splene, an inward feast, A causelesse laugh without a jest; A face which gladnesse doth annoint, An arme for joy flung out of joynt; A spritefull gate that leaves no print, And make a eather of a flint: A heart that's lighter then the ayre An eye still dancing in its sphere. Strong which mirth nothing shall controul A body nimbler then a soul: Free wandring thoughts not tied to muse Which thinking all things, nothing chuse; Which ere wee see them come, are gone, These, life it selfe doth feed upon. Then take no care but only to be jolly, To be more wretched then we must, is folly.
A Blush. STay hasty blood! where canst thou seek So blest a place as in her cheek? How can'st thou from the place retire VVhere beauty doth command desire? But if thou canst not stay, then show; Downe to her painting papps below Flow like a deluge from her breast VVhere Venus Swannes have built their nest, And so take glory to disteine The azure of each swelling vaine; Thence run thou boyling through each part Till thou hast warm'd her frozen heart; But if from love she would retire Then martyr her with gentle fire And having search't each secret place Fly back againe into her face; VVhere blessed live in changing those VVhite lillyes to a Ruddy rose: To his Mistris. Last when I saw thee, thou didst sweetly play The gentle theife, and stolst my heart away, Render't again or else give me thine owne In change, for two for thee (when I have none) Too many are, else I must say, Thou art A sweet facd creature with a double heart.
On Christ-church windowe, and Magdlen Colledge wall. YEe men of Galilee why gaze yee so On Mandlins necessary print, as though T'had bin enough for that pure virgin's sonne That was incarnate, dyed, & rose, to have done Those heavenly acts, that ransom'd al from hell And yet no visible effigies tell The eye, the manner how. Ye misconceive VVho think these sacred mysteryes must leave Impression onely in the soul; how then Shall those that bear more shape than mind of men, (Unlesse their outward sense informe them) know VVhat accidents their Saviour long ago Sustain'd? each wise man sees 'tis not the fate Of every ideot to be literate. And who can then forbid (ye Lay) to look And read those things without or line or book. Besides (if modestye may judge) what ist But a supply to each Evangelist? Long may the learned study, peace and scratch Before the forme of th' mainger, or the cratch Wherein Babe Christ was layd be understood. Each bungling joyner now may ken what wood The stall was made of where the long eared steed
And his associate Oxe did stand and feed. Each practis'd oastler knowes their meat, can say There is their provender, this is their hay. Yee now may learne the naked shepherds hew The stripling boy, and him it'h cap of blew, As perfectly as it had seene the clownes Each day a sunning on the jewish downes; 'Tis strange the dogg's not there, perhapps the Curr VVas left behind, for feare of noise or stirre: But veiw the venerable face whereon The horne and candle cast reflection, Observe it well if ere you chance to meet In paradise, you'le know't as soon as see't, Tis reverent Iosephs portraiture, see how▪ The very image seemes to cringe and bow, Marke well his beard, his eyes, his nose, if ought Be mist, tis yours, and not the painters fault. Then lead your eyes unto the beauteous one Who nere knew man, yet mother to a sonne. Doth not her face more fully speake her heart And joy, than text or comment can impart? But oh how little like her selfe when shee VVhose upcast, downe cast lookes, behold the tree? That fatall tree whereon the Lord of breath Expos'd himselfe to th'tyranny of death; VVas ever sorow so set forth? and yet To make the quire of heavinesse compleat,
The lov'd disciple bears his part, and so Doth that brave lasse that clips the Crosse below. Consult allauthors, English Greek & Lattin, You nere saw truer greife or finer sattin. Foule fall the bird whose undiscerning mute Presumes to turpifye so rich a suite; T'was very strange they durst so boldly greeve When those untutor'd hacksters of the Shreeve Close by sat armed Cap-a-pee with speares, And swords, and glittering helmets, or'e their eares Bestriding fiery steeds so markt so made Bucephalu's himselfe was but a jade Compar'd to these, why? who would be but vext To see such palryes here, and none it'h text? Next let your eyes and thoughts be fixt upon The sad-sad story of the passion; See how from side, from feet, from hands as yet The crimson blood trills down, you'l sweare twere wet; Were Thomas here himselfe, he would not linger But sooner trust his eyes then erst his finger. Mark how death's sable cloud doth over-spread His lips, his cheeks, his eyes, his sacred head. Behold death drawn to th'life, as if that hee Thus wrackt and stretch't upon th' accursed tree,
Had been of purpose nayld to th' crosse to try The Painters cunning hand, more than to dye. He left him dead, but twas not in the power Of grave, or hell to keep him, there one houre Beyond his own determination. Three dayes are past, and Ionah's type is done He walkes, and in full glory leaps from tombe: As Lazarus from th' earths insatiate wombe, But not to dye againe: meane while the guard Who vigilantly slept, soon as they heard Deaths prisoner, and their's so strangely rise Start up with frighted hearts and gastly eyes. They stare and muse, and sweare, the heardsmen talke Strange things, but nere till now saw dead men walke: Do but take notice how the rascalls look As if some prodigie had thunderstrook The villaines hearts, or some strange power had showne Medufae's head, and turnd them all to stone. Sure small perswasion would have made the Elves For feare of further paines to hang themselves: And blame them not, the Lord was now cal∣cin'd Bright as the Sun, his body so refin'd That not the sawcinesse of mortall eye Could stare upon such lustre and not dye. His glorifi'd humanity can stay
No more on earth, heaven calls, he must away; Yet ere he part hee'le take his leave, th'eleven, Attend, and see him ravisht into heaven. Their eyes (untill an interposing cloud Did interdict accesse of sight, and shrowd His godlike countenance from mortall ken) Still waite upon th'ascending Lord; but when Distance had snat cht him from their view, they lift Their hands to th' skie, as if they made some shift To draw him down againe, such was their love Theie scarse assent to his ascent above. Where once more, note, the text supplyed which tells Th'Apostles were spectators and none else But count byth' pole you'l find th' eleven in∣creast Their troops amount to five or sixe at least. Were Luke alive, hee'd thank the painters wit, Who saw his oversight and mended it. Let's yeeld to reason then, let him that lists Dispute the number of th' Evangelists; If Judgement ever please this thing to lift Or Greenbury or none must be the fift I've done, bur first Ile pray, hayle holy cloth And live in spight of rottennesse or moth. Nor time nor vermine ere shall dare to be Corruptors of so much Divinitie; But men of Galilee why do ye gaze, On that which may delight, but not amaze?
That's left for us; let any wise man bend His eyes towards our orientall end Hee'e blesse himselfe indeed, grow wise; with∣all Approaching take the window for a wall And then conclude that Wadehams perspective Nor Lincolnes stately types can long survive; They'le break for envie (spight of wise) to find Us to transcend themselves so farre behind; But Ile not prayse our own, 'tis far more fit To leave the talke to some fine Maud'lin wit, Who may enroule in some well languisht staine As we their walls, so they our lights againe Only I feare they will, (least we surpasse) Pull down their hall to build up Eastern glass. An Elegie. WHy faire vow-breaker, have thy sinnes thought fit That I be curst example of thy wit As well as scornes? (bad womn) have not I Deserv'd as much as quiet misery? Be wise and trouble not my suffering fit For every sin I have repentance yet, Except for loving thee; do not thou presse My easie madnesse to a wickednesse As high as that, least I be driven so As far from heaven as thou art, which I know
Is not thy ayme, for thou hast sin'd to be In place, as in affection, farre from me. Am I thy freind or kinsman? have I ought That is familiar with thee bettring thought A dreame and some few letters too, yet lye Neglected records of my injury. I know no itch my silent sorrowes moves: To begg a bridall kisse or paire of gloves These are the lighter dutyes which they seek Whose sleepe is sound & constant as the week Is in her nights, who never met the chaunce Of love amisse, but in a dreameing traunce And wak't to gladnesse; t'is not so with me My night and day are twins in misery. These spend-thrift eyes have beene prepar'd with feares To keep a solemne revelling in teares; Hadst thou beene silent I had known the shame Of that dayes union by my greife, not fame. Priva'te as sorrowes lodging had I dwelt Follow'd with my dispaire and never felt Anger except for livinge hadst thou bin Content with my undoinge 'Tis a sinn My love cannot forgive there to upbraid Awret chednesse which thou thy selfe hast made▪ Heaven knowes I sufferd, and I sufferd so That by me twas as infallible to know How passive man is, fate knew not a curse Except thy new contempt to make mee worse And that thou gav'st when I so low was brought
I knew not if I liv'd but yet I thought, And counted sighs and teares, as if to scann The aire and water would make up a man. Hadst thou not broake the peace of my decay Ere this I thinke 'de wept some sinns away, Being diseas'd, diseas'd past mine owne cure Thou wouldst needs kill which made mee to indure My patience: why (Ioyes murdresse) wouldst thou prove VVhether that bee as passive as my love? Had woman such a way as shee can give To man deniall, as of love to live? VVhy then th' abhored reason meers me; why Successless lovers doe so quickly dye, So be it with mee, but if any curse First can be fastned on thee which is worse Then thy unwept for vow-breach may it come As my greife heavye; may the tedious summe Of thy great sinns stand sentinell to keep Repentance from thy thoughts reach. May thy Sleep Be broken as my hopes, 'bove all may e Thou choosest husband ripe to jealousye. And find it true, to tell thee; may the theames On which thy sleepe doth paraphrase in dreames Bee my sad wrongs: and when some other shall (VVhom chance hath made with mee a∣pocryphall In loveing storyes) search an instance forth To curse his Mistris for her little worth,
May thy name meet him, under whom must be The Common place of womans perjury. May heaven make all this: and if thou pray May heaven esteeme as that thou didst that day Of thy last promises, I've said, be free This pennance done, then my dayes destinye By thee is antedated. But three sighs Must first pay my admission to the skyes. One for my madness, loving woman so That I could think her true; the next ile throw For wounded lovers, that i'le breath a new; The third shall pray my curses may prove true. In imitation of Sir Philip Sydnie's Encomium of Mopsa. ASsist mee Love, and Lov's, great Queen of Paphos Inspire my muse with straines more rich then Saphos! Approach you Heliconiau lasses, even Chaste Erato, Thalie and th' other seaven. Direct my quill whilst I her praises caroll out Whose paralle's not found in all the world about In lovelinesse sh' excells (and 'tis no wonder) Those brave Cicilian, forgers of Joves thunder, For chastity Im'e sure her equall none is Not Venus selfe that lov'd the faire Adonis.
Medea's not more mild, who as the talk is Made Iason steale the golden fleece from Cholchos. For modest silence, I dare say shee'l fit ye Wherein shee's not an ace behind Zantippe, But Oh! the comely graces of her feature Great Plutoes Cour affords not such a creature, Her golden tresses far surpasse Megaera's In compassing her lofty forehead, whereas No frown nor wrinckle ere appeares to fright ye But still more calme than smooth fac'd Am∣phirité. Beneath those vaulted cells are fixt those tor∣ches From whence proceeds that flame so fiercely siorches. Between both which her precious nose is pla∣ced, With fairest pearles and rubies rich encased. Next comes her heavenly mouth whose sweet composure Falls not within expressions, limmits, no sure. This even unto her precious eares doth guide us, Which makes her full as faire as great King Mydas. She's smooth as Pan, her skin (which you'le admire) is Like purest gold, more glorious far then Iris,
And to close up this Magazin of pleasures She most exactly treads god-Vulcans measures This is my Mistris Character, and if in These lines her name you misse; 'tis faire Befs Griffin. A Scholler that sold his Cussion. TOm I commend thy care of all I know, That souldst this Cushion for a pipe of To— Now art thou like though not to studdy more Yet ten times harder then thou didst before. On the death of Cut. Cobler. DEath and an honest Cobler fell at bate And finding him worne out, would needs translate; He was a trusty so'le, and time had bin He would well liquord go through thick and thin. Death put a trick upon him, and what was't? The Cobler call'd for All, death brought his last; 'Twas not uprightly done to cut his thread, That mended more and more till he was dead:
But since hee's gone, 'tis all that can be said, Honest Gut-Cobler here is underlayd. A Letter to Ben. Johnson. DIe Iohnson, crosse not our Religion so As to be thought immortall; let us know Thou art no God; thy works make us mistake Thy person, and thy great creations make Us I doll thee, and cause we see thee do Eternall things, think thee eternall too, Restore us to our faith and dye, thy doome Will do as much good as the fall of Rome: 'Twill crush an heresie, we ne're must hope For truth till thou be gon, thou and the Pope. And though we may be certaine in thy fall To lose both wit and judgement, braines and all, Thou Sack, nor Love, nor Time recover us Better be fooles then superstitious. Dye! to what end should we thee now adore There is not Schollership to live to more, Our language is refin'd: professors doubt Their Greek and Hebrew both shall be put out And we that Latin studied have so long Shall now dispute & write in Iohnsons tongue, Nay, courtiers yeeld, & every beautious wench Had rather speak thy English then her French.
But for thy matter fancy stands agast Wondering to see her strength thus best at last. Invention stops her course and bids the world Look for no more; she hath already hurld Her treasure all on one, thou hast out-done So much our wit and expectation, That were it not for thee, we scarse had known Nature her selfe could ere so farre have gon. Dye! seemes it not enough thy verse's date Is endlesse; but thine own prolonged fate Must equall it; for shame engross not age But now (the fith act ended) leave the stage. And let us clap, we know the Stars that do Give others one sife, give a laureat two. But thou, if thus thy body long survives, Hast two eternities, and not two lives. Die for thine own sake, seest thou not thy praise Is shortned onely by this length of daies. Men may talk this, and that, to part the strife, My tenet is, thou hast no fault but life. Old Authors do speed best, me-thinks thy warm breath Casts a thick mist betwixt thy worth, which death Would quickly dissipate. If thou wouldst have Thy Bayes to flourish, plant them on thy grave. Gold now is drosse, and Oracles are stuffe
With us, for why? Thou art not low enough. We still look under thee. Stoop, and submit Thy glory to the meanest of our wit. The Rhodsan Colossus, ere it fell, Could not be scan'd and measured, half so well. Lie levell to our view, so shall we see, Our third and richest University. Art's length, Art's heighth, Art's depth, can ne're be found, Till thou art prostrate, stretch'd upon the ground. Learning no farther then thy life extends, With thee began all Arts, with thee it ends. On a young Lady, and her Knight. A Vertuous Lady sitting in a muse, (As fair and vertuous, Ladies often use,) With elbow leant upon one knee so hard, The other distant from it half a yard. Her Knight, to quip her by a secret token, Said, Wife, arise, your Cabinet stands open. She rising, blush'd, and smilingly did say, Lock it then, if you please, you keep the key.
On a Welch-man's devotion. THe way to make a Welch-man thirst for blisse, And daily say his prayers on his knees, Is, to perswade him, that most certain 'tis, The Moon is made of nothing but green cheese: Then he'l desire nought else, nor greater boon, Then plac'd in heaven, to feed upon the Moon. On a Maid's Legge. FAir Betty us'd to tuck her coats up high, That men her foot and leg might soon espy. Thou hast a pretty legg, (saith one) fair Duck. Yea, two, (saith she) or else I have ill luck. They're two indeed, they're twins, I think, quoth he, They are, and yet they are not, Sir, said she; They're birth was both at once, I dare be sworn And yet between them both a man was born.
To his Sister. LOving sister, every line Of your last Letter, was so fine, With the best mettall, that the grain, Of Scriveners pin-dust had been vain. The touch of gold did sure instill Some vertue, more than did your quill. And since you write no cleanly hand, Your tokens make me understand. Mine eyes have here a remedy, Whereby to read more easily. I do but jest; Your love alone, Is my interpretation, My words I will recall, and swear, I know your hand is wondrous fair. On the death of Hobson, the Cambridge-Carrier. HEre Hobson lies, amongst his many bet∣ters, A man not learned, yet of many Letters; The Schollers well can justifie as much, Who have receiv'd them from his pregnant pouch.
His carriage is well known, oft hath he gone An Embassie, 'twixt father and the son. In Cambridge few (in good time be it spoken) But will remember him by some good token. From thence to London rode he day by day, Till death benighting him, he lost his way. Nor wonder is it, that he thus is gone, Since most men know, he long was drawing on. His Team was of the best, nor could he have Them mir'd in any ground, but in the grave; And there he sticks indeed, still like to stand, Untill some Angell lend his helping hand. So rests in peace the ever toiling Swain, And supream Waggoner, next Charls his wain. Another on the same. HEre lieth one, who did most truely prove, That he could never die, whilst he could move. So hung his destiny, never to rot, Whilst he could but jogg on, and keep his trot. Made of Sphear mettall, never to decay, Untill his resolution made of stay. Time numbers motion, yet without a crime, 'Gainst old truth, motion numbered out his time.
And like some Engine mov'd, with wheeles and weight, His principles once ceas'd, he ended streight. Rest, that gives all men life, gave him his death, And too much breathing put him out of breath. For had his doings lasted as they were He had been an immortall Carrier. Another. HEre lies old Hobson! Death hath his desire, And here (alasse) hath left him in the mire; Or else the waies being foul, twenty to one, He's here stuck in a slough, and overthrown. 'Twas such a shifter, that if truth were known, Death was half glad that he had got him down. For he hath any time this ten years full, Dog'dd him 'twixt Cambridge and the London-Bull. And surely death could never have prevail'd, Had not his weekly course of carriage fail'd. But lately finding him so long at home, And thinking now his journey's end was come; And that he had tane up his latest Inne, Death in the likenesse of a Chamberlin,
Shew'd him his room, where he must lodge that night, Pull'd off his boots, and took away the light. If any ask for him, it shall be sed, Hobson has supt, and newly gon to bed. Fr. Clark, Porter of St. Johns, To the President. HElp Silvanus, help god Pan, To shew my love to this kinde man, Who out of's love and nature good, Hath well encreas'd my store of wood. And whilest he the same peruses, Wood-Nymphs help instead of Muses. Oh thou that sitst at St. Iohns helm, I humbly thank thee for my Elme; Or if it chance an Oak to prove, With heart of Oak I thank your love. This Tree (to leave all Ovid's fables) Shall be the Tree of Predicables. Or if you like not that opinion, The kindred Tree of great Iustinian. Thus finer Wits may run upon't, But I do mean to make fire on't: By which I'le sit and sing, in spight of wealth, And drink in Lambs-wool to your Wor∣ship's health.
An Epitaph. HEre underneath this stone doth lie, That worthy Knight, brave Sir Iohn Drie; At whose funerall there was no weeping, He dy'd before Christmas, to save house-kee∣ping. A Wife. A Lusty young Wife, that of late was sped, With all the pleasures of a marriage-bed, Oft a grave Doctor ask'd, whether's more right For Venus sports, the morning or the night. The good old man reply'd, as he thought meet, The morn's more wholsom, but the night more sweet. Nay then (said she) since we have time and leasure, We'l to't each morn for health, each night for pleasure. The constant man. HE that with frownes is not dejected, Nor with soothing smiles erected;
Nor at the baits of pleasure biteth, He whom no thoughts nor crosse affrighteth But, center to himself, controleth, Change and fortune when she rouleth. Who when the silent night begins, Makes even reckoning with his sinns: Who not deferreth till to morrow, To wipe out his black scores of sorrow. Who sets hell-pains at six and seven, And feareth not the fall of heaven. But's full resolv'd without denyall, To yield his life to any tryall; Making his death his meditation, And longing for his transmigration. This is the constant man, who never From himself, nor God doth sever. To his Mistris. COme let's hug and kisse each other, Sacrificing to Love's mother: These are duties which she loves, More then thousand milky Doves Fresh bleeding on her altars. We Will not use our piety In such slaughters. Cruelty Is no devotion, nor can I Believe, that she can pleasure take In blood, unlesse for Mars his sake.
No: Let us to Cythera's Queen, Burn for sacrifice our green, And tender youth, with those divine Flames, which thine eyes begot of mine. And lest the while our zeal catch cold, In warm embraces we'l enfold Each other, to produce a heat. Thus pleasing her, we pleasure get. Then let's kisse and hugg each other, Sacrificing to Lov's mother. Swearing. IN elder times, an antient custom was, In weighty matters to swear by the Masse. And when the Mass was down, as all men note, Then swore they by the crosse of the grey Groat. And when the crosse was likewise held in scorn, Then faith and troth was all the oath was sworn. But when they had out-worn both faith and troth, Then, Dam my soul, became a common oath. So custom kept decorum in gradation: Mass, cross, faith, troth out-sworn, then came damnation.
On a good Legg and Foot. IF Hercules tall stature might be guess'd But by his thumb, the Index of the rest, In due proportion, the best rule that I Would chuse, to measure Venus beauty by, Should be her leg and foot: Why gaze we so On th'upper parts, as proud to look below, (In chusing Wives) when 'tis too often known, The colours of their face are not their own. As for their legs, whether they mince or stride, Those native compasses are seldom wide Oftelling truth. The round and slender foot, Is a prov'd token of a secret note, Of hidden parts, and well this way may lead, Unto the closet of a mayden-head. Here emblems of our youth, we Roses tie; And here the Garter, love's dear mystery. For want of beauty here, the Peacock's pride, Let's fall her train, and fearing to bespy'd, Shuts up her painted witnesses, to let Those eyes from view, which are but coun∣terfeit. Who looks not if this part be good or evill, May meet with cloven feet, and match the de∣vill. For this did make the difference between
The more unhallowed creatures, and the clean. Well may you judge her other parts are light, Her thoughts are wry that doth not tread a∣right. But then ther's true perfection, when we see, Those parts more absolute which hidden be. Nature ne're lent a fair foundation, For an unworthy frame to rest thereon. Let others view the top, and limbs through∣out, The deeper knowledge is to know the root. In viewing of the face, the weakest know What beauty is, the learned look more low: And in the feet the other parts descry, As in a pool the Moon we use to spy. Pardon, sweet-heart, the pride of my desire, If but to kisse your toe it should aspire. Upon the view of his Mistresse face in a Glasse. AH cruel Glasse didst thou not see, Chloris alone too hard for me? Perceiv'dst thou not her charming sight, Did ravish mine in cruell fight? But then another she must frame, Whose single forces well might tame
A lovers heart; no humane one, Is proof against her force alone. Yet did I venture, though struck mute, The beauteous vision to salute. But that like aire in figur'd charms, Deceiv'd the ambush of my arms. 'Twas some wise Angel her shape took, That so he might more heavenly look. I her old captive, now do yield Her shaddowed self another field: By such odds overcome, to die, Is no dishonoured victory. On Bond the Userer. HEre lyes a Bond under this tombe, Seald and deliver'd to, god knows whom. To the Duke of Buckingham. WHen I can pay my Parents, or my King' For life, or peace, or any dearer thing, Then, dearest Lord, expect my debt to you Shall be as truly paid, as it is due. But as no other price or recompence Serves them, but love, and my obedience. So nothing payes my Lord, but whats above The reach of hands, his vertue, and my love.
For when as goodness doth so overflowe, The conscience binds not to restore but owe, Requitall were presumptn, and you may, Call mee ungratefull, when I strive to pay. Nor with this morall lesson do I shift Like one that meant to save a better gift. Like very poor or connterfeit poor men, Who to preserve their Turky or their hen Do offer up themselves. No, I have sent (A kind of guift, will last by being spent) Thanks-starling, farr above the bullion rate Of horses, hangings, jewells, coyne, or plate. Oh you that should in choosing of your owne, Know a true Diamond from a Bristow stone, You that do know they are not allwayes best In their intent, that lowdest do portest But that a prayer from the Convocation, Is better than the Commons protestation, Trust them that at your feet their lives will lay And know no arts but to performe and pray Whilst they that buy perferment without praying Begin with bribes, and finish with betraying. The Gentlemans verses before he Killed himselfe. HAst Night unto thy Center, are thy winges Rul'd by the course of dull clockt plum∣metings?
If so, mount on my thoughts, & wee'le exceed All time that's past t'gain midnight with ou speed The day more favourable hasted on And by its death sent mee instruction To make thy darknesse tombe my life, let then Thy wonted houres seize on the eyes of men Make them imagine by their sleepe, what I Must truly act, let each starr veyle his Eye With masques of mourninge clowdes: me∣thinkes the owles Prodigious summons strike me, and she houles My Epicedium, with whose tragick quill Ile pencill in this map my haplesse ill. Caus'd first by her, whose fowle apostacy In love for ever brand her; and when I Am dead, deare paper (my minds heire) convey This epitaph unto her veiwe, and pray Her to inscribe it on my tombe. Here lyes One murthered by a womans perjuryes Who from the time, she scorn'd him, scorn'd to live No rivall shall him of his death deprive.
A Song in commendation of Musicke. WHen whispering straines doe softly steale With creeping passion through the heart And when at every touch wee feel Our pulses beat and beare a part When threads can make A hart string quake Philosophy Can scarce denye The soule consists of harmony. When unto heavenly joyes we feigne What ere the soul affecteth most Which only thus we can explaine By musick of the winged host. Whose layes wee thinke Make starrs to winke Philosophy Cannot deny Our soule consists of harmony. O lull mee, lull mee, charminge ayr My senses rockt with wonder sweet Like snow on wooll, thy fallings are Soft, like a spirit, are thy feet Greife who need feare That hath an eare Downe let him lye
And slumbring dye And change his soule for harmony. A Dialogue betwixt Cupid and a Country-Swaine. AS Cupid tooke his bow and bolt Some birding-sport to find; He lightt upon a shepheards swaine That was some good mans hinde. Swa. Well met faire Boy, what sport abroad It is a goodly day: The birds will sitt this frosty morne You cannot choose but slay. Gods-ouches look, your eyes are out You will not bird I trow: Alas goe home or else I thinke The birds will laugh at you. Cup. Why man thou dost deceave thy selfe Or else my mother lyes Who sayd that though that I were blind My arrowes yet had eyes. Swa. Why then thy mother is a voole And thou art but an elfe, To let thy arrowes to have eyes And goe with out thy selfe, Cup. Not, so Sir Swaine, but hold thy prate, If I do take a shaft
Ile make thee know what I can do (At this the young Swain laught:) Then angry Cupid drew his bow Swa. For Gods sake kill mee not. Cup. Ile make thy lither liver ake Swa. Nay Ide be loth of that. The singing arrow hit the marke And pierc'd his silly soule You might see by his hollow eyes Where love had made a hole. And so the Swain went bleeding home, To stay it was no boot: And found that he could see to hit, That could not see to shoot. Sighes. O Tell mee, tell, thou god of winde In all thy cavernes canst thou find A vapor, flame, a gale or blast Like to a sigh which love doth cast? Can any whirle-wind in thy vault Plough up Earths breath with like assault. Goe Wind and blow then where thou please Yea breathlesse leave mee to my ease. If thou bee'st wind, O then refrain From wracking me whilst I complain;
If thou bee'st wind, then leight thou art And yet how heavy is my heart? If thou bee'st wind, then purge thy way Let care, that cloggs thy force, obey, Goe wind and blowe, &c. These blasts of sighing raised are By th'influence of my bright starre; The AEolus from whence they came Is love that straines to blow the same: The angry Sway of whose behest Makes hearth and bellowes of one brest. Go wind and blowe, &c. Know t'is a wind that longs to blow Upon my Saint where ere she goe, And stealing through her fanne it beares Soft errands to her lipps and eares, And then perhaps a passage makes Downe to the heart when breath she takes. Goe wind and blow, &c. Yea gentle gale, try it againe, Oh do not passe from me in vaine; Go mingle with her soul divine Engendring spirits like to mine: Yea take my soul along with thee To work a stronger Sympathy. Goe wind and blow, &c.
My soul before the grosser part Thus to her heaven should depart, And when my body cannot lie On wings of wind, she soone shall flye; Though not one soul our bodies joyne, Our bodies shall our soules combine. Goe wind and blow thou where thou please, Yea breathlesse leave me to my ease. Weomen. WEomen are borne in Wilsheire, Brought up in Cumberland. Lead their lives in Bedfordsheire Bring their husbands to Buckingame And dye in Shrewsbury. On a dissemble. COuld any show where Ples people dwell Whose head stand in their brests, who cannot tell, A smoothinge lye, because their open heart And lipps are joyned so neere. I would depart As quicke as thought, and there forget the wrongs Which I have sufferd by deceitfull tongues. I would depart, where soules departed bee
Which being freed from clowdy flesh, can see Each other so immediately, so cleare, That none need tongues to speak nor eares to heare: Were tongues intended to expresse the soul And can wee better do with none at all? Where words first made our meanings to re∣veale? And as they us'd our meaning to conceale; The ayre by which we breathe, will that turne fogg? Or breath turne mist; will that become a Clogg Which should unload the mind? fall wee upon Another Babells Sub-confusion? And in the selfe same language must wee find, A diverse faction of the wordes and mind? Dull as I am, that hug such empty aire, And never markt the deeds, (a phrase more faire More trusty and univocall) joyne well, Three or foure actions wee may quickly spell A hollow heart; if these no sight will lend, Read the whole sentence and observe the end. I wil not waite so long: the guilty man (On whom I ground my speech) no longer can Delude my sense, nor can the gracefull art Of kind dissembling, button up his heart. His well-spoke wrongs, are such as hurtful ords Writ in a comely hand, or bloody swords, Sheathd up in velvet, if he draw on mee My armour proof is incredulity.
To a Freind. LIke as the hand which hath bin usd to play One lesson long, still runs the usuall way: And waites not what the earers bid it strike, But doth presume by custome this will like. So run my thoughts which are so perfect grown, So well acquainted with my passion; That now they do prevent mee with their haste And ere I think to sigh, my sigh is past; Is past and flown to you, for you alone Are all the object that I think upon; And did not you supply my soul with thought For want of action it to none were brought. What though our absent armes may not enfold Reall embraces; yet wee firmly hold Each other in possession; thus wee see The Lord enjoyes his Lands where e're he be. If Knights possest no more then where they sate What were they greater then a meaner state? This makes mee firmly yours, you firmly myne That something more than bodies us combine. A Poeticall Poem, by Mr. Stephen Locket to Mistrisse Bess Sarney. TO my Bess Sarney, quintessence of beauty, I Steven Locket do present my duty.
In rythem daigne goddess to accept my verses, I wis with worse wise men have wip't their A— O thou which able art to take to taske all (Pox! what will rythme to that?) oh, I'me a raskall, But I'me turnd poet late, and for thy credit, Have pend this poem, prethee tak't and read it. Thou needs not be asham'd of't, for it raises Trophyes as high as maypoles to thy prayses. But first in order it thy head doth handle That's more orbicular than a quadrangle. On top of which doth grow a Turst of tresses Winter her selfe, rayd in her hoary dresses Of frost, lookes not more lovely; thy browes truly Have larger furrowes, than a feild ploughed newly. Thy eyes, ha eyes (Zounds I'am so full of clin∣ches) Are not sunck in thy head above sixe inches; From which distraining gently, there doth streame Rivers of whey, mixed with curdled creame. Straight as a Rams horne is thy nose, more marrow Lyes in thy nostrills, than would fill a barrow. And at your lip to mak't more ornamentall, Hangs down a jewell of S—Orientall. The bright gold & thy face are of one colour,
But if compar'd with thine, that is the duller. Thy lips are white as tallow, never man did Buss sweeter things, (sure they are sugar∣candid.) Thy teeth more comely than two dirty rakes are, Thy breath is stronger than a douzen jkes are. A fat for all perfumes, a turd for roses Smell men but thee, they wish them selves all nses. Thy voyce as sweet, as musicall, as fine is, As any phlegmy Hagg's, that ninty nine is. And when thou speakst, (as if th'had bin the wonder Of women kind) thy tongu's as still as thun∣der But oh thy shoulders large; 'tis six to seven, Should Atla's faile, but thou wouldst beare up heaven. Thou dost excell, I warrant thee for a button, Hercules and Cacus too, that stole mutton. About the wast, there thou art three times ful∣ler, Then was the Wadham Gragantuan Buller. Thy buttock and thy fashion are so all one, That I'de a swore thou hadst a Fardingall on Thy leggs are Badgt like, and goe as even, As do Iambick verses or I Steven, And now I'm come unto thy feet, where I do Prostrate my selfe, with reverence to thy shoo,
Which for antiquity ne're a jot behind is. Tom Coriats, that travell'd both the Indies. For thy sweet sake, I will go down to Pluto, And in thy quarrel beat him black & blew too; And lest Sr Cerberus should be too lusty, I have a loafe will hold him play, 'tis crusty. I'le bring the Dev'll back with me in a snaffle, For in that kind I scorne to take a baffle. And so I take my leave; prithee sweet Thum∣kin, Hold up thy coats, that I may kisse thy bumkin. Thanks for a welcome. FOr your good looks, and for your Claret For often bidding, Do not spare it; For tossing glasses to the top, And after sucking of a drop, When scarce a drop was left behind, Or what doth nickname wine e'vn wind: For healthfull mirth and lusty Sherry, Such as made grave old Cato merry; Such are our thanks that you may have In bloud the Claret that you gave. And in your service shall be spent The spirits which your Sack hath lent.
To Phillis. FYe on this Courtly life, full of displeasure Where neither frownes nor smiles keepe any measure, But every passion governs in extremes, True love and faith from hence falshod doth banish: And vowes of friendship here like vapours vanish, Loyalty's counted but a dreame, Inconstant favours like rivers gliding, Truth is despis'd Whilst flatterie's priz'd, Poore vertue here hath no certaine abi∣ding. Then let's no longer stay, my fairest Phillis, But let us fly from hence where so much ill is; Into some some desert place there to abide True love shall go with us and faith unfained Pure thoughts, embraces chaste, and vowes un∣stain'd. Vertue her selfe shall ever be our guide, In Cottage poore where neither frowning fortune, Nor change of fate Can once abate, Our sweet content, or peace at all im∣portune.
There will we drive our flocks from hills and vallies, And whilst they feeding are, wee'l sit & dally; And thy sweet voyce to sing birds shall invite Whilst I with roses, violets, and lillies Will flowry garlands make to crown my Phil∣lis. Or numbred verses to thy praise indite And when the Sun is Westwardly decli∣ning, Our flocks and we, Will home wards flee And rest our selves untill the Suns next shining. Women. ONce I must confesse I loved And expected love againe, But so often as I proved My expectance was in vaine. Women joy to be attempted, And do glory when they see Themselves from loves force exempted, And that men captived bee.
If they love, they can conceale it, And dissemble when they please, When as men will straight reveale it And make known their hearts disease. Men must beg and crave their favour, Making many an idle vow; Whilst they froward in behaviour, Faine would yeild, but know not how. Sweet stolne-sport to them is gratefull, And in heart they wish to have it; Yet they do account it hatefull Upon any termes to crave it. But would men not goe about it But leave off at all to woe, Ere they would be long without it, They would beg and crave it too. The World. WHether men do laugh or weep, Whether they doe wake or sleep, Whether they feele heat or cold, Whether they be young or old; There is underneath the Sun Nothing in true earnest done.
All our pride is but a jest, None are worst and none are best; Greife and joy, and hope and feare, Play their pageants every where; Vaine opinion all doth sway And the world is but a play. Powers above in clouds doth sit, Marking our poore apish wit, That so lamely without state, Their high glory imitate. No ill can be felt but paine, And that happy men disdaine. On his absent Mistresse. ABsence, heare thou my protestation Against thy strength, Distance and length; Do what thou canst for alteration: For hearts where love's refin'd Are absent joyn'd, by tyme combin'd. Who loves but where the Graces be, His mind hath found Affectious ground Beyond time place mortality, That heart that cannot varie, Absence is present tyme doth carry.
By absence this good meane I gaine That I can catch her, Where none can watch her, In some close corner of my brain, There I embrace her, and there kisse her And so enjoy her, and so misse her. The Constant Lover. I Know as well as you, shee is not faire, Nor hath she sparkling eyes or curled haire; Nor can shee brag of vertue or of truth, Or any thing about her save her youth. Shee is woman too, and to no End I know, I verses write and letters send: And nought I doe can to compassion move her Al this I know, yet cannot choose but love her. Yet am not blind as you and others bee; Who think and sweare they littile Cupid see Play in their Mistris eyes, and that there dwell Roses on cheekes, and that her brest excell The whitest snow, as if that love were built On fading red and white' the bodies quilt. And that I cannot love unless I tell Wherein or on what part my love doth dwell. Vaine Hereticks you bee, for I love more Then ever any did that told wherefore: Then trouble mee no more, nor tell mee why, Tis! because shee is shee, and I am I:
The Irish Beggar. I Pray you save poore Irish knave, A hone a hone Round about the towne throughout Is poore Shone gone, Master to find, Loving and kinde But Shone to his mind's Neare the neere, Poore Shone can find none heere Which makes him cry for feare, A hone a hone. Shn being poore, his feet being sore, For which heele no more Trot about, To find Master out, He had radir go without And cry a hone, I was so curst that I was forc't A hone a hone. To goe bare foot and strips to boot And no shooes, none, None English could I speake, My mind for to breake, And many laught to heare the moane I made, I like a tyred jade, That had no worke or trade, Cryed, a hone a hone.
In stead of breakfast, Was faine runn a pace To gett more stomach to my hungry throate, And when for freind I sought, They calld me all to nought, A hone a hone. For Ladyes sake some pitty take; A hone a hone. I serv'd a lasse where was no masse No faith none; Oft was I beat 'cause Ide not eat, On frydayes, beefe and meat, Twice a day, And when I went to pray, Tooke holy bead away; A hone a hone. Make Church to go Whether will or no Ile dye, or I doe so, Grace a Christ, Poor Shone loves Popish Preist, Good Catholick thou seest. A hone a hone.
Answer. I prithee Shone make no more mone For thy Mr lost. I doe intend something to spend,, On Catholicks thus Crost. Take this small guift, And with it make a shift; And bee not thou bereft of thy minde, All though hee be unkind; To leave thee thus behind To cry a hone. Buy thee some beere, And then some good cheere, There's nought for thee too deare; What ere ensue Be constant still and true, Thy country do not rue Nor cry a hone. Shone Good shentry men that do intend To helpe poore Shone at's need Mine patron eer hath given mee beere And meat whereon to feed, Yea and money too And so I hope that you, VVill do as he did do for my reliefe, To ease my paine and greife; Ile eat no powdred beefe; VVhat ere ensue
Ile keep my fast As in times past, And all my prayers and vowes I will renew Cause friends I find but few, Poore Shone will still prove true, And so adieu. A Question. I aske thee whence those ashes were Which shrine themselves in plaits of haire? Unknown to me, sure each morne dyes. A Phoenix for a sacrifice. I aske whence are those aires that flye From birds in sweetest harmony? Unknown to me, but sure the choice Of accents ecchoed from her voice. I aske thee whence those active fires Take light which glide through burnisht aire? Unknown to me, unlesse there flyes A flash of lightning from her eyes. I aske thee whence those ruddy bloomes Pierce on her cheekes on scarlet gownes? Unknowne to me? Sure that which flyes From fading roses, her cheek dyes.
Ile ask thee of the lilly, whence It gaind that type of innocence? Unknowne to me, sure natures deck Was ravish'd from her snowie necke. The Reply. ASke me no more, whither do stray The golden atomes of the day; For in pure love, heaven did prepare Those powders, to enrich your haire. Aske me no more whither doth haste The nightingal when summer's past; For in your sweet devided throat She winters, and keepes warme her noate. Aske me no more where those starres light VVhich downewards stoop in dead of night; For in your eyes they sett; and there Fixed become, as in their spheare. Aske me no more where Iove bestowes, When Iune is past, the fading rose; For in your beauties Orient deep, All flowers as in their bedds do sleep.
Aske me no more if East or West, The Phoenix builds her spiced nest; For unto you at last she flyes, And in your fragrant bosome dyes. The Mock-Song. I Tell you true, whereon doth light The dusky shade of banisht night, For in just vengeance heavens allow It still should shine upon your brow. I tell you true where men may seek The sound which once the owle did shreek, For in your false deviding throat It lyes, and death is in its noate. I tell you true whither do passe The siniling look out of a glasse; It leapes into your face, for there A falser shadow doth appeare. Ile tell you true whither are blowne The airy wheeles of Thistle down, They fly into your mind, whose care Is to be light as thistles are.
I tell you true within what nest The stranger Cuckoe's eggs do rest, It is your bosome which can keepe Nor him, nor him, where one should sleepe. The Moderatix. ILe tell you where another sun That setts, as riseing it begun. It is my selfe who keepes one spheare And were the same if men so were. What need I tell, that life and death, May passe in sentence from one breath; So issue from my equall heart Both love and scorn for mens desert. Ile tell you in what heavenly hell An Angell and a friend may dwell: It is myne eye whose glassy book Sends back the gazers divers look. Ile tell you in a divers scale One weight can up and downewards hale: You call me thistle, you a rose; I neither am, yet both of those. Ile tell you where both frost and fire In peace of common feat conspire;
My frozen brest that flint is like, Yet yeilds a fire if you will strike. Then you that love, and you that loath. With one aspect I answer both; For round about me glowes a fire, Can melt and harden grosse desire. The affirmative answer. OH no, heaven saw mens fancyes stray To idolize but dust and clay; That embleme gave that they might see, Your beautye's date but dust must bee. No Philomel when summers gon Hasts to the wood her rape to moane; (Unwilling hers) a shamd to see Your (unlike hers) unchastity. Oh no, those starrs flye but the sight Of what you act in dead of night, A shamd themselves should Pandars prove In your unsatiate beastly love. Oh no, that rose when Iune is past Lookes pale as with a poysonous blast; And such your beauty, when as time Like winter shall oretake your prime.
Oh no the Phoenix shuns the place, And feares the lustfull fires t'embrace, Of your hot brest and barren wombe, As death or some perpetuall tombe. A discourse between a Poet and a Painter. Poet. PAinter, I pithee pencill to the life The woman thou wouldst willingly call wife, Fashion her from the head unto the heel, So perfect that but gazing thou mayst feel Pigmaleons passion: colour her faire haire, Like amber, or to something else more rare, Temper a white shall passe Pyrenean snow, To raise her temples, and on it bestow Such artificiall azure, that the Eye, May make the heart beleeve the mable skye, To perfect her had melted in soft raines, Lending a blew to brauuch her swelling veines, Then Painter, to come lower, her sweet chin, I would have small and white, not much trench'd in; Nor alltogether plain, but such an one The nicest thought may judge equall to none. Her nose I would have comely, not too high, Though men call it, in Physiognomy,
A type of honour; nor too low▪ fr then They I say, sh's known (God knowes) how many men; Nor broad, nor flat, that's the hard favour'd mould: Nor thin, nor sharp, for then they'le call her scold. Apparrell it in such a speaking grace, That men may read Majesty in her face. Her lipps a paire of blushing twinnes so red, Nice fancy may depart away full fed. But, Painter, when thou comst unto her eye, There let thy Pencill play; there cunningly Expresse thy selfe, for as at feasts▪ so here The dainties I keep last to crown the cheer. Make her eye Love veet argument, a look That may discourse▪ make it a well wit book, Whereas in faire set  of art, Men there may read the story of her heart. Whiter than white, if you would portray ought, Display her neck cure as the purest thought. To make her gratious give her a broad brest Topt with two milkie mountains; down her chest. Between those hills let Loves sweet vally lye, The pleasing thraldome of a Love-sick eye. Still, Painter, to fall lower paint her waste Straight as the Cedar, or the Norway Mast, To take a modest step, let men but guesse By her neat foot a hidden handsomnesse.
Thus, Paintr, I would have her in each part, Remaine unmatcht by nature or by art. Canst thou doe this? Panter. —Yes Sir, Ile draw a feature, You shall conclude that art hath out-done nature, The Pencill Sir, shall force you to confesse, It can more lively than your pen expresse. Poet. That by this then let me find, To this body draw a mind; O Painter, to your pencill fall, And draw me something rationall: Give her thoughts, serious, secure, Holy, chaste, religious, pure. From vertue never known to start, Make her an understanding heart. Seat the Graces in her mind, A well taught truth, a faith refin'd From doubts and jelousies; and give Unto her heart a hope may live Longer then time, untill it be Perfected by Eternity. Give her an honest loving mind, Neither too coy, nor yet too kind: But let her equall thoughts so raise her, Loose thoughts may fare, and the chast praise her. Then, Painter, next observe this rule, A principle in Apelles Schoole;
Leave not too much space between Her tongue and heart, 'tis seldome seen That such tell truth; but let there be, Between them both a sympathy: For she whose tongue and heart keep even In every syllable, courts heaven: If otherwise, this maxim know, False above's not true below. Thus mind and body let her be all over, A golden text bound in a golden cover. Canst thou doe this? Painter. —But Sir, 'Is't your intent I should draw her in both parts excellent? Poet. It is. Paint. Then in plain words, not in dark sense to lurk, Find you the woman; and 'Ile fall to work. To B. R. for her Bracelets. TIs not (Deare Love) that Amber twist Which circles round thy captive wrist, Can have the power to make me more Your pris'ner then I was before. Though I that bracelet dearer hold, Than Misers would a chaine of gold. Yet this but tyes my outward part, Heart-strings alone can tye my heart.
'Tis not that soft and silken , Your hands did unto mine bequeath; Can bind with halfe so powerfull charmes, As the Embraces of your armes; Although not iron bands (my faire) Can bind more fiercely than your aire. Yet that will chaine me most will be, Your heart in True Love's-knot to me. Tis not those beams, your haires, nor all Your glorious out-side doth me thrall; Although your lookes have force enough To make the stateliest Tyrants bow: Nor any angell could deny, Your person his idolatry. Yet I do not so much adore The temple, but the goddesse more. If then my soul you would confine To prison, tye your heart to mine; Your noble vertues, constant love, The only powerfull chaines will prove; To bind me ever, such as those The hands of death shall ne're unloose. Untill I such a prisoner be No liberty can make me free.
On Tom Holland and Nell Cotton. A Light young man lay with a lighter woman, And did request their things might bee in common; And gave her (when her good will he had got∣ten, A yard of Holland for an ell of Cotton. A We lchman. JEnkin a welchman having suites in law Journying to London chance to steal a Cow; For which (pox on her luck as ere man saw) VVas burnt with in the fist, her know not how. Being ask'd how well the case did with him stand Wee's have her now (quoth Ienkin) in her hand. A Woman that scratcht her Husband. A VVoman lately fiercely did assail Her husband with sharp speech, but sharper nail; On that stood by and saw her, to her sed Why do you use him so? he is your head. He is my head (quoth she) indeed tis true, I do but scratch my head, and so may you.
A Mistris. HEr for a Mistris, would I faine enjoy, That hangs the lipp and pouts for every toy: Speakes like a wag, is bold, dares boldly stand And bid love welcome with a wanton hand. Laughs lowd, and for one blow will give you three And when shee's stabbd, will fall a kissing me. If shee be modest wise and chast of life, Hang her shee's good for nothing but a wife. One fighting with his wife. MEg and her husband Tom, not long agoe, VVere at it close, exchanging blow for blow. Both being eager, both of a stout heart, Endured many a bang ere they would part. Peter lookt on & would not stint the strife, He's curst (quoth he) that parteth man and wife. Ambition. THe whistling windes me-thinkes do wit∣nesse this, No greif so great as to have liv'd in blisse.
Then only this poore plain song will I sing. I was not borne, nor shall I dye a King. To leape at honour is a daungerous case, See but the gudgeons they will bite a pace. Untill the fatall hook be swallowed downe, Wherewith ambition angles for a crowne: Then be content and let the baite passe by, He hath enough that lives contentedly. But if thou must advancement have, then see This is the way thou must advanced be. True temporizing is the meanes to climbe There is no musick without keeping time. Upon a Gardiner. COuld he forget his death? that every houre Was emblem'd to it by the fading flowre: Should he not mind his end? yes needshe must, That still was conversant'mongst bedds of dust. Then let no on yon in an handchercher Tempt your sad eyes unto a needlesse feare; If he that thinkes on death well lives & dyes, The gardner sure is gon to paradise.
On his first Love. MY first love whom all beautyes did ado Fireing my heart, supprest it with her scorn. And since like tynder in my heart it lyes By every sparkle made a sacrifice. Each wanton eye now kindleth my desire And that is free to all which was entire. For now my wandring thoughts are not con∣fin'd Unto one woman, but to woman-kind. This for her shape I love, that for her face, This for her gesture, or som other grace: And somtimes when I none of these can find I chuse her by the kernell not the rinde. And so do hope though my cheife hope is gone To find in many what I lost in one. And like to merchants which have some great losse Trade by retayle which cannot do in grosse. She is in fault, which caus'd me first to stray Needs must he wander, who hath lost his way▪ Guiltlesse I am, she did the change provoke, Which made that charcole which at first was ok For as a looking glasse to the aspect, Whilst it was whole doth but one face reflect; But crac or broak in peeces, there is shown Many lesse faces, where was first but one. So-love unto my heart did first preferre Her image, and there planted none but her:
But when twas crackt & martyrd by her scorne Many lesse faces in her seat were borne, Thus like to tinder I am prone to catch Each falling sparkle, fit for any match. To his Mistris. I Will not doe sacrifice To thy face, or to thy eyes Nor unto thy lilly palme Nor thy breath that wounding balme: But the part To which my heart In vowes is sealed, Is that mine Of blisse divine Which is concealed. Whats the golden fruit to me So I may not shake the tree? What's that golden architecture If I may not touch the nectar? Bare enjoying all the rest Is but like a golden feast, Which at need, Can never feed Our love sick-wishes Let me eate, Substantiall meat, Not view the dishes.
To his letter. FLy paper, kisse those hands Whence I am bard of late: She quickly will unloose thy bands, O wish me thine estate. Appeare unto her eyes Though they do burne to fumes: For happy is the sacrifice, Which heaven-fire consumes. Yet ev'n with this depart With a soft dying breath, Whisper the truths into her heart, And take them on thy death. Tell her thou canst not now New oathes or give or take, Or to repeat the former vow Wee did each other make. Say thou cam'st to complain But not of love, nor her But on my fortune being faine Thus absent to conferre. When thou hast offer'd this Perhaps then for thy payne, She will inpart to thee a kisse And read the ore againe.
Perhaps when form my sake, Her lipps have made thee blest, That so embalmd hee, she will make Thy grave within her brest. Oh never then desire To rise from such a roome: Who would not leave his life t'aspire In death to such a tombe. And in these joyes excesse, Melt, languish, faint, and dye▪ For might I have so good accesse To her, ev'n so would I. An Epitaph upon Hurry the Taylor. WIthin this tombe is honest Hurry layd, Who in good fashion liv'd, good fashion dy'd. T'is strange that death so soon cut off his thread Som say his end not full done, he was dead. But here the knot is, and I thus it scann He took a yard, whose due was but a spann. How er hee's happy, and I know full well He's now in heaven since here he had his hell.
Scylla toothlesse. SCylla is toouthlesse; yet when she was young, She had both tooth enough, and too much tongue: What should I now of toothlesse Scylla say? But that her tongue hath worne her teeth away. AVicar. AN honest Vicar riding by the way, Not knowing better how to spend the day Did sing unto himself Genevaes psalmes; A blind man hearing him straight askt an almes To whom (quoth he) with coine I cannot part, But god bless thee good man with all my heart, O said the man the greater is my losse, When such as you do blesse without a crosse. On a Ribband. THis silken wreath that circles-in my arms Is but an emblem of your mystick charmes; Wherewith the magick of your beauty binds My Captive soule, and round about it winds;
Time may weare out these soft weak bands, but those: Strong chaines of brasse fate shall not discom∣pose This holy relique may preserve my wrist, But my whole frame by th'other doth subsist: To that my prayers and sacrifice, to this I only pay a superstitious kisse. This but the idoll, that the deity; Religion there is due, here ceremony. That I receive by faith, this but in trust; Here I may ender duty, ther I must: This other like a layman I may bear But I become loves preist when that I weare; This moves like ayre, that as the center stands, That knot your vertue yes, this but your hands. That nature fram'd, but this is made by art This makes my arme your prisoner, that my heart. To a Gentlewoman, desiring a copie of Verses. FAire Madam, cast those Diamonds away, What need their torchlight in so bright a day: These show within your beauties glorious noon
No more than spangles fixed in the moon: Such jewells then the truest lustre beare When they hang dangling in an Aethiop's eare But placed neere a beauty, thats so bright Like starres in day-time they are lost from sight In this you do your sex a great abuse, These are not pretious stemmes for womens use. Nature to men hath better jewells sent, Which serve for active use not ornament. Then let us make exchange, since that those be Fitter for you, and these more fit for me. On Dr. Corbett's Marriage. COme all yee Muses and rejoyce, At our Apolloes happy choice. Phoebus has conquer'd Cupids charme, Fair Daphne fyes into his arme. If Daphne be a tree, then marke, Apollo is become the barke. If Daphne be a branch of bay, He weares her for a crowne to day: O happy bridegrome which dost wed Thy selfe unto a virgins bed. Let thy love burne with hot desire, She lkes no oyle to feed the fire. You know not poore Pigmaleons lot Nor have you a meere idoll got.
You no Ixion, you no proud Iuno makes imbrace a cloud. Looke how pure Dianaes skin Appeares as it is shadow'd in A crystall streame; or looke what grace, Shines in fair Venus lovely face; Whilst She Adonis courts and woes Such beautyes, yea and more than those, Sparkle in her; see but her soul, And you will judge those beautyes foul. Her rarest beautye is within, She's fairest where she is not seen; Now her perfection's character You have approv'd and chosen her. Oh precious she! at this wedding, The jewell weares the marriage ring. Her understanding's deep, like the Venetian Duke you wedd the sea, A sea deep, bottomelesse, profound, And which none but your selfe may sound. Blind Cupid shot not this love-dart, Your reason chose, and not your heart; You knew her little, and when her Apron was but a muckender, VVhen that same Corrall which doth deck Her lippes, she wore about her neck: You courted her, you woed her not Out of a window; shee was got, And borne your wife; it may be se'd, Her cradle was her marriadge bed.
The ring too was layd up for it Untill her finger was growne fit; You once gave her to play withall A babie, and I hope you shall This day your auncient guift renew, So she will do the same for you: In Virgin wax imprint upon Her brest your owne impression, You may (there is no treason in't,) Coine sterling, now you have a mint. You now are stronger than before, Your side hath in it on ribb more. Before she was a kin to me Only in soul and amity. But now wee are, since shee your bride, In soul and bodye both allyde. T'is this hath made me lesse to doe, And I in one can honour two. This match a riddle may be styld, Two mothers now have but on child; Yet need we not a Salomon Each mother here enjoyes her owne▪ Many there are I know have try'd, To make her their owne lovely bride; But it is Alexanders lot, To cut in twaine the Gordian knot: Claudia to prove that she was chast, Tyed but a girdle to her wast; And drew a ship to Rome by land But now the world may understand;
Here is a Claudia to faire bride, Thy spotlesse innocence is tryed, None but thy girdle could have led, Our Corbet to a marriage bed. Come all ye muses and rejoyce, At this your nursling's happy choyce: Come Flora straw the bridemayds bed And with a garden crowne her head, Or if thy flowers be to seek, Come gather roses at her cheek. Come Hymen light thy torches, let Thy bed with tapers be beset. And if there be no fire by, Come light thy taper at her eye, In that bright eye there dwells a starre, And wisemen by it guided are. In those delicious eyes there be, Two little balls of ivory; How happy is he then that may With these two dainty balls goe play, Let not a teare drop from that eye Unlesse for very joy to cry. O let your joy continue; may A whole age be your wedding day. O happy virgin, it is true, That your deare spouse embraceth you. Then you from heaven are not farre, But sure in Abrahams bosome are, Come all ye muses and rejoyce At our Apollo's happy choice.
Mart. Epigr. 59 lib: 5. THoul't mend to morrow, thus thou still tell'st me Faine would I know but this, when that will be? Where might a man that bliss-full morning finde, In vast Armenia, or in urmost Inde? This morning comes as slow as Platoes yeare, What might this morning cost (for sure tis deare?) Thoul't mend to morrow: Now's too late; I say He's only wise that mended yesterday. In Richardum quendam, Divitem, Avarum. DEvising on a time what name I might Best give unto a dry illiberall chuffe, After long search on his owne name I light, Nay then (said I) No more, I have enough; His name and nature do full well agree For's name is Rich and hard; and so is he. In Thomam quendam Catharum. THomas the puritan, cannot abide The name of Christmas, Candlemas, or such
But calls them ever Christide, Candletide, At all to name the masse (forsooth) to much: Thomas by this your rule the sacred font In Baptism must be-wash your limmes againe, And a new name you must receive upon't For superstitious Thomas youl disdaine. Then might I be your gode, or his guide, Instead of Thomas you shall have Tom-tyde. Epilogus Incerti Authoris. LIke to the mowing tone of unspoke speeches, Or like two lobsters clad in logick breeches; Or like the gray fleece of a crimson catt, Or like a moone-calfe in a slippshoo hatt; Or like the shaddow when the sunne is gone, Or like a thought, that nev'r was thought upon, Even such is man who never was begotten, Untill his children were both dead and rotten. Like to the fiery touch-hole of a cabbage, Or like a crablowse with his bag and baggage. Or like the guilt reflection of the winde, Or like th' abortive issue borne behind, Or like the four square circle of a ring, Or like high downe a ding a ding a ding.
Even such is man who breathlesse without doubt Spake to small purpose when his tongue was out. Like the fresh colours of a withered Rose Or like a running verse that's writ in prose. Or like the umbles of a tynder box, Or like a sound man, troubled with the pox. Or like to hobbnayles coyn'd in single pence, Lest they should lose their preterperfect∣tence Ev'n such is man who dyed, and yet did laugh, To read these strong lines for his Epitaph.
THE INNOVATION OF PENELOPE AND VLYSSES, A Mock-Poem. By I. S. LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1658.
The Epistle Dedicatory to the Reader. COurteous Reader, I had not gone my full time, when by a sudden flight occasioned by the Beare and Wheel-barrow on the Bank-side, I fell in travaile, and therefore cannot call this, a timely Issue, but a Mischance, which I must put out to the world to nurse; hoping it will be fostered with the greater care, because of its own innocency. The reasons why the Dedication is so generall, is to avoid Carps in the Fishpond of this world, for now no man may reade it, but must pa∣tronize it. And must protect what he would greet perchance, If he were not the Patron with def-iance.
You see here I have much adoe to hold in my muse from her jumping meeter: 'tis time to let slip. For as the cunning statua∣rist did by Alcides foot guesse at the pro∣portion of his whole body, so doe I for∣beare the application of this Simile and rest, Yours ever. I. S.
To his Worthy Friend Mr. I. S. upon his happy Innovation of Penelope and Vlysses. IT was no idle fancie, I beheld A reall obiect, that around did gild The neighbouring vallies and the mountaine tops, That sided to Parnassus, with the drops From her disheveld hayre. I sought the cause. And loe, she had her dwelling in the jawes Of pearly Helicon, assign'd to bee Guide ore the Comick straynes of poetry. She lowr'd her flight, and soone assembled all, That since old Chaucer had tane leave to call, Upon her name in print: But O the rabble Of pamphleteers even from the court toth' stable, Knights, and disarded Captaines, with the scrib; Famous in water-works, besides the tribe Of the true poets, they attended on The birth of this great Convocation. Sacred Thalia, in an angrie heat That well became her zeale, rose from her seat; And beckoning for silence, there disclaym'd, Protection of the poets, and then nam'd The cause of her revoke, for that (quoth she) So many panders 'long to poetry:
A crue of Scriblers that with brazen face Prostitute art and worke unto disgrace My patronage, each calling out on mee For midwife to his bastard progenie. Thus standing as rotectresse of that brood My care's ill construed by the sister-hood. With that she paused a while, and glanc'st her eye Among st the mingled pen-wrights, to descrie One to dstinguish by a different style, Dull Latmus from Diviner Pindus soyle, At length she six't on thee, and then anon Proclaym'd the her selected champion. Then was this worke presented to her care. She smiled at it, and was pleas'd to heare Dunces so well traduc'd; and by this rule, Discoverd all that nere were of the schoole Of noble poesie, and them she threw Farre from her care and her aquantance too; Thus were they found and lost, and this the test, They writ in earnest what's here meant in jest. James Atkins.
To his Precious Friend I. S. upon his choyse conceipt of Penelope and Ulysses. LOng look't for comes at last; twas sayd of old, I'le use the proverb; herein I am bold: For if the ancient Poets don't belie us Nihil jam dictum quod non dictum pris: But let that passe: the thing I would intend, With my unpolist lines, is to commend A worke that may to an ingenious care Be its owne or ator; for nothing here, But grate's this stupid age, wherein each mae That can but yme, is poet laureat. It is the scorne of time, and for m par That at the best am but afeind to art, My senses ake to heare the cry advance And dot upon the workes of ignorance; Let focles admire folly: while I thee That into pastime turn'st their poetrie.
To his Sonne, upon his Minerva. THou art my son,  y choyse is spoke; hine with thy fathers muse strikes equall stroke, It shewd more art in Virgil to relate, And make it worth th' heareing, his Gnats fate; Then to conceive what those great mindes must be That sought and found out fruitfull Italic. And such as read and do not apprehend And with applause the purpose and the end Of this neat Poem, in themselves confesse A dull stupiditie and barrennesse. Methinks I do behold in this rare birth A temple built up to facetious mirth, Pleasd Phoebus smiling on it; doubt not then, But that the suffrage of juditious men Will honour this Thalia; and for those That praise Sr. Bevis, or whats worse in pros, Let them dwell still in ignorance. To write In a new strain, and from it rase delight As thou in this hast done, doth not by chance But merit, crowne thee with the laurell branch. Phillip Massenger.
To his Deare Friend Mr. I. S. upon his quaint Innovation of Penelope and Ulysses. FLy, Fly my muse, this is the tyme if ever try thy ings, now sore aloftor ne; Importune fame, for 'tis her hand must owe A glory to this temple. Bid her blow, Till her lungs crack and call the world to see A worke that else wil 'ts owne trumpet be. I would not have the squeamish Age to jeare Or slight my muse for bringing up the reare: Nor let the garish rabble looke a squint, As though I were one of their tribe in print; It is a Trust that fitly does become My matchlesse freindship to have such a Rome For know no vulgar pen could ever glory To be the Master of so choise a story. Blush, Blush, for shame, yee wood-be-poets all, Here see our faces, let this glasse recall Your faults to your remembrance, numbers, rym Your long parentheses, and verse that clim Up to the elbow; here you may descry Such stuffe as weaker wits call poetry: From hence-forth let no pedling rimers dare Prophane Thalias alters with such ware. For which great cure, this booke unto thy name Shallbe a trophy of immortall fame. I. M.
The Author to the Author. To his worthy Friend I. S. upon his happy Translation of Ulysses and Penelope. LEt joy possesse the universall Globe, The worke is donne, bright Sol is in his robe, Let time and nature breathe, and let the arts, Pause here a while, they have perform'd their parts And as a Man, that from the Alpes doth fall Being in drinke, and has no hurt at all: When afterwards hee has considerd well, An veiw'd the Alitude, from whence hee fell, When in his sober thoughts hee has the hint on't It frights him more then to endure the dint on't; Even so our Author, when hee veiwes aright What time and industry have brought to light, May more be troubled both in Mnd and Wit, o thinke what's donne, then in the doing it, If at the spring and Birth-day of Glendour, Whom storyes treat of for a Man and more, If then I say there was such notice taken, That VVales and all her Mountaniers were shaken, What Alteration must there needes be now, To usher in thine Issue! who knowes how
To fadom thought, or tye the starres in strings? Such must his learning be that kens these things. Me-thinks the spheares should falter, and the sage Should from this time reckon another age, Gossips shall make it famous, It shall bee The common Meatpole to Posterity: The time of Edmonds and of Gertrude's birth, Was three yeares after such aworke came forth, Then was the great eclipse, and that the time When this Mans Granfather was in his prime; Hackster the Back-sword-man then broke his Arme, That yeare old Honyman his Bees did swarme, And if I guesse aright, began that yeare The Hollanders Plantation in York-shire. Thus shall all Accidents be brought about, And this the onely time to find em out. Men did of old count from the dayes of Adam, And Eve the spinster (no newes then of Madam,) Some from Diana's Temple, that rare peece, Some from the stealing of the Golden fleece; From moderne Matters som their Reckoning make From the great voyage of Sr: Francis Drake, Other's from 88, and some there are That count from bringing of the Brook from VVare. But all these things shall be abolish'd quite, And no Man now shall aprehend delight, To have a sonne a daughter or a neece, Their age not dated with this master-peece.
More I would say, much more; but that I fear My liberall commendations would appeare Like to the Gates of Thebes, where all, and some, Fear'd lest the citty should run out at 'um, Such may my error be, whilst here I sing, Great Neptunes Anthems, to salute a spring, Bùt such a spring, as all that ere have seene it Confesse theres nought but spirit of waters in it. And here let me excuse that prity Elfe Thy froward Muse that left thee to thy selfe; Whom thou upbraidst for that; which I replye, Was nought but Advantagious Policy; T'was a good Omen when she backward went That she would arme her selfe with double hint And so shee did, they'l say, that doe peruse ore This seeming pamphlet which aonensues your Loving Friend. I. S.
The Author to himselfe. HIgh as the Alpes my towring muse dos wing it, To snach the laurell from fames fane, & fling it Even at thy crowne, thy crowne; where may it sit, Till time it selfe, being non-plus'd, wither it. Each stroake that herein of thy pen made proof, Is like the stamp of Pegasus his hoof, And does uncurtaine where does sit and sing, The Heliconians, round about the spring. I wish the world this pamphlet had not seene, Or having veiw'd it, it had faulty been. Then might I still have lov'd thee, cruell fate Has made the now the object of my hate: For envy feedes on merit, but believe mee, I love thy person, though thy worth does grieve me. I. S.
The Preface to that most elaborate piece of Poetry, entituled, Penelope and Ulysses. NO, I protest, not that I wish the gaines To spoile the trade of mercenary braines, I am indifferently bent, so, so, Whether I ever sell my workes or no. Nor was't my aime when I took pen in fingers, To take imployment from the Ballad-singers; Nor none of thse: But on a gloomy day, My genius stept to me, and thus gan say; Listen to me, I give you information, This History deserves a grave translation; And if comparisons be free from slanders, I say, as well as Hero and Leanders. This said, I took my chaire, in colours wrought, Which at an outcry, with two stooes I bought. The stooles of Dornix, which that you may know well Are certain stuffs, Upholsters use to sll. Stuffs, said I? No: some Linsey- Wolsey-monger mixt them, They were not Stuff nor Cloth sure, but betwixt them. The Ward  bought them in, it was without High Faringdon, and there a greasie lout Bid for them shillings six, but I bid seven, A summe that is accounted odd, not ven: The Cryer thereat seemed to be willing, Qoth he, there's no man better then seven shilling, He thought it was a reasonable price, So struck upon the Table, once, twice, thrice, My pen in one hand, Pen-knife in the other, My Ink was good, my Paper was no other. So sat me down, being with sadnesse moved, To sing this new Song, sung of old by Ovid.
But would you think, as I was thus preparing All in a readinesse, here and there staring To find my implements, that th' untoward Elfe, My Muse, should steal away, and hide her selfe, Just so it was, faith, neither worse nor better. A way she run, er'e I had writ a Letter. I after her a pace, and beat the Bushes, Rank Grasse, Firrs, Ferne, and the tall Banks of Rushes At last I found my Mse, and wot you what, I put her up, for lo she was at squat. Thou slt quoth I, hadst thou not run away, I had made Verses all ths live-long day. But in good sooth, o're much I drst not chide her, Lest she should run away, and hide her But when my heat was o're I spake thus to her; Why did'st thou play the wag? I'm very ure. I have commended thee, above old Chaucer; And in a Tavern once I had a Sawcer Of White-wine Vinegar, dasht in my face, For saying thou deservedst a better grace: Thou knowst that then I took a Sawsedge up, Upon the knaves face it gave such a clap, That he repented him that he had spoken Against thy Fame, he struck by the same token, I oft have sung thy Meeters, and sometimes, I laught to set on others at thy rimes, When that my Muse considered had this geare, She sigh'd so sore, it griev'd my heart to heare, She said she had done ill, and was not blameless, And Polyhymey (one that shal be namelesse, Was present when she spoke it) and before her, My Muses lamentation was the soarer. And then to shew she was not quite unkinde, She sounded out these strong lines of her minde.
THE INNOVATION OF Vlysses and Penelope. O All ye The harder the word is, the easier it is to be un∣stood. Cliptick Spirits of the Sphaeres That have or In varying the use of the senses, the Author shewes himselfe to be in his wit. sense to hear or In varying the use of the senses, the Author shewes himselfe to be in his wit. use of eares, And you in number There the Author shewes himselfe to be well ver∣sed in the Almanack. twelve Caelestiall Signes That Poets have made use of in their lines, And by which men doe know what Seasons good To gueld their Bore-piggs, and let Horses blood; List to my dolefull glee, ô Being twice repeated, it argues an elegant fancy in the Poet. list I say, Unto the Complaint of Penelopay.
She was a Loer, I, and so was hee As loving unto her, and he to To makefalse English, argues as much knowledge as to make true latin. she: But mark how things were aler'd in  mo∣ment Ulysses was a Graecian born, I so meant To have inform'd you first; but since 't is or', It is as Better once done then never. well, as had it been before: He being as I said, a Greek there rose A Quarrell 'twit the Trojans and their For sometimes there may happen a quarrell a∣mongst friends. foes, I mean the Graecians, whereof he was Till he was married, he could be but one. one, But let that pass, he was Lartes Sonne. Yet least some of the difference be ig-norant, It was about a There is no mischiefe, but a woman is at one end of it. Wench, you may hear more The more you heare on't, the worse you'l like it. on't In Virgils Aeneids, and in Homer too; How Paris lov'd her, and no more adoe But goes and steales her from her Husband: wherefore The Graecians took their Tooles, and fighted therefore.
And that you may perceive they were stout There was a Spanish regiment amongst them. Signiors, The Combat lasted for the space of ten That may be done in an houre, which we may re∣pent all our life after. years. This Gallant bideing where full many a Mo∣ther Is oft bereav'd of Child, Sister of Brothe, His Lady greatly longing for his presence Being up to the Elbowes in trouble, she expressed it in this line. Writ him a Letter, whereof this the Sense. "My pretty Duck, my Pigsnie, my Ulysses, "Thy poor Penelope sends a Even Reckoning, makes long friends. thousand Kisses "As to her only Ioy, a hearty greeting; "Wishing thy Company, but not thy meeting "With enemies, and fiery Spirits in Armour, "And which perchance may do thy bedy harme∣or "May take thee Pisoner, and clap on thee bolts "And locks upon thy legges, such as weare Colts. "But send me word, and e're that thou want r∣some "Being a man so comely, and so handsome, "Ile sell my Smocke both from my backe and As a pudding ha's two ends, so a smock ha's tw . belly
"E're you want Money, Meat, or Cloathes, I tell yee. When that Ulysses, all in grief enveloped, Had markt how right this Letter was Penelo∣ped. Laid one hand on his heart, and said't was guilty, Resting the other on his Dagger-hilty, Thus gan to speake: O thou that dost con∣troule All beauties else, thou hast so bang'd my soule With this thy lamentation, that I sweare, I love thee strangely, without wit or fear; I could have wish'd (quoth he,) my selfe the Paper Inke, Standish, Sandbox, or the burning Ta∣per, That were the Instruments of this thy write∣ing Or else the Stool whereon thou sat'st inditing: And so might have bin neer that lovely breech That never yet was troubled with the As Love doth commonly break out into an itch, yet with her it did not so. Itch. And with the thought of that, his Sorrow doubled His heart with wo, was so Cuff'd and Cornub∣led,
That he approv'd one of his Ladyes Verses, (The which my Author in his booke rehear∣ses) 'Tis true quoth he, There the Author translates out of Ovid, as Ben Johnson do's in Sejanus out of Homer. Loves troubles make me tamer, Res est Soliciti plena timoris Amor. This said, he blam'd himselfe, and chid his folly For being so ore-rul'd with melancholly, He call'd himself, Fool, Coxecombe, Asse, and Fop, And many ascurvy name he reckon'd up, But to himself, this language was too rough, For certainly the Man had wit enough: For he resolves to leave his Trojan foes, And go to see his Love in his best Cloaths. But marke how he was cross'd in his in∣tent, His friends suspected him incontinent: And some of them suppos'd he was in love, Because his eyes all in his head did move, Or more or less then used, I know not which But I am sure they did not move so mich As they were wont to doe: and then 'twas blasted. Ulysses was in love, and whilst that lasted
No other newes within the Camp was spoke of, And many did suppose the Match was broke off, But he conceal'd himself, nor was o're hasty To shift his Cloaths, though now grown some∣what nasty. But having wash'd his hands in Pewter Ba∣son, Determines for to get a Girle or a Son, On fair Penelope, for he look'd trimmer Then young Leander when he learn'd his By this you may perceive, that primers were first printed at Abidos. Primer, To Graece he wends apace, for all his hope Was only now to see faire Penelope: She kembd her head, and wash'd her face in Creame And pinch'd her cheeks to make the For distinction sake, because many mens noses bleed white blood. redde bloud stream She don'd new cloaths, and sent the old ones packing, And had her shoes rub'd over with Lamp Black is the beauty of the shoe. blacking, Her new rebato, and a falling band, And Rings with severall poesies on her hand.
A stomacher upon her breast so bare. For Strips and Gorgets was not then the weare. She thus adorn'd to meet her youthfull Lover Heard by a Post-boy, he was new come over: She then prepares a banquet very neat Because a Cow, was amongst the ancient Graecians called a Neat, Gesner in his Etymolog. lib. 103. Tom 16. Yet there was not a bit of Butchers meat But Pyes, and Capons, Rabbits, Larkes, and Fruit; Orion on a Dolphin, with his Better falsifye the Rime, then the Story, &c. Harpe, And in the midst of all these dishes stood A platter of Pease-porridg, wondrous good, And next to that the god of Love was plac'd, His Image being made out of Rye-paste, To make that good, which the old Proverb speaks [The one the Heart, 't other the belly breaks.] Ulysses seeing himself a welcome Guest Resolves to have some Fidlers at the Feast: And 'mongst the various Consort choosing them That in their sleeves the armes of Agamem- Non, in the next verse, wore: Cry'd in a rage Sing me some Song made in the Iron-Age.
The Iron-Age, quoth he that used to sing? This to my mind the Black-Smith's Song doth bring The Black-Smiths, quoth Ulisses? and there holloweth, Whoope! is there such a Song? Let's ha't. It followeth, The Black-Smith. As it was sung before Ulysses and Penelope at their Feast, when he returned from their Trojan Warrs, collected out of Homer, Virgill and Ovid, by some of the Modern Familie of the Fancies. OF all the trades that ever I see, There's none with the Blacksmith compar'd may be, With so many severall tooles workes hee Which Nobody can deny, The first that ever thunderbolt made, Was a Cyclops of the Blacksmiths trade, As in a learned author is sayd, Which Nobody, &c. When Thunderingly we lay about The fire like lightening flasheth out; Which suddainly with water wee d'out. Which No, &c.
The fayrest Godesse in the skyes To marry with Vulcan did devise, Which was a Blacksmith grave and wise Which, &c. Mulciber to do her all right Did build her a Towne by day and by night, Which afterwards he Hammersmith hight Which, &c. And that no Enemy might wrong her Hee gave her Fort she need no stronger, Then is the lane of Ironmonger, Which, &c. Vulcan farther did acquaint her That a pritty estate he would appoynt her, And leave her Seacoale-lane for ajoynture. Which, &c Smithfeild he did free from dirt, And he had sure great reason for't It stood very neare to Turne▪ mill street venus court Which, &c. But after in good time and tide, It was to the Blacksmiths rectifyed, And given'em by Edmond rouside, Which, &c. At last Vulcan. he made a Nett or traine, In which the God of warre was t'ane, Which ever since was call'd Pauls chaine Which, &c. The common proverb, as it is read, That we should hit the nayle o'the head:
Without the Blacksmith cannot be said, Which, &c. There is another must not be forgot Which falls unto the Blacksmiths lot, That we should strike while the I'rons hott, Which, &c. A third lyes in the Blacksmiths way When things are safe as old-wives say, They have 'em under lock and key, Which, &c. Another proverb makes me laugh Because the Smith can challenge but halfe; When things are as Plaine as a Pike staffe, Which, &c. But't other halfe to him does belong; And therefore, do the Smith no wrong, When one is held to it hard, buckle and thong, Which, &c. Then there is a whole one proper and fit And the Blacksmith's justice is seene in it, When you give a man rostmeat and beat him with spitt, Which, &c. Another proverb does seldome fayle, When you meet with naughty beere or ale, You cry it is as dead as a dore nayle, VVhich, &c. If you stick to one when fortunes wheele Doth make him many losses feele We say such a friend is as true as steele. VVhich &c.
Ther's one that's in the Blacksmith's bookes, And from him alone for remedy lookes. And that is he that is offo'the hookes. Which, &c. Ther's ner'a slutt, if filth over-smutch her But owes to the Blacksmith for her leatcher: For without a payre of tongs no man will touch her Which, &c. There is a lawe in merry England In which the Smith has some command When any one is burnt in the hand; Which, &c. Banbury ale a halfe-yard-pott, The Devill a Tinker dares stand to't; If once the tost be hizzing-hott. Which, &c. If any Taylor has the Itch, Your Blacksmith's water, as black as pitch, Will make his fingers goe thorow-stitch. Which, &c. A Sullen-woman needs no leech, Your Blacksmiths Bellowes restores her speech And will fetch her againe with wind in her Breech. Which, &c. Your snuffling Puritans do surmise, That without the Blacksmiths mysteries, St: Peter had never gotten his keyes, VVhich every one can deny,
And further more there are of those Tha without the Blacksmiths help do suppose St: Dunstan had never tane the Divel by the nose Which Nobody can deny. And though they are so rigid and nice And rayle against Drabs, and Drinke, and Dice Yet they do allowe the Blacksmith his vice Which, &c. Now when so many Haeresies fly about, And every sect growes still more in doubt The Blacksmith he is hammering it out, Which, &c. Though Serjeants at law grow richer far, And with long pleading a good cause can marr Yet your Blacksmith takes more pains at the Barr, Which, &c. And though he has no Commander's look Nor can brag of those he hath slayn and took, Yet he is as good as ever strooke. Which, &c. For though he does lay on many a blow It ruines neither freind nor foe; Would our plundering-souldiers had don so, Which every one can deny. Though Bankrupts lye lurking in their holes And laugh at their Creditors, and catchpoles, Yet your Smith can fetch em over the coales. Whch Nobody can deny. Our lawes do punish severely still, Such as countersit, deed, bond, or bill,
But your Smith may freely forge what he will Which, &c. To be a Jockey is thought a fine fear, As to trayne up a horse, and prescribe him his meat Yet your smith knowes best to give a heat. Which, &c. The Roreing-Boy who every one quayles And swagges, & drinks, & sweares and rayles, Could never yet make the Smith eat his nayls. Which, &c. Then if to know him men did desire, They would not scorne him but ranck him higher For what he gets is out of the fire. Which. &c. Though Ulysses himselfe has gon many miles And in the warre has all the craft & the wiles, Yet your Smith can sooner double his files. Which, &c, Sayst thou so, quoth Ulysses, and then he did call For wine to drinke to the Black-Smiths all, And he vowed it should go round as a Ball VVhich Nobody should deny. And cause he had such pleasure t'ane, At this honest fidlers merry straine, He gave him the Horse-Shoe in Drury-lane Which Nobody can deny.
Where his posterity ever since Are ready with wine, both Spanish & French, For those that can bring in another Clench Which Nobody can deny. The song being don they drank the health, they rose They wo'd in verse, and went to bed in prose. A Prologue to the Mayor of Quinborough. LOe I the Maior of Quborough Town by name, With all my brethren saving one that's lame; Are come as fast as fyery mil-horse gallops, To meet thy grace, thy Queene, & her fair Trollops, For reason of our comming do no look, It must be don, I finde it i'th Town-book: And yet not I my selfe, I scorne to read, I keep a Clarck to do these jobbs at need. And now respect a rare conceipt before Thong castle see thee, Reach me the thing, to give the King, that other too, I prethee, Now here they be, for Queene and hee, the guist's all steele, and leather, But the conceit of mickle weight, and here they 're com together,
To shew two loves must joyne in one, our Towne presents to thee, This gilded scabberd to the Queene, this dagger unto Thee. A Song. HEe that a happy life will lead, In these times of distraction, Let him list'n to me and I will him read A lecture without faction. Let him want three things whence misery springs, They all begin with a letter. Let him bound his desires to what nature requires, And with reason his humor fetter. Let not his wealth prodigious grow, For that breeds care and dangers; Makes him envi'd above, and hated below, And a constant slave to strangers. They're happiest of all whose estats are small Though but enough to maintain 'um They may do, they may say, having nothing to pay, It will not quit cost to arraigne u'm. Nor would I have him clogg'd with a wife, For househould care and cumber,
Nor to one place confine a mans lise: Cause he cannot remove his lumber. They are happier farr that unwedded are, And forrage on all in common, For all stormes they may flye, & if they should dye They undo neither child nor woman. Nor let his braines overflow with witt, That savours on discretion; 'Tis costly to get and hard to keep And dangerous. in the possession. They are happyest men that can scarce tell ten, And beat not their braines about reason; They may say what will serve, themselves to preserve, And their words are neare tak'n for treason. Of fools there is none like to the Witt For he takes paines to show it, When his pride and his drinke brings him into his fit; Then straight he must be a poet Now his jests he flings at States and at Kings For applause of bayes and shaddowes; Thinkes a verse serves as well, as circle or spell Till he rhimes himselfe to the Barbadoes. He that within his bounds will keep, May baffle all dysasters; To fortune and fate commands he may give
Which worldling call their masters; He may dance, he may laugh, he may sing, he may quaffe, May be mad, may be sad may be jolly, He may walk without fear, and sleep without care, And a fig for the world and its folly. The drunken Lover. J. D. Delight. I Dore, I dote, but am a sott to show't, I was a very fool to let her know't; For now she doth so cuning grow, She proves a freind worse then a foe: She will not hold me fast nor let me goe, She tells me, I cannot forsake her; Then straight I endeavor to leave her, But to make me stay throw's a kisse in my way, Oh then I could tarry for ever. Then I retire, salute, and sit down by her, There do I five in frost, and freeze in fire, New Nectar from her lipps I sup. And though I do not drink all up; Yet am I drunk with kissing of the cup: For her lipps are two brimmers of Clarret, Where first I begin to miscarry: Her brests of delight, are two bottles of white, And her eyes are two cups of Canary.
Drunk as I live, dead drunk beyond reprieve For all my secrets dribble through a sive, Her arme about my neck she laith, Now all is Scripture that she saith Which I lay hold on, with my fuddled faith, I find a fond lover's a drunkard; And dangerous is when he flyes out, With hipps and with lipps, with black eyes and white thighes, Blind Cupid sure tippled his eyes out. She bids me, Arise, tells me I must be wise, Like her, for she is not in love she cryes; Then do I fret and fling and throw, Shall I be fettered to my foe? Then I begin to run but cannot goe I pray thee, sweet, use me more kindly. You had better for to hold me fast, If you once disengage your bird from his cage, Beleeve me hee'le leave you at last. Lik a sot I sit that fild the towne with witt, But now confesse I have most need of it; I have been drunk with duck and deare, A bove aquarter of a yeare: Beyond the cure of sleeping or small beere, think I can number the months to, Iuly, August, September, October Thus goes my account a mischeife upon't But sure I shall goe when I am sober.
My legs are lame, my courage is quite tam'de, My heart and all my body is inflamde; Now by experience I can prove. And sweare by all the powers above; Tis better to be drunk with wine then love. Good sack makes us merry and witty, Our faces with jwells adorning; And though that we grope yet, there is some hope, That a man may be sober next morning. Then with command she throwes me from her hand, She bids me goe yet knowes I cannot stand; I measure all the ground by tripps, Was ever Sot so drunk in sipps, Or ever man so over seene in lipps, I pray, maddam fickle, be faithfull, And leave off your damnable dodging, Pray do not deceive me, either love me or leave me, And let me go home to my lodging. I love too much but yet my sollie's such I cannot leave, I must love to 'ther touch. Heres a Health unto the King, how now? I am drunk and speak treason I vow; Lovers and fooles say any thing you know, I feare I have tyred your patience, But I am sure, tis I have the wrong on't,
My wit is bereft me; for all that I have left me Will but just serve to make me a song on't, My mistris and I shall never comply, And there is the short and the long on't. To the Tune of The beginning of the World. R. P. Delight. O Mother, chave bin a batchelour, This twelve and twanty yeare; And I'ze have often beene a wowing, And yet cham never the neare: Ione Gromball chee'l ha' non s' mee, Ize look so like a lowt; But I vaith, cham as propper a man as zhe. Zhee need not be zo stout. She zaies ifize, cond daunce and zing, As Thomas Miller con, Or cut a cauper, as litle Iack Taylor: O how chee'd love mee thon. But zoft and faire, chil none of that, I vaith cham not zo nimble; The Tailor hath nought to trouble his thought But his needel and his thimble, O zon, th'art of a lawfull age, And a jolly tidy boy, Ide have thee try her once a gaine, She can but say thee nay:
Then O Gramarcy mother, Chill zet a good vace o' the matter, Chill dresse up my zon as fine as a dog And chill have a fresh bout at her. And first chill put on my zunday parrell That's lac't about the quarters; With a paire of buckram slopps, And a vlanting paire of garters. With my sword tide vast to my zide, And my grandvathers dug'en and dagger And a Peacocks veather in my capp Then oh how I'ch shall swagger. Nay tak thee a lockrum napkin son, To wipe thy snotty nose, T's noe matter vor that, chill snort it out, And vlurt it athart my cloths: Ods, bodikins nay fy away, I prethee son do not so: Be mannerly son till thou canst tell, Whether sheele ha' thee or noe, But zirrah Mother harke a while Whoes that that comes so near? Tis Ione Grumball, hold thy peace, For feare that she doe heare. Nay on't be she, chill dresse my words In zuch a scholards grace, But virst of all chall take my honds, And lay them athwart her vace.
Good morrow my honey my sugger-candy, My litle pretty mouse, Cha hopes thy vather and mother be well, At home at thine own house. I'ch am zhame vac't to show my mind, Cham zure thou knowst my arrant: Zum zen, Jug, that I mun a thee. At leasure Sir I warrant. You must (Sir Clowne) is for the King, And not for such a mome, You might have said, by leave faire maid. And let your (must) alone. Ich am noe more nor clowne thats vlat, Cham in my zunday parrell, I'ch came vor love and I pray so tak't, Che hopes che will not quarrell. O Robbin dost thou love me so well? I vaith, abommination, Why then you should have fram'd your words Into a finer fashion. Vine vashions and vine speeches too As schollards volks con utter, Chad wrather speak but twa words plaine Thon haulfe a score and stutter. Chave land, chave houss, chave twa va beasts, Thats better thon vine speeches; T's a signe that Fortune favours fooles She lets them have such riches.
Hark how she comes upon mee now, I'd wish it be a good zine, He that will steale any wit from thee Had need to rise betime. An Old Song. BAck and sides go bare go bare, And feet and hands go cold, But let my belly have Ale enough Whether it be new or old, Whether it be new or old, Boyes, whether it be new or old: But let my belly have ale enough, Whether it be new or old, A beggar's a thing as good as a King, If you aske me the reason why For a King cannot swagger And drink like a beggar No King so happy as I: Some call me knave and rascall slave, But I know, how to collogue Come upon Um, and upon 'um; Will your worships and honour um, Then I am an honest rogue, then I Come upon um, and upon 'um will you wor∣ships:
If a sart fiye away where he makes his stay, Can any man think or suppose? For a fart cannot tell, when its out where to dwell, Unlesse it be in your nose, unlesse it be in your nose boyes, Unlesse it be in your nose. For a fart cannot tell, when its out where to dwell Unlesse it be in your nose. The Sowgelder's Song, in the Beggers-Bush. I Met with the Divell in the shape of a Ramme, Over and over the Sow-gelder came, I took him and haltred him fast by the horne, And pickt out his stones as you'd pick out your cornes. Oh quoth the Divell and with that he shrunk, And left me a carkase of mutton that stunk. Walking alone but a mile and a halfe, I saw where he lay in the shape of a calfe; I took him and gelt him e're he thought any e∣vill, And found him to be but a sucking Divell. Bla quoth the Divell and clapt down his taile, And that was sold after for excellent veale.
I met with the Divell in the shape of a Pigge, I look't at the rogue, and he look't something bigge; E're a man cold fart thrice, I had made him a hogge, Oh quoth the Divell and then gave a Jerke That the Jew was converted by eating of porke. In woman's attire I met him full fine, I took him at least for an Angell divine; But viewing his crabb-face I fell to my trade, And I made him forsweare ever acting a maid. O quoth the Divell, and so ranne away, And hid him in a Fryers gray weeds, as they say. For halfe a yeare after it was my great chance To meet with a gray coate that lay in a Trance, I took him and I graspt him fast by the codds; Betwixt his tongue and his taile I left little odds. Oh, quoth the Divell, much harme hast thou done, Thou art sure to be cursed of many a man. My ram, calfe, my porke, my punk and my fryar, I have left them unfurnish't of their best Lady ware; And now he runs roaring from alehouse to Taverne,
And sweares hee'le turn tutor to the swagger∣ing gallant: But if I catch him Ile serve him no worse For Ile lib him, and leave him not a peny in his purse. A Song. Three merry ladds met at the Rose To speak the praises of the Nose, The nose which stands in middle place Sets out the beauty of the face; The nose with which we have begunne, Will serve to make our verses runne, Invention often barren growes; But still their's matter in the nose. The nose is of so high a price, That men prefer't before their eyes; And no man counts him for his friend, That boldly takes his nose by the end. The nose that like Euripus flows, The sea that did the wiseman pose. Invention, &c. The nose is of as many kinds, As mariners can reckon winds, The long, the short, the nose displayd; The great nose which did fright the maid; The nose through which the brother-hood Did parley for their sisters good. Invention, &c.
The slat, the sharp, the roman snout, The hawkes nose Circled round about: The crooked nose that stands awry, The ruby nose of Scarlet dye, The Brazen-nose without a face That doth the learned Colledge grace; Invention, &c. The long nose when the teeth appeare, Shews what's a clock if the day be clear, The broad nose stands in buckler place, And takes the blowes from off the face; The nose being plaine without a ridge, Will serve sometimes to make a bridge. Invention, &c. The short nose is the Lovers blisse, Because it hinders not a kisse. The toating nose is a monstrous thing, That's he that did the bottle bring: And he that brought th ttle hither, Will drink; oh monstrous! out of measure. Invention, &c. The fiery nose, in Lanthornes stead, Will light its Master to his bed; And who so ere that treasure owes, Growes poore in purse, though rich in nose. The brazen nose that's o're the gate, Maintaines full many a Latin-pate. Invention, &c.
If any nose take this in snuffe, And think it more then is enough; We answer them, we did not fear, Nor think such noses had been here. But if there be, we need not care; A nose of wax our Statutes are. Invention now is barren growne; The matters out, the nose is blown. Phillada flouts me. Oh! what a pain is love, How shall I bear it? Shee will inconstant prove, I greatly feare it. Shee so torments my mind, That my strength faileth; And wavers with the wind, As a shippe that saileth. Please her the best I y, Shee looks another way. A lack and well a day Phillada floutes me. All the fair yesterday, She did passe by me; She look't another way, And would not spye me. I woo'd her for to dine, But could not get her.
VVill had her to the wine, Hee might intreat her. With Daniel she did dance, On me she look't a sconce. Oh thrice unhappy chance, Phillada floutes me. Faire Maid, be not so coy, Doe not disdaine me: I am my mothers joy Sweet entertain me. Shee'l give me when she dyes, All that is fitting, Her Poultrey and her Bees And her Geese sitting. A paire of mattrisse bedds, And a bagge full of shredds. And yet for all this goods, Phillada floutes me. She hath a cloute of mine Wrought with good Coventry, Which she keeps for a signe Of my fidelitie. But i'faith, if she flinch, She shall not weare it. To Tibb my tother wench I mean to beare it. And yet it grieves my heart, So soon from her to part.
Death strikes me with his dart, Phillada floutes me. Thou shallt eate Curds & Cream, All the year lasting; And drink the Christall stream, Pleasant in tasting; Wigge and whay whilst thou burst, And ramble berry; Pye-lid and pasty crust, Pears, Plums, and Cherrey. Thy raiment shalbe thin, Made of a weavers skin, Yet all's not worth a pinne, Phillada floutes me. Fair maidens, have a care, And in time take me: I can have those as fair, If you forsake me. For Doll the dairy-maide, Laught on me lately, And wanton VVinifrid Favours me greatly. One throws milk on my clothes, T'other playes with my nose; What wanton signes are those? Phillada flouts me. I cannot work and sleep All at a season;
Love wounds my heart so deep, Without all reason. I'gin to pine a way, With greife and sorrow, Like to a fatted beast, Pen'd in a meadow. I shall be dead I fear, With in this thousand yeare; And all for very feare. Phillada flouts me. The Milk-maids. WAlkeing betimes close by a green wood side, Hy tranonny, nonny with hy tranonny no; A payre of lovely milk maides there by chance I spide With hy tranonny nonny no, with tranonny no, One of them was faire As fair as fair might bee; The other she was browne, With wanton rowling eye. Syder to make sillibubbs, They carryed in their pailes;
And suggar in their purses, Hung dangling at their tailes. Wa-coats of flannell, And petty-coats ofredd. Before them milk white aporns, And straw-hats on their heads, Silke poynts, with silver taggs, A bout their wrists were shown; And jett-Rings, with poesies Yours more then his owne. And to requite their lovers poynts and rings, They gave their lovers bracelets, And many pretty things. And there they did get gownes All on the grasse so green, But the taylor was not skilfull, For the stitches they were seen. Thus having spent the long summers day, They took their nut browne milk pailes, And so they came away. Well fare you merry milk maids That dable in the dew For you have kisses plenty, When Ladyes have but few.
The old Ballet of shepheard Tom. AS I late wandred over a Plaine, Upon a hill piping I spide a shephards swaine: His slops were of green, his coat was of gray, And on his head a wreath of willow & of bay. He sigh'd and he pip't, His eyes he often wip't, He curst and ban'd the boy, That first brought his annoy: Who with the fire of desire, so inflam'd his minde, To doate upon a lasse; so various & unkinde. Then howling, he threw his whistle a way, And beat his heeles agen the ground whereon he lay. He swore & he star'dhe was quite bereft of hope, And out of his scrip he pulled a rope: Quoth he, the man that wooes, With me prepare his noose; For rather then I'le fry, By hemp Ile choose to dy. Then up he rose, & he goes streight unto a tree, Where he thus complaines of his lasses cruelty, A pox upon the divell, that ever twas my lot, To set my love upon so wooddish a trot.
Had not I been better took Ione of the mill, Kate of the creame house, or bony bouncing Nell: A Proud word I speak I had them at my beck; And they on holydayes Would give me prick and praise. But Phillis she was to me dearer then my eyes, For whom I now indure these plaguy miseryes. Oft have I woo'd her with many a teare, With ribband for her head tire, and laces from the fayre, With bone-lace and with shoone, with bracelets and with pinns, And many a toy besides: good god forgive my sinns. And yet this plaguy flirt Would ding them in the dirte And smile to see mee tear, The locks from of my haire. To scratch my chops, rend my slops, & at wakes to sit Like to a sot bereft both of reason sense and witt. Therefore from this bough Tom bids a dew To the shepherds of the valley, and all the joviall crew. Farewell Thump, my ram, and Cut my bobtaild curre, Behold your Mr, proves his owne murtherer.
Goe to my Philis, goe, Tell her this tale of woe. Tell her where she may finde Me tottering in the winde. Say on a tree she may see her Tom rid from all care, Where she may take him napping as Mosse took his Mare. His Philis by chance stood close in a bush, And as the Clowne did sprawle, she streight to him did rush. She cut in two the rope and thus to him she said, Dispairing Tom, my Tom, thou hast undone a maid. Then as one amaz'd. Upon her face he gaz'd; And in this wofull case, She kist his pallid face, He whoopt amaine, swore, no swaine ever more should be, Soe happy in his love, nor halfe so sweet as she, Obsequies. DRaw not so near Unlesse you shed a tear On the stone, Where I grone, And will weepe, Untill eternall sleepe
Hath charm'd my weary eyes. Flora lyes here, Embalm'd with many a teare, Which the swaines, From the plaines, Here have paid, And many a vestall Maid Hath mourn'd her obsequies: Their snowy brests they tear, And rend their golden hayre; Casting cryes. To Celestiall deityes, To returne Her beauty from the urne, To raigne Unparallel on earth againe. When strait a sound, From the ground, Peircing the aire, Cryes, shee's dead, Her soule is fled, Unto a place more rare. You spirits that doe keep The dust of those that sleep, Under the ground, Heare the sound Of a swaine, That folds his armes in vain, Unto the ashes he adores.
For pity doe not fright Him wandring in the night: Whilst he laves Virgins graves With his eyes, Unto their memoryes, Contributing sad showers. And when my name is read, In the number of the dead, Some one may, In Charity repay My sad soul, The tribute which she gave, And howle Some requiem on my grave. Then weep noe more Greife willnot restore Her freed from care. Though she be dead, Her soule is fled Unto a place more rare. Of a Taylor and a Lowse. A Lowse without leave a Taylor did molest, The Taylor was forc'd the lowse to arrest;
The Taylor of curtesie the lowse did release, But she bitt the harder and stil broke the peace. In this doubtfull matter, your counsell I crave, What law of the lowse the Taylor may have, A jury of beggers debating the cause, Decree'd in their verdict that lyce should have lawes, And therefore they say without further reciting That lyce must be subject to the law of bac∣biting. Which law doth provide for the party so greived The lowe so offending not to be repreived. But straight to be taken and had to the jayle, And after to suffer the crush of the nayle. The old Ballad of Little Musgrave and the Lady Barnard. AS it fell one holy-day, hay downe, As many be in the yeare, When young men and maids Together did goe, Their Mattins and Masse to heare, Little Musgrave came to the church dore, The Preist was at private Masse But he had more minde of the faire women; Then he had of our lady grace
The one of them was clad in green Another was clad in pale, And then came in my lord Bernards wife The fairest amonst them all; She cast an eye on little Musgrave As bright as the summer sun, And then bethought this little Musgrave This lady's heart have I woonn. Quoth she I have loved thee little Musgrave Full long and many a day, So have I loved you fair Lady, Yet never word durst I say. I have a bower at Buckelsfordbery Full daintyly it is geight. If thou wilt wed thither thou little Mus∣grave Thou's lig in mine armes all night. Quoth he, I thank yee faire lady This kindnes thou showest to me, But whether it be to my weal or woe This night I will lig with thee. With that he heard a little tyne page By his ladyes coach as he ran, All though I am my ladyes foot page Yet I am lord Barnards man
My lord Barnard shall knowe of this Whether I sink or sinn; And ever where the bridges were broake He laid him downe to swimme. A sleepe or wake thou Lord Barnard, As thou at a man of life For little Musgrave is at Bucklesfordbery: A bed with thy own wedded wife. If this be true thou little tinny Page, This thing thou tellest to mee, Then all the land in Bucklesfordbery I freely will give to thee. But if it be a ly, thou little tinny Page, This thing thou tellest to me; On the hyest tree in Bucklesfordbery Then hanged shalt thou be. He called up his merry men all Come sadle me my steed, This nigh must I to Buckellsfordbery, For I never had greater need. And some of them whistl'd & some of them sung, And some these words did say; And ever when my lord Barnards horn blew, A way Musgrave a way.
Me-thinks I hear the Thresel-cock, Me-thinks I hear the Jaye, Me-thinks I hear my Lord Barnard, And I would I were away. Lye still, lye still, thou little Musgrave And huggell me from the cold, Tis nothing but a shephards boy, A driving his sheep to the fold. Is not thy hawke upon a perch? Thy steed eats oats and hay; And thou fair Lady in thine armes, And wouldst thou bee away? With that my lord Barnard came to the dore And lit a stone upon He plucked out three silver keys, And he open'd the dores each one. He lifted up the coverlett, He lifted up the sheet, How now, how now, thou littell Musgrave Doest thou find my lady sweet? I find her sweet, quoth little Musgrave The more 'tis to my paine, I would gladly give three hundred pounds That I were on yonder plaine.
Arise arise thou littell Musgrave, And put thy loth-es on, It shal nere be said in my country I have killed a naked man. I have two Swords in one scabberd, Full deere they cost my purse: And thou shalt have the best of them And I will have the worse. The first stroke that little Musgrave stroke, He hurt Lord Barnard sore The next stroke that Lord Barnard stroke Little Musgrave ne're struck more. With that bespake this faire lady, In bed whereas she lay, Although thou'rt dead thou little Musgrave, Yet I for thee will pray, And wish well to thy soule will I So long as I have life, So will I not for thee Barnard Although I am thy wedded wife. He cut her paps from off her brest, Great pitty it was to see, That some drops of this ladies heart's blood Ran trickling downe her knee.
Woe worth you, woe worth, my mery men all, You were ne're borne for my good: Why did you not offer to stay my hand, When you see me wax so wood. For I have slaine the bravest Sir Knight That ever rode on steed, So have I done the fairest lady That ever did womans deed. A grave, a grave, Lord Barnard cryd To put these lovers in: But lay my lady on upper hand For she came of the better kin. The Scots arrears. FOwre hundred thousand pounds A lusty bag indeed▪ Was't ever knowne so vast a sum Ere past the river Twde? Grea pitty it is, I swear, Whole carts was thither sent, Where hardly two in fifty knew, What forty shillings meant: But 'twas to some perceiv'd, Three kingdomes were undone.
And those that sit heere thought it fitt, To settle them one by one, Now Ireland hath no haste, So there theile not begin; The Scottish ayde must first be pai'd, For ye came freely in, And William Lilly writes— Who writes the truth you know; In frosty weather they marched hither. Up to the chins in snow. Free quarter at excesse, They do not weigh a feather, Those Crowns for coals brought in by shoals; Scarce kept their men together, Of plunder they esteeme As trifles of no worth, Of force ye dote because recruite Issued no faster forth. If once this cash is paid I hope the Scot be spedd, He need not steale but fairly deal Both to be cloth'd and fedd. Our sheep and oxen may Safe in their pastures stand, What need they filch the cow Thats milch to sojourne in their land. I wonder much the Scot With this defiles his hands,
Because the summ's a price of Rome Rays'd out of the Bishops lands, But too too wel ye know To what intent they in came Twas not their paines produc'd this gaines Twas sent to packe them home, Mee thinks I heare them laugh To see how matters proved, And give ashout it so fell out, Ye were more fear'd then loved, key after this nge hath forgott fires hee much retires shows himselfe no Scott.
Rebellis SCOTUS. CUrae Deo sumus, ista si cedant Scoto? Variat spleniis omina Psche st suis. Aut stell yea. , Campanuae omns; totus Ucalegon suo, Coriaceae cui millies mille hydriae, Suburbicants pensiles parciis Non sint refrigerio. Poeticus furor, Cometâ non mins, vel ore flammeo Commune despuente fatum stellulâ, Dirum ominatur. Ecquis, è Stoâ, suam Iam temperet bilem? patria quando ue Tam Pymianâ, id est pediculosâ, perit? Bombamachidis{que} fit bolus myrmeciis? Scotos nec ausim nominare, carminum Nisi inter amuleta, nec meditarier Nisi cebello, quod capillitio rubens (Quale umo coluberrimum uriis caput) Quot inde verba, tot vnena promperit. Rhadamantbe, fac, guttr esset nuc mihi, Sulphurque, patibulmque copiosius Ructans, Magus qu cnias bnbycinas; Poteram ut Agyr or, pillas Vomicas loqui,   yga: Aut ut Genvae Sie, Peers Tartara,  equleos boare pulpitis: At mchinan pr frem nunquam Scoto, Cunis Scltis hi gutturalibus. Ut dig Di dunt, vorem par est pris, (Pgiator u) sicas, & acinaces. Is, hc, I ambe, gressibus faxo tuis At huc, ambe, mosibus faxo magis. Satyrque tortri, tot huc adducite Flagella, qut prsens mereur seculum Scoti enfieis pares; audax sylum Horre tinge, sic nocent minus.
Vt Martyres olim induebant belluis. (Quasi sisterent Regis sacros hypocritas) En hos eodem Schmate (at retro) Scotos, Extrà Scotos, intus feras, & sine tropo. Fallax Ierna viperae nihil foves Scoto Colono? Non ego Britanniam. Lupis carentem dixrim, vivo Scoto. Quin Thamesinus pyrgopolinices Scotus Poterat leones, tigrides, ursos, cane Proprii inquilinos pectoris spectaculo Monstrsse; pro obolis omnibus quibus solet Spectare monstra Cratis, & Fori simul Poene ocreatum vulgus. Et patria fera Scotos eremus indicat terrae plag Vel omnipraesentem negans Deum, nisi Venisset inde Carolus, cohors nisi Cafordiana, miles & Montros, Feritatis eluens notam pagan, Hanc prsset semivictimam Deo; Nec Scoticus est, totus Lpardus, Leo; Habent & Ara sicut Arcam fderis Velut tabellae bifiis pictae plicis Fert Angelos pars haec, & haec Cacodaemonas: Cui somnianti tartarum su pavor Sic poenitere, viderat regnum velim Nigrius Scotorum semel, & esset innocens. Regio, malignâ quae facit votum prece, Relegetur ad Gyares breves nunquam incola! Punsset ubi Cainum nec exilio Deus, Sed, ut ille trechedipnum, magis Domicaenio. Vt gens vagans recutita, vel contagium, Aut Beclzebub, si des ubiquitarium. Hinc crro fit semper Scotus, ceros locos, Et hos & illos quoslihet cito nauseans, Vt frusta divisi orbis, & Topograpiae Mendcitatis offulas, curts nimis.
Ipse universitatis haeres integrae, Et totus in toto, natio Epidemica, Nec gliscit ergo jargonre Gallicè, Exoticis aut Indicis modis, neque Iberio nutu negare, nec studet Callere quem de Belgicis Hoghen moghen Venter tumens, aut barba canthari refert. (Quae Coriatis una mens nostratibus) Pugna est in enio, atque animus in patinâ Scoto. Huic Struthioni suggert cibum chalybs, Et denti-ductor appetitus, baltheo, Pro more, pendulos molares inserit. At interim nostras quid involant dapes? Serpens Edenum, non Edenbrgum appetit. Aut Angliae, cui jam malum est Hemorrhois, Haematopotas hs posteris meatibus Natura medica supposuit hirudines Cruore satiandos licèt nostro priùs, Nostro sed & cruore moribundos quoque. Nec computo credant priori, nos item Novum addituros, servitutem pristinae Aliam, gemellam nuperae, fraterculos Palpare quando caeperant charos nimis, (Suffagiorum scilicet poppysmata) Et crustulum impertire velut ffam Cerbero Subblandiens decreverat Senatulus. Nos aera locus arma visc eribus priùs Indemus usque & usque vel capulo tenus. Seri videmus quo Scotum tractes modo. Princeps rebelli mitior tergo quasi Sellas equino detrahen aptat suo. At jus rapinas hasce defendit vetus? Egyptus ista perdit, aufert Israel An bibliorum nescis hos satellites? Praetorianis queis cohortibus, Hiersalem triariis) spes nititur novae Sororcularum? Cardo, cardo vertitur Cupediarum, primitivae legis, &c.
O bone Deus! quanti est carere linte is! Orexis ut Borealis, & fames, movet! Viuque, vestibusque cassi, hinc Knoxio Suore simul, & Knoxio utuntur coquo, Piè quod algeant, quod esurian piè. Larvas quin usque detrahas, & nummulis Titulisque, (ut animabus) suest fallacia. Librae, & Barones (detumescant interim Uocabulorum tympani) quanti valent! Hic Cantianum paene, paene villicum, Solidosque totos illa, sed gratis, duos. Apagè superbae fraudulentiae, simul Prosapiâ pictos, fide & pictos procul: Opprobrium poetico vel stigmati Etiam cruci crux. Non aliter Hyperbolus Hyperscelestus ostracismo sit pudor. Americanus, ille, qui coelum horruit Quod Hispanorum repat eò sed pars quota! Videra in Orco si Scotos, (hui tot Scotos!) Roterodamus pependerat medioximus. Sat musa! semissa fercularia Medullitùs vrans, diabolis invides Propriam sibi suam Scoti paropsidem. Vt Berniclis enim Scoti, sic Lucifer Saturatur ipsis Berniclatioribus. Nam lapsus à furcâ Scotus, mox & Styge Tinctus, suum novatur in Plaut-Anserem. FINIS.
The Rebell SCOT. HOw! Providence! and yet a Scottish crew! Then Madam Nature wears black patches too? What shall our Nation be in bondage thus Unto a Land that truckles under us? Ring the bells backward, I am all on fire, Not all the buckets in a Country Quire Shall quench my rage. A Poet should be fear'd, When angry, like a Comet's flaming beard. And where's the Stoick, can his wrath appease To see his Countrey sick of Pym's disease? By Scotch-invasion, to be made a prey To such Pig-widgin Myrmidons as they? But that there's charm in verse, I would not quo The name of Scot without an antidote; Unlesse my head were red, that I might brew Invention there that might be poyson too. Were I a drowsie Judge, whose dismal note Disgorgeth halters as a Juglers throat Doth ribbands: could I (in Sir Emp'rick tone) Speak Pills in phrase, and quack destruction: Or roar like Marshall, that Genevah Bull, Hell and damnation a Pulpit full: Yet to expresse a Scot, to play that prize, Not all those mouth-Granadoes can suffice. Before a Scot can properly be curst, I must (like Hocus) swallow daggers first. Come, keen Iambicks, with your badgers feet, And Badger-like, bite till your feet do meet Help, ye tarc Satyrists, to imp my rage, With all the Scorpions that should whip this age, Scots are like Witches; do but whet your pen; Scratch till the bloud come, they'l not hurt you then.
Now as the Martyrs were inforc'd to take The shapes of beasts, like hypocrires at stake; I'le bait my Scot so, yet not cheat your eyes, A Scot, within a beast, is no disguise. No more let Ireland brag, her harmlesse Nation Fosters no Venom, since the Scot's plantation; Nor can our feign'd antiquity maintain; Since they came in, England hath Wolves again, The Scot that kept the Tower, might have showne (Within the grate of his own breast alone) Leopard and the Panther, and ingrost t all those wild Collegiats had cost: honest high-shooes, in their termly fees, to the salvage Lawyer, next to these. Nare her selfe doth Scotch-men beasts confesse, Making their Countrey such a wildernesse, A Lnd that brings in question and suspense Gods omni-presence, but that Charles came thence, But that Montrosse and Crawfords loyal band Atton'd their sins, and christ'ned half the Land; Nor is it all the Nation hath these spots; There is a Church, as well as Kirk of Scots: As in a picture, where the squinting paint Shews fiend on this side, and on that side saint: He that saw Hell in's melancholy dream And in the twi-light of his fancy's theam, Scar'd from his sins, repented in a fright, Had he view'd Scotland, had turn'd Proselyte. A Land, where one may pray with curst intent, O may they never suffer banishment! Had Cain been Scot, God would have chang'd his doom, Not fore't him wander, but confin'd him home. Like Jews they spread, and as infection fly, As if the devil had Ubiquity. Hence'tis they live at Rovers, and desie This or that place, rags of Geography.
They're Citizens ot'h' world; they're all in all, Scotland's a Nation Epidemical. And yet they ramble not, to learn the mode How to be drest, or how to lisp abroad; To return knowing in the Spanish shrug. Or which of the Dutch-States a double Jug Resembles most, in belly, or in beard. (The Card by which the Marriners are steer'd.) No; the Scots-Errant sight, and sight to eat; Their Essrich-stomacks make their swords their meat Nature with Scots, as Tooth-drawers hath dealt, Who use to hang their teeth upon their belt. Yet wonder not at this their happy choice; The Serpent's fatal still to Paradise. Sure England hath the Hemeroids, and these On the North-posture of the patient seize, Like Leeches, thus they physically thirst After our bloud, but in the cure shall burst. Let them not think to make us run o'th score, To purchase villenage as once before, When an Act pass'd to stroak them on the head, Call them good Subjects, buy them Ginger-bread. Nor Gold, nor Acts of grace, 'tis Steel must tame The stubborn Scot: a Prince that would reclaim Rebels by yeilding, doth like him, (or worse) Who sadled his own back, to shame his horse. Was it for this you left your leaner soil, Thus to lard Israel with Aegypts spoyl? They are he Gospels Life-guard, but for them (The Garrison of new Irusalem) Wha would the Brethren do'the cause! the cause! Sack possets, and the fundamental Lawes!
Lord! what a goodly thing is want of shirts! How a Scotch-stomack, and no meat, converts! They wanted food and rayment; so they took Religion for their Seamstresse, and their Cook. Unmask them well; their honours and estate As well as conscience are sophisticate. Shrive but their titles, and their money poize, A Laird and twenty pounds pronounc'd with noise, When constru'd, but for a plain Yeoman go, And a good sober Two-pence, and well so. Hence then, you proud Impostors, get you gone, You Picts in Gentry and devotion; You scandal to the stock of Verse, a race Able to bring the Gibbet in disgrace. Hyperbolus by suffering did traduce The Ostracism, and sham'd it out of use, The Indian, that heaven did orsweare, Because he heard the Spaniards were there, Had he but known what Scots in hell had been, He would Erasmus-like have hung between: My Muse hath done. A Voider for the nonce; I wrong the devil, should I pick their bones. That dish is his; for when the Scots decease, Hell, like their Nation, feeds on Barnacles, A Scot, when from the Gallow-tree got loose, Drops into Syx, and turns a Soland-Goose. The End.
