P3063 11951439 51436
The Death of Good Josiah Lamented. A SERMON Occasioned by the Death of our Late Most Gracious Soveraign Queen Mary, OF Ever Blessed Memory. Preach'd at Balsham in Cambridgshire, March 3. 1695. By JOSEPH POWELL, M. A. Rector of Balsham in Cambridgshire. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill, 1695.
A SERMON Occasioned by the Death of the Queen. 2 Chron. XXXV. 24. And all Judah, and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.— THese words are a record, how sensibly affected the Kingdom of Judah was with the death of good Josiah; for this gene∣ral concern there was great reason, consider∣ing his station, his character, and the circum∣stances of their affairs, when this excellent Prince was snatcht from them. The notice you have now had, of the approaching Fu∣neral of our late Queen, of Blessed Memory, will, I hope, render a discourse upon a Text
of this nature very seasonable. I could not satisfie my self, that so extraordinary a Prin∣cess (whose equal in all respects we do not yet know to be left behind her in the whole com∣pass of the world) should pass to her Grave, without some notice taken of her in the most private corner of her Kingdom; without pay∣ing some small, but well meant tribute to her sacred memory; some publick testimony gi∣ven by us, her meanest Subjects, of our thank∣fulness to God for those eminent gifts and graces which shin'd in her, with so bright and glorious a lustre; the esteem of the present age, and the wonder of all that shall follow; of whom I may venture to affirm, alluding to a passage of our Saviour concerning a former Mary (whom she equall'd in her pre∣sent piety,Mat. 26.14. but was a great deal more happy in a constant innocency) that in the whole world, where-ever the praises of persons, fa∣mous in their generations, are rehearst, there shall also the admirable graces and illustrious excellencies of this our Mary be told, for a me∣morial of her. I could not but think it a de∣cency, on this occasion, to try to affect all of you, with so great, so unexpressible a loss sustain'd by this Nation, in the Death of our
incomparable Queen; for whose death, the people of England have full out as much rea∣son to be sensibly concern'd, as those of Judah could possibly have for the fall of that Religi∣ous Prince here mention'd; of whom we read that all Judah, and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. I shall first consider the words, as they re∣late the death of Josiah, and the behaviour of his Subjects thereupon; and then I shall ap∣ply this historical passage to the sad occasion of my present discourse. 1. The Person, whose death is here mourn'd, Josiah. 2. The Concern his Subjects exprest, at his death. They mourn'd for him. 3. This Mourning spoken of, as general and universal; his Mourners were not barely a few Courtires, who attended immediately upon his person, or held offices and employ∣ments by his Life, but all the people of his do∣minions, who lookt upon his death as a pub∣lick judgment and calamity, in which their whole Nation was concern'd; and all Judah, and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 1. The Person, whose death is here related, was Josiah. He was King of Judah and Jeru∣salem, and upon this account his life was of
much more value than many lives, where the Commonwealth receives no detriment. The whole body of the people have an interest in the life of the Prince, their safety does much depend upon the preservation of his person; and they commonly suffer not a little by his fall, especially (as here it was) when it is sud∣den and violent. Hence David, as a King, is stil'd the light of Israel,2 Sam. 21.17. 2 Sam 18.3. 2 Kings 24.19. and said to be worth ten thousand of his Subjects; for something very like to this is spoken of Zedekiah, who by the account the Scripture gives of him, appears to have been none of the best of Princes; and his Fall from his Empire, and Captivity in Babylon, very passionately la∣mented by Jeremy;Lam. 4.20. The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord is taken in their pit, of whom we said, under the shadow of his wings shall we live; upon this reason is that Apostolical Precept grounded, which the first Christians so very carefully observed,1 Tim. 2.1. to pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority; inasmuch, as the community is immediately interested in their preservations; and whatever their per∣sonal qualifications were, their fall was found, by sad experience, to produce great disorders in the affairs of the Empire.
But Josiah was an extraordinary Prince, of great wisdom unusual vertue, of an exem∣plary piety, of an uncommon goodness; he had a great zeal for Gods honour, a mighty re∣gard to his worship, and noble designs for the promoting, and advancing Religion. His general Character is,2 Kings 22.2. that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his Father; and turned not aside to the right hand, nor to the left. After this are remarkt the glo∣rious actions of his reign,2 Kings 23. 2 Chron. cap. 34. cap. 35. 2 Chron. 34.3. for the imitation of succeeding Princes; and that the ages to come might call him blessed. In the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, being now not full sixteen years old he began to seek after the God of David his Father; and with much application and seriousness, to do something of moment, and which might be lasting, for the honour of God, and the interest of Religion; four years after this, he resolutely undertook the removing all Idolatry, and setting up the worship of the true God throughout all the land: Six whole years he employ'd in bringing this great work to per∣fection; after this, he resolv'd upon repair∣ing the breaches of the house of God; and
whilst some ruinous parts of the Temple were pull'd down, in order to rebuild them, in the Rubbish was found a Book of the Law of the Lord given by Moses.2 Chron. 34.14. Grotius sup∣poses this to have been the original copy of the Law, deliver'd by Moses to the Israelites to be preserv'd. I rather think, with others, that Manassah, in the long reign of fifty five years, designing utterly to abolish the Wor∣ship of the God of Israel, and set up Idola∣try, had gathered in the Books of the Law and burnt them; at which time some pious person, who feared God, and believed that he would still have mercy upon Sion, and re∣store beauty and strength to his Sanctuary, hid a Copy of the Law in some secret place of the Temple, which lay there conceal'd, all the age of Manassah, and the short reign of his Son Amon; but upon repairing the Tem∣ple, was now discovered. Josiah, upon peru∣sing those severe threatnings contain'd in it, in case of their falling off from the worship of the true God, and becoming dissolute in their manners; and comparing those with the pre∣sent state of Judah,2 Chron. 34.19. rent his clothes, which was a receiv'd sign of great sorrow and con∣cern; and calling his people together, ex∣horted
them to a Reformation; and engag'd them to enter with him into a covenant,v. 31. be∣fore the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his testimo∣nies; and his statutes, with all their heart, and with all their soul; to perform the words of the covenant, which were written in the book; and to render this more awful, the bet∣ter to fix it upon their minds, that they might remember to do it all the days of their life: and to begin the work of diligently observing the Law, he appoints a solemn Passover, such a one as had not been, from the days of Samuel,2 Kings 23.22. nor in all the days of the Kings of Judah to that time; this was the work only of one year. He lived after this thirteen years, but all the remaining account left of him, is only in the general, that he applied his time, and his power, to the perfecting that good work he had began; and this remembrance of him stands upon the Sacred Record, when his Life was clos'd; that like him, There was no King before him,2 Kings 23.24.25. neither after him, arose there any like him. It is hard to be conceiv'd, what a Blessing a Prince of so much piety and goodness is to a people; what a wonderful influence his authority, when thus used, has upon reform∣ing
a Nation; what is the force of his exam∣ple, and how strange a change and alteration it soon works in the manners of a people; who will ever be disposed to imitate and fol∣low the pattern set them by those who rule over them: The holy Books have noted it of Josiah's example, that it provoked all Israel to serve,2 Chron. 34.33. even to serve the Lord their God; so that all his days they departed not from following the Lord the God of their fathers. I might add to this, a consideration of the eminent favours and unusual kindnesses God sometimes shews a Nation, with respect to the piety and goodness of those who have had the rule over them; so God is said to have done great things for Judah,Isay 37.35. for his servant David's sake and this a long time after David was dead. But behold a dark veil overspreading all this glory, the scene is shifted, and that which now appears strikes with horror and amazement, the heavens darken, the Inha∣bitants of the earth are fill'd with trembling and astonishment, and all faces gather black∣ness. This Prince of all their hopes, was snatcht away by a violent and immature death, in the flower of his age, being but thirty nine years old; and at a time too when
they had reason to promise themselves the greatest blessings and advantages from his go∣vernment. There is still a more dismal thought, he was snatch'd away in Judgment, a very ter∣rible and severe Judgment to the Kingdom of Judah: God was angry with them and up∣on executing often denounc'd threatnings a∣gainst them; but good Josiah was first to be gathered to his fathers,2 Kings 22.20. that his eyes might not see the evil God was bringing upon them: Of him those words of Isaiah are supposed to be spoken, The Righteous perisheth,c. 57.1. and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are ta∣ken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come. Jeremiah began to prophesie of this in the days of Josiah, and when he fell he mentions it, as near approaching; that incomparable Prince, whose Piety and Vertue had kept it off in his days, being removed: and the cer∣tainty of his Prophesie was proved by the e∣vent: For soon after his death all things ran into confusion, and evil hastned apace upon them, and their long captivity in Babylon was at hand. His immediate Successor had but a short reign of two months, and was carried into Egypt. and there dyed: The next, after
eleven years, was bound in Fetters, and car∣ried to Babylon: The third came to the Crown at eight years of Age, and left it again after three months and ten days, when his Brother was plac'd in the Throne; in whose time the Wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and all the Palaces thereof, with the house of God, burnt with fire; his Sons slain in his sight, his own eyes after this put out, and he bound with Fetters of Brass, and carried into that long captivity, which that Nation endur'd in Babylon. There is but one thing more to be observ'd in the Death of this excellent Prince; though his death was sudden and violent, and in the vigor of his age; yet the holy books speak of him, as one who came to his grave in peace; the same phrase is used in the mention of Abraham his death,Gen. 15.15. who died in a good old age. This phrase therefore of coming to his grave in peace used concerning Josiah, notwithstanding the manner and circum∣stances of his death, learns us, that Death, at whatever time he approaches, cannot be un∣timely to a good man; and though it may be a severe Judgment to others, to himself it is a great blessing. Well then may we allow
them to be concern'd for the loss of such a Prince. 2. They mourned for Josiah. Mourning for the dead is very agreeable to the softest and most tender passions in our nature; and some outward solemn significations of this, have been in use and practice in all Nations. Solo∣mon speaks of it as a known and constant Funeral usage: Man goeth to his long home,Eccles. 12.5. and the mourners go about the streets. This being by custom limited to a certain time, the Scri∣pture calls the days of Mourning. This was especially observ'd towards those who had been in eminent stations in the world: whose Funerals were ever attended with mournful lamentations, with regard to that power and authority they once had. So David appoint∣ed a solemn lamentation for Saul and for Jo∣nathan his Son;2 Sam. 1. and compos'd a Funeral Song on this occasion; they took care also to deposit the earthly remains of their dead in their proper Sepulchres; which places were always accounted sacred, and not to be viola∣ted. Abraham had such a regard to this, that whilst he was yet a stranger in Canaan,Gen. 23. he pur∣chased a place to bury his dead in: Where he himself and Sarah his Wise were afterward
buried;Jer. 22.19. and the Prophet pronounces it as a Judement upon Jehoiachim, that he should be deny'd that solemn burial, used to persons of his quality: they did not grutch any cost expended upon their interments, as appears by the account we have of Asa's Funeral;2 Chron. 16.14. and did all that was in their power to express an honourable regard to the memory of the de∣ceased, as we find done to Hezekiah at his death.2 Chron. 32.33. When great and good were in con∣junction; when the person was as illustrious for his piety and vertue, as for his power and authority; when he had used those as instru∣ments of doing honour to God, and procu∣ring benefit to mankind, had valued them as capacities of being more beneficial to the world; and made it his aim, that others should enjoy the greatest good of his possessing them; they then scarce thought any cost enough to be laid out in solemnizing their Funerals: they lamented excessively, and yet were con∣cern'd that they could not express a passion so sensibly as it was felt; and lookt upon no ho∣nour great enough to be done to their memo∣ry. Mourning then past from outward cere∣mony and show, and external decency, into the most pungent and smartest feeling of the
mighty loss sustain'd by the publick, in the death of such benefactors: They spoke of their piety, call'd to mind their heroick, and their exem∣plary vertues; recited all their noble and useful designs; told what they had done for God, and for Religion, and for Mankind; produc'd the great numbers, who in particular cases had re∣ceived benefit by them; said all the worthy things they could think of in their praise; and left others to supply (by raising in their minds an Idea of the bravest man) what they com∣plain'd, they fell short, for want of expression, in describing. They fear'd no suspicion of flattery, where a person eminently great, was equally good; but presum'd all men would consent, that whatever could be said, must fall far short of his due praise. This usage we find observ'd in the Christian Church, towards the great and glorious Champions for their faith; they followed them mourning to their graves. They made Orations in their Praise, they register'd their Names in the Church Rolls, they rehearst them in their most so∣lemn service, and built their places of wor∣ship over their Tombs, and all this they did in honour to them; and to excite others to follow their example. After this manner the
people of Judah mourned for Josiah; as there had been none before like him, so neither did they mourn, in such a manner, for any be∣fore him;Zec. 12.11. insomuch, that when the Prophet intended to express the most grievous and bitter lamentation, he could not find out a more lively and proper figure, than to com∣pare it to the mourning in the valley of Me∣giddo; which became a proverbical speech among the Jews; who, when they would describe the utmost grief, had nothing higher to say of it, than that it is like the mourning for Josiah; as if there needed nothing more to paint this passion to the life, than to draw the Valley of Megiddo, with this good Prince fallen in it. When private men fall, the mourn∣ing is little and is confin'd, and soon over; it reaches only a small Family, and a very few select friends: their deaths make no noise, and the notice scarce goes beyond the neigh∣bourhood; they creep silently into their graves, and are in a little time forgot; the reason is, there are not many who are inte∣rested in their lives; and their deaths make no changes and alterations, to fall under pub∣lick notice; but the life of a good Prince is such a benefit to the community, that every
one has a share in it; when he falls the whole body of the people feel the stroke, and time is so far from wearing out the sense of it, that hereby it is encreas'd; they know not at present what their loss is, till time and expe∣rience makes them understand and feel it. 'Tis, in the Prophets metaphor,Amos 8.9. like the Suns going down at noon, and the darkning the earth in a clear day; it wraps a people up in night and horror, it frustrates all their hopes, and brings a damp upon all their joys: It turns their feasts into mourning, and their songs into lamentations; it brings up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head; and there is heard, as when Nature suffers an universal graon. 3. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. We read of Jonah, that he was so con∣cern'd for his gourd, that he fainted, and wished he might dye;Jonah 4.8. and said it was better for him to dye, than to live: what that was to him, the same is a good Prince to to his peo∣ple, a shadow over their heads, whilst he rules over them; submission to the will of God is a duty in all cases, and therefore when such a Governor is remov'd from a people, which
may fairly be accounted one of the most difficult instances of submission: But 'tis agree∣able to Nature, and Religion, on such occa∣sions of a common Sorrow, to express an uni∣versal concern, reaching as one continued mournful groan from one end of the land to the other remotest point of it. 'Tis not a bare defect in piety, but stupidity, and down∣right brutishness, not to be affected with so severe a providence agreeable to the nature and consequence of it. When Elisha saw E∣lijah going from him to Heaven, he crys out,2 Kings 2.12. O my Father my Father, the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof q. d. Who shall be left to defend and promote Reli∣gion, and what shall become of the Church of God, after thy departure? It is the character the prophet gives of pious Kings and Queens,Isay 49.23. that they should be nur∣sing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to Gods Church. The people needed no such pro∣phesie, whilst Josiah was their King: They were witnesses to the great regard he paid to Gods Worship, and the mighty designs for Gods Honour, and the advancing Religion, which he was early engaged in, and vigo∣rously persued throughout the whole course
of his reign. They saw what countenance piety had from his authority, and of what in∣fluence his example was; and that there was visibly a very different face of things from what they very well remember'd of the reign of Manassah. Such reflexions were, upon this occasion, enough to raise such a cry in Ju∣dah as was in Egypt, when in every house throughout the whole land, there was one found dead; which Moses describes as a great and terrible, as well as universal lamentation,Exod. 11.6. such, as there was none before it, nor any like it any more. Had Josiah been an old man, it would have been some ease to them to have reflected, that his stay with them could not have been much longer; when events hap∣pen no otherwise than men expect, and ac∣cording to the course of Nature, there is less room left for surprize or concern; but this Prince was in his prime, like to live many years; half his gsass was still to run, many of his great designs lay unperfected, he was un∣der both a capacity and will of doing much more good, and vast were the advantages which his Subjects yet expected to reap from his government: Poor vain man! how are all his glorious expectations frustrated; and
his most promising hopes baffled in a moment. When the breath of a man goeth forth, all his thoughts perish. An argument wisely urged by the holy Psalmist,Ps. 146.3.4. not to trust in man, not in the greatest and best man, whose life is so very uncertain; but rather to make this pious reflexion upon all the withering glory of this world; happy is the man, who hath the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in the Lord his God. But yet, who is of so robust and morose a constitution, as not to let fall a tear at the Funeral of a person, whose life was so great a blessing to the world? who can assume so much of the Stoick, as to permit no mo∣tion of the most tender and soft passions in his nature, when he beholds mighty delights of good to mankind unravell'd in an instant? who does not find himself disorder'd at the sight of a Body, warm and beautiful, vigo∣rous and active, animated with a divine Soul, adorn'd with all the accomplishments of wis∣dom and goodness; but now a cold and use∣less carcass, noisome and offensive, and no longer to be endur'd above ground; all its motions stopt, its curious and amazing clock∣work broke in pieces, forsaken by its heavenly guest, without the least traces of wisdom, or knowledge, or design remaining.
Quis talia fando — Who can forbear bewailing the lot of human nature? or unconcernedly contemplate so sud∣den, but so strange an alteration in his state? There remains yet one thing more, to swell their grief on this occasion: Jeremy and others had spoken of great evil that was coming upon them; and Huldah the Prophetess, of whom this good King had sent to enquire the time of the execution of the threatnings in the book of the Law,2 Kings 22.14. had foretold that this should be respi∣ted till after the death of Josiah: which an∣swer he had caused to be read in the ears of all the people, and took that opportunity to exhort them to temperance; this they could not but call to mind, when they saw him unexpectedly taken away from them; and this naturally suggested to them, that God remov'd him in his anger; that their sins had render'd it unagreeable with the divine me∣thods observ'd in governing the world, that he should be continued any longer amongst them; that he was taken away from that evil which was now hastning to come upon them; that having fill'd up the measure of their ini∣quities, his death was the last warning of their ruine, a sign from Heaven of their ap∣proaching
fall, and like a fatal knell, rung out to the Funeral of their State. In these circumstances what could be lookt for less, than that all Judah and Jerusalem should unite as one man, in mourning for Josiah. It is now time to apply this piece of Scri∣pture history to the very sad occasion of my present discourse. This is too melancholly, too dismal a subject to dwell long upon. I found it no easie matter to command my self, whilst in secret I was giving scope to my me∣ditations; and saw it necessary to confine them, for fear of a greater disorder in rela∣ting them. The history of the Text applies it self, and I have endeavour'd to set it in such a light that your own reflexions may spare a great deal of my pains in drawing the parallel. It would be hard to arbitrate betwixt these two Princes, Josiah and our late Queen; which of them excell'd in piety, and had the largest designs for the honour of God, and the interest of Religion; whose authority and example gave the highest countenance to vertue, and had the best influence upon the different ages in which they liv'd; which of them did, or was most likely to have done the most good;
whose life was more desired, or tkeir deaths more deservedly lamented by their Subjects. It would be vanity in me to pretend to draw the character of our Queen, who have on∣ly heard of hers, as the Queen of Sheba had done of Solomon's fame. This is already done, by those who had opportunities to ob∣serve the constancy and fervour of her Devo∣tions; the admirable example she set to all about her; the visible effects of this, in put∣ting some vices, formerly very fashionable, so perfectly out of countenance, as to sneak, and not dare to appear openly in her Court; to be witnesses to many useful designs of such a nature, that it was impossible they could lye conceal'd; and so many extraordinary works of charity (diverse of them done to her enemies) which though done in the most secret manner, in regard of her station, came necessarily under the notice of some near her. Happy are those men, happy are those her servants, who stood continually before her, and heard her Wisdom. It is said of her, that she not only perfectly hated all flattery, but had so humble an opinion of her self, that she would not bear the least part of the just∣est commendation. So that whilst she liv'd
it would have been rude, to have drawn her character, though in little; but being dead, it is fit this should be now done in its full length. What has been attempted by seve∣ral hands has, I doubt not, proceeded from a laudable design of proposing such an ex∣ample, as the world stands in need of; and paying that just tribute to her memory, which no Englishman, can have so much of ill na∣ture in him, as to dispute, much less to open his mouth, and slily slander that is reported of her. Experience witnesseth, of what great use it is to transmit to posterity the lives and acti∣ons, of such as have been famous in their generations; these are found to make a deep∣er, and more lasting impression, and to have a better effect upon mankind, than the choi∣cest collection of precepts. Here Vertue is drawn more to the life, and according to the Philosophers wish, assumes a body, and ap∣pears in a visible shape, commands with au∣thority, and becomes the most forcible, and prevailing rule of Practice. I am sensible much has been said of our late Queen, but too much cannot be said on such a subject: Such an instance of piety and goodness, is like
the appearing of a new Star in the heavens, the wonder and enquiry of the Age. It would argue a great degeneracy of manners, and a small regard to the publick good, to suffer such an example to lye by neglected, or not to take care to have it faithfully recommend∣ed to posterity. When we come to see her life whole at large, we shall be made sensible, that her wisdom and piety do much exceed that we have yet heard of her; and that the half has not been told. I am much deceiv'd in my account of her, if she did not every way answer the character given of Josiah,2 Chton. 34.2.3. that she did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and served God, and kept his com∣mandments with all her heart, and soul, and might, declining neither to the right hand, nor to the left. We are all sensible, that she was snatch'd away by a violent distemper, in the vigor of her age, when we least dreamt of it; and were struck with astonishment and trembling at the news; whilst the age just be∣gan to be reform'd by her authority, and ex∣ample; and we promis'd our selves lasting blessings from her long reign, and when we could very ill have spar'd her. So unsearchable are Gods councels, and his ways past finding out.
We cannot, we must not dispute with Hea∣ven: Gods will ruleth over all: 'Tis as well folly as impiety not to acquiesce in it. This Church and Nation stand highly indebted to God, that such a blessing was so lent us; and one so dear to him; and so long sincefitted for the beatifical vision, so many Years confined to this low and imperfect State, and kept from her reward for the service of others: And to do good to the World. When it seems good to him to resume his own gifts, it be∣comes us to take up with holy Job's pious re∣flections. Shall we receive good at the hands of God,Job 2.10. and shall we not receive evil. God has taught us by this instance, (and a severe discipline it is, whereby he learns us this les∣son) the Vanity of all our blooming hopes, when they are placed any where, but upon him alone; and that he can continue his Fa∣vours, though he lays aside what we have reason to own, as one great instrument of a kind and happy providence to those Nations. We must not envy our good Queen the rest and felicity She has reacht to. This would be foul ingratitude to a Person who has done us so much good to repine that she has exchang'd the troubles and cares of an
earthly Crown, for one that has nothing sticks to it to darken the brightness of it, or abate the happiness of possessing it: Her Death was her reward for her uncommon goodness, as the most early and sudden death is to every one that is fitted for, and goes di∣rectly to bliss; but it is otherwise to be con∣sider'd in respect of us, who have reason to look upon our selves, as judg'd unworthy of her. Allow us then to let fall a tear upon her Hearse, and at least to sigh out our loss; that if there be any in the remotest corners of her dominions, from whom her vertues lay conceal'd, they may here begin to under∣stand something of that loss, which time and experience will better explain, than it can now be exprest. And may these inclinations be a∣waken'd in us all, to enquire further after her, that what through the shortness of her reign was left unfinish'd, in encouraging Ver∣tue, and putting a restraint upon Vice, may in some measure be supplied, and a Reforma∣tion perfected by the remembrance of her. It seems to me too bold a judgment of divine Providence, to speak confidently of Gods an∣ger, as hereby declar'd to be gone out against us, and to forebode upon this occasion, some
ama∣zing evil at our heels, to overtake us. We sel∣dom guess aright, when we assign a reason, and take upon us to account for Gods pro∣vidences in this world; which are so very dark, that we expect it to be a part of that perfection of knowledge, which will be our reward hereafter, to unfold the mysteries of them. This indeed was certain in Josiah's death, who was not to see the evil coming upon Jerusalem: and this observation has been made of many other excellent persons. When St. Austin pray'd for an enthanasy, he hereby exprest his desire not to live to see the desola∣tions that were hastning upon the African Churches; and his prayer was heard, for he dy'd just before the sacking of that City where∣of he was Bishop. The like Mr. Calvin has noted of Luther, that he often pray'd he might not see the vials of wrath pour'd upon Germa∣ny; which immediately after his death came upon those places in a storm, and with the swiftness and execution of a whirlwind; but those reach only such cases, as are evident 'twas either by Prophesie, or the event. It would be a very undue return to God, for those signal favors we have so long enjoy'd; It would a gue a very small sense of that Providence,
which has hitherto defended us: and too fond a reliance upon second causes, upon this occa∣sion (though a very sad one) to anticipate evil, or despond of our safety. The only pi∣ous, and safe use to be made of our fears, will be, to do all we can (which was the great aim of our Quren) to promote a reformation of manners throughout the Nation. This, af∣ter all other fruitless expedients without it, will be the only sure, and effectual course to be taken to any lasting security; and since we have suffered a loss not to be recovered, what is left for us, but wisely to consider how re∣ligiously she used her power, and how admi∣rable an example she has left the age; that we may strive to be such true, and sincere Chri∣stians, as she her self was, and desir'd, and pray'd, and endeavour'd all her Subjects might be. So may we hope, that God will still pro∣tect our King, amidst those dangers he ex∣poses his Royal Person to for our safety, to whom her Pravers were a Sheild, for a con∣tinuance of success to our arms, though we are depriv'd of that benefit we owe to the purity and fervency of her devotions, for peace, and quietness at home, whilst we are engag'd in a war abroad; which it were great
ignorance of the World, not to own to have been hitherto the result of her wise conduct of affairs, and the effect of the singular good∣ness of her temper, and the remarkable Piety of her conversation, concurrent causes of calming the feircest passions, and procuring Gods blessing upon us, and protection over us. So may she still live, and rule, and do good to these Nations; and continue to be what she foret her inclinations to accept the Government for, a happy instrument of saving us from ruine, and making us a wise, reli∣gious, and a prosperous Nation; which God grant for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour and praise, now and ever Amen. FINIS.
Some Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1695. THirty Six Sermons, viz. 16 Ad Aulam, 6 Ad Clerum, 6 Ad Magistratum. 8 Ad Populum; with a large Preface. By the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln. The Eighth Edition Corrected and Amended. Whereunto is now Added the Life of the Reverend and Learned Au∣thor. Written by Isaac Walton, Fol. Price 15 s. 1. Conversation in Heaven; Part the First: Being De∣votions Consisting of Meditations and Prayers, on se∣veral considerable Subjects in Practical Divinity: Writ∣ten for the raising the decayed Spirit of Piety. The second Edition in Twelves, Price 2 s. 2. Conversation in Heaven; Part the Second: Being Sacramental Devotions, Consisting of Meditations and Prayers preparatory unto a Worthy Receiving the Holy Communion. As also Meditations and Prayers, suited to every part of Administring and Receiving it. Twelves Price 1 s. Both Written by the Reverend Dr. Lawrence. Smith, Rector of South-Warnborough in Hampshire. 3. Of the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven: A Ser∣mon Preach'd before the Queen at White-Hall, October 12, 1690. By William Beveridge, D.D. Rector of St. Peters Cornbil. The second Edition, 4to. Price 6 d. 4. An Anatomy of Atheism; a Poem, Written by a Person of Quality, 4to. Price 6 d. 5 Religion the only Happiness: A Poem, in a Letter to a Friend; 4to. Price 6 d.
6. A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Grey, late Vicar of Dedham in Essex; Preach'd in the Parish Church of Dedham February 2 d. 92, with a shortaccount of his Life. By Joseph Powel A.M. Then Rector of St. Mary on the Wall in Colchester; and now Rector of Balsham in Cambridge shire, Quarto, price 6 d. 7. Cursory Remarks upon a Sermon Preach'd before the Lord Mayor at St. Mary-le-Bow, January the 30th. 94. In a Letter to the Honourable Sir P.D. Barronet: By the late Reverend Mr. Thomas Rogers, A.M. Quarto, Price 6 d. 8. Tachygraphy: the most exact and Compendious Method of Short and Swift Writing, that hath ever yet been Publish'd by any. Composed by Thomas Sholton. Author and Professor of the said Art, approved by both the Universities, Octavo, Price 1 s. 9. Zeiglographa: Or a new Art of Short Writting, never before Published; more Easie, Exact, short and speedy than any heretofore. Invented and Composed by Thomas Shelton, Author and Teacher of the said Art. Allowed by Authority, Octavo, price 1 s. 10 In the Press, and will be published the next Term The Duties of the Closet; being an Earnest Exhortation to Private Devotion, 12 mo. price 1 s 6 d. FINIS.
