P3165 99833660 38138
Varieties of Villany: AS, Murther, Maiming, Theft, Perjury upon Perjury. AND Many other Infamous Matters Set forth at Large, and Published, IN THE CASE (With its Proofs and Evidences) OF JOHN PRAED, Respondent, To the Appeal of VVILLIAM VVARRE. VVhich came to a Hearing at the Bar of the House of LORDS, on the 27th of January 1692/3. and went for the Respondent Nemine Contradicente. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper in Fleetstreet, and S. Briscoe in Covent-Garden, 1693.
TO THE READER. I Should here Excuse this unexpected Presumption, if I had not been as unfit to make Apologies, as I am to Play an After-Game of Reputation, especially in Print. But he that can't Fence so well, is more oblig'd to Fight, upon Punctilio, and just Oc∣casion, than the greatest Master of the Noble Science; And though the Press (by Fools and Knaves) is become almost as Scan∣dalous as the Yard that goes by that Name, yet some Men will adventure therein, like those that hazard the Infamy of Hanging to save their Notions of Honour. But there is little of that the Mer∣chants call Honour to be got, where so much Interest is lost; and therefore the
thing will the better Answer my Expecta∣tion: And I am sorry I must here say that so many of the Merchants (upon mis∣information) have done me all the Mischief that lay in their Power, at the same time when I was adventuring Life, Fame and Fortune for them; as will partly appear by some of the following Letters, which I should not insert, but that (by Order of Court, as they concern'd the Case) they were produc'd before the Master in Chan∣cery: And a Man (however Modest he otherways may be) will do as much to main∣tain his Cause and his Credit, as he would to Preserve his Life, if it lay at Stake. And this may be an acceptable time to serve my Country (as well as my own Satis∣faction) since so many of the most Eminent Merchants of London, and so many other Men, are laying their Heads together to Settle the Trade of the Nation, and to Ob∣struct the Encreasing Decay of Substantial Commerce.
THE CASE OF JOHN PRAED Respondent, to the Petition and Appeal of WILLIAM WARRE. THAT in, or about, the Year, 1679. the Appellant joined with Mr. Bonnel of London, Merchant (to whom the Re∣spondent was formerly an Apprentice) to send the Re∣spondent, as their Factor, to Zant, in Company with one Mr. Pendarves, who was then Consul of the Morea. That although the Appellant was then a Member of the Turkey-Company (to whom the Morea Currans belonged) and had taken the usual Oath of Fidelity to the said Company;The Appellant's Oath to the Turkey-Company broken. yet he conspired with one Daniel Gates, then of London Merchant; and in the Year 1680, sent the Respondent a Free Commission to buy up all the Morea Currans. That the Respondent complied with the said Commission,The Respondent to have 8 perCent. for his com∣pliance with the Appel∣lant's Project. and accordingly shipp'd all the Morea Currans, on the Ship Old African, Captain Joseph Waters Commander, the Appellant having ordered the Respondent to draw 8 per Cent. Commission money, which encouraged the Respondent to disburse about Twenty thousand Dollars on the account of the Currans aforesaid,20000 Dollars Dis∣burs'd by the Respon∣dent. which the Re∣spondent had Orders to draw, by way of Venice, on one Mr. Williams and Partner, the Appellant's Correspondents there.
That the Turkey-Company after the buying of the Currans afore∣said, made a Decree,A Decree of the Tur∣key-Comp. against the Respondent— under the Penalty of 20 per Cent. that no one of them should any more em∣ploy the Respondent, under the Penalty of 20 per Cent. Not that the Respondent was ever employed by the Turkey-Company, or was he ever a Member thereof; but because he was effectually faithful to the Appellant (his Employer) who had been so offen∣sively perfidious to them. And at the same time they turned Mr. Pendarves out of the Consulship for the Appellant's Fault;Mr. Pendarves turn∣ed out of the Consulship. and because there were False Witnesses suborned, and sworn against him at Zant, &c. That,The Respondent's Bills for the 20000 Dollars not paid by the Appel∣lant's Order. after the same Ship was laden with the aforesaid Currans, and sent away, the said Appellant, and the said Gates sent Orders to the said Williams and Partner not to accept any of the Respon∣dent's Bills; which Orders they complied withal, for not one Peny of the Respondent's Bills were ever paid. That at the same time there lived in the House of the Respon∣dent and Partner,Tavernor formerly an Apprentice to the Ap∣pellant. one Francis Tavernor, who was their Cash, and Book-keeper, and had been Apprentice to the Appellant, when he formerly lived at Zant. That at the Respondent's going to Zant,The words of the Ap∣pellant's Letter proved in Chancery. the Appellant wrote a Letter to the said Tavernor, wherein were these Words: Now mind your business there, and let me alone for these Asses. And he so minded the business he was set about,The Value of 30000 Dollars stolen from the Respondent and Pendar∣ves by the Order and Approbation of the Ap∣pellant. that after the Appellant had ordered the said Williams, and Partner, not to accept the Respondent's Bills, He the said Tavernor, stole, and run away with the said Respondents, and Partners Papers, and Books, to the value of Thirty thousand Dollars, and upwards, which was done by the Order and Approbation of the Appellant. And, since that, the said Tavernor hath suffered for it,Tavernor put into the Galley for the same. both in Prison, and in the Galley; though he was let out again by the Venetian Justices, for Money, and for some Reasons of that State. That some time since the Proveditore,A Design to Assassi∣nate Pendarves, and his losing three of his Fin∣gers. or Governor, of Zant, designed to Assassinate the aforesaid Mr. Pendarves, because he would not comply with some Proposals against the Interest of his Principals or Imployers; but he escaped with the loss only of three of his Fingers.
That after that, there was an intention to Murder the Respon∣dent.Proved in Chancery, 1. An Intention to murder the Respondent by cutting his Throat. 2. Two Persons actu∣ally murdered. 3. Another Man woun∣ded. And the aforesaid Tavernor undertook to cut the Respon∣dent's Throat whilst he lay in his Bed, and had made Provision for th purpose; but his heart failing him, five others were hired to accomplish the design; and two of them repenting, discovered the Contrivance to the Respondent, for which they were both shot and killed. And, some time after that, another Person was wound∣ed, almost to Death, upon the same Account. That thereupon the Respondent was forced to leave the Island,The Respondent forc'd to fly for his Life. after he had suffered these and many other Injuries, and particu∣larly a Petition for his Banishment,The Original Petition for the Respondent's Ba∣nishment, Proved in Chancery, and the Tran∣slation read at the Hea∣ring of his Cause. because he would not comply with the Venetian Interest, as others did, against that of his own Country, and had written his Reasons for it, with an Intention to publish them, because theyAbove 100000 l. per annum. concerned this Nation above 100000 l. per annum. That by the unjust Proceedings aforesaid of the Appellant,The Respondent disa∣bled to follow his Pro∣fession for 10 Years last past. and his Accomplices, both the Respondent, and the aforesaid Pendarves, have been utterly disabled to follow their Profession, those ten Years and upwards; and the more, because that, in all this time, they cannot have Justice done them at Zant, and Venice. That upon the Respondent's Arrival in England,The Appellant refused to account with the Re∣spondent. the Appel∣lant, and the said Gates refused to come to an Account with the Respondent, and both bid him take his Course at Law for his Pretensions. That the Respondent for want of the Papers,The Respondent not able to Prosecute the Appellant for many years &c. stolen from him, could not prosecute the said Appellant, and Gates, and was therefore forced to retire into the Country, where he lived for some Years, until the Appellant preferred his Bill in the Exchequer,The Suit in the Ex∣chequer. against the said Gates, for an Account of the Currans aforesaid. That in the Pleadings in the Exchequer between the said Parties it appeareth that the Currans for which the said Respondent de∣mandeth Satisfaction,The Currans came safe to the Appellant's or Gates's hands, and they proved Partners. came safe to the Hands of the said Appel∣lant, or the said Gates, and that the said Appellant, and the said Gates were then Partners.
That thereupon the said Respondent exhibited his Bill in Chan∣cery against the said Appellant,The Respondent's Bill in Chancery. and the Administratrix of Daniel Gates,The Appellants and Gates decreed to ac∣count with the Respon∣dent, and to pay Interest. to have an Account, and Satisfaction, for the said Currans; and Witnesses being examined, this Cause came to Hearing the 1st. of Dec. 1691. Whereupon, and upon reading the Proceedings in the Exchequer,The Case appearing so cruel to the Court, they ordered the Respondent's Costs to the Hearing, for Non-payment whereof, the Appellant stands in Contempt to a Commis∣sion of Rebellion. the Court was well satisfied that the Appellant was a Partner with the said Daniel Gates for the aforesaid Currans, and that they ought to account to the Respondent for the same. And thereupon it was referred to Sir John Francklin, to examine, and see, what was due to the said Respondent, for the said Currans, and to compute Interest for the same, and to tax the Respondent his Costs to the day of Hearing. That since the said Hearing,Respondent's Charge amounts to 8000 l. whereof only 1100 Dol∣lars confessed by the Re∣spondent to be paid, and not one Peny more pro∣ved to the contrary. the Respondent, and Appellant have attended the said Master upon the said Account, and the Respondent's Charge amounted to about 8000 l. as the said Respondent hath sufficiently proved. And neither the said Ap∣pellant, nor the said Gates, have proved one Peny paid towards Satisfaction of the said Currans, more than what the said Re∣spondent, hath in his Examination, confess'd, which amounts to about 1100 Dollars.The Master of the Ship Old African that laded the Currans, and the Appellant's own Correspondent at Venice, witnesses against him, in Chancery. That the said Master being ready to make his Report,Appeal. the said Appellant, farther to delay the Respondent, hath appealed from the said Decree, and the several Orders made thereupon. Part of the Appellant's Case. THat the Respondent (with the Moneys, and Effects sent him, and Mr. Pendarves his Partner there, and solely upon the said Gates's Account) did Buy, and Lade the Ship with Currans, for Gates. That there is not any Proof of the Appellants being concern∣ed with Gates, in sending for the Currans to the Respondent. ☞ And the Appellant hath denied it on his Oath.
Part of Gate's his Commission to the Respondent. SIR, London, 25th June, 1680. HAving Ordered Capt. Waters,Which Letter, toge∣ther with this Commis∣sion, came inclos'd in the following Letter from the Appellant; the Original whereof was stolen from the Respon∣dent by Tavernor, and since that it came into the hands of the Turkey Company who have it by them. Commander of my Ship Afri∣can, to follow your Orders at Zant, as you'll perceive by the inclosed Letter to him— Advise me from time to time, what occurs, the whole Design depends upon Secresie to all other Persons, but your Self, and Francis Tavernor. I remain, Your loving Friend, Daniel Gates. Part of the Appellant's Commission. SIR, London, 25. June 1680. YOu'll have seen by what I have wrote at large, at present and before, how very unworthily the Morea Committee have been to honest Mr. Pendarves, and I am resolved to be quits with them if possible.— Wherefore to be brief, the Ship A∣frican is order'd to be with you by the 10th of August Old Style; and here inclos'd you have an Order from Mr. Gates to Capt. Wa∣ters, to follow your Order.—If the Ship loads from the Mo∣rea, then she is for account of Mr. Gates and Company, but let it be specified in the Bill of Lading for account of whom it con∣cerns, which be sure you send to me, the Bill of Lading to be delivered in Amsterdam in blank— As soon as this comes to your hands, consult with Tavernor privately, and send over Lazari to Capparre all the Morea Currans, under pretence of buying the Theacra Currans.— I am sure you can manage this much better, than I can direct you, and do conjure you to do, what Man can do, in this Matter.— You must keep it very privately.— In fine, do what Man can do to gratifie your Friends in this particular; for the Morea Committee have affronted that good Man so much, that I cannot endure it.— You must not mention one word of this to Mr. Bonnel's.— Draw 8 per Cent. Commission if she loads in the Morea.—If ever you'll gratifie or oblige me, endeavour to make this Business take effect— Leave no Stone unturn'd, and you shall see how grate∣fully it shall be resented by, Your affectionate Friend
Part of the Appellants Bill, against Gates, in the Exchequer. HUmbly complaining sheweth— that in or about the year 1680, the Orator William Warre, and one Daniel Gates,Gates kept all the Ships Cargo, and Warre sued him in the Exche∣quer for his share, though neither of them paid the Respondent. having trust, and confidence each in the other, did, in Copartner∣ship, and as equal sharers, Import from the parts beyond the Seas to London in the Ship call'd the African, whereof Joseph Waters then was Commander, two hundred and sixteen Butts, sixty six Carratels, and fifty Quarter Rolls, to the value then of six thou∣sand pounds, and upwards. Part of Gates his Answer to the aforesaid Bill. THIS Defendant saith, that the Complainant being justly in∣debted to the Defendant in the year 1679. in the summ of 1120  l. steri. — the Complainant afterwards in the year 1680. proposed to this Defendant, for the accommodation of the diffe∣rences that were then on Foot— then to become Partner with the Defendant, in the Lading the African Frigat in the Bill men∣tion'd— And thereupon it was agreed between the Complai∣nant and the Defendant, that the said Ship should be Laden with Currans by Mr. John Praed Merchant in Zant, who was the Com∣plainants Correspondent, and that what Money the Defendant had on Board the said Ship, should be paid to the said Mr. John Praed towards the Lading the said Ship, and the Complainant did undertake to pay the Remainder of the Money— And it was then also agreed that when the Currans were sold, this De∣fendant should be paid all that was, and should be due unto him— But this Defendant saith, that though this said Complainant did agree, as aforesaid, to pay the remainder of what the said Ships Lading should amount to, yet the Complainant never paid any part of the Money, as this Defendant hath been inform'd by the said Praed, &c.— After which former agreements, and before the arrival of the said Ship, the said Complainant became farther indebted to this Defendant in about one thousand pounds more, and then the Complainant and Defendant did agree that the Defendant should sell all the said Currans — And that this Defendant should be paid all the several summs in the Sehedule herewith annexed.
Part of the Appellants Affidavit— THE said Defendant William Warre maketh Oath that when the Currans in question were shipped, he this Deponent was advis'd from Zant, that they cost considerably less, than the Plain∣tiff doth charge them at — And this Deponent farther saith, that at, or soon after the time of shipping the said Currans, the Complainant, or the Complainant and Partner did order Mr. Tho∣mas Williams and Company, residing at Venice, to draw several summs of Money, at several times, on this Deponent, on account of the said Ship of African Currans now in question, which this De∣ponent accordingly paid, and this Deponent witnesses, who can prove the sending down the said Money to Zant, to the Plaintiff, and Partner. Part of the Deposition of Mr. Abraham Anselme, who was Partner with Mr. Williams at Venice. ABraham Anselme Gentleman, formerly examin'd for the De∣fendant in this Cause, was on the 25th of November 1692. sworn, and cross examin'd, deposeth and saith — To the sixth Interogatory this Deponent saith, that during the time this Deponent was at Venice he cannot remember that he, or his Partner Mr. Thomas Williams did receive any Orders from the Defendant Warre, or the said Daniel Gates, or either of them to send down any summ of Money to the Complainant Praed, upon his Particular account, or that any summ, or summs, of Money whatsoever was sent down, or remitted upon the said Complai∣nants particular account, but saith, that very considerable summs of Money were sent down, and remitted, by this Deponent, and his said Partner, by the Order of the Defendant Warre and Gates, upon the joint account, to the said Complainant, and one Pendarves his Partner — To the seventh Interogatory this Deponent saith — And farther saith, that he believes, that after the lading the afore∣said Currans, this Deponent and his Partner did receive Orders from the Defendant Warre, and the said Gates, not to accept of any more Bills from the Complainant —
A Letter Written by Mr. Williams to the Respondent. SIR, Venice 17th July 1681. VVE have yours 10th June, with a Bill on our selves for the 6000 Dollars which we shall draw forwards on Mr. Dan. Gates,This Money was never sent to me nor to Mr. Pendarves. And Warre (by a mistake) produced a Letter from Williams before the Master in Chancery, wherein Wil∣liams wrote him how he had trickt me about the 6000 Dollars. and send you the same per Captain Paxton, consigning it to your self. Part of the Deposition of Captain Waters Commander of the African aforesaid AND this Deponent farther saith, that the price of Currans at the Morea was then three Dollars, and three quarters per Sack, as this Deponent verily believes; for that he then paid at that rate himself for Currans he bought there. Parts of several Letters from Mr. Warre persuading me to come Home for several pretended reasons.Which were never paid. SIR, London 1st. April 1681. *THE Moneys you have drawn on account of the Old African should have been on Mr. Gates, and therefore what you have further to draw on that account, let it be on him, and that you may be sure of his compliance,His design was under pretence of Vindicating Mr. Pendarves to have me ruin'd for a reason, as I may hereafter shew the World. the Currans you shall load on the Zanteote let come Hypothecated to Mr. Walter Atwood for payment of the same; tho' at Venice I am sure* Williams hath Or∣der to accept and pay whatever you draw; — You will hear how the Turky Company have dealt with you upon account of the Morea Commission, they have made a Decree of Court that no Man of them all shall employ you for the future under the penalty of 20 per cent. SIR, London 4th April, 1681.Here he contradicts himself. VVHAT Currans you are to load for Gates consign to Mr. John Banks,And yet Gates and he protested our Bill then after for 3000 Dollars. writing a formal Letter with them, and let all come under my Covert. But I have taken care that there is effectual Credit for you at Venice; therefore do not hypothe∣cate, but consign the Currans to Mr. John Banks. SIR, London 8th June 1681. I Hope this may find you well arrived at Venice, in order to your proceeding home, which pray prosecute with all expedition,
for we shall have a Parliament speedily, that will smoak off the Company; for they will pay dearly for their  day. Now you must know that Gates plays the Rog  therefore be sure you hypothicate all his Currans under ∣vert, and then I'le handle him well enough. In case you  not home your self, send a Procure to Mr. Edward Ambrose to de∣mand Twenty thousand Dollars of Gates, and Damages, Advice , I should have Paid for my Folly. and  he shall Pay for his Knavery in due time. Be sure you consider well of this Affair; but if you come in Person, all will be imme∣diately effected, which I intreat you to do, and to settle all Mat∣ters besides; for you see all Letters are directed to Mr. Pendar∣ves only; therefore pray fail not to come Home, without one Minutes delay. I will provideWhen he had broke it. the House good Business. Be sure you bring all Gates his Letters with you.— SIR, London, 22 July, 1681. BE sure you send me two Procures, one in the Name of Mr. Ambrose, and another in my Name; and send me the Originals of Gates his Letters per first.Another Project that I might have nothing to shew for my Money. But if you come your self, all will be adjusted in 24 Hours; for Gates plays the Rogue with me most abominably; Therefore, I say, that you must come Home; if not, there's nothing to be done with him.— I have Paid your Bills in near Four Thousand Pounds sterling,And yet he never Paid one Peny. and have not received one Peny of Gates; therefore I beseech you to come Home. Come away immediately, and all will be well; otherwise I must redraw on you.— SIR, London, 5th August, 1681. I Do much wonder you continue Drawing, I must Re-charge it on you again.And though he would not Pay my Bills, I was constrain'd by my Cir∣cumstances to Pay his. I have this day Drawn on you 2000 Ducats, payable to Mr. Williams.— SIR, London, 14th Octob. 1681. UNderstanding you are returned from Venice to Zant, and are not coming Home, I will accept no more Bills. I am almost quite distracted, and know not what to do, nor what I write, when had you come Home, all had been obviated. Now I know not what to write, nor what to do. You must make the best shift you can; but unless you come home, nothing can be done.—
SIR, London, 27th September, 1681. I Have all yours to the 5th of September, and am quite distracted when I consider under what Circumstances we all lye, and all by your not coming Home, as I beg'd and intreated you; and what should possess you not to do it, I cannot tell.— Mr. Bonnel is willing with all his heart.And yet Mr. Bonnel writ me the contrary by the same Post. Wherefore I pray, and beseech you to come away— Once more, I beseech you, for Gods sake to come Home; for we have a Partner in our Eye, that will bring good Business to the House. But nothing can be done, unless you come Home, for Gates plays the Knave so damnably with me, that I cannot help my self, by reason of your losingThat Letter Ta∣vernor stole from me, before he ran away with the rest of the Things. But there were many Stories made about it. the Letter out of your Pocket. Therefore you must come Home. I can say no more, but expecting to see you Home spee∣dily, I remain, SIR, Your Disconsolate, but ever Affectionate faithful Friend till Death, Will. Warre. Part of a Letter from Mr. Warre to Mr. Pendarves and my Self, being the last that he wrote us. SIRS, London, 30th Jan. 1681/2. AS this is a very Sad day, so my Subject is more— And also by the not coming Home of Mr. Praed, when I wrote to him so earnestly, and told him so plainly, that otherwise it would be the Ruin of us all.—After the Ships were gone. Then I beg'd you to secure your selves against that Base Fellow Gates, whose Unfaithfulness in a great measure hath been the Occasion of all our Misfortunes; but your neglecting that, to shew favour to such a known Villain, was a Madness.If my Throat had been Cut, th, and the other Pretension would have stood him in good stead. I have Paid on Mr. Praed's Bills, l. 4500. Ster∣ling and am not imbursed one farthing; for this unworthy Gaes keeps all in his hands, and saith, he will render an Account to Mr. Praed, and I cannot sue him for fear of worser Conse∣quences.—For being prov'd Pejurd to the Turkey-Company. I hope in God yet, upon Mr. Praed's coming Home, all things may be accommodated; for, I Protest to God, I am almost out of my Senses, and upon the Brink of Despair; which might have been all prevented, had Mr. Praed come home. I have been pursued by the Turkey-Company to the utmost Ruin
of Man, both in Point of Credit, and every thing else. In fine, I am quite distracted, and eart is quite broke. However, there is a God in Heaven, who knows my Since∣rity to all Men.— A Letter from Mr. Williams to Mr. Bonnells. SIR, Venice, 14th October 1681. MR. Praed you will have seen departed for Zant, according to our Council to him,This Mr. Williams, in his Wine, confess'd the whole Plot to me. for that we apprehended his go∣ing for England might (as you imagin'd) prove of Mischievous Consequence; and truly, what then we only suspected, we now fear to be real. Wherefore we humbly conceive, you will do a worthy part to endeavour to prevent those Evils threatning him— We have adventur'd (as a common Friend) thus freely to speak our sence.— We do not question, but your Prudence will not only bury in secresie this hint, but likewise direct you to such Courses, whereby our said Friend at Zant, may have farther Proofs of your fatherly Kindness for him, and our selves that content of being desirous of his Good,And yet he did me all the ill Offices that lay in his Power. and our Friend's Prosperity. Part of an Intercepted Letter from Mr. Warre to Mr. Fran. Taverner. London, 13th May, 1681. I Have yours under Vitals Cover.— The African is bound out again upon the old Design. Wherefore order Lazari to pro∣vide his Bows and Arrows, for this will be a Tryal of Skill, and must be manag'd with dexterity: But Mr. Fendarves know nothing of the Matter, that so he may always Plead Innocency. And pray endeavour by all means to keep him a Year or two longer there, that so I may have time to re-establish all things to yours, and Mr. Yard's Advantage; but if he comes home, I can do nothing for you. I am heartily glad to hear that Mr. Praed is coming for Venice. 'Tis what I desired. Tell him from me, (as a Friend, if he be not gone off) that, when he comes home, we will rout Sir Cle∣ment Harby, Horse and Foot, and that his Father (being a Par∣liament Man) will make a heavy to do in the House about his ill Usage, as Mr. Pendarves his Father did, when he was like
to be Slain by the Proveditor, who thereupon was made to give him Satisfaction.— Parts of two Letters from Mr. Gates to Mr. Pendarves and my Self. SIRS, London, May 26th, 1682. I Have yours 13th October, and 22th February; and am Sorry you should be any ways prejudiced for want of a just com∣pliance with what is your due.— I shall wait your reply, and if you can give me Satisfaction, I resolve to deal justly, by the Blessing of God, both with you, and all Men. SIRS, London, the 20th Octob. 1682. I Have yours, 1st Octob.— The sole Reason why I did not accept your Bill, was because Mr. Warre refus'd to accept what was drawn on him. And whereas you hint that I am so great a Debtor to your Mr. Praed, I do not know of One Peny that I owe him in all the World. What hath pass'd between him, and Mr. Warre about the Lading of the Old African in the Morea,Gates kept the Cur∣rans, and Warre kept the Accounts: and both kept me out of my Mo∣ney. I am ignorant of. I still say, I have no Account, In∣voyce, nor Bill of Lading for said Goods; so that if Mr. Praed be any ways prejudiced, he may thank himself, and at last must find his Effects in the hands of Mr. Warre; who, I am afraid hath intrigu'd both me, and you too.— I add no more, but desiring God to bless you, and keep you, and deliver you well out of the hands of Mr. Warre. I abide, Your Loving Friend Dan. Gates. Parts of some Letters from Mr. Pendarves to me. Zant, 2 March, 1682.— I find Gates and Warre are both agreed to keep you out of your Right; and I the rather believe it, because I hear that Gates his Servant is coming out into Partnership with Warre's Man Taverner.—
Zant, 15 April 1683.— I writ you also, That Taverner was suddenly bound out again from England to this place, and that he railed against his Master Warre most bitterly; but whether 'tis in Earnest, or in Jest, I cannot tell. Zant, 8 June 1683.— From Taverner there are several Letters to his Confederates here, still railing (as they pretend) against the ill Treatment of his Master Warre; and yet he writes, That Gates his Man is coming out to be his Partner. They are all agreed, like a Company of &c's. as they are.— Part of a Letter from Mr. Pendarves, sent by me to Mr. Warre. Zant, 20th September 1682. I Can hear Nothing from you but by daily Protests, as to which I shall say little, until I hear from the Bearer, who, (let People say what they please) hath done as much as Man could do for you; and if you render him Evil for so much Good, what in the Name of God will the World think of you? I think, since the Creation of the World never was the like Action committed by Merchants, as hath been committed by Gates, and you against him.— And now I shall proceed to another Subject; namely, your Man Mr. Taverner. Harby, and he are now Sworn Brothers, and the rest of the Fraternity are all his Favourers, though he hath been found Guilty of many Malefacts, and even of Preme∣ditated Murder.— First, In designing to kill his Lady, Wife, or Whore, or what you please, two Years since, though he now lives publickly with her. And this was to be done by Pattore, and himself at a Salazza. Nat. Grantham (then his beloved, and now in our House) was the first Discoverer thereof. And how many times he hath been the Occasions of her Pissing Bones, is best known to himself.— And now let me come to tell you of another Plot of this Gentlemans, and that was to Murther Mr. Praed. And who should be the Men to commit it, but Pattore, Speri, and Clathi, (Persons well known to your self.) Clathi, with others, was seen several times about the House, with Pistols, to dispatch him. And if it could
be executed as he slept in his Chamber, and by your Good Man Mr. Francis Taverner. To which end and purpose, he had made him a Pair of Shoes of Hat.— But you may very well question how we came to hear of so many Particulars of the Business. Why, one of his own Confederates, even Pattore by Name, confessed all, and was thereafter Kill'd himself: Whereof the Bearer will give you a better account, and to him I refer you.— Part of the Depositions of William Ceely Gent. and of Signieur Eliezer Trevese. William Ceely Gent. to the 3d, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th and 10th Interrogatory, Deposeth as followeth: (3.) TO the Third Interrogatory, this Deponent saith, That he doth know Mr. Francis Taverner of Zant, and saith, that it was publickly reported, That the said Taverner stole away Mr. Pendarves's, and the now Complainant's Cash-Books, and se∣veral other Things out of their House; And saith that he was pre∣sent, and heard the said Taverner confess, and declare to the said Mr. Pendarves, That he took the said Books, and threw them out of a Window to a Porter, or some Person, who carried them away by his Order: Upon which, the said Mr. Pendarves ask'd the said Taverner, why he did so? To which he replied, That he had as much to do with the Books as the said Pendarves had, for that he was intrusted by his Master (meaning the now Defendant Warre) and more saith not to this Interrogatory. (4.) To the Fourth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That there being a Combination at Zant, between the said Taverner, & several other Factors there, to defraud their Principals, and the Complainant refusing to be concerned in such Ill Designs with them; and discovering the same, the said Taverner, and several other Factors there, did, as much as in them lay, to Discredit the said Complainant. And more saith not to this Interrogatory. (5.) To the Fifth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That he doth know very well William Waite in this Interrogatory named, and enquired of, who is a Factor at Zant. And saith, That the said Mr. Waite did Inform this Deponent, That the Defendant
to ruin the said Complainant; and the said Mr. Pendarves. And that there was not any thing done in Prejudice of the said Com∣plainant, and the said Pendarves, but what was done by the Order, or Approbation of the Defendant Warre, or to the very same Effect. And more saith not to this Interrogatory, saving that the said Waite also told this Deponent, That he had seen a Letter from the Defendant Warre, to the said Taverner; wherein he wrote, Be sure you mind your Business there, and let me alone with the Asses here; or to that effect. (7.) To the Seventh Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That he doth very well know it was generally reported, That there was a Petition for the Banishment of the Complainant and Partner Mr. Pendarves. And this Deponent the better knoweth the same, for that he was at Zant, when the Complainant lived there, as a Factor; and this Deponent saith, That he doth verily believe that the Petition now produced and shewn to him this Deponent at this the time of his Examination, marked No 2. is the same Ori∣ginal Petition. And saith, that he hath heard several Persons in Zant declare, That they knew the Hand-writing of several Per∣sons whose Names are thereto Subscribed, was of their own Hand-Writing. And this Deponent heard several Persons tell the said Complainant, and the said Mr. Pendarves, of the said now produ∣ced Petition, and they promised them to get the Petition, if they could, from the Person that kept the same; which accordingly they did, and brought the same to the Complainant, and the De∣ponent and another Person, Translated the same into English. And this Deponent hath read over the said Petition, and doth believe the Contents thereof to be true; It being the Duty of a Factor to act, as much as he can, for the Benefit, and Advantage, of his Principal; which this Deponent very well knows the Com∣plainant did: And more saith not to this Interrogatory. (8.) To the Eighth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That he Living with the Complainant at Zant, doth very well know that the Complainant was informed that the said Taverner, and others, in Confederacy as aforesaid, had a Design to Kill the Complainant, for that he disvovered their Design of defrauding their Principals, as aforesaid. And saith, That one Pattore (who confessed he was Imploy'd, with one Spery, and Clathy, by the said Taverner, to Kill the Complainant) discovered the said Design to the Complainant. And saith, That the said Pattore was, some short time after, Shot, and died thereby, for discovering the same. And saith, That the said Spery did likewise Inform the Complainant of the said Design
they had to Kill him. And saith, That Taverner Promised them a Hundred Dollars to do the same. And further this Deponent saith, That the said Taverner, in Discourse with this Deponent, touching the said Design of Killing the Complainant, said, That the Rogue Pattore had already received God's Judgment for his Villany in discovering the same, and doubted not but Spery would also, and soon after the said Spery was Killed. And more saith not to this Interrogatory. (10.) To the Tenth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, that he doth very well know Moses Trevese, Vice-Consul for the English at Zant, in this Interrogatory named, and enquired of: And saith, That he hath credibly heard, and verily believes that the said Moses Trevese was Assaulted, and Wounded, and in great danger of being Killed, for speaking in Vindication of the Complainant; For this Deponent saith, That the said Moses Trevese told this De∣ponent, that about five Men set upon him in the Night time, and, if a Banish'd man Armed had not come in, he had been Killed. And more saith not to this Interrogatory; Saving that one Alex∣ander Vitall, a Jew, told this Deponent, That one Mr. Tho. Cordell, a Factor, confessed to him, that he was the Cause of the said Assault, on the said Moses Trevese, and had given Orders for his being Killed, or at least for the Cutting off one of his Hands; for that he spoke in the Praise, or Vindication of the Complainant. (11.) To the Eleventh Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That he doth very well know Mrs. Jefferyes, Wife of Mr. John Jeffe∣ryes at Zam, in the Interrogatory named, and enquired of; And saith, That he being at the said Mr. Jefferyes House with him, and Mr. Chester Cordell, the said Mrs. Jefferyes asked this Deponent if he had seen that Infamous Book of that Infamous Rogue your Kinsman Mr. Praed, meaning the now Complainant. The said Mr. Praed, having wrote a Book to the Merchants at London, touch∣ing the Design and Actions of the Factory at Zant to defraud their Principals Whereupon, the said Mr. Jefferyes her Husband said, He hath clawed us all of I saith; Thereupon Mrs. Jefferyes said, It is well he is gone for England, otherwise he should not go without leaving that Arm behind him that wrote the said Book. To which the said Mr. Chester Cordell replied, Madam Have a care what you say, for if he comes here again, and any harm befalls him, you may be questioned for your words Unto which she replied, Here again, No. no, he will never come here again; if he does, to be sure Casa. and others, whom he hath Abused in his Infamous Book, will be revenged on him: And more saith not, &c.
Signior Eliezer Trevese to the 3d, 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th Interrogatories, Deposeth as followeth, viz. (3.) TO the Third Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That he was Servant to the Complainant, and lived with him at Zam.— And this Deponent doth very well know Mr. Francis Taverner.— And saith that it was publickly reported, That the said Taverner stole away Mr. Pendarves's, and the now Complai∣nant's Cash-Books, and several other things, out of their House at Zant: And more saith not to this Interrogatory. (4.) To the Fourth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That the said Complainant was much discredited when he was at Zant, by the Factory there; for that he was honest, and just, and acted for the benefit, and good of his Principals, and refused to act other∣wise, and to be concerned with them in a Combination, or Contri∣vance, how to Cheat their Principals, and for that he discovered the same: And more saith not to this Interrogatory. (6.) To the Sixth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That within a Year last past (as this Deponent remembers the time to be) he, this Deponent, meeting with the Complainant in London, the said Complainant, and this Deponent went into the Swan-Tavern in Cornhil, and drank a Glass of Wine; and, as they came out of the Tavern, meeting with the Defendant Warre, the Complainant asked him, if he would drink a Glass of Wine? and the Defendant Warre said, Yes, with all his heart; upon which, the said Complainant and Defendant Warre, and this Deponent, went into the Swan-Tavern again; and, as they were drinking a Glass of Wine, the now Complainant very much complained of the Defendant Warre's ill dealing with him, in keeping his Money from him. At first the Defendant Warre seemed to say, That he was not the only Person that wronged him; but soon afterwards the said Defendent Warre declared, and said, That all he had in the World, and himself, and putting his hand to his Throat, said, and this too, lyes at your Service. And more saith not to this Interrogatory. (7.) To the Seventh Interrogatory this Deponent saith, that he doth know, that it was generally reported in Zant, That there was a Petition for the Banishment of the Complainant, and Partner, Mr. Pendarves, and this Deponent the better knows the same, for that he lived with the Complainant, when Factor there: And this Deponent verily believes that the Petition
shewed to him, this Deponent, at this the time of his Examination, marked No. (2.) Is the same Original Petition; for this Depo∣nent saith, That he is acquainted with the Hand-Writing of seve∣ral Persons, whose Names are thereto Subscribed, and believes their Names thereto Subscribed, are of their respective proper Hand-writing, and the reason of the said now produced Petition was as this Deponent hath heard, and believes; because the said Complai∣nant would not agree with the Factory, to wrong, and deceive their Principals. And more saith not to this Interrogatory. 8. To the Eighth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That he doth know that the Complainant was in danger of being Kill'd at Zant, by some Persons, that some of the Factory had employed to do the same; because the said Complainant had discovered how the Factory wronged their Principals; and saith, That one Pattore, and Spery, two of the Persons employed to Kill the Complainant, discovered the said Design to the Complainant; and saith, That the said Pattore was soon after shot, and died thereby, for his dis∣covering the same. And more saith not to this Interrogatory. (9.) To the Ninth Interrogatory this Deponent saith. That the Complainant and his Servants (immediately after the said Disco∣very) did go Armed, in order to prevent the Complainant's be∣ing Killed; and this Deponent, as one of the Complainant's Ser∣vants, went Armed with him. And more saith not to this Inter∣rogatory. (10.) To the Tenth Interrogatory this Deponent saith, That Moses Trevese, in this Interrogatory named, and enquired of, is this Deponent's Father; and this Deponent very well knoweth, that his said Father was Assaulted, and Wounded, and in danger of losing his Life, for speaking in Vindication of the Complainant, and had one of his Fingers cut off and, if he had not stept back, had certainly been Killed. And more, to this Interrogatory, saith not. A Letter from Mr. Pendarves. Zant, the 5th of June, 1683. I Am told, that Taverner should Write to his Friends here, that I should Advise you of the Action done unto Moses, which then I mistrusted only was done by Mr. Cordell; but now it is certainly known that the said Cordell was the Occa∣sion thereof for he hath not only confess'd it to his Friends,
but he also sent a Message by Vitall, to Moses in a Vaunting Nature, to tell him so much, and that he merited more. A Letter from Mr. Ceely. Zant, May the 13th. 1683. YOu may Peruse my former Letters, speaking of the great danger your Friend Moses was in of losing his Life. About four or five days since, Vitall told Moses, that Cordell confess'd to him, that he was the Occasion of that Assault, and that he had given Orders to Capsa to Kill him, or at least to cut off one of his Hands, for that Moses had discoursed basely of him to the Captains, and told them, That there never came such a Man upon the Place as— for that he had found out such things, as never were discovered, and now all their Roguery did appear, and for many other things else, which he, the said Cordell, was resolved to be revenged on him for.— A Letter from Sir John Buckworth to Sir Clement Harby, late Consul of Zant. SIR, London, the 18th of March, 1681. I Am now to acquaint you, That the Turkey-Company have writ His Majesties Ambassadador; That they have chosen you Consul of the Morea, and have desired him to furnish you with Barratts, and all other necessary Commands; so that, be∣fore we have done we hope to make Warre repent of his Knavery; and, when Pendarves comes home, he must expect the like Pro∣ceedings against him.— And as for Praed, the Company were but Yesterday, very hardly, prevailed with to forbear making an Order, at the General Court, That no Turkey-Merchant shall Imploy him any more, as a Factor (either at Zant, or any where else) under the Penalty of Paying Twenty per Cent. on all Goos bought by him, and have only respited that Order for Five Months, upon his Master's Promise, That he shall acknowledge his Fault, and discover to the Company the whole Truth; which if he doth not, and ask their Pardon, if I hold the Place I am in, I shall miss of my Mark, if I procure not such an Act of Court against him.
A Letter without Date from M. Simon Baxter, Mercha in London. I Have Three of yours before me, all Dated in October fro Venice, which came safe to my hands at my Arrival at  noua; but I had not time to thank you for your great Civilitie I waited upon your Master with your Letter. He desired me walk into his Counting-House; and having read what you wro he supposed I could give him a farther Account: At which was much surprized, you having not acquainted me with a thing you had written. Then he asked me, what made you come from Zant to V¦nice? I told him, I heard you were Banished, and, for what could understand, it was for nothing else but for being too Ze¦lous, and Faithful in serving them, and other Friends. I did ¦large my self upon that Point, and told him how much I w satisfied in your Justice, and Truth; and that if there was a Honest Man living Abroad— At which, your good O Master smil'd, and said, That he was infinitely satisfied in you Fidelity; and withal told me, That if I could give the same Ac∣count to Sir John Buckworth, as I had given to him, I should  you a great deal of Service. I answered, that I should be ve ready to serve you; but desired his Excuse in that, as not being so well acquainted with Sir John; but should watch an Opportu∣nity to Discourse some Member of the Turkey-Company, th might possibly hand it to him. And accordingly I met wit Sir William Royston, my Kinsman, who is related to, and ver intimate with, Sir John. And one Evening I met Sir William, an Mr. George Vanham, when I took occasion to discourse of you To which Mr. Vanham replied, That the Turkey-Company we very angry with you, and that a little before, Sir Samuel Dash wood (a Member of that Company) shewed him a Copy of  Letter which (if it was true) demonstrated you to be a very Ill Man, Crime nor my Ac∣cuser. and he feared you could not excuse your self.
A Translation of the Petition for the Banishment of Mr. Pen∣darves, and my self, as it was Proved, and Read in the Court of Chancery. Most Illustrious Regiment, and most Worshipful Magistrates of Zant, VVHereas the Foundation of the Sustenance of the Sub∣jects of Zant, consists in the Sale of their Currans, from whence the Publick Eranio receives to great Profit, in respect of the Customs, the Publick Polity have made many Laws against the Plots that were laid, and executed by the English Merchants, in Prejudice of the said Interest. Amongst the Merchants of that Nation, inhabiting this City, we find Mr. Pendarves, and his Partner to attend nothing more than to destroy this Trade, and make themselves Masters of the Livelihood of the People. So much have they done (omitting their former Actions) that last Year (the Samuel and Henry being consigned to them) they borrowed Currans already Sold, hoping, for Repayment of the same, to have them at such inconsiderable Prices, as themselves should propose. The Year Currant, Mr. John Jefferyes, and Mr. Thomas Cor∣dell, Cappar'd the Nathalico Currans, for the Morea Company, to be laden on the Britain. But the Ship, called the Old African, arriving before her,This was a pre∣tension of the Factors to Defame Mr. Pen∣darves. the said Pendarves, and his Partner, sent over Signior Lazari, upon the said Ship, to load those Currans, and thereby to lower the price of our Currans; which the said Old African was, at first, intended to load. For the Britain, being an Unfree ship, was forced to depart, almost empty, to the most No∣torious Detriment of the Publick, and considerable Disadvantage of the Private Interest. Nor did the Coutrivance of that House, against these Islands,This was to stir up the Mob. end here, but they had formed a Plot to Infect the People with the Plague, that to the fear thereo might force them to Sell their Fruit, at Ten, or Twelve Dollars a Thousand; for a Ship called the Zantiot, which they Threatened, and would Adventure to Detain until August next, on purpose to lower the Price. Notwithstanding that, on the Seventh of that Month, Mr. Tho∣mas Cordell boughtBy a Sham Con∣tract. at Nineteen, though the Ship, intended to load them, was not yet arrived; as that of Pendarves, and Praed was, who declared, that the Ship should stay for New
Currans, if we would not Sell the Old, as aforesaid. The which astonished the Inclination of the rest of the English Fa∣ctors, who expected Ships likewise; and will not only be a great Prejudice to the Price of the New (there being above a Million and half of the Old) Currans unsold,They pretended at first 50 Dollars a Thou∣sand, and we bought them at last for 12. but will also prove a very Considerable Loss to the Publick Patrimony; for as much as the Fischal Chamber will lose much the more of the Publick Imposts. Now the Conspiracies, Villanies, and Intreagues of this Nature, which Mr. Pendarves, and his Partner, carry on, do make the whole Island Exclaim against them, and Necessitate Vs under-written to approach the Presence of your most Illustrious Gravity, to represent the Grievances thereof, making most humble Instance that Sig∣nior Michel Mounigo, and Signior Giacoma Sciuro, Ambassa∣dors chosen by our most Worshipful Community, may have Or∣ders, from this Magnificent Council, to appear at the Feet of the Publick Majesty, and, in the Name of Vs, and the whole Island, to Implore, that there may be a Decree made by the most Excellent Senate of Venice, for the Banishment of that House from these Islands; That so they may never more be Admitted into the Trade thereof. Constantin Minotto, suplico. Anastasio Siquro, suplico. Zanne Bernardachi, suplico. Silivestro Raftopullo, suplico. Costantin Macri, suplico. Theodoro Gubeno, suplico. Michel Mandricardi, suplico. Stellio Raftopullo, suplico. Draco Matessi, suplico. Antonio Barsso, suplico. Carlo Mocenigo, suplico. Constantin Logotheti, sup quanto disopra. Nicolo Mandricardi Kr. suplico. Antonio Boldu, suplico.
Nicolo Calofono, suplico. Cosmo Manessi, suplico. Stamatelo Servo, suplico. Anastasio Micano, suplico. Zuanne Logotheti, suplico. Zorzi Draco, suplico. Nicolo Sicuro, suplico. Aloisio Soliman, suplico. Zuanne Soliman, suplico. Anastasio di Garzoni, suplico. Zuanne Agiapostolititi, suplico. Nicolo Mocénigo, suplico. Diego di Zuffi, suplico. Eustachio Logotheti, suplico. Andrea de Garzoni, suplico. . Aluise Romanzan, suplico. Anastasio Barbiani, suplico. Gio. Francisco Mendino, suplico. Eustachio Melisurgo, suplico. Nicolo Barbiani, suplico. Zorzi Sicuro, suplico. Giacomo Sicuro, suplico. Giacomo Sumachi, suplico. Giacomo Chrisoplevri, suplico. Zorzi Cacomali, suplico. Giorgio Zeleman, suplico. Marco Venturin, suplico. Domenico Gambara suplico quanto disopra. Paulo de Zuffi, suplico.
Anzolo Locadello, suplico. Zuanne Lefcochelo, suplico. Baseglio Barbiani, suplico. Vizenzo Minotto, suplico. Nicolo Logotheti, suplico. Giorgio Rafti, suplico. Stamatela Russo, suplico. Bortolomeo Belloni, suplico. . Zorzi Rucani, suplico. Strizolio Summachi, suplico. Zuane Trompetti, suplico. Zuane Belliatti, suplico. Stamati Scordili, suplico. Antonio Daagliaro, suplico. . Carlo Pupillo Colla, suplico. Nicolo Balsamo, suplico. Bellisario Catellano, suplico. Anastasio Tuselo, suplico. Giacomo Pellicano, suplico. Theodoro Stavrachi, suplico. Nicolo Milioti, suplico. Cannello Mauritio, suplico. Zuanne Motta, suplico. Zuanne Papadopulla, suplico. Aluife Trompetti, suplico quanto di sopra
Part of a Letter from Mr. Warre about the Ships Lading, for which the precedent Petition was preferr'd for our Banish∣ment. London, 5th August, 1681. I Observe what you have resolved on about the Zantiot, which I, and all the World here, do mightily approve of. Part of a Letter, from Signior Cosma, (a Cunning Zantiot) sent by me to his Quondam Friend, and great Acquaintance Mr. William Warre, when the said Mr. Warre Wrote to me to come to Venice, and from thence Home. I suspected the Im∣portance thereof, and found it was written by the Antiphrasis of his Fancy, to render my Condition ridiculous to him that made it so; and not according to the Pretensions of the Stile. Zant, 5 Nov. 1681. THough you will have all the News from Mr. Praed, the Bearer hereof; yet I also must tell you, Che per mano del medesimo è della sua gran sapienza (as he Ironically calls it) habiamo perso tutte le nostre sostanze. I also, in particular, am a Sufferer, by his keeping the Zantiot, about Three Months in Port, a Trick that was never Played here, to take our Currans from us at so base a Price. I had thought once to have sent mine to you for my own Account, Se bene tanto mi sarebe andata in fumo Mandarla,They are his own words. come haverla venduta à questo Signior Praed; Per che tanto sarai scotato costa, quanto che mi sono Brusato da questo Signiore.— I recommend it to you, as a Favour to us, that, at his Arrival, you would procure, by all means, to keep him there,He spake and acted better sence and  than he writ here. e darli altri Impiegi, in altri Negotii, piu grandi, per altri paesi; for we are Poor enough already, and all this Gentleman's Study, and Application, is to make us more Miserable. When you lived here, we prayed for your Departure, and your Absence, and truly it happened ac∣cordingly, to our great Consolation; but could you not therefore send us a worser Plague than this, Tanto nel racomando per gratia, quanto pesso, che nou si lascia a tornare in questa Casa.—
A Letter from Mr. Ceely. Zant, April the 10th, 1683. SInce you went hence, and could regain so little Credit at Home, all things are transacted openly, which were carried on before with so much secresie, and Cunning; and 'tis as Won∣derful, as it is Shameful, to see how they value themselves on their Out-witting the Merchants, and those that have adventured so far on their Accounts, &c. The Conclusive Part of a Letter from Mr. Pendarves, writ∣ten a little before the Disuniting of The Union, and theThe Octo were Eight Merchants, who joyned with the Factors of Ve∣nice, and Zant, and made up The Union (as they call'd it) to Ingross all the Currans, notwith∣standing they were pre∣advised of an Intention, at Zant, &c. to trick them, which broke The Octo all to pieces. Octo; Names well known upon the Exchange of London. Zant, the 3d of Sept. 1684. — And now, or never, is the time for you to make appear to all in England, the Sincerity of your Actions here at Zant, which by me shall not be done, they having been already too incredulous to our Reports in times past.— FINIS.
