P3502 12758284 93464
A PRINTED PA¦PER CALD THE LORD DIGBIES Speech to the Bill of Attainder OF THE EARLE OF STRAFFORD. TORNE IN PEICES, AND BLOWNE AWAY. Printed in the yeare. 1641.
A PRINTD PAPER CALD THE LORD DIGBIES Speech to the Bill of Attainder OF THE EARLE OF STRAFFORD. Torne in peices and blowne away. THe sandg, that is the incohaerent selfe-devid∣ing & selfe-forsakeing speech, that endeavours to show how the same man, might both cōdemne and acquite the same man (the Earle of Strafforde) doth not so much call for the stroke of an hammer, to batter it, as a puffe of wind to blow it away, to encounter it with the Votes of the two houses of Parliament, with the Vnited opinion of the Iud∣ges, with the learned Argument in Westminster Hall (before the Cōmittees of both houses) were to Kill a fly with an Axe, and to honor, rather then to overthrow it. For certainely the strength of it, is onely great in the kindnesse (that I say not the weakenesse) of the Reader, stealeing a way the af∣fection, not convincing the Iudgment; if Argu∣ments be raised from it; they are such as neede an Hospitall, being blinde and lame, if Arguments
be raised against it the speech falls before them, like grasse before the Mower. Will you see an Argument of this paper, and indeed a paper Argument? If it doth not appeare to him by two Testimo∣nyes, that the Army of Ireland was to bee brought over to reduce this Kingdome then the Earle of Strafford is not guilty of High Treason. Now doth he beleeue himselfe in this proposi∣tion, when he seeth divers other charges of Trea∣son besides laide against him; if three or foure trea∣sons bee obiected and proued, is it a sufficient cause of cleareing if on be not proued to his mind, and as he sayes but by a single Testimony, though the other by more? if the Authour can not bee drawne to a better beleife by the cordes of Reason, I thinke he would certainely be drawne to it, by the cordes of a comparison. If himselfe were tyed with three or foure cordes, and a friend had freed hym from one, would he tell his friend, let me a∣lone for I am free enough, though I am bound by the rest; surely I thinke the other cordes (after some stay at least) would perswade him to change his minde by his inability to change his place. But faults in this paper doe not goe alone For is he not willingly blind when he sees not the very clause, Of reducing this Kingdome by an Irish Army manefestly appearing in the former, and as it were looking him in the face? For a for∣mer Testimony of two witnesses saith, that his Majestie is absolued from all rules of Gouerment and may doe what power will admitt: certainly
most besides himselfe doe see what power will ad∣mitt the vse of an Irish Army and any other that the same power can purchasc, or command. So that where hee quarrels for want of an Irish Army hee hath gotten now about his eares, Irish, English, Dutch. &c. But yet againe he multeplies and is fruitfull in absurdeties. He sayes, that he hath no notion of subuerting Law treasonable but onely by force; certainely this Argument then will neuer subuert the Law, for it hath no force in it, it is an Argu∣ment taken onely from his owne Ignorance, and runs, or rather haults thus, he knowes no other therefore there is no other: to frame this right it should runn thus. There is no way of Subuerting the Law, but that which I know, but I know no way of subuer∣ting the Law, but by force. Now in the first of these is to much knowledge, and in the latter to much Ignorance. But who sayth this? Is it some auncient Iudge or Father of the Law, that hath swallowed and di∣gested the great volumes of that iudicious and weighty profession? Or is it the speech of one that lookes more into the Courte then the Innes off Court? I pray behold an Engine strongly framed to lift up and ouerpoyse the trust and beleife of a whole Kingdom in point of Law, A young gentle∣man Knowes it not. But if he be not skilfull in common Law, he may be some what skillfull in common Rea∣son, and that may tell him; that if nothing but force
can subvert Law, then Iudges can not subvert Law upon the seates of Iustice; For though they willfully pronounce iudgment contrary to Law; stop lawfull defences and rob the Subject of the benefit of Law; aud let loose the prerogatiue upon the Law to destroy it, except they driue the Sub∣jects away from Courts of iustice by Halberds & Guns; they may take the Law from them by false iudgments, denying Prohibitions Habeas corpus, & all Legall Remedies and yet not subuert the Law. If this Authors estate should be lost by this way of Iniustice, he may comfort himselfe (and let it be his comfort alone) that it is not lost by Sub∣verting the Law. O unhappy Tresilian that thou didst not liue in the times, when such Patronages might haue beene giuen thee, for then mightest thou have liued out thy time; since thou couldst not committ Treason by subverting the Iron Lawes, but onely by Iron. And now I am fallen upon Tresilian, I may not forgett this Authors Argument, to which this Tresilian will giue an vnhappy conclusion. He argues thus: The Earle of Straffords practises have beene as high, as tyrannicall, as ever any. But the practises of Tresilian and others haue been as high as high-Treason. Therefore the Earle of Straffords prac∣tises haue beene as high as high Treason. Thus you see how this Author with the helpe of Tresilian hath pronounced sentence against the E. of Strafford. So that if he had no other Iudge this one thus assisted would condemne him, when
he goes about to save him. But that is nothing to the purpose, that he is condemned; for though he be condemned; and so condemned, that hee can never be absolved till he be dispatcht into another world, yet this Au∣thor will not have a hand in this dispatct. A mercifull Inference and most unsutable to the premises, especially if it come out of the mouth of a Iudge. Marke how it soundes in such a mouth, I being a Iudge condemne you as guilty of murher or of as high a treason as ever any, but I will haue no hand in your sentence or dispatch. If Iudges should ride their Circuits and end their Assies in this Logicke, granting the premises, and denying the conclusion, were it not most vaine & a meere mockery of Iustice? For it were only to fid faultes and not to correct them, and to turne iustice into meere wordes. It would shortly make a kingdome a den of Theeues, murderers and Tray∣tors, and safe for none to dwell in; no not for those that teach this doctrine; though they may be thought by teaching to deserue it. Nec enim Lex equiar vlla &c. Lastly, who can beleeve this mans suspitions ra∣ther then Sr. Henry Vanes Oath vpon advised Re∣collection? And oath that gets an addition of be∣leife from the speeches going before (joyntly te∣stifyed by the Truely Noble Earle of Northum∣berland) and backt by a memoriall written the same day when the words were spoken: which words cald venemous by this paper, had their venome from the speaker, not the hearer, and be∣ing
Recorded the same day wherein they were spoken, did arise thereby to such a pregnance of Testimony, that it became very great, and might in a wise mans eye (be it M. Pym or any other) looke very neare as big as two. But though the Testimonyes be big, or many, and the charges many also; and the Earle of Strafford as high and Tyrannicall in practises as ever any (by this authors confession) yet he must at once be both condemned, and saved. Though in his saving, the Votes of both Houses be condemned, and the Kingdome and law in danger not to be saved. FINIS.
