P3559 12349248 59932
The Proceedings AT THE GUILD-HALL IN LONDON, On Thursday July the 29th, 1680. THe Poll having been cast up on Munday the 26th, be∣fore Sir Jonathan Raymond and Sir Simeon Lewes, the present Sheriffs, and Henry Crispe Esquire Common Serjeant; together with Sir Thomas Player Knight, John Ellis, Nicholas Delue, Thomas Papillon Esquires, and Mr. Peter Houblon, Mr. Lucy Knightley, and Mr. Samuel Swin∣nock Merchants, all eight on behalf of Slingsby Bethel, and Henry Cornish. Sir William Dodson Kt. Nicholas Charleton Esquire, George Tori∣ano, and Henry Loads Merchants, on behalf of Mr. Ralph Box and Mr. Nicholson, it did appear before them, that Mr. Slingsby Bethel had Votes—2276. Mr. Henry Cornish had Votes—2483. Mr. Ralph Box had Votes—1428. Mr. Humph. Nicholson had Votes—1230. Upon which a Common-hall was Summon'd on Thursday July 29, which being met, made a very numerous Assembly, crowding one another from Ten until half an hour past Twelve, at which time the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen came upon the Hustings, and being sate, and silence commanded, the Common-Sergeant thus declared the occasion of the Meeting. Gentlemen, MY Lord Mayor hath met you here to day, that the Sheriffs may declare to you how they have found it upon the Poll, and that they may make the same return to my Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen according to Custom. Having so said, and Sir Thomas Player, Mr. Pilkington, Mr. Pa∣pillon and others, standing without the Hustings Bar, directly oppo∣site to the Lord Mayor, Mr. Papillon delivered into the Common-Sergeants hand the following paper with these words.
Mr. Papillon. My Lord Mayor, The Commons of London do make a request to your Lordship, in reference to their own just vindication. To the Right Honourable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. WE the Commons of this City now in Common-hall assembled, cannot but take notice how our last meeting here on this oc∣casion, hath by some of this City been misrepresented to His Majesty as Tumultuous and disorderly; and though we did not observe any thing of that kind, but what might commonly happen in such great Assemblies on like occasions, yet not knowing how far the indiscre∣tion of the Informers may have carried that scandal in prejudice of us, we hold our selves bound in duty to declare, (as hereby we do) That the heat that then appeared among us, was no other than the effect of emulation for His Majesties Srvice, and the preserva∣tion of our own just Rights; and therefore we do utterly detest any thought of violating our Allegiance to our Sovereign, or of doing the least thing that may bear the Interpretation of an affront to His Government, or a dis-affection to His Royal Person. We pray your Lordship to represent us as such to the King, that he may be no longer deceived in that matter, nor His gracious inten∣tions towards us be in any sort diverted; and withal humbly to as∣sure His Majesty, that we will with one heart and one hand, to the uttermost peril of all that is dear to us, joyn in the defence of His Royal Person, and the Protestant Religion, against all Attempts and Plots to the contrary, though never so often repeated upon us. And being deeply sensible it hath been the design of the Popish Party for many years, and still is, for to destroy him and it: And that there is under God no way so effectual to prevent these their cruel and bloody purposes, as by His Majesties Authority in Parlia∣ment. We therefore further pray your Lordship, humbly to beseech His Majesty in our Names, That for the preservation of His Royal Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion to us and our Posterity, he would graciously please to order that this Parliament, his great Council, may assemble and sit, that the most speedy and ef∣fectual course may be taken, to search into, and prevent those grie∣vous cruelties, desolations, and destructions, which the Councils of Rome have determined, and are still endeavouring to execute on this Kingdom▪ and as by that means we have hopes we shall be se∣cured against all our fears, so we shall have cause to thank your Lordship for thus representing us to His Majesty, and humbly to pray for His long Life and happy Reign over us, as becomes us who profess our selves to be His Majesties Obedient, Loyal, and Duti∣ful Subjects.
This was assented to, and strengthened by the unanimous shouts and acclamations of all the assembled Citizens, as generally hold∣ing up their hands in farther testimony of their Approbation. Af∣ter which, the Lord Major and Aldermen went off the Hustings in∣to the Council-Chamber, leaving the two present Sheriffs and the Common-Serjeant behind, who then delivered himself again in these words. Common-Serjeant. Gentlemen, at your Meeting on the 14th of Julylast for the choice of Sheriffs to serve you for the year ensuing, these persons were put in nomination, Sir William Russel Kt. Slingsby Bethel, Henry Cornish, Ralph Box, Humphrey Nicolson; and the Sheriffs decla∣red the choice to fall on Slingsby Bethell, and Henry Cornish, but there was a Poll demanded for Mr. Ralph Box, andHumphrey Ni∣cholson, and upon the Poll the Sheriffs do find, that Slingsby Bethell hath—2276 Votes. Henry Cornish—2483. Ralph Box—1428, Humphrey Nicholson—1230. and so the majority is for Mr. Slingsby Bethell, and Mr. Henry Cornish. Whereupon the whole Hall gave a second acclamation as before. Immediately after this, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen re∣turned again to the Hustings, at which time the Common-Serje∣ant expressed himself to the Citizens as follows. Common-Serjeant. Gentlemen, I have acquainted my Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen, that on the 14th of July last, several persons were put in nomina∣tion to be Sheriffs of the City of London, and County of Middle∣sex for the year ensuing; that there was a Poll demanded, and that upon the Poll Mr. Slingsby Bethell, and Mr.Henry Cornish had the majority of Votes; and I am commanded by the Court to declare, That Slingsby Bethel, and Henry Cornish, are your Sheriffs for the year ensuing: and this is your free choice. Upon the words Free Choice, there was a third acclamation, by which nothing more of general consent and unanimity could be expressed.
THE Lord MAYOR's Speech. Gentlemen, I Must confess I have always had this apprehension, that no∣hing could contribute more to the safety of His Majesties Per∣son, and the Welfare of his people, than a right understanding be∣tween the King and His People, and more immediately between the King and this his great City. If there have been any such misre∣presentations as you seem to intimate in your Petition, I call God to witness I am free from it, and I do not easily believe any body else would be guilty of such a thing; however, as to that matter, Gen∣tlemen, I shall readily comply with your request, and inform the King truly of the fact. For the other matter, I am obliged to say so much to you, that I had the honour not long since to wait upon His Majesty, when he was pleased to declare to me and assure me, that this Parliament should sit in November next; and I am in∣formed likewise, that he hath acquainted all his Judges with the same thing, for them to satisfie the Countreys in their several Cir∣cuits. If that be so, I hope your great concern for that matter might have been spared, being anticipated by His Majesties graci∣ous intention. However, I shall not be wanting with all humility to lay the whole matter before him. My Lord having ended his Speech, the whole Hall returned their humble thanks to his Lordship by a fourth acclamation, not infe∣riour to the rest, testifying their full satisfaction in what his Lord∣ship had declared. FINIS.
