P362 13798415 101874
Lachrymae Sacerdotis. A Pindarick Poem Occasion'd by the DEATH Of that most excellent Princess, our late Gracious Sovereign Lady, Mary the Second, Of Glorious Memory. By HENRY PARK, Curate of Wentworth in Yorkshire. LONDON: Printed for Iohn Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, and are also to be Sold by Edm. Richardson, in the upper Court in Scalding-Alley, near the Poultry-Church, 1695.
A Pindarick Poem UPON THE DEATH OF THE QUEEN. I. FAding and Fugitive, alas! Is life and all its transient Joys, Which men pursue with big Con∣cern and Noise.
Like posting shades they come and go, Capriciously they ebb and flow, As in their silver tides the fickle Waters do: Time's little Envoys that inhabit Glass, With silent speed the moments pass, Fleet, in their brittle house they run, With Heaven's Antartick Traveller, the Sun. They count his Lucid Journeys in the day, And in the Night pursue his absent Ray. Yet they, with all their pious haste, With all their share of heels, scarce run so fast As human life, that was, and is, and then is past. II. To Nature's dark Retreats we all must go, Inexorable Fate will have it so;
The raw bon'd Archer hits us all; Struck by his Old Victorious Dart, we fall. The pious, witty, fair and strong, The snowy aged, and the fiery young, They all must cross the sooty Lake at last, And the oblivious Waters taste; Even they, who by their High Descended Birth, Do Personate the Gods on Earth; The awful Sons of Purple Majesty, that wear the Tyrian Fishes Livery, They likewise soon or late Must bend their consecrated Heads to fate, Wrapt up in dull Narcotick Lead, A fit reception for the cold and Dead; In balmy Urns they lye, The Aromatick spoils of Destiny. III. What Head can hope to be Exempted from Mortality;
Who can secure their hov'ring Breath, When Glorious Mary yeilds to Death? She in whom Lustre, Pomp and Gran∣deur shin'd, And all the God like Gifts combin'd, A graceful Aspect, and a Port Divine, A Female Sweetness, Courage Masculine, Majestick Dread, yet free Address, Awe, without Superciliousness, Kind clemency, and bright Imperial Meen, All these united, in her looks were seen; Nor were the Dowry's of her Soul Less Charming than her outward Parts, By both she purchas'd Love, by both she gain'd our Hearts; Those immaterial wonders of the Mind, A well-form'd Judgment, and a Wit re∣fin'd, A Fortitude, that made her stand sedate, 'Midst the Convulsions of a giddy State,
A Piety, that breath'd Seraphick Flame, jy'd Honour, and a spotless Fame, A Charity, unbounded, large, and Free, Diffusive as the Deity. All these Basilick Graces in her met, to make the Saint, elaborately great. IV. Whilst some, Drunk with Despotick sway, did try, To raise the scenes of hated Tyranny, Our Charming Regent strove To Govern, by the milder Laws of Love; For well the gentle Empress knew, That Mercy was the All-cementing Glue, That stubborn Crouds to chearful Homage drew; Even her Foes, inhuman, fierce, and rude, She gain'd, by all indearing Mansuetude, And by Pacifick Arts did try, To make 'em blush at their Disloyalty. Thus safe, without the Brawny Switz to Guard, Or the dull Teague, to fill her Palace-yard. She, the bright Sexes Ornament and Pride, Liv'd much belov'd and more lamented dy'd,
Leaving the Brittish Chronicles a Name, That shall to endless Age her Worth Proclaim, Born on the never-molting Wings of Fame. V. But, tho with Gentle Reins, she Rul'd us here, Abroad she taught her Foes to fear, Like the Mellifluous Lion Sampson slew, She had her Strength, as well as Sweetness too, So haughty Tourvil knew; Who, when he came t' insult the Brittish Shore, Proud of a Triumph bought before; She in the greatest hazards, calmly brave, Steadily Constant, Wise and Grave, With an Intrepid Roman Heart did hear Th' amazing Tidings, yet disdain'd to Fear; She sent her Fulminating Navy's out, And Russel put the baffl'd Gaul to shameful Rout; With like success, of old Briareus strove To Vanquish all the Deities above; Jove, and his Goddess, both Survey'd the Fight, Resolving to maintain Elizium's Right; Vext at the many-handed Man, They hurl'd their powerful Thunders once a∣gain,
And when they had the brandish'd Vengeance thrown, They quickly struck the bold Aggressour down, Rally'd the routed Gods, and bravely kept their own. VI. You, that with unjudicious Joy, did wait, To hear of Mary's mournful Fate, Leave off to be Profanely Rude, Come, and see sorrow in its Pulchritude, View in the Brittish Nymphs a Noble strife, Who should excel in more Ingenious Grief, Clad, like the Sunless World, in shades they go, Yet bright they shine in their Eclipses too, Gracing Afflictions, and adorning Woe: So when the Queen of Probity was driven, By mens unequal deeds, from Earth to Heaven, Diana broke her Silver Bow, And all the lovely Chastities below, Knowing the Goddess would no more return, Put on their Sables, and agreed to Mourn.
VII. But we in vain our Pious Woes relate, Thin are the Threads that fill the Loom of Fate, Time deals with man, as man with Trees, He strikes the stately Timber down, And lets the ignominious Weeds alone, The Trees of Celcitude receive his blow, Whilst unaspiring shrubs rejoyce and grow; Death loves to play at Royal Game, Oft spares the Rural homely Dame, And Strikes the Queen of Glory, Worth amd Fame? Thus a large Oak, that long had stood, The top and Ornament of all the Wood, Of each inferiour Tree, The sheltring Monarch he, Struck by the unregarding Ax, must lye, On the cold surface Dead and Dry, And mourn'd by all the Vegetable Family, FINIS.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton, at the Ra∣ven in Jewen-street. THE History of all Religions in the World, from the Creation down to this present time, in 2 parts; the first containing their Theory. and the other relating their Practices. By, W. Turner, M. A. and Vicar of Walberton in Sussex. Price bound 6 s. The First and Second Volumes of the French book of Martyrs, published in English with her Majestie's Royal Privilege. Price 20 s.—The Third and Fourth Volumes, containing all the Persecutions of Lewis the fourteenth, will be also done into English soon after the said Volumes are publish'd in Hol∣land. The Tigurine Liturgy, published with the approbation of Six Reverend Bishops. Dr. Burthogg's Essay upon Reason, and the Nature of spirits, dedicated to Mr. Lock. Price 2 s. 6 d. The Works of the Right Honourable Henry late Lord Delamer, and Earl of Warrington, containing his Lordship's Advice to his Children, with about 32 Original Manuscripts, written with his Lordship's own hand. Price bound 5 s. Malbranch's Search after Truth, compleat, in Two Volumes, in Octavo. To which is added the Author's Defence against the Accusations of Monsieur de la Ville; also the Life of Father Malbranch, of the Oratory at Paris; with an Account of his Works, and several particulars of his controversie with Mon∣sieur Arnaud, Dr. of Sorbon, and Monsieur Regis, Professor in Philosophy at Paris. Written by Monsieur Le Vassor, lately come over from Paris: both Vo∣lumes done out of French from the laft Edition, by Mr. Sault, Author of the New Treatise of Algebra: both Volumes 10 s. Bishop Barlow's Genuine Remains, containing near an hundred distinct sub∣jects, Theological, Philosophical, Historical, &c. Published from his Lordship's Original Papers, by Sir Peter Pett, Kt. Advocate General for the Kingdom of Ireland. Price bound 6 s. A Detection of the Court and State of England, during the 4 last Reigns; and the Interregnum; consisting of secret Memoirs, &c. with Observations and Reflections; Also an Appendix, discovering the present state of the Nation; in two Volumes; by Roger Coke, Esq Price bound 8 s. Casuistical Morning-Exercises, the 4th Volume; by several Reverend Divines in and about London. Price bound 6 s. The Tragedies of sin contemplated in the Fall of man, the Ruin of the Angels, the destruction of the Old World, the confusion of Babel, and conflagration of Sodom; by Stephen Jay, Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire. Price 2 s. 6 d. A Practical Discourse on 1 Thes. 4.7. by John Brandon, Rector of Finchampsted. A Treatise of Fornication, by VV. Barlow, Rector of Chalgrave. The Divine Captain characteriz'd, in a Sermon preached by Edm. Hickeringal, Rector of All Saints in Colchester. The Frailty and Ʋncertainty of the life of man, delivered in a Sermon at the Funeral of a person that died suddenly, by the Reverend Mr. W. Bush, A Practical Discourse upon Col. 3.5. by R. Carr, Vicar of Sutton. Dr. Singleton's Practical Discourses upon 1 John 12.28.
An account of the Conversion of Theodore John, a late Teacher among the Jews. Heads of Agreement assented to by the United Ministers, price 4 d. The Life of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Brand, written by Dr. Annesley, price 1 s. Practical Discourses on sickness and recovery, in several sermons as they were lately Preached in a Congregation in London, by T. Rogers, M. A. after his recovery from a sickness of near two years continuance. Early Religion, or a Discourse of the Duty and Interest of youth. The se∣cond Edition. Price 1 s. Fall not out by the way, or a perswasion to a friendly Correspondence between the Conformists and Nonconformists, in a Funeral Discourse on Gen. 45.24. occasioned by the desire of Mr. Anthony, Dunwell, in his last Will. All 3 writ∣ten by T. Rogers, M. A. Price 1 s. The Mourners Companion, or Funeral Discourses on several Texts, by John Shower, price 1 s. 6 d. Mensalia Sacra, or meditations on the Lord's supper, by the Reverend Mr. F. Crow, M. A. late minister at Clare in Suffolk, price 1 s. A Pradical Discourse on the late Earthquakes, by a Reverend Divine, price 6 d. Triunity, or the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity asserted in a Discourse on 2 Cor. 13.14. by Isaac Mauduit, minister of the Gospel, price 6 d. An Earnest Call to Family Catechism and Reformation, by a Reverend Divine, price 6 d. or 50 for 20 s. Comfort for Parents mourning over their Hopeful Children that dye young, by T. Whitaker, minister at Leeds in Yorkshire. The 3d Edition of the Life and Death of the Reverend Mr. John Elliot, who was the first Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians in America; with an Account of the wonderful success which the Gospel has had amongst the Heathens in that part of the World. Written by Cotton Mather, price 1 s. A new book of Trade, entituled Panarithmilogia, by W. Leybourn, Author of Cursus Mathematicus, price 4 s. 6 d. Gospel Truth stated and vindicated, by the Reverend Mr. D. Williams. The second Edition, price 1 s. The Tryals of several Witehes lately Executed in New-England, published by the special Command of his Excellency the Governor of New-England. The third Edition, price 1 s. Lachrymae Sacerdotis. A Pindarick Poem Occasion'd by the Death of that most excellent Princess, our late Gracious Sovereign Lady, Mary the Second of Glorious memory. By Henry Park, Curate of Wentworth in Yorkshire. {inverted ⁂} All these aforesaid books are sold by John Dunton, at the Raven in Jew∣en-street, and also by Edm. Richardson near the Poultrey-Church. Advertisement. ☞ Proposals and Specimens for Recording the most Remarkable Providences and Events, &c. that have happened in this present Age, will speedily be publisht by the undertakers. ☞ The Orations on the Queens Death, by Frederick Spanheim, Dr. Perizonius, and Mr. Orminius, will speedily be publish'd in Eng∣lish.
