p3877 15265156 103318
Instructions TO A Nobleman's Daughter CONCERNING RELIGION. At first designed for One, now di∣rected to all of that Rank, and useful young Persons of Quali∣ty, and others of that Sex. WITH Sacramental, and other suitable DEVOTIONS. By John Provoste. M. A. LONDON, Printed by W. R. for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Tem∣ple-bar, and L. Stokey at the Golden-key over against the Muse-gate at Charing-cross. 1700.
ERRATA. PAge. 5. line 19. read despised, p. 8. l. 14. r. Subjects. l. 22. r. Catechism. p. 10. l. 14. r. capable. l. 25. r. reading. p. 12. l. 12. after Blessings 2 Comma. l. 13. r. Baptized. l. 19. after understood put a Period. l. 21. r. may. l. 25. r. ad∣vance. l. 26. r. not. p. 16. l. 10. r. Epicurus. p. 17. l. 6. r. no. l. 12. r. Joy. p. 18. l. 6. r. bla∣mable. l. 20. after Pray put a Semicolon. l. 21. after Heaven put a Comma. p. 20. l. 2. r. under∣standing. l. 13. r. fashioned. p. 22. l. 13. r. Eyes see. p. 28. l. 6. r. me. p. 33. l. 14. r. ineffectu∣al. p. 34. l. 18. r. to. l. 20. r. Wise. p. 38. l. 12. r. then. l. 19. r. earliest. p. 39. l. 12. r. them∣selves. p. 49. l. 2. r. Images. p. 69. l. 23. r. 2 Sacrament. p. 70. l. 16. r. John. p. 18. l. 4. r. Prov. 31.
TO THE Right Honourable THE LADY — Madam, I Hope your Ladyship has all the Sa∣tisfaction which the Country can give to any one, or your own Expecta∣tion promised to your self, and whereas Expectation is often raised above En∣joyment, I hope Enjoyment now rises high, and surmounts all your gay No∣tions of it▪ I know, and methinks at this very Instant I have a sense and a share of that Joy which your Ladyship is affected with upon your Retreat from the Town: Let that Joy encrease, and in the Country, and in every Place, and in every thing let it still be grea∣ter
and so much rather, because it  greater than you deserve,  same Virtue and Prudence, which make you deserve it, will be sure to make your Jy, and all Things very Innocent. I have sometimes ex∣ercised your Ladyships Condescension; and with that easie Mildness, which you shew n all Occasions, and with which you have already learned to bear all Evils, you have seemed to bear the Trouble of Reading my Instructions: But you never had so much Advantage from my Writing, as now, to satisfie for the Trouble, nor I so good Occasion to give it. I doubt not but you will have the same Thought of the Occasion, I have my self; and so I may hope for an Effect equal to it. I have often beheld your growing Piety with a secret and rising Satisfaction, and I cannot but endeavour to continue and improve my own Satisfaction, by Exhorting, Advising, Intreating your Ladyship to continue and improve your Piety. Seeing I have so great a pleasure in
the View, I am become a Party, and my own Interest, that I may have it still, engages me to do all I can for the enlargement of a thing which gives it: A thing which is so good in it self, and so advantageous to you, and which you seem to Repay and Reward for all its Advantage by the graceful Light and Beauty you reflect upon it; when like a well-set Diamond, it appears in you and borrows from you. I have with so much Pleasure observed that Piety, which was your own original Growth; and then with how much more shall I observe, and with how Innocent a Pride, any part of your piety hereaf∣ter, which has been planted in your Mind by my Endeavour, and which being placed in so Rich, and Noble Ground, must there be to a Wonder fruitful by your own. I shall see it with a Joy refined and high, with a greater than that of the King in History, when he saw the fair and goodly Tree, his own Hand had set, and then his De∣light in Surveying the Growth of the
Tree scarce was equal to this of re∣membring that he had set it. I should think my self to do Service to the World, in doing this to your Ladyship, who may be so useful to the World; and to Religion, by the Influence of your Example; by the Authority of your Interest, and by the Prudence of your Zeal to make use of both, as of every thing, to the best and most worthy Purposes. So shall I have, in this my Writing, that glorious Hope of doing the greatest Good by the shortest way, to many in one; as when the chief City is taken, all the Neighbouring Country very often comes in by an easie Surren∣der, or is Conquered with it: And surely the thing will as much become your Quality as it will be promoted by your Zeal, that there should be a nu∣merous Train to attend you in your Course of Virtue, and in your Journey towards Heaven. All the Religious Things, when carried on by you to o∣thers, will at the same time be im∣proved, and become more inviting by
their passing through your Hands, as Liquors take a fragrant, and more grateful tast from the Vessel through which they pass. When there have been already such shining Effects of your Virtue, and when the Cause is so fruitful and sure, so generous and al∣ways ready to produce them, I may oblige my self and the World by all my pleasing and most agreeable Presages, and yet my Gift of Foretelling may not be, like those Effects, extraordinary; as they who pretend to the Faculty of declaring things to come, do little more than argue from the same Causes to the same Effects. The Country gives you lei∣sure, and you want nothing for the rai∣sing a Good-will, to read such things as this before you; and the Country gives not only leisure, but a new Ar∣gument for Religion, because there the invisible things of God are un∣derstood by the things which are made, By every Flower you gather, and every Fruit you eat, by the mean∣est Herb you tread on, and the least
thing you see in the Garden, or in the Field. The Country has already no little part in your Favour, it has so large a Place in your Affections, that it could lend some even to things less Grateful; the most disagreeable things would cease to be so, when this should recommend them to you: But surely the Country will have new Endear∣ments, and more lively Charms, when you shall begin to apprehend it, as ha∣ving all the convenience, not only to breath, but to think more freely too, and as having at the Leisure, and Li∣berty, and Enlargment, not only for many other Purposes, but for one thing which you love more than the Coun∣try, and then all things, for Religion. Thus I have frankly declared the De∣sign of these Papers, and your Lady∣ship will generously pardon the length of them, and all their Faults; whereof I think my self to be guilty with Au∣thority; because the Design is such as gives the highest Authority to this, and to any other Action, and to all the
harmless Errors of it. When I have freely confest the Purpose of my Wri∣ting, (and this no worse than what you hear) your Ladyship will give me leave to speak freely upon it, with all that plainness which good Designs always covet, and well-meant Instructions chuse, and the true Ends of both re∣quire. Then may I be allowed to speak without the Ceremony of Address to your Sex, and your Quality; that I may thus teach you to forget your Greatness, which you seem already to know so little of, and to be your self almost a stranger to: The nice Con∣sideration of it is to be laid aside for the Time by me in Writing, and by you in Reading. This Boon I ask at the opening of my Discourse, as the Great Council asks (at the first opening of it,) Freedom of Access and of Speech in Debates upon Things of pub∣lick Good. As to the Grandeur of Birth, you have so much of the Nobi∣lity which Virtue gives, that the other is almost sunk in this, and the greater
Light scarce allows the less to be seen. As to the gaudy Honours of the solemn Regard which such a Birth does al∣ways claim, your Ladyship is to leave this part to others; as that is not, like Virtue, your own, so the esteem which it should have is not to be from your self; and yet to that an Esteem is due: Indeed Moses would never have refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, and the Grand∣son of a King, if he had been the thing which he was called, he would not have Renounced the innocent Glories of such a Relation, as he did not despise the in∣glorious Reproach of Christ, if the Pretence would not have been false Heraldry, and the Advantage only the enjoying the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. But so great, Madam, is your share, and so rich you are, in high∣er Things, that you may reserve e∣nough for your self, if you resign your Claim of Birth to them who have no∣thing besides it, to them who are con∣tented to be still what they were born,
and, as if they were only over-grown infants of one Days Age, have made no Progress since the first Minutes of Life. I now beg leave to tell stran∣gers, that they are not to take the length of your Understanding from that of your Age, and to tell your self, that I have so great an Opinion of your Understanding, and so little of my own, as to think I could not easily Write any thing upon such a Subject above your reach: So great is my O∣pinion too of your Piety, as to think I could not easily prescribe any thing a∣bove your Practice. I am sure, nothing which can have any part in your Religi∣ous well-being, though never so high, can be above my Wishes, and it is no more beyond my Attempts to enforce it, than beyond yours to do it. I am sure again, if you are to have every thing I wish, you cannot have too much of that Wisdom, which (according to the Wise, though Apocryphal Wri∣ters) reaches from one end to ano∣ther
mightily, and sweetly orders all things. My willing Consent is always ready for all your Inclinations, and my joy∣ning with you as ready for all your Service. But I would, of all things, carry on the pleasing Harmony of your good Actions in Consort with you; in nothing so much you desire, in nothing so much you shall have the Concurrence and united Force of, Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble Servant. J. P.
Madam, I Have ask'd your leave to di∣rect Instructions to you, and now I presently take it, as rea∣dy to make use of it as you are, I am sure, to grant it, who, as you are too generous to deny any thing which should advance the Good of others, so are too wise to refuse that which would promote your own. The First Advice which I shall offer to you, shall be in the first thing which Religion taught you. Let the Catechism never be for∣gotten: Though it is learn'd in Childhood, it is to be remem∣bred still in all the other parts of our Age; therefore indeed learn'd in Childhood, that it may not be for∣gotten, and that it may be useful
ever afterwards: As when the Pilot has Sailed very far, and very often, yet he is not to throw away his Compass, nor to Sail without it. Religion begins thus in Childhood; if in that Age it begins, much more in our Age of Understanding it is to be continued, and to be improved, as other things are not less, but they become greater and stronger too by Time. Religion is much more to be continued in all the Scenes of Life beyond our Childhood, because we afterwards come to the Age of Practice, which is its chief design, and because our Understanding is more accomplish'd afterwards, and so we are then more capable of Ad∣vancements in that which is the most noble Exercise of our Under∣standing, in Religion. Indeed the first use of our Reason, the first open∣ing of it is to be in that, because it will be more prepared for a Progress in Knowledge, and the Child, the yet imperfect Creature, for Attain∣ments
in Perfection, by making the first steps in the Understanding of Him who is the Fountain of Know∣ledge, and of all Perfection. A par∣ticular right He has to the first Fruits of our Reason, because it is more particularly derived from God, and it is more the Image of Him from whom it comes, and because the Be∣ing of him from whom it derives its own, is a Principle our Reason is acquainted with as soon as any, and therefore it should be as soon ac∣quainted with the Worship and the Knowledge of Him. If our Child∣hood, amongst its many Pastimes, is to have Religion for its Business; if that Light and thoughtless Age is in this alone to become serious and wisely Active, this much more should be our Exercise, when our Age has all the steady Thought and Reflection, and when all our Thought is directed to Business, and Things of high and serious Impor∣tance, and when the more we think,
we are carried still farther into Re∣ligion. If our Reason at the first glimmering and dawning of it is to begin its day, as we should every one of our Life, with Religion, much more is this to have enlarg∣ment with our Reason, and to be the greater Light to rule the Day; the Worship of the Father of Lights, is surely to be much more then our Ex∣ercise, when we are in so much bet∣ter condition to perform it. I speak thus of Religious Know∣ledge, that, when gained in the for∣mer, it is not to be lost in the follow∣ing part of our Age, because too ma∣ny think it may then well be lost, and it was intended only for our Child∣hood, and when we were children, we were in Bondage under Rudiments, we spoke as Children, understood as Chil∣dren, thought as Children, but we are to put away afterwards childish things. How great, alass, the Misunderstan∣ding, and how fatal the effect, if there be no recovery from it! How
much do they, who thus misunder∣stand, seem Industrious to prove themselves Children still? How much happier would they be, if they were so indeed? They would then have something like Excuse; now they have not. All that we did, and learn'd in the more serious Undertakings of our Childhood was only designed for Discipline and Method to dispose us for the doing and learning more here∣after, as he can never be Rich, who keeps not that which he has gain'd, and he can never be Skilful in any Art or Science, who forgets the first Notions of it he once was taught. A Father of the Church said upon a like Occasion, nothing is to be dispised by those who are to be instructed, and led into the know∣ledge of things; for if they look upon the first Elements as little things, how shall they attain the perfect and great things in knowledge? These early things which the Church has taught us, are not Scaffold work, to be ta∣ken
down again, but Foundation, and he that would take away the Foundation, when the House is near the being, finish'd, would only un∣dermine it, and never finish it. Who∣ever discards the knowledge of the Catechism, when he is no more a Child, he either at the same time re∣nounces all knowledge of Religion, (but surely, if that knowledge were necessary in Childhood, it is much more necessary afterwards) or he at the same time designs a much high∣er Knowledge in Religion; and be∣cause he is still going forward, he leaves the first behind him, not as too heavy, but as too light, or little to carry with him. Indeed he must not here forget those things which are be hind, if he will reach forth to those things which Are before, if he will press towards the Mark of the Prize of the high Calling. The more he values those other things he would understand, the more he is to value these first things, without
which he cannot understand the o∣ther, and the more Knowledge he has attained, the more humble he is, or should be, and so not apt to des∣pise the meanest Truth as well as Person; be owes the greater regard to these original Truths, to which he owes all his highest Improve∣ments. Indeed they are not the meanest Truths, they are the first in Order and Dignity, as well as in Time and Place, because they are the Doctrines of things necessary to Sal∣vation, and no Good so great as Salva∣tion, no Truth so great, as that which teaches things necessary to it. The other Doctrines are the Issues of these by a natural Consequence, and so they cannot be nobler than these, till the Off-spring shall claim more Honour than Parents, from whom they derive all they have. The o∣ther parts of Religion are but so many several Streams that flow from these, which therefore should have all the Reverence from us, as Fountains had
so much from the Heathens, were Sacred, and were Adored. The Doctrines of the Catechism are very far from being those of the lowest Rank, they have so much the Character of the Scripture from whence we received them (as Fruits have the Nature of the Soil wherein they grow) that however there are things in the Catechism for the low∣est, there are also many for the high∣est and most manly Understanding: The things are so high, that they are subjects more of Belief, then of En∣quiry, and yet when they have My∣stery enough to puzzle the Enquirer, they have at the same time Evidence enough to baffle the Unbeliever; Evidence, like that of Witnesses a∣gainst a Malefactor, to Condemn him. The Doctrines still are great, however the style of the Catechism, like that of the Scripture, be very plain, as the greatest Person may ap∣pear in the plainest Dress: There is so much more of the nicer Art, to
reduce sublime and awful things to easie and familiar Words, and there is more Authority in such a Language, as there is often a more prevailing Au∣thority in a condescending and lowly Behaviour. That No∣ble Person had a very just OpinionThe Lady Catherine Manners, afterwards Marchioness of Buck∣ingham. of our Catechism, who ac∣knowledged it to be a plain Summa∣ry of saving Truth, and being of a Roman-Catholick Family, and Edu∣cation, she seemed in this Acknow∣ledgment to give a generous Pledg, that there should be Success to their Endeavours, who were Zealous to teach her new and better Principles. The Religious Beginnings of Child∣hood are in things necessary to Salva∣tion, that our happy End, the End of our Faith may be in Salvation it self, our Christian Beginning is in things more necessary, as in the first part of a Feast we find the Meats which have more substance, and nourish more. Our first entrance
is in the needful things of Belief and Knowledge, both because this Be∣lief and Knowledge are the Root to all the goodly Branches of Religion, and there must be first a Root, be∣fore there can be an enlargement of the Tree into spreading Branches, and useful Fruit, and because the former Time of our Age is not so ca∣pable of, nor has such Occasion and Exercise for the several good Works, which are the other chief parts of Christian Duty; but it is already capable of Knowledge, which should prepare us for them. That being planted in the House of the Lord, you may flourish in the Courts of the House of our God, in His Church, and you my bring forth more Fruit in your Age, that you may grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, your reading over the Catechism once every Month of your Life, and your reading it with all the Wisdom, and careful Observa∣tion
of your more perfect Age, would be a most useful Office; when you may be above the giving an account of it to others, you can never, in a Life of all those Years I wish you, out-live the Necessity of giving it to your self, and to God. There is a Precept to all, even to the oldest Christians, for the being ready al∣ways to give account to others, to give an Answer to every Man that asks a Reason of the Hope which is in them. So needful is the conti∣nuance of this first Knowledge, that you cannot know any thing else a∣right, without having still an Eye to this, and then steering by it; you are to take it with you wherever you go, in whatever you do: It is the Standard, by which all your Know∣ledge is to be tryed, and it is the Rule, to which all your Practice hereafter is to be reconciled. As the Catechism is always to be well remembred, so is it to be well considered by you. No part of it
you are to consider more, than your Vow in Baptism, and the Explaining of the Commandments in the Cate∣chism; the Performance of which Commandments (so explained) is one great part of the Performance of that Vow, and the great, the princi∣pal Exercise of your wisest Age, and of the best Endeavours in all the Time which is to come, and I hope with a long Train after it of Days and Blessings upon your doing that which you were not only Baptized, but you were born to the Performance of. I know you already understand very much in Religion, and often have I observed, and always rejoyced in observing how much you un∣derstood. But now, That the for∣mer Age of your Life, as the first was of the World, may be a Golden one, That your Knowledge may rise to Practice in the Com∣mandments, and your Practice may advance to Perfection; that you may not be discouraged in the Practice (e∣specially
in the beginning of it.) I beg leave to advise you, who under∣stand already so much of Religion, not to misunderstand the Design thereof, as if Melancholy were a na∣tural Effect of Religion, or were a ne∣cessary Duty of it, as if it denied us a moderate Liberty in worldly Enjoy∣ments, and required that we should deny our selves this Liberty. Were such a Notion of Religion a true one, and embraced as true, it might have a dismal Consequence, that nothing of Religion, besides this Notion, might be embraced by Persons of your Age, and Sex, and Quality. Your Age, as well as Sex, may be sup∣posed to love things less difficult or severe, and not to abhor Diversi∣on and Mirth; your Quality gives a Right, almost a Birth-right to that, to which your other Circumstances may give some Inclination, to Plea∣sure, and harmless Enjoyment. Me∣lancholy is very far from being com∣manded, it is forbidden by Religion;
Excess of that, as much forbidden, as the Excess of Mirth. Religion for∣bids not Enjoyment, but abuse, which is no part of the Enjoyment, which indeed does lessen it, that, and not Religion hinders all. So far Religion is from hindering, that in its Design it promotes, and in its Practice, in the present Act it gives a chearful Mind, and this is one great, this is one present Reward to the Practice of it: Surely none has so much cause as the Pious Man for a chearful Mind, and O let him ever have it, let there be no Pretence or Bar against his having that which is thus his right, and which God him∣self desires he should have. As there was a famous Master who would have Pictures of Joy to be placed round his School, that his Scholars might have Images of Delight in their Minds, and Knowledge might become a more inviting Fi∣gure to those who came thither to make Addresses to it. Religion is a
thing of great delight in its Nature, and it is never otherwise, but when it is made otherwise by us, as the most pleasing Wines by our ill Ma∣nagement, or ill Keeping may be∣come sower, and very unpleasant. The Fear of the Lord maketh a merry Heart, and giveth Joy and Gladness, Ecclus 1.2. So much Religion is a thing of the noblest Joy, that it gives no little Joy, not only to those who sincerely Profess, and sincerely Pra∣ctice it themselves; but even to those who behold it, when thus Pro∣fess'd and Practiced, in others. I am sure the thing which is very delight∣ful in its Nature, much more is made so by your Ladyship; Religi∣on has often appeared to me as ha∣ving a particular and surprizing De∣light, when I have beheld it in your Deportment. The French Philosopher told one of your Sex, that no Beau∣ty was equal to that of Truth, and the Writer of his Life makes this Remark, that the Saying was no
Complement, and he talked more like a Philosopher than a Courtier. I am sure, this saying, that the Beauty of Virtue is above all other, can be no Affront to a Person, who has a large share of Virtue, and so in the Praises of it. There was a Sect of Philosophers, which so many of the Noble Youth resorted to in the Time of Epicus, as to a Court, and which pretended to all the Art∣ful Refinement of Wit; but here their Wit did not shew it self, nor do them Service, when they profess'd the Study and Advancement of Plea∣sure, and yet admitted not any set∣tled thought of Religion into their Debates upon it: The Epicureans pursuing Pleasure, and not carrying this along with them, went out of their way all the time, and the un∣happy Men, the farther still they went, still were farther off from Pleasure, and when there was so much of the Name in their Books and Harangues, there was little of
the thing in their Mind or Condition. It is the end of a Man, of a wise Man so to order every thing, that he may find a Pleasure in every thing he does, in all things belonging to him: A wise Man he cannot be, he has no true Light in his Mind, who with all his busie search can think of fin∣ding Pleasure by any other Light then that of Religion. May every thing your Ladyship does entertain you with Joy, especially Religion, and this so much more, because this will give an high tast of Joy to all o∣ther things. The chief delight of Piety is in it self a Delight of the Mind, and not therefore less, the Pleasures of the Mind are the great∣est: But indeed, that the Mind may be capable of the Religious Plea∣sure, it must be prepared with a par∣ticular Frame of Spirit, a true and suitable Disposition towards it, as the Body it self his very little Sense of bodily Enjoyments, if Indisposed. Some complain they find not that
lofty Satisfaction, that Rapture we talk of: But we never said, there was such a Delight, unless upon a most hearty Tryal, and Religion is not therefore to be blamed, because they are very Blameable; nor is there any want in Religion, because they never found what they never sought. May your Ladyship find a Joy in eve∣ry Act of Religion, especially in Prayer, which procures strength for the do∣ing all the other Acts thereof, and in∣crease of Satisfaction in the doing them, and which is it self so plea∣sant, that it has a foretast of Heaven, where is fulness of Joy and Pleasure for evermore. Well may Prayer give us a foretast of Heaven, seeing it carries us thither every time we Pray as when St. Paul was caught up into the third Heaven; he not only heard the words which are not to be uttered, but perhaps he tasted the Enjoyments which are not to be conceived. Prayer carries us up to Heaven, and then in the re∣turn,
(as Angels do to those, to whom they give a friendly Convey∣ance) it sets us down again gently up∣on the Earth, and makes Earth it self more pleasant, when thus it has brought us back from Heaven: The Man who goes so often thither, must needs return with something of the Pleasures, and the Riches of the Place, as the Merchant, who Tra∣vels often to the Countrey of Gold and Silver, and precious Stones, does as often bring from thence some of the gaudy, and admired, and dazling Goods. That you may be prepared for the devout Offices of Prayer, and for all the exalted Satisfactions of it, be pleased to compose that Mind, which indeed is seldom discomposed, to fix your Soul for an Attention to the pi∣ous Work, and so God himself will attend, and have a kind regard to the Work, and to the Person. Be∣fore you begin to Pray, you may pre∣pare and fix your Mind by some good
Thoughts, as short as may be, of the Duty you are undertaking, and of the God you are to Address to in the Duty, and cast off for the Time all your common Thoughts of worldly Things, that you may think more, and better of the Duty, and of God. Your Thoughts are always harmless, but they may not so easily be always useful, nor always Pious in that de∣gree of Elevation, when they are ex∣ercised upon worldly Things, they are formed and fashioned for the time into a likeness with them; your Mind then complies and condescends to an unaffected Debasement, it sub∣mits and bows down, with a gene∣rous Regret, to the Meanness of the Subject; as the Eagle, with all its greatness, and lofty Flights, vouch∣safes sometimes to lower it self and come down, when its Quarry is near the Earth. As to the Work you are to undertake in Praying, you may be pleased to consider, that you intend to ask Blessings for Soul and Body,
and particular Blessings; such, and such things for both; and you may consider particularly, what things they are you intend to ask. You may not forget, that not only Prayer is a most holy Work, but if you would obtain what you ask, you are also to be Holy, before and after∣wards: Pure Hands should be lift up; if there be not Purity, there will not be Strength in those Hands, nor in the Prayer. As to the God you Address to in Prayer, you may con∣sider, that as you are a weak and needy Creature to want the things you Pray for, so he is a great God, and able, a bountiful God, and wil∣ling to give them: That He may be moved to give them, you are at all times, but especially in the Praying time, to pay all the Reverence to your Maker, and the Maker of all the World, to Him who dwells in Heaven, and Governs on Earth; to Him who dwells in the highest Hea∣vens, knows, and preserves, and go∣verns
all things to the Iowest Earth. You may again consider, that having retired from your ordinary Company, you are now to Converse with an higher Being. Indeed the remove from our common Business and Con∣versation to Prayer is so great, that we cannot in such a sudden Motion, without some preparing Thoughts, take off our Mind from things of or∣dinary Exercise, and place it on those of Devotion: The distance between these things is so wide, that however Spirits are said to be very nimble in their Motions, the Soul cannot pass the next Minute from the one to the other. Nothing more apt than Con∣versation to engage our Mind, and after the withdrawing of our Body from it, the remembrance of its Transactions, whether pleasant or unpleasant, seems to place us still in the midst of our Company, and de∣tain us with them: In respect of this Conversation, that with God is a thing altogether new, it is more
refined and excellent, and therefore we cannot so very soon be capable of it, as he who has Conversed with Peasants and the meanest Persons, does not thus become the most Ac∣complish'd Man for the higher ap∣proach to the Presence and Thrones of Princes. Very narrow and im∣perfect is all our Correspondence with Spirits, and even with those who, as some imagine, have a nearer Alliance to Matter, and so to us: Our Eyes sees nothing, our Under∣standings very little of them; no Sense or Faculty is satisfied in the enquiry into them; whenever we perceive their being near us, we al∣most covet to be farther from them, we entertain them with a Reverence very like Amazement and Horror. If our Disadvantages be such in all our Entercourse with Spirits, much more in that with the Father of Spi∣rits: And then should not Israel in the softer meaning, prepare to meet his God? And thus we shall
make those Disadvantages as little as may be to us; at least we shall be so prepared for our attending God, as Men put on the best Dress they have, when they are to wait on Persons much above them. I have here allowed my self so much more enlargment on the necessity of forming our Minds into a suitable Frame, before our Praying, because otherwise there can be little Thought in our Prayer, and less Affection, and the Prayer which wants either, must want Success: Therefore is there so ex∣traordinary Success to so many Pray∣ers; they may well not have it, when they do not deserve it, & they cannot deserve what they seem not to desire. If your other Engagements will comply with so many Times; let your Prayers be thrice in a Day, in the Morning the first Business, at Night the last, and at Noon before your Dinner; because a Work so Carnal as Eating, would make
you less disposed for a Work so Spiri∣tual as Praying; and because this de∣serves a place before every other Business, and it is to be our Meat thus to do the Will of Him who sent us, and thus to pray for Grace that we may do the Will of him that sent us into the World. Your Prayers are to be Publick and Private, not only private, but publick upon every Opportunity, not only publick, but private too, and you constant in the Seasons of both. As to publick Pray∣ers, the Church has prescribed, and who has a better Right to prescribe? Who could have better Success? As to private, your own Devotion will soon be skilful, and the Advice of Pious Books will give you Laws: Such Laws your Books will be ready to give, and you to obey. I would advise your having not only particular Times, but a parti∣cular Place for your Private Devo∣tion, and so, if the Place be not re∣served for this use alone, yet the
Duty it self should be alway perfor∣med in that place, reserved for that alone: Then as often as you come near this Religious Apartment, some good Thought will come near you too, when you shall remember the Business you have there often done, and you are now to do: There may well be some Vertue in that Air, which has been made fragrant and so often sweet with the Incense of your Prayers. The Grace of God is the chief thing you are to pray for, because all other things will follow this. You are to pray for Grace, that it may in∣struct you in all such things in which a Christian is to be instructed, and may turn your Thoughts towards Religion, and your Inclinations to a Desire for the Benefits thereof. You are to pray for Grace, that it may di∣rect and move you to enter upon a solemn Course of Religion, direct and give Strength to the whole Pra∣ctice of it, guard your Age so tender against the many Temptations of the
World, and fix it against the several Misfortunes thereof upon the true Foundations of Religion and Pru∣dence, and give it a true Notion of the World: Then will you know that this gaudy World is a place of Vanity, and that nothing but Re∣ligion can make it a place of Satisfa∣ction, and so you will know the wisest thing which can be known by Man in the whole Circle of his boasted Learning: Pity it is that we do not know it sooner, that only many Years and many Misfortunes should teach it, more Years than have yet past over your Head, and worse Misfortunes then (I hope) will ever come near your Condition; though indeed the being above Misfortunes is not one of those peculiar Privile∣ges belonging to Birth and Quality. Let my Experience be yours, let not this be one of the dear bought things your Sex is said to covet: But as the Complaisance of our Sex delights to present costly things to yours, may the Experience be purchased only
at my Cost, and teach us both. And as the Gallantry of our Sex very often exposes it self for the Safety and the Interest of yours, so let the Dan∣ger and the Evil be only mine. Dear bought Experience taught me what it true, And Friendship bids me tell that Truth to you. You are to pray for Grace, that it may now betimes prevent your be∣ing guilty of those Sins, which many young Persons begin too soon to be guilty of and which sooner or later are to have a Repentance, and the Repentance is to have so much cost, in Tears and Sighs, in painful Thought and unpleasant Remem∣brance: Surely those Sins are Disea∣ses of the most Dangerous Kind, which we should rather chuse to pre∣vent then to remove, and when they have entertainment from our Youth, they are like that forward Fruit which is very unwholsome and will soon be rotten. You are to pray for Grace, that it may guide you through this Life to a better; as hap∣py as I wish your present Life, there is yet one far more happy, which I
doubt not, you wish your self; and which that Grace is to guide you to, and moreover it is to guide you through the several parts of your present Life with all the Success and Blessing in all the Management of it. As you are to pray for your self, so for those next to your self, your near Relations, and for all good things to them, Spiritual and Tem∣poral. The Advice you are ready to prevent, because the Office, I know, is very pleasing to you, who pay so much Duty, where you ow it, and so much Love to your other Relations, more (I had almost said) than you can be supposed to owe. You are not only to pray for what you want, but to give thanks for your not hav∣ing wanted many things, for those you have enjoyed from the first day of your Life unto this, for your Noble Birth, and wealthy Fortune, and Virtuous Education. Such a Thanksgiving to God will require a Prayer to him for all the Endow∣ments of Mind suitable to such a
Birth, and Fortune and Education, and for the making these his Favours useful to the Glory of him you pray to; and him who gave them. You are to pray for a low Opinion of all this World, and of one part of it more than all, of your self, that your heart may not be haughty, nor your Eyes lofty, and you may not exer∣cise your self in great matters, nor in things too high for you, Moreover you may pray, that to your other, to your many earthly Goods may be added that of Health, in order to your being more capable of making the best use of all, your doing more service to God, more good to others. You may pray that in this your walking through the Vally of the Shadow of Death God would make you to fear no Evil, and make his Goodness and Mer∣cy to follow you all the Days of your Life, that so you may dwell in the House of the Lord for ever, dwell in his House here, and in that other not made with hands, eternal in the Hea∣vens. Your prayers upon these seve∣ral
occasions are to be short, and then may be more servent, and what is wanting in length may be supplied in a more warm Devotion, which is to God more pleasing; a warm Devotion more pleasing to God, then a Burning Sacrifice. The Force of our Prayers, when more close and united, in a narrower Room, in less Time and fewer Words, may be stronger, and as that Force is stron∣ger, the Prayers will be more earnest. The Orator must weep himself, if he will be sure to have his hearers weep: Much more we must be earnest in praying if we expect that God will be moved in hearing, that he will shew to us a part of the strange Affe∣ction he has to Mankind which the Prophets have told us of, and which only their Flights can describe. It is one design of Prayer to unite us to God, and so much it does unite us to him, that our Affections and his are almost to the same; as we are affe∣cted more or less in the presenting our Prayer so is he in the recei∣ving it.
I pretend not here to have given all the Rules which are necessary for Prayer, but some more particular to to your Ladyships Quality and Age I have designed to give, and then to recommend your Learning of other more general Rules for Prayer and for all things from the Books of Re∣ligious Wisdom, those which you are not a Stranger to, and which, I am sure, you will be every Day more acquainted with. The Books are to be few and chosen, and so much the rather should yours be cho∣sen, because in every Kind you de∣serve the best: Few Books, that they may be read, and chosen, that the reading may be useful. At the same time you read the Writings of others, let this of all things be written upon your mind, that whereas there are several parts of Religion, the chief part is practice, and a living in obedience to the Commands of God, and that all pre∣tending
to Religion is trifling with∣out it, and that still the Older you are, the more Practice is required. In order to your being moved to live in a Religious Method of all this Practice, you may be assured that your Life can never be happy with∣out Religion, and then what is to make your whole Life happy, is to be it self a greater part of it, is to be indeed begun in the first Seasons of Life, and so continued to the last. If the beginning afterwards were not late and ineffectual, yet it would be less certain and more difficult, the beginning sooner will by the long and early custom make Religion that which I so much desire it may be to you, and may be accounted by you, a delightful thing, the most delightful in the World. Religion I have declared before to be a thing which has all the Refinement and Delicacy of Pleasure; and then why should we lose so much Pleasure all the time we are not engaged in the
Interests of Religion? Youth is the time, in which we think we have a Claim to Pleasu e; and then, if it covet all other Pleasure, why not the truest and highest Joy, and why not Religion, which alone can give this, which alone can secure the other? We can no more be happy too soon then too much; and all the Wit and all the Power of Man cannot order an happy Life without ordering the Life to be first Religious. This Truth is as great as evident; O that all those would consider it, to whom the considering of it would be useful, that is, all Mankind. And seeing it is the Desire of every Man to be happy, there should be this o∣ther Desire of the Good and the Wise, that every Man would consi∣der and every Man would do what is necessary to make him, as he desires to be, very happy. Be pleased to remember that high degree in the World does not make Vertue a lower or a needless thing;
and that Riches make Religion still more needful, because Riches have many Dangers, against which Reli∣gion only can give Security, and be∣cause when there is such a plenty of other things, it is pity there should be a want of that alone. Riches are coveted too much, Reli∣gion too little; and yet this should be more desired, if not for its own sake, at least for the sake of Riches, which, if they are never so much desired, never so much possest, are yet no Blessing without Religion. You may remember also that Noble Blood, a Body Highborn does not make us so great as that Nobler sort of Mind, which shews its heavenly Birth in heavenly Actions. You may not forget that no Beauty does so charm, no Dress so adorn, as Vertue always does, no Conversa∣tion is so truly delightful, as a devout Communion in Gods worship, no Behaviour and Accomplishment has so lovely a Grace, as that of Reve∣rence
in the Worship of him who cannot have too much: Happy we, if from the best of us he could have enough; but we must be contented, as God is satisfied, with our being Servants, though unprofitable. Noble Birth, and Beauty, the Arts of Con∣versation and Behaviour, and all the Glories of Dress, which are things very much admired, will deserve much more to be so, when joined to Religion, and when they have the great Advantages which Religion gives them: Indeed this gives the greatest, because it is greater, it is better then all things. All the things you can desire (or others can desire, can Love in you) are not to be compa∣red unto it, the gain thereof is better than fine Gold, it is more precious than Rubies, and its ways are ways of plea∣santness. So says Solomon, and the same Author says, a Gracious Wo∣man retaineth Honour. He had high Birth himself, and so much of it, that the Haughty Aethiopian
Emperors; amongst all their Bulky and noisie Titles, are proud of no∣thing more then that they have (as they pretend) Royal Blood flowing from him. Solomon had a King his Father, and his Father the chief Head of a Family of Kings, the first and last settled Royal Family in Isra∣el; Solomon was a King himself, and as he had Riches and Greatness, to make him awfull, so he had Beauty and Wisdom, and all the Charms of Wit and Conversation and Lan∣guage to make him lovely to Man∣kind: Grace was poured into his Lips, and he was fairer then the Children of Men, he dwelt in Ivory Palaces, and his Garments were perfumed with Myrrhe and Aloes and Cassia, and Kings-Daughters were among his Ho∣nourable Women. In the same Psalm his Queen too is described, and in vain had she been brought unto the King in Raiment of Needlework, and in vain she had stood at his right hand in Gold of Ophir, and her cloathing of wrought
Gold, if she the Daughter as well as Wife of a King had not been all glo∣rious within as well as she was with∣out in all her Aegyptian Glory; the King would never have so much de∣sired her Beauty, if she had not heark∣ned and considered, enclined her Ear and Worshipt. A Writer of your Sex brings in the Shepherd professing all the Rap∣ture of Esteem, and something more the Passion to the Sheperdels, not for those Endowments, which are commonly treated with all the softer Language and respectful Names, but for other and greater things. Yet not for these do I Alinda Love, Hear then what 'tis that does my Passion move: That thou still earliest at the Temple art And still the last that does from thence depart, Pan's Altar is by thee the ofinest prest, Thine's still the fairest Offering and the best; And all thy other Action seem to be The true Result of unfeign d Piety. These Perfections shined through all the shade of that Meaness which Poetry had drest her in, and her own Humility was ready to put on; and
they discover'd to every admiring Eye the Noble Lady (for so she was) under the borrowed Disguise of a Shepher∣dess. I have spoken so much more upon Noble Birth, because as that is a ve∣ry great Blessing in it self, so it has been to some a very great Evil, to those who have so valued them∣selves, or have been taught by o∣thers, attending them, so to value themseves upon it, as to imagine they wanted nothing else, and were above the being good, above that very thing which would make them still more Noble, and would give them an higher Rank then Birth had given them, would place them above all things besides it self. I have all the high regard to Noble Birth, especi∣ally to that which your Ladyship de∣rives from a Family I have so peculiar an Honour for: I would only advise all Persons who are born in Great∣ness not to have too high a Re∣gard for it in one Sence, and scarce high enough in another. The gene∣ral
Precept of the Philosopher seems to be particular to them in its de∣sign, that men should reverence them∣selves: Surely they should teach o∣thers to pay Honour to them by do∣ing Honour to themselves, they should have a Reverence for the Me∣mories and the Venerable Ghosts of their Ancestors, in not embezzling the Honour as well as the Estate which they bequeathed, and in act∣ing so that their Ashes may not be disturbed, nor they dead once more in those whom they left behind to represent them. Vertue did first give Honour and Title; and that is still necessary to preserve it. Honour acquired by Virtue is greater than that of Inheritance, and when the Honour which was first the Reward of Vertue is carried down to others as the Gift of Inheritance, these in∣deed are Noble once, the first Day of their Birth: But, if they continue and enlarge those vertuous Actions
of their Ancestors, they make them∣selves Noble anew, every Day of their Life, confirm and enlarge their original Right to the Honour they received from others, and then begin to make it their own. Jehu could not chuse but pay a regard to Birth, in the midst of all his Holy Rage, and the Wickedness of Jezebel, in whom there was but one thing to give her any claim to a regard, and for the sake of that one thing she had it, she was to suffer less Dishonour in her Death, because she had so much honour in her Birth, Go, bury her, for she is a Kings Daughter. The Son of God, who vouchsafed to be born, as Man, in all the Forms of Mean∣ness, chose a Noble mans Daughter for the Subject of a Miracle to raise her when dead, and so a Noblemans Son, to rescue him from Death. I have not designed one word to lessen Birth, but all to make it greater, by Vertue added to it, and adorning it.
With the same design I have spo∣ken of Riches and Pleasures, and all the desirable Advantages of the World, and which are only of this World: I would not have them excluded, I would have those who possess them not to love them better than themselves, and not to exclude Religion, and then Happiness too, which never goes in to any Place, but where Religion goes in before it. The Things of the World have too much wrought on many Aged, and not Imprudent Persons: Much more then is there need of Caution to one of your Age, and your Quali∣ty, when too many of the same greater Figure have abused their worldly Advantages, being first a∣bused themselves by the ill Counsels of those who have been too near them. Indeed your Ladyship gives me no occasion to suspect that you had ever any to Misguide you, or that you are to be Misguided, when I by a delightful Experience have
viewed so much Virtue, as should either make me think you had never been attacked by ill Counsels, or you had always Virtue, Strong and Wise, to conquer them. There are Persons in the World, (and may you be always one of those) upon whom Ill Advice is no less ineffectual then Good is very often on others, ill things cannot stand before them, and, as no venemous Beast can live in some Climates, they dye as soon as they come near them, or within the fatal Air of this so mighty Innocence. There is a Serpent to every Daughter of Eve, as well as there was to Eve her self, and so to every Son of Adam: But however the Serpent be more subtle then any Beast of the Field, there are those who will be innocent, be he never so Crafty, and they will not eat of the Fruit, and without eating of it their Eyes are opened, and they know Good and Evil, and so as to pursue, and to avoid. Every good Person
has something of an Exorcist, in him the Apostolical Power of casting out Devils is hot lost, to him it is con∣tinued, the evil Spirit cannot bear his Presence, as he could not bear that of Christ, when he sell down before him, and cried out, I be∣seech thee torment me not. Besides the many Temptations from others, there is a Tempter within our selves, there is a Principle of Vanity in the Nature of Man, in this too earthly Nature, which carries us on to these Vain Earthly Things with a fierce Desire, as fierce alas, as if they were not Vain: From this Principle, which seems to be almost as old as our Nature, rise all the Sins of our following Life, these are only so ma∣ny irregular ways into which our Inclinations divide themselves for the Pursuit of earthly Things. From this Principle of Corruption in our Souls, rise all our Sins, as from ano∣ther of natural Corruption in our Bodies do rise the several Diseases of
them. The best of us therefore may have need to be upon our Guard a∣gainst the Things of the World, and good Reason there is to keep low, and to correct betimes that prevailing Cause of Corruption by Advice, and by Endeavour. In order to your successful Pro∣gress in this Course of Religion, you will, (I am sure) be easily, and soon Exhorted to have (shall I say?) Or to continue a suitable and devout Re∣gard to that Day of the Week, which is particularly designed for Religious Offices. The Day, which is set apart, and for something, and that can be no other than holy Duty; the Day, which we call the Lord's Day in a prophane Jest, if we do not keep it to the Lord, if our use of it be Prophane, that is, not Religious. He who regardeth a Day, regardeth it unto the Lord. Man is Born to La∣bour, (as Job has told us) he is design∣ed by God to be always in Action, and that Action as much as may be
worthy of himself, and useful to himself, or others: They who have the lowest Respect for this Day, pre∣tend not then to do the Business of their particular Calling; and there∣fore should they not do that of their general Calling, as they are Christi∣ans? This one Day was not set a∣part, only to be a Blank, a void Space in our Time, and to have no∣thing written upon it: If we could be contented to lose one Day, as to our own Interest, in every Week of so short a Life, yet God is not wil∣ling to allow the loss of one, as to his Service, we complain, says a Learned Heathen, that Life is short, and Time is swift, and yet like Men, very Un∣thrifty, and very Poor, we mispend our too little time, as if we had too much. Whatever time we mispend, we should take care, like Men luxu∣rious in their Expences, and yet still just in ther Principles, to mispend none but our own Indeed,
if we should take this Care, we should mispend no Time, because none is ours, much less that which God has made His more than any o∣ther, His in a peculiar manner: Not only God, but Man; all the Authori∣ty of Man, that of the Church, and that of the State has made it God's own Time: And if any Sacred Thing, which one Man gave to God, another cannot take away but with the blackest Guilt, much less that which God has given to him∣self, and Man gave to God. Our u∣sing well this part of our Time will prevent our abusing every other part, because it will advance us to such a State of Mind, it will lead us into such Rules of Life, that we shall learn to be always careful, and resolve to be always good. Surely we shall be so, if we remember an A∣postles Saying, that we are not our own; and then not our Time; be∣cause if we our selves are not our own, then not any thing belonging
to us, which can be held no other∣wise than our Being is, and must pass over with our selves to the great So∣vereign Lord. You are ready, (I know) to keep this Day with all the solemn Care, and you are to perform the Duties of it with all the solemn Reverence. The fix'd and ordinary Duties of it are Praying, and Hearing, Meditati∣on, and Reading, and Acts of Chari∣ty; and moreover there is an extra∣ordinary Duty, the receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, see∣ing your Years now meet, and come up to your devout Inclinations, and Time now almost overtakes your Pi∣ety and Prudence, which (as swift as Time is) have been so much before it. Since this is so great which now we see, how great must that be, which we may expect; the good Things we view at a distance, though so far off, yet appear not little, they already entertain our Eyes with a pleasing Prospect, and fill our Minds
with amusing Thought and the brightest Image, when we look forward to the Seasons of full and ripe Perfection, of which we have the first Fruits now already. That the Sacrament of Perfection may give you a large share thereof, and hasten it upon you, and so gratify your eager Zeal and our swelling Expecta∣tion, you will not fail to receive the Sacrament as often as you have Op∣portunity to receive it. No mean believe me, between not receiving, and refusing; if you do not receive it, you refuse it; and be pleased to consider how heinous the Crime must be to refuse, when God does offer, not to come, when God in∣vites. Every time the Sacrament is to be administred, it is offered to all the Persons of the Place, as much to each of them, as if it were offered in express words, and by name to every single Person only and not to the rest, for him only provided. And then you may begin to think how conde∣scending
a thing it is for a great Man, for one much greater than our selves to order a particular entertainment for us, and how indecent a thing to deny our Presence. That you may hereafter receive this Sacrament with advantage, and now perform with advantage the o∣ther Duties of Worship, which al∣ready you are not more capable of then zealous for, I would propose few things more and sooner than a Constancy to the Church of England, in which the Performance of all those Duties is so strictly required, and the manner of performing them so well prescribed. A Church it is, which cannot fail to be agreeable to you, because it so well instructs you in Religion, in no part whereof you would be ignorant, it is so ready to promote your Knowledge in every part, which you are so eager to im∣prove: A Church, which the more you understand, is still the better sa∣tisfied, and her Satisfaction is still
made greater by yours, instead of envying you your own Knowledge, or denying you a share in that of o∣thers by Instruction. I would re∣commend a Constancy to the Com∣munion of the Church with full Judgment of your Mind, and sincere Good-will of your Soul, that Soul, which is to have so much Advantage from that Communion. When I give this Advice, I offer it with all the Sincerity which becomes the Subject of Advice, Religion, and which becomes a Man who has all the Zeal for the well-being of the Person to whom he offers it, for this well-being in every thing, especially in Religion. I would be sure to be thus sincere, when I propose this (I am sure) wholsome Counsel, and therefore in that very Instant I for the time endeavour to forget my own being a Member of this Church, I separate in my Thoughts my being so from my Advice to you to be so forever. I do not exhort you to this
Communion, because I live within it, but because it is the best for your Eternal Welfare, and for my own. And so I am not partial to my self in my inviting you to my own Church, as some are fond of every thing they meet with at their own House. But I should be indeed very partial, if I should reserve good things to my self, if I should not exhort you to a Communion with that Church, which is, and which upon all my Experience and all my Consideration I have found to be the best, and which I therefore chose at first, there∣fore now continue in. As Christ's Disciples said upon a like occasion, Whither shall we go? So may I say, if we are not to continue in this Church, to what other shall we go? What necessary thing for the Souls of Men can any other give, which we have not here? Surely if Men will be hearty in any Religion, they will not fail of embracing ours, when they have heartily enquired
what it is, and they truly know, how much it deserves to be embra∣ced. Therefore perhaps so many Atheists oppose our Church with a particular Fury, and so many, when they have revolted from it, have soon become Atheists afterwards, their denying all Religion has been the next Step to the denying one, of which a less thing can scarce be said, then that is as good as any. Others going from it have indeed not known whither to go, they have roved a∣bout in a Circle of Error, have gon backward and forward in an endless Maze of Religions, and whereas once there was a Promise to move the Earth, if there were but found a Place to stand on, the Religious world turns round with them, because they have not such a place. When Cain went out from the Presence of the Lord, he became a Fugitive and a Vagabond in the Earth, and his Punishment in this Sense too was greater than he could bear: The Spirits of ill Men
some imagin to have their wandring in the air for a part of Punishment, the worst of Spirits and the Prince of the Air gave this Account of him∣self, that he went to and fro in the Earth, and walkt up and down in it. So the departing from our Church has been punisht in many with their being never fixt, who would not be fixt where they might, where they should have been very steady. Never indeed shall they find the Truth, who are alway seeking, and will never believe, they have found it, as they cannot be long in a right way, who will change their way every Minute and every step. The pursuing as well as the renouncing every Religion is an ill extream; the seeking thus for ever is one ill ex∣tream as well as the not seeking any is another. There can be no reason at any time to forsake our Church; no reason to be always forsaking one, and running into another.
I insist so much more on this Plea for our Communion, not only be∣cause the Subject is very pleasing to my self, but also very advantagious it is to you. Indeed to your thoughts of this best Church I would give the best Impressions, that you might be above the Danger of receiving any of the worse kind hereafter, that you might be fixt before at this your Age, which is so capable of Good, and so liable to Ill, and besides the Tender∣ness of your Age there is the Softness of your Sex to make you the more disposed for the taking of any sort of Stamp or Impression. You will for∣give this my troublesome, however zealous, Industry to see you settled in true Principles, and in strong con∣viction of that Truth, because In∣constancy (as you read before) in Religion is a thing so Dangerous, and Constancy in a false one is a thing so fatal. Moreover Attempts have been ve∣ry often made upon those of just
Sex for the betraying of them into a false Religion, and too often those at∣tempts have bin successful. My desires are so much more importunate for your continuing in a Religion (which has so much reason for it) in a good Religion upon very good Reason, because they who at first took Reli∣gion by that handle, and afterwards held it there are said in Scripture to be Noble; the doing so was a mark of a Generous Spirit, and such a Spi∣rit is very suitable to such a Quality as yours, and no less suitable to Re∣ligion. Many are the Arguments I could urge to prove the Necessity and the Advantage of your being a Daughter of the Church, as well as of your No∣ble Parents. But all such Arguments would as much be lost upon you, who have little need to be convin∣ced, as they are too often upon o∣thers in a worse Sence, who resolve not to be so. I shall offer no more
Arguments, then two, and those, as very peculiar to your Quality and more exalted State: one I borrow from him who had no such Zeal for the Church as should make him par∣tial to it, but approaching Death, which makes so many wise, and ma∣ny sincere, taught him to confess, that the People of England being natu∣rally inclined to Freedom, and bred in Riches and Plenty can hardly be indu∣ced to embrace any Religious Disci∣pline which may abridg their Liberty, and Pleasures: That is, any other Discipline then this of the Church, which at the same Time it allows us Liberty and Riches and Pleasures, does prefcribe our not abusing them to our own greatest Disadvantage, and moreover our using them to the Advantage of others, and of Religi∣on. I now may add my other Ar∣gument, the Order and Decency of our Worship, which makes it very natural to Persons of your Nobler
Rank, who are distinguished from others by order (that of High and Low in the different Figures of the World) and by Decency, their having so much of it in their appea∣rance: They have all the Forms of Address paid to them, wherever they vouchsafe to appear, and therefore something is to be paid by them to the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. So K. David argued, and that gene∣rous Devotion, which was so much his Vertue and his Glory, made him, apt to argue, See now I dwell in a house of Cedar, and the Ark of God dwelleth within Curtains. And so God himself did argue, offer it now unto thy Prince, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person? From this my naming of order in Worship I will take occasion to re∣commend it in all other things: And so much rather, because if there be a Rule for all other things, much more will there be one for
Religion, and when all things are done in order, they will be done with ease, and be finish't each of them in very good time, and so there will not be a want of time, and a want of Thought free and dis∣engaged, for Prayer and other Works of Religion. To do things in order, even those of our Busie and common Life, is so far a part of Religion, as we thus imitate God, who is not the Author of Confusion, who made, and who preserves all things still, in number weight and measure, who has fixt the times for Night and Day, for Summer and Winter, and for every thing, who has taught those Creatures Order which know little else: He hath appointed the Men for Seasons, and the S knoweth his going down, the Stork in the Heaven knoweth her appointed Time, and the Turtle and the Crae, and the Swallow observe the time of  That Wisdom of Solution, the Fame whereof was in all Nations rou
bout, not only shewed it self in Reigning so as that Judah and Is∣rael dwelt safely, every Man under his Vine, and under his Fig-tree; not only in speaking Three Thou∣sand Proverbs, and in speaking of Trees, and Beasts, and Fowl; his Wisdom also appeared in the Order of his private Business, that of his Family, and the Queen of Sheba ad∣mired it in this Order, as well as in greater Things. His Wisdom taught him to prescribe, as always to himself, so to others fix'd Times for all things, and then to declare that, To every thing there is a Sea∣son, and a Time to every purpose under Heaven. But here some may be ready to say, that when each Affair is performed in all this Method, and at allotted Times, the Man becomes a Slave (and no worse Slave then he who is his own) the Rule is a Chain, and Life is a Toil, as he who observes the strict Rules of Physick is very far from being happy, or being easie. I
intend not the observing of Order with this Anxious Care, and as if the thing must be done in this very man∣ner, and not otherwise, whatever happens, but only that it be for the most part observed, and when it may be so with little trouble, and with the common Foresight of every prudent Person; and then there will be something of Order, even in the not observing of it. Otherwise Or∣der would be a thing too Nice for the State of Man, as some things are too fine to be used, or to last. Our present State will not be so regular as a good Man would have it, nor so Uniform; and all of a piece, and colour, as a wise Man would make it, our whole Condition, when on Earth, is uneven, like the Earth it self, which is divided into Hills and Plains, and rough Way as well as smooth. No Rule of Acting can pretend to a greater Name than that of a Law, nor to greater Authority;
and seeing we live not under Persian Emperors, every Law upon a new Over-ruling Occasion may be Re∣pealed, or be Suspended. Order is not to be Superstition and Caprice, like that of the Orator, who made use of his angry Eloquence in a Law-Suit, Commenced against the inno∣cent Roman that ruffled and discom∣posed his Gown. We are not to be Martyrs for our Rule, as the Man in the Greecian Common-wealth was to die for the new Law which he proposed; and we are not to ob∣serve the Rules of our appointed Or∣der, as a Pedant those of his Gram∣mar, or as a Monk professes to observe those of his Society. Living in me∣thod, without the Severity of living thus, will be so far from being a Toyl, that it will make every thing else to cease from being so; there will be Ease in every Business, and the great∣est in the Mind; when  is no Hurry without, there will be none within. Not only Use will
make Order so familiar, but it will make it self so pleasant, that we shall not be afraid of it, we shall choose and covet it, as we choose the Tra∣velling in an open Road, and find it much more easie, and we covet the Sayling by a Compass, and find it much more safe. Indeed a Physi∣tian of elder Times prescribed this Rule of Health, that none should be ob∣served: But if none, then not his own, and then not his against every Rule. That the Order, which I know to be so useful in all our Life, and to be so needful in the best part of Life, in Religion, you may be sure to observe in this better part; when you enter upon any Action, consider, first, whether the thing you would do be Lawful, whe∣ther God has not forbidden it, and whether the best, and the wisest Men would not forbid it, and ad∣vise against it. Very great Reason there is to consider thus, because you will otherwise have no Blessing
from that God, from whom, I hope, you will have an overflowing Plenty of it; no Blessing so as to finish the Action you begin, or no Blessing af∣terwards, so as to have any good Ef∣fect rising from it: And surely all that Prudence, which your present Behaviour gives us a Promise of, will not give you leave to think of doing any one thing in vain, much less that which should be worse than Vain, should be hurtful. Be plea∣sed to consider first, whether the Thing have any sinful part, and not first, what Pleasure it may have, and what Profit; because our greatest Profit is in Religion, and in Religion should be our greatest Pleasure; and because Religion should be the go∣verning Principle of all our Actions, and should be always at the Helm to guide them, and is always the most faithful Oracle to be consulted upon the Issues of them. So a great Man says, a Prince, as Pious as Great, I have set the Lord always before me,
therefore I shall not be moved, Psalms 16. I shall neither do, nor suffer Ill, I shall be sure in my Actions, and safe in my whole Condition. The not considering in our first Steps of Action, whether it be such as we should go any farther in it, whether it be good or not, is an ill Thing it self, much worse than at first sight it seems to be, it leads us into Pro∣faneness, and a Contempt of Reli∣gion; and therefore in Scripture it is a Mark hereof: Indeed so much rather it is a Mark of Profaneness; because this very thing is a first Principle of Religion, that our Acti∣ons should begin from Him, from whom all Creatures had their be∣ginning, and because, if Religion does not come in at first, it comes in seldom afterwards; either that withdraws upon the contempt, or we make the first contempt greater still, and we harden'd Men too soon learn to forget what before too bold∣ly we had despised. The Action be∣gins
in disorder, which gives the first place to Profit or Pleasure, and it cannot but end as it began. Remember always your Confir∣mation, that is, this your Dedica∣tion of your self to God (as the Jews had an yearly Remembrance of the Dedication of the Temple) your taking the Vow upon your self which in your Baptism you made by others; and that you always may remember it, be pleased to read the Form of Confirmation once every Quarter of the Year. This was a Sacred tye, and the first with which you by your own act bound the first and tender part of your Life, and, I know, the Bond was not uneasie or too stiff for the tenderness of it, but, in Solomon's Language, an Ornament of Grace unto your Head, and a Chain about your neck; and to be bound con∣tinually upon your heart. This was one of the most awful, the greatest Acts of Religion, you ever yet per∣form'd,
because it was the sealing of a Covenant between God and your self in most awful manner, the Covenant made in Baptism, but seal∣ed in Confirmation. You then de∣clared what you would do, and you obliged your self to the doing of it in your whole following life, and the Bishop declared what God would do at the same time he prayed to God for it, that he would assist you in, and reward you for the performing your pious part. How great and solemn was the Engagement, when the Bi∣shop askt you with others, Do ye here in the presence of God and of this Congregation renew the solemn Pro∣mise and Vow that was made in your Name at your Baptism, ratifying and confirming the same in your own Per∣sons and acknowledging your selves bound to believe and to do all those things which your Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for you. How great and solemn was the Bishops Prayer, when the Venera∣ble
Man invested with heavenly Power, and with all things to give commanding Authority to his Per∣son, and a Religious Grandeur to the performance, laid his hand up∣on you; as if he would convey a part of that precious spiritual Oynt∣ment, which had been poured on his Head, to yours, like the Oyl running down from Aaron's head, and so spreading farther to the parts below. At the same time the Bishop laid one hand upon your Head, he lift up another to that Heaven from whence his Power was derived, in Prayer for you, Defend, O Lord, this thy Servant with thy hea∣venly Grace, that she may continue thine for ever, and daily encrease in thy Holy Spirit more and more; un∣til she come into thy everlasting King∣dom, Amen. I have indeed a par∣ticular reason for recommending all the nice and serious respects to your Confirmation, not only because of
the useful Greatness of the thing it∣self, but also because of the extraor∣dinary regard I ow it, as well as you, seeing I bore a part therein, had the Honour to attend you in it, and present you to it. My Lord your Father, as he ob∣served me to be always, so upon this occasion save me to be most particu∣larly concerned for your Spiritual Interests, he did me the Honour to think favourably of me, and was willing to believe that this my zeal (for your Confirmation) had a Knowledg with it, and at the same time to wish (I may suppose) that in order to the having such a Zeal, others might have such a Knowledge, and therefore he askt me what Proof I had from Scripture for the practice of Confirmation: My Answer was to this purpose, that 1. however it is Sacrament to some, it is not to us, but indeed it follows one, and being not essential, but very useful in Re∣ligion, like many other useful and
yet not absolutely necessary things, it might not be expresly comman∣ded, and not so expresly found in Scripture, which is a particular and a standing Rule only for things ab∣solutely necessary to Salvation. In other things the Church may know that they advance the great ends of Religion, and then it wants for their use no other Command be∣sides its own. But 2dly. Confirmation has a proof from Scripture, Acts 8. The first Christians of Samaria were ba∣ptized upon the preaching of Philip, v. 12, and after their Baptism the Apostles sent Peter and Johh to pray for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. v. 14.15. then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost, v. 17. that is, were Confir∣med. Your Baptism placed you in the Christian Church; but your being there was declared, and you engaged your self to the abiding there, in
your Confirmation: As an Am∣bassadour may be sometime un∣known in the Kingdom he is sent to, but he is not supposed, or decla∣red to be there, till his publick En∣try, and then he begins publick Action. When you were to be Confirmed, your Age made your beginning of Religious Action very seasonable, and your Confirmation made your going on therein very necessary, has given it all the obli∣ging Circumstances. Go on there∣fore, as you have begun, and do, as you are obliged, and go forth in the strength of the Lord God, and pray for a double Portion of that his Strength, and say; Give me, O my God, a zealous and steady Piety, a most devout and flaming Love of thee, O my Creatour, whom I ought to remember now in the Days of my Youth, and the Days of my Pleasure, and I am also to remember those other Evil Days, which as far they are from me now, yet will
come, and the years will draw nigh, in which I shall say I have no Pleasure. So shall your Confirmation be repeated upon you from God every day of your Life, and, in the Strength he gives, you shall become great in Reli∣gion, and go so far therein, as only those have gone, whose shining Example was a Light in your way, and taught you to go forth betimes, as they did before you, and as too few do after them. Our Virtue and our Age, in the common View of Man∣kind, pass through the same degrees, and their Progress often is the same, as there is not ripe and well grown Fruit without a Bloom before, which pleases so much at present, and pro∣mises so much hereafter. We have often had a surprizing Account of some younger Saints, what good and excellent things they said, what great and excellent things they did. Indeed we have heard won∣derful
Descriptions of the Vertues of the blessed Virgin in the first part of her Age, and so the Life of the Mother almost becomes as much a Miracle as the Birth of the Son: That such particular relations were true we have no proof, and they have no credit; but the foundation of them is not without its truth, that she whose Piety was so eminent af∣terwards, it is most likely, could never have attained those glorious improvements, without beginning sooner than others too often do; she could never have been so highly fa∣voured of God, if God had not been highly and early beloved of her, if she had not been a Virgin as much in her Mind, as otherwise, if her Purity had not been great in the first outgoings of her Life, though her first Conception was not undefiled. Your Confirmation leads you to Prayer, because you are afterwards to beg Grace of God for your being able to answer all those holy ends of
your Confirmation, and because this leads you into Religion, the first Act whereof is Prayer. Seeing Prayer is the first Act of Religion, that your beginning may not be an Error, and seeing it is an immedi∣ate Address to God, that it may be with all the Caution and Reverence of Approach, I would direct you here, and I now propose the use of Three Prayers to you, which have a particular Respect to your own Condition, and may be added one of them still to your other Prayers, at your three daily Times of Pray∣ing. A Thanksgiving for Great Birth, and a great share of Earthly Goods. O Merciful Father, and the God of all the Families of Israel, thou didst make me to hope when I was yet upon the Breasts, I was cast upon thee from my Birth, and
from my first Hours thou wast my God. Thy Blessings in that my Birth were some of them common to me with others, and I praise thee for them; But some thou gavest me, O my gracious God, more pe∣culiar to my self, and for these too I praise thee. For my noble Birth, and for all the following Advanta∣ges of it, those of Fortune, and those of Education, for all I praise thee, and make me to praise thee in all those Advantages, by directing and improving them all to thy Glo∣ry, and not admiring my own therein. Thou hast called me to Glory and Virtue, and to no Virtue more than to Humility: May I be humble always before thee, and al∣ways consider, that all Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof is as the Flower of the Field, the Grass withereth the Flower fadeth, and the Fashion of this World, as Gaudy and Beautiful as it is, passeth away. So, when I thus consider, and when
I am thus humble, may I have a Name better than that of Sons and Daughters, an everlasting Name which shall not be put out, that in Heaven it self, through him who had his Birth from thee, and was thy first-born Son, through Christ my Saviour. Amen. A Prayer for a lively Sense of Religion, and a sincere Love thereof. LET thy Tabernacles be amiable to me, O Lord of Hosts, let my Soul long, and even faint for the Courts of the Lord, and my Heart and my Flesh rejoyce in God. Make my Soul to thirst for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God? Make thou the Mighty to give unto the Lord, to give unto the Lord Glory and Strength, to give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name, to Wor∣ship
the Lord in the Beauty of Holi∣ness. As the Heart panteth after the Water-brooks, so let my Soul pant after thee, O God. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and is there any thing upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee? O let thy Desire be also to the Work of thine own Hands, to Crown me with Mercy and loving Kindness, in this, and in another Life; through Christ our Lord. Amen. A Prayer for other Graces and Virtues, and Religious Accomplishments. I Acknowledge, O Lord, that e∣very good Gift, and every per∣fect Gift is from above; and seeing thou art so ready to give it, I rejoyce that it is from thee; and because it is all from above, I therefore here below lift up mine Eyes unto the Hills, from whence cometh my Help. Bless me with all those Virtues,
which are suitable to my Sex, and and my Condition, and my Age, and which are to make my Passage through this World easie, and that into another safe. With the many Goods of this World, by thy Grace give me a wise Contempt of it, and the lowest Opinion of all Earthly Things, as thou hast given me by thy Bounty, a very high Portion of them: Grant me Prudence, and inno∣cence, and Success in all my Actions concerning them, and yet Meek∣ness and Patience hereafter in all the Evils which thou may'st design for my Tryal, and which may disturb my Enjoyment. Give me Vigour of Understanding, and all the goodly Endowments of it, instruct and im∣prove my Soul in a daily Increase of all useful Knowledge: Enlighten it with the Knowledge of thy self, the Father of Lights, and the only true God, the Knowledge of whom is eternal Lise; that I may thus go from Strength to Strength, till I ap∣pear
before the God of Gods Zion, and then appear in the Glory and the Purity of Souls which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, and are the first Fruits to God, and to the Lamb, and are without spot before the Throne of God: O grant me a place before thy Throne, for the sake of him thy Lamb, and my Redeemer Jesus Christ. Amen. Let your Life be divided, the Re∣ligious part of Life, betwixt Prayer and Practice, and let no Variety di∣vert you more than the daily Re∣turns of Duty in passing from the one to the other: Neither is to exclude, but each is still to bring in the other; because by Prayer you gain a Power for holy Actions, and that Power is executed by Practice, and any such Power is like a Law, without Execution very Fruitless. A Virtuous Woman, with the Addi∣tion of Greatness, is a publick Good, and her Influence is boundless, and
so as to make Virtue a publick and common Good in the best Sense, by making others like her self: In your being one of the Virtuous Number, how much Honour shall you add to your Honourable Fami∣ly? How much Happiness to that other Family, into which hereafter Marriage shall Transplant you? To both Families, and to your self a greater Happiness I cannot wish, than the Enlargment of those Vir∣tues which shine forth already, nor to my self a nobler Satisfaction, than that Success of all this my Advice, which is not doubted by him who gives it. How great a Blessing is such a Woman I spoke of? Her Price is far above Rubies, above those she is adorned with. How great Things are said of her by a mighty King, and a Wise one, by Lemuel, who could not choose but be a skilful Judge of Virtue, when he had so much Experience in Vice; as skilful a Judge in the Perfections of the
Sex, as when two contended for the Child, he shewed himself in the Rights thereof. That Description, Prov. 1. is a part of the Prophecy his Mother taught him, vers. 1. whose particular Conversation with her own Sex, must needs make her learned in the Accomplishments of it? The Woman there described is a Person of Honour and Wealth, and so great enough to have her Picture drawn by a King, and the Colours to be given him by the Mother of a King: Honour her Cloathing first, and then Silk and Purple, her Covering of Tapestry, and all her Houshold Cloath∣ed with Scarlet, her works praise her in the Gates, and her Husband is known in the Gates, (a Place of Judg∣ment, and Authority, and Greatness) when he sitteth among the Elders (or Governours) of the Land, 22, 23.31, 25. Nor is her Greatness made therefore doubtful, because her In∣dustry so active in all Kinds of Work is a part of her Character and her
for the greatest Persons of that Age chose the same Industry for their Ex∣ercise. That when many Daughters have done Virtuously, you may, if not excel them all, as Verse 29, yet imi∣tate the Virtues they excel in; your Practice is to be a Copy from that charming Picture in one part more than all, and that one Work in which her Hands were exercised I would recommend to you more than all the rest, in which she used them, she stretcheth forth her Hand to the Poor, yea, she reacheth forth her Hands to the Needy, v. 20. And here I would make it one part of my Counsels, that amongst other Books of Scripture, you would read not only the last Chapter of this Book, but would begin at the first, and so go on and read all the Book, which has not only, as other Proverbs, shortness and Wit in the Language, but great Wisdom, and profound Thought in the Sense, and such as would direct the several Mo∣tions
of your Life in the use. How∣ever it was Written by a King, who as such, had greater Advantage from the high Throne he sat on to view all Affairs, and to advise upon them, yet was it not Written to Kings a∣lone, but to all their Subjects, and to all Mankind. When there has been so much Care and Expence to teach you every thing of common Behavi∣our, you should much more learn those higher Arts of prudent Con∣duct, and those which will give you true Accomplishment, will make you agreeable, not only to others, in your outward Deportment, but to your self, in your inward satisfaction. As you should observe a regular Me∣thod in all things you are to do, so should you at all times have some∣thing to be done. A Thought it is most worthy of a great Person to think her self made for Action, be∣cause as Happiness, the highest State to which Mankind can be advanced, is in Action, so Greatness is more in
Action then in Condition: The latter kind of Greatness does follow the other, and is only an unfinish'd Piece without it. When I speak of Action, I intend not your being al∣ways exercised in things high and serious, but only your being always in some Exercise, and so when the thing it self may not be of such a so∣lemn Importance, yet it may have this Praise at least, that it is very In∣nocent: Then your being employ∣ed therein will preserve you also In∣nocent, and if sometimes little good be done to others, or your self, yet your doing great Evil may be pre∣vented. I intend not any sort of Ex∣ercise which should have Toyl to Bo∣dy or Mind, but only that which should be advantageous to both without oppressing either. Amongst the many sorts of Exercise, Reading deserves a place, indeed it should have the chief, because you will then do right to the principal part, to your Understanding, in
improving that which I know is so capable of Improvement; and be∣cause your Reading will furnish you with so many useful Notions to make you happy in your Life, Wise in your Deportment, and both Wise and Happy in Religion. Some good Thought of the Book will have a se∣cond Printing within your Mind: Be your Reading never so unconcer∣ned and easie, it will be sure to leave some Impression, as often our Mo∣tion, be it never so nimble and light, will yet leave a Mark behind it. And thus like her whom our Prince of Poets describes (and as he seems so be in love with her Perfections, so every one would be with his Description of them) you will have In your Mind the wisest Books, As in your Face the fairest looks. A modern Writer, in his Remarks up∣on a neighbouring Nation, observes the Conduct of its great Ladies to be such, that he never heard of any one there who had been accused of Vice;
he supposes this steady Virtue to have no other Cause, than that they are always busie, and so they are not at leisure for Thinking, and less for do∣ing Ill, and then too they give no oc∣casion to others to think Ill, not of them. A Nobleman of this King∣dom, and lately a Minister of State, advised his Daughter to Read, or to hear Reading two or three Hours e∣very Day: And surely, if he always gave as good Advice to his Prince, for the Management of Publick Af∣fairs, as here he did to his Daughter, for the Advancement of her Virtue, and private Wisdom, he was one of the best Statesmen in the World. I have seen a Collection of Prayers, and Spiritual Rules, Written by a very great Person of your Sex, and of our Nation, when very young, from the Books she Read, not only to make the Writing an Exercise, and Action of the better sort, but that she might fix what she Read with the greater Force upon her
Mind, and that the best part of what she had found in other Books, she might always find again in her own, it might be always ready for her View, and for her Use. And here I cannot choose but wish that the young Nobility of the other Sex would make Reading much more their Practice; they would find it very useful to them, and themselves more useful to their Country. At the same time I beg leave to offer an humble Proposal, and well design∣ed Request to their Parents, that they would make the Education of their Sons one great part of their Care, and their Improvement in Learning one great part of their Education. I know the Failure in the present Me∣thod of Education, I have often de∣clared against it, and often bewail it. Never did any Nation understand Greatness more than the Romans, and in that Glorious Age when Rome had the largest share of it, her Emperors and Noblemen esteemed themselves
greater as they were more learned. They never thought there was any Attainder in Knowledg, nor did that, which was to exalt their Soul, debase their Blood. So high was their Ambition to excel in Letters as well as in War and Policy, that one of their Emperors resented his Boldness as a Crime of High trea∣son, who pretended to a more refi∣ned Skill in one sort of Learning, which was the darling Inclination the Mistress of his Prince, and in which he would not admit a Rival as well as not a Partner in his Empire. It has been often said, that those of our Sex have no Advantage above the other, in respect of Learning, but what Education gives them: I hope they will not in flaming Com∣plaisance renounce one advantage that of Learning, by denying them∣selves another, this of Education, nor think it a mark of good Breeding to neglect a chief part thereof. Let there be no occasion for the other Sex to upbraid our own, none for
ours to be conquered by them as much in understanding as in Love: And at the Weapon which we have called our own, that of Knowledg. If we are conquered, let us like van∣quisht Forces rally again, and re∣trieve our Honour, as Armies have sometime done, when the Women have met them in their Flight, up∣braiding and insulting over them more than their Enemies, and yet at the same time less angry with them, for not acting like Men; then with themselves for not being so. Let the doing good to others, and in them to your self as to the welfare of your Soul be the chief end of your Life, as you will find it one of the chief Delights thereof. In every Action consider how far in the course thereof you may do good to others, and be sure to follow it on that side of it, in which it leads you to the doing good, and as more is to be done, so much more pursue it. Every one is Born for the doing
this, much more those of such a Birth as yours: They are born and placed on higher ground above others, that they may have a free and boundless prospect of the wants of others, and that all the kind effects may in a gentle stream flow down to those be∣neath them, as the Springs first rise in the highest places to refresh the Country all around, and the hum∣ble Vallies are enriched by what flows down from the Hills above them. The Great and the Noble are not more distinguished from the common Orders of Mankind by their Condition, then by this privilege of it, the imparting all the generous advantages to others, and as their condition is better than that of o∣thers, so they are to make the con∣dition of others too better than they found it. They are distinguish'd by the greatness of their Fortune, as they are able, & by the greatness of their Mind, as they are ready for all useful Offices. They are like the Stars which have
their lofty and glittering place in the World, not to be admired by the other lowly Creatures, not to dazle all things under them with their brighter Glory, but to guide and cherish them with their Light and Influence. The esteem which they receive from Men, they are to give to God, they are tō convey it farther still, and carry it up to Him who is indeed the Fountain of Honour, who is higher than the highest, to Him whose Stewards they are as well in the Honour they receive as in the Riches they possess. When the late Earl of Rochester began to have very solemn apprehensions of ano∣ther State, and very zealous thoughts of a Soul and of Spiritual things in this, when with all the flaming Piety of a Saint, and all the careful Tender∣ness of a Father he began to be con∣cerned for himself, and for those next to himself, his Children, he wisht that his Son might become an honest and religious Man, and so what he
never could be otherwise, a Blessing and Support to his Family, that he might never be a wit, that is, one of those wretched Creatures, who value themselves upon their despising God and Religion, his Being and his Providence: This Nobleman complained, that his Children were brought into a vi∣tious world, and declared, that no Fortunes or Honours were equal to their possessing the Love and Favour of God. If there could be need to urge your willing Vertue with new Engage∣ments, I should tell you that you may think your self still more enga∣ged to adorn your Birth, and each prerogative of it with good Actions, to enlarge your Interest, which is so great already, in the World by doing them, because your Sex has no other way to raise its Interest, no other passage to Esteem and Power: Our Sex has many advantageous ways, as many as there are inge∣nuous Professions, yours does seem to be so much designed for Vertue,
that it almost seems to be your Profes∣sion, and you to have no other, that you might be at free leisure for it, and be devoted to it. There should be the same standard of Nobility in the thoughts of those who have it, which there was in China for many hundred years, where as the Emperour himself (who was cal∣led the Son of Heaven) was very learn∣ed and good, so the Nobility of those un∣der him and deriving from him was not from Birth, but from a likeness to him in great advancements of Knowledge and Vertue. It is a Notion which often re∣turns upon me, that when I look round the World, amongst the many enter∣taining Objects I meet with there I find none that comes near my eye with so much delight as a Person very Great and very Good. Vertue and Beauty are often said to make a Masterpiece in the mixture: But Vertue and Greatness, when joyned together, make up some∣thing yet more perfect; Vertue, when placed so high, is not only seen better, it is seen more Glorious. We now be∣hold, with too much evidence, Christian Piety in a great Decay, which yet, while it is so great in some, is lamented by o∣thers; If Religion must not live, there
are Surviving Friends to attend the Fu∣neral, and to bewail the Death: But then how importunate are to be their Prayers, how Serious are to be their en∣deavours, that Christian Religion now in its lower state of decay and corrup∣tion may have at least one advantage, which it had not in its first sate of purity and perfection, that many Mighty and many Noble may be called, and they not onely for their own sake, but for the sake of others, that by the prevailing force of their Example and their Power many others may be called as well as they. There is an argument for Religion not onely from your Quality, but from your Sex. The Religious engagements are so much stronger upon your Sex, because that tenderness of mind, which is so na∣tural to it, is no less natural to the Par∣ticular Spirit of Devotion, and to the general Spirit of Christ's Religion, and because while Men are engaged in the business and noise of the World, and many in the most noisie part thereof, in War, you may enjoy a devout rest at home, your Closet knows nothing of tumult, there at least is peace and leisure. All who have a passion for Piety have at the same time another, they are concerned
with zeal that it may flourish in your Sex, and so may spread it self and flourish in the World, that the famous Saying upon Truth may have its accomplish∣ment in Piety, and this, when appearing in a Form so beautiful, may strike the eyes and charm the affections of all who behold it. Christian Religion, in the first Ages of it, did somtimes ow the multiplying of its Numbers to the Zeal of your Sex: And so may still the Holiness so much designed and promoted by that Religion have a Glo∣rious enlargement from it. Not onely the Believing Wife then did sanctify the Ʋn∣believing Husband, but the Pious Woman now may sanctify the less pious Man, and her Example not only reproach him for not being good, but invite him to the being so hereafter. St. Hierom declared that the propagation of Vertue as much as that of the World it self was due to your Sex, and therefore, when dissa∣tisfied with the general corruption of Mankind he fled into retirements from them, and instead of an abode with them chose to dwell with the Wild beasts of the Desert, he still continued a Religious correspondence with many of your Sex. The reformation of that World, which now so fiercely we complain of, may be
expected now from such as those whom St. Hierom then conversed with, and by a soft conveyance of all things pious from their hands: According to the ar∣gument of the Chinese Philosopher the World consists of Kingdoms, and King∣doms consist of Families; And each Fa∣mily is more in the continual view of its Governess, and more to be fashioned by her. Not only the Philosopher of China but the other of Greece, he who gave Laws to the World in Learning, as his Scholar did in War, had the same wise Notion, that the good management of Kingdoms is to follow this of Families. Indeed the influence of the Mother is great upon the Mind, as her share is great in the bodily Constitution, of the Children; and then in this sence too, If the Root be holy, so may be the Branches. Especially those, in the Family, of her own Sex, who are so much more within her view and her management, and whom her experience, in respect of her own Education, and then her particular knowledge of all things peculiar to her Sex do give her a more natural capacity to manage with the best success. The saying of a Bishop to a Courtier was no less suitable, in its Wisdom, to his Cha∣racter
from whom it came, then useful, in its influence, to him it was directed to, When you chuse a Wife, make your strict enquiries into the qualifications, not of the Father, but of the Mother, and then you have found those of the Daughter at the same time and in one discovery. And therefore, as it was the ambition of a Jewish Wo∣man, to be a Mother, so it should be that of a Christian, to be a good one. Amongst the several things I have of∣fered to your practice, Fasting I have not named, much less prescribed, because if that can be useful in any part of your Age, some may think it not to be so ne∣cessary in this part thereof. But surely there will be a time, when Fasting will be very useful, for the withdrawing our selves from the World, and fuell from the fire, that meat from our desires, which does often nourish them more than us, as it often feeds an ulcer more than a sounder part. Fasting will be useful for the making Spiritual Objects familiar to us, and for a particular enquiry into our Spiritual state like that into our weekly expences, for the remembrance and the repentance of our sins, and the appointing all the methods of suitable Pro∣vision against them, for the considering
not only our Sins, in order to the for∣saking them, but our Graces too, in order to the continuance and im∣provement of them. When a great Sol∣dier was to retire from the World, who had seldom retired from his Enemy, he declared it to be very needful, that there should be some space between the affairs of life and the day of death: Indeed there should be some between Life and Life, there should be a Truce with the World, in order to a Peace with God, there should be a Time of Respite, not only for the sense of Tasting, but for those of seeing and hearing, and all the Senses; so we may seem to dye, though not dai∣ly, yet one Day at least in the Week, and to better Purposes than Charles the Fifth, we may thus act Death it self, the chief Parts whereof are the Silence of the Condition, and want of Sense. And so Retirement is, like Death, a silent and quiet State, and a remove from sensible Things, and it has something too of the Happiness which follows Death, in the Religious Enjoyments of it. A Method it were of great Advantage to the making you that which you so much desire to be, and which all others nope to see you, a finisht Work of Prudence & Virtue, if you would chuse one eminent
for both, known to be so by all who know her, one of the like Quality and Condition with your self, whom you may observe, and imitate in both. You may place her Actions before you in the fairest Light, make her a daily Example to you in her Behaviour, that you may afterwards rise to be an Example in yours to others. Indeed the Learned Heathen has taught us another use of such a Method, not only to place the Actions in our sight, that we may imi∣tate the Good, but the Person too in our Presence, that we may avoid all Evil, be overaw'd against it, in a very innocent Magick, to carry always the Excellent Person with us, to suppose him standing before us, where-ever we are, and reading morāl Lectures to us. For the latter use of this Method you have less occasion; for the being Overawed by an imagined Presence against all Evil, because this al∣ways is at so great a distance from you, and very much out of sight: Your Inno∣cence is such, and your Conversation so well chosen, that you almost see as little Evil in others, as others can see in you; there is a continual Presence within your Self, to Overaw, and to Controle, that of pious Thoughts, and a far greater
than what the Heathen did propose, there is that of God. However your Innocence is so great, yet should you be always on your Guard, to defend and preserve it, as the greatest City deserves and re∣quires so much more Art and Care to keep and defend it: no Innocence is too great to be Assaulted, and, without a pru∣dent Care, to be conquered. Not only Lot's Wise is to be remember'd, but A∣dam's too, the first that ever was; and were your Innocence as perfect, as in all my Raptures of Wishing, I could desire, yet would it not be more perfect than Hers, and that, we know, was no more above a Conquest than above a Tem∣ptation. I have all the vigorous Hope, (and surely my Hope will not deceive me here) that the early Appearance of your Understanding, which others ad∣mire, and which you are happy in, will give you very much a Capacity of one kind, that of doing good, and will place you in a Condition, not so much of com∣mitting any greater Sin, as of avoiding it. You are now Madam, a Flower of the Fairest Kind, in all the blooming Graces, and lively Perfections of a beau∣tiful Appearance. I would take some Care, and I would desire some from
your self, that there may be one part of you, which may not be too much like a Flower, and which may not wither. As I would exhort you to the securing one part, which may not be frail, and which should make the rest of you lasting to your great Advantage, so I would Exhort you to nothing more, than to remember that all things upon Earth besides are not lasting, are very frail: However you can make something not to be so, which has a Relation to your self, yet you can never make earthly Things otherwise by all your Art: They will not cease to be such, though you never cease to desire them, and to love them, they will only Infect you with their own Weakness, and you will be so much more frail your self, as you more desire them, and love them more, nor will their just Value be raised by your raising your Af∣fections towards them. Seeing the Things of the World are such, you may begin to argue what little Reason there will be to have a value for your self upon things which have very little in them∣selves; and then what they have not, they cannot give. So you will be moved to the not desiring a greater share in this World than you have, when, if you had
a greater, you would only have a more bulky heap of Frailty, which surely is not a thing desirable. As you will not covet more than you possess, so you will neither esteem your self, upon that which you enjoy, more than you ought, nor will you esteem it more than it deserves: And then the eager Passion we commonly have for things, when they are going from us, will have no place in your Mind, when you loose them, you will not look upon things with a fond admiring Eye, which you cannot so much as look on long, but the fleeting Goods will soon be out of sight, and out of reach. You will pay no high regard to these Enjoyments, which are every hour passing from you, and which, as soon as they are gone, you will see, could not claim any such regard, when to you nothing of them shall remain, no∣thing but an empty wast, and the wild and melancholy Prospect of it. You were not more charmed with their Face, when they were coming towards you, than you shall be frighted with their back parts, so Deformed and Mon∣strous, when they are gone away beyond you. Your Disdain will be a generous Revenge to their Inconstancy; they fly
from you, and at the same time you no less fly from them; you are forsaken by them, and they abhorred by you. This true Judgment of the World will make you a true Friend to, and judge of your self, the Knowledge of its unsteady Na∣ture will give you a very steady Know∣ledge of Religion, and an hearty Sense thereof: When the Uncertainty of the World has made an Impression upon your Mind, a Zeal for Religion will make a∣nother, the Contempt of that will ad∣vance the Esteem for this, when that falls so much lower, this will rise so much higher in your Soul, by a difference of Motion, as the things are different. It may seem very strange, that my plea∣ding should be so importunate for your Contempt of the World, when you have so large an Interest therein; as the Ad∣vice would seem absurd, and very disa∣greeable to him who has the largest stake in the Game, to play all the time with little Care. But if you should think my Pleading to be less suitable, yet it is on your side, and then I cannot think any thing absurd or unseasonable, which favours and promotes your Well being. This my Proposal can never be so unsea∣sonable, as it will be necessary; because
if earthly Things be treated by you with Fondness and Caresses, you will scarce be happy in having more than others, you may be most unhappy in loosing more; as Bodies of greater Bulk are more ex∣posed to Wounds, and the Wounds are more Inflamed, and Fatal. The Pos∣sessing a wealthy Share in the World does not make the despising of that less needful, but rather is a new Engagement to it; because otherwise you only have so much more to hurt you. There cannot be a right Use of the World, unless there be a mean Opinion of it; if there be not a right use, if you abuse it, that will be sure to abuse you too in a just Revenge, and will do you Mischief. So well does one of your Sex declare in those her Man∣ly Writings, which have so large a share in the two great Accomplishments, (Piety and Wit) where no share can be too large, and she Summons the whole World to hear the mighty Thing which she declares, when thus she Writes in Defiance to earthly Things, and for In∣struction to Mankind, who are not very apt to bid Defiance to them. My Muse pronounce aloud, there's nothing good, Nothing the World can shew, Nothing it can bestew.
Your having the meanest Thoughts of the World is my last Advice, (however when I have so great an Opinion of this Advice, it might also have been my first) that, like other last words, it may be more Imprinted upon your Memory, may go farther into your Judgment, and pierce deeper into your Affections; be∣cause this will Crown and Finish, and give a lively Influence to all my other Counsel, without this it cannot be per∣formed, or cannot be effectual. You will not then so remember your worldly Advantages, as to forget your self, or rather to remember and think of your self too much; but the good-natured Saying will have its force upon you, Ecclus 3.18. The greater thou art, the mote humble thy self, and thou shalt find favour before the Lord. If any part of my Advice seem less ea∣sie, be pleased to chuse and begin with that which seems very easie, and that will carry you by gentle Steps to the o∣ther; upon the practice of the easier part, the other will not seem any longer difficult: As sometimes by a scarce sen∣sible rising we go up to the top of the Hill, and without great Toyl, only by going on, we reach it, when it appears
at a distance very high, and the Ascent very troublesome. You are ready, I know, to meet Religion, in every way in which it is coming towards you, and you give it all the joyful Embraces at the Meeting, and you are ready to take all Good Advice, at the same time you so little want it, and are fit to give it. E∣very thing which wears the Badg, or comes in the Name of Religion has more than a Cup of cold Water, something warm and vigorous, and hearty from you, and surely you shall not loose your re∣ward. To Proposals of Religion you always give an easie and liberal Enter∣tainment, and you are not therefore to be opprest, as Persons easie in Access, and bountiful in Entertainment, some∣times are by troublesome and imposing Guests. My Instructions should be use∣ful, but not severe; like a well modell'd Poem, they should have Profit, and Pleasure too, they should be Healthful, as Exercise and good Diet, not unplea∣sant as Physick, especially where little of Disease is to be removed, and a softer Method will prevent: When the Mind is of so untainted a Constitution, the Phy∣sitian may be as much a Courtier as he pleases, there can only be need of some∣thing
to prevent, and not to Cure. If any part of my Counsels seem less suita∣ble to your present Age, that has a De∣sign beyond it, to become a standing Rule for all your Life; and why should not good things, as well as some ill things, and Poisons have a lasting force, and work at the distance of many Years? I would thus lay up for you a Treasure of Instructions, which may hereafter make you Rich in good Works, and I would in this Sense lay up for you a good Founda∣tion against the time to come, a Foundation as strong as good, that you may be built up in your most holy Faith, and may never be liable to any Fall or Ruine. My Designs cannot be narrow and short, when your Welfare is in view, and in pursuit; and how charming is the Thought of my having done any thing to advance it in every part of your Life! So you may be that to me, which an old Christian Writer calls a Prince of his Time in an Epistle to him, The glorious Ornament of all my Labours, if I may pre∣tend to Labours, and may deserve such an Ornament. A Secretary to four Popes Writ a Book of Advice upon Studies and Learning, Dedicated it to an Illustrious Lady, and he intended it for her Ser∣vice.
A Grammar was Written for the Use of Queen Mary, when very young, and Presented to her Mother, Catherine Queen of England: I profess not here to send you Learned, but Religious Instru∣ctions, and not to teach you Words, but Things, the best, and the greatest Things, and no other Language but of the better Country, that is, the Heavenly. I pre∣sent only such Instructions, as upon the Command of King James the First, Dr. Williams, (afterwards Bishop, and Lord Keeper) writ for the use of the Lady Catherine Manners, Daughter to the then Earl of Rutland, and Married to the then Marquess of Buckingham. When the Author sent those Instructi∣ons to the Marquess, he declared thus in his Letter which attended them; Pray∣ing is most necessary for the obtaining, Prin∣ciples for the Augmenting, Resolution for Vie defending a true Faith and Profession. The young Marchioness was then not only to be Instructed in the Doctrin of the Church of England, but to be Con∣verted from another, of the Church of Rome. That every thing now proposed, may so much more prevail for your sake, and
for mine, be pleased to Pray in that pre∣vailing Language of the Church. Lord of all Power and Might, who art the Author, and Giver of all good Things, graft in my Heart the Love of thy Name, encrease in me true Religion, Nourish me with all Goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep me in the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. And now, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things. May you observe all these Rules, and whatsoever Rules may be added to these, that you may have an Addition too of Blessings, and a far more exceeding Weight of Glory, a Weight which shall not be Uneasie, or Oppress; but the heavier it is, shall be still more easie. May the holy Practice, you began so ve∣ry early, end very late, may it never end; but O let it be continued in the Heavenly, in the endless State, not only continued, but as high as the Heaven is, in comparison of the Earth, so much more heighten'd too. May you always be pos∣sest
with a Desire, a steady and refined Desire of Heaven, as a Place not only of everlasting and unchangable Happiness, but also of everlasting and unchangable Holiness. May you be happy now in a Religious Practice, and happy hereafter in the Reward thereof. In the mean time the view of both, of your Practice and your Reward, makes another happy, the unworthy Writer, and Madam, Your Lady ships most Ʋnworthy And most humble Servant. J. P. A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament, with regard to its being Commanded by God, and desired by us. O Most gracious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him the Father of Mercies too, and the God of all Comfort, let thy Mercies, and thy Comfort, I most
humbly, I most earnestly beseech thee, be always present to me, and particularly at this time, and at such times as this. Thou hast ap∣pointed a Sacrament for the Health and the Strength of my Soul; O make me to rejoyce in that Appoint∣ment now, as I am to live, by the right use of it, hereafter. Thou hast given me a Command, O my God, to receive it, and thou hast given me the priviledge of receiving it: O let this Command at least be performed by me, that the Breaches of all thy o∣ther Commands may be forgiven to me. O let not this Priviledge be despised, that all the other Priviled∣ges and Benefits may not be forfeited. Thy dying Son has spoken to me, and in Words which were almost Written in his Blood, and which I should be ready to Seal with mine; do this in remembrance of me. When he bids me, and when thou repeatest what he said, with new Engagements, shall not I do this, and every thing? Can I
chuse but do it, when it is to be done in remembrance of him, the Thought of whom is to be most pleasing to me, his Name is as Ointment pou∣red forth, his Mouth is most sweet, and he altogether lovely? Can any thing be needful to make me remember him? Can any thing be able to make me forget him, till I can forget my self? It yet there be no necessity for any thing to preserve the Memory of him, there is one for the performing what thou Commandest. If nothing can make me forget thy Love, and the Son of thy Love, yet I am to shew that I do not forget him, in remem∣bring his Precept. From thy Good∣ness I have received a Command, and now from thy Grace a Desire for the observing of it. O grant me all the Measures, the overflowing Mea∣sures of thy Grace for the Executing thy Command, and my Desire, and thy Grace, (as much need as I have thereof, will be sufficient for me, I can do all things through Christ who
strengthens me. Lord, I desire, help thou my Weakness in desiring, and much more in the performing. Be thou a Sun and a Shield, a Sun to Chear and Enlighten, a Shield to save and defend my Soul. Gird me with Strength, who have none of my own, and let thine so wound my Spiritual Enemies, that they may not be able to rise, but fall under my Feet. Let there be no want of Grace from thee, and in me no want of Will: I am Feeble and Weak, but thou, O Lord, art Strong and Migh∣ty, and thy strength is made perfect in my Weakness, and will make that perfect too. As thy Mercy rejoyces against Judgment; so does thy Pow∣er against Infirmity, and thy Power, the more I want of it, will rejoyce so much more, if my use of thy Gift be suitable to what thou hast given: Thou givest to will and to do of thy good Pleasure; for the partaking of this thy Holy, this thy blessed Sacra∣ment thou hast given me to will, O
give me to do of the good Pleasure, which thou hast declared for me, and declared to me in the Merits, and for the fake of thy beloved Son, and my never enough beloved Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Another Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament, with a regard to God's Favour, and our Qualifica∣tions in our Approaches to the Sa∣crament. O Thou the God of my Mercy, and the God of my Salvation, accept, I pray thee, thy most unwor∣thy Servant in that Duty in which I should appear most worthy, and accept my Weakest Service, where the best of my Strength should be employed. O thou High and lofty One that inhabitest Eternity, whose Name is Holy, thou dwellest in the High and Holy Place, with him al∣so that is of a contrite and hum∣ble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart of the Contrite: O make
me contrite in Heart, and humble in Spirit, that thou may'st dwell with me, that I may dwell with thee in thy House, and at thy Table. For thy Son's sake, for thy own sake, for thy Mercies sake, contend thou not for ever, and be not thou always angry, that the Spirit may not fail before thee, and the Soul which thou hast made. Thou hast seen my ways, O heal me; lead me, and re∣store Comforts to me, and to my Mour∣ners, to all those Powers within me, which mourn for my Sins against thee: Be thou mine everlasting Light, and the Days of my Mourning shall be ended. Make me first to wash my Hands in Innocency, and then admit me to compass thine Altar, O Lord of Hosts, my King and my God. And how blessed are they who dwell in thy House, they shall be always praising thee! A Day in thy Courts is better than a thousand. I confess my Sins, O do thou forgive them: I grieve for my Sins, O make me to rejoyce in the Pardon of them. [Here remember as much as may be, and confess the particular Sins of your Life] Too long, alas, have I lived, O make me to live no longer, in a Correspondence with them. Too long have I born the Bur∣then, and thou the Defiance, of them.
Too long have I been at Peace with my Lusts, and then all the time not at Peace with thee, and with my self: I now Pro∣claim War against them, do thou teach my Hands to War, and coyer my Head in the Day of Battle, give me the Shield of thy Salvation, and thy right Hand shall hold me up, and thy Gentleness shall make me great. Give thou to me Grace and Glory, and make me to live a Godly Life, and then no good thing shalt thou with∣hold from me now in the Sacrament, nor afterwards in any other part of Religion, or any part of my Life. Cloath my Soul with the Garments of Salvation, cover it with a Robe of Righteousness, as a Bride adorns her self with her Jewels. Let that Pardon, which this Sacrament is the Seal of, be extended to all my sinful Imper∣fections in the receiving of it. The Pardon of my Sins, and the Acceptance of my self, the great Benefits of thy Sacrament, and a true Frame of my Soul, that the benefits may be mine, and I may be thine for ever, vouchsafe, O God, who art rich in Mercy, to grant to me who am poor in Performance; O grant all to me in the Name, in the Righteousness, in the Mediation of thy only Son, and my only Redeemer, Thy blessed Son, and my ever
blessed Redeemer, and I ask all again in his holy Words, Our Father, &c. These Prayers are so much lon∣ger, because it is supposed that good Persons set a part more time for this Occasion, and so they are more at leisure for a length, and they have then a stronger Devotion for the bearing it; and the Retire∣ment at such a Season is to take off our Thoughts from the World, and to this Design Prayer is very useful, and the more we are in that Duty, the more we are out of the World; the nearer we approach to God in Prayer, the farther we are from the World in Thought. Here follows a shorter Prayer to the same Preparatory Purpose. O Blessed Jesu, who hast Suffer∣ed, who hast Died for me, whose Sufferings and Death I am now to remember, make me, un∣worthy as I am, not to Eat and Drink Unworthily in this solemn Remembrance: That Worthiness
which I have not, be pleased to give me, O give me that which thou hast purchased for me, that which I have so little, which thou hast so much of, thou hast enough for me, and for all Mankind besides me; I ask it for my self, and for all, now, and ever. Amen. Devout Ejaculations at the Holy Table before the receiving of the Sacrament. THou hast invited me, O merci∣ful Lord, to thy Table, and lo I come; Thou wilt receive whom thou hast invited, O receive me graciously. Lo, I come, to do thy Will, O my God, I am contented, I delight to do it; and let thy Law be always within my Heart. In Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for Sin thou hast had no Pleasure, Sacrifice and Offering thou wouldest not; but a Body hast thou prepared, thy Sons Body to be Crucified; O let a Soul too be Prepared, my Soul to be Offered. O most Kind and Compassio∣nate Jesu, who didst Exhort the
Daughters of Jerusalem at the time of thy death not to Weep for thee, but to Weep for themselves, and for their Children; have a favourable Regard to all my Weeping for my self, and for my Sins, upon this Re∣membrance of thy Death. Devout Ejaculations after the re∣ceiving of the Sacrament. I Have received, O my God, and I Praise thee, I Glorify thee, I Adore thee for the Honour of thy Command, and the Favour of thy Leave to do so. Thou hast given me Bread from Heaven, Thou hast given me Wine that maketh glad the Heart of Man, glad with a spiritual Joy which thus begins in this World, and is not to end in another. I did hunger and thirst after the Righteousness which is offer'd in this Sacrament, and O let me now be filled, let me now be blessed. Let all the spiritual Vertues of thy Body and Blood, O most holy Jesu,
enter into my Soul, enter deep into it, may they enliven, may they no∣rish, may they strengthen it to an everlasting Life. Amen. However this Discourse has nothing to deserve such a Conclusion, yet I ask leave to give the same to my Discourse, which a Jew did to his, when he had Written a Catechism, (by him named Good Doctrine) of the Jewish Religion, According to the Sincerity of my Purpose remember me, O God: The Jew says yet more, which I cannot pretend to say, with that Confidence which is more pe∣culiar to Jews in the high Thoughts of their Favour with God. I shall not blush, nor be ashamed in this World, nor in that to come, but thou wilt give me the Portion common to those by whom many have been Exhorted to Piety and Righteousnese; for they shall shine as Stars, so, so let it please thee. FINIS.
