P4058 12378466 57195
Sad and serious Politicall CONSIDERATIONS, Touching the invasive War against our Presbyterian Protestant Brethren in Scot∣land, their late great Overthrow, and the probable dangerous consequences thereof to both Nations and the Prorestant Religion. Which may serve as a SATISFACTORY APOLOGY for such Ministers and People, who out of Conscience did not observe the publike Thanks∣giving, against their Covenant, for the great slaughter of those their Brethren in Covenant. Printed in the Yeer 1650.
Sad and Serious Politicall Considerations. THE English Independents new invasive War a∣gainst their Presbyterian Protestant Brethren of Scotland, and late great rout and slaughter of their Army, meeting with variety of censures and con∣structions, according to the divesity of mens inclinations and interests, some prudent Christians, ingaged to no par∣ties, whose interest is onely the preservation, propagation and safety of the reformed Protestant Religion against the common Enemies and Underminers thereof, have these sad melancholy apprehensions thereof; That it is a dolefull Prologue and tragicall Scene, not onely to the approaching ruine and desolation of both Kingdoms for their manifold crying sins, but likewise to the speedy subversion of the true Protestant Religion, and extirpation of all zealous Profes∣sors thereof through our three Kingdoms, and in forraigne parts, upon these ensuing considerations. 1. That the Kingdoms of England and Scotland make up the greatest Body of the Protestant Religion in Christendom, being best able to defend themselves, and succour other Re∣formed Churches, when indangered and designed to ruine by Popish Enemies, as the Lords and Commons declared long since in their Exact Colle∣ction p. 663.666. A Colle∣ction of Or∣ders & Ordi∣nances, p. 354. Protestation to this Kingdom and the whole world, 22. Octob. 1642. and in their Order of the seventh of October 1643. And therefore the ruine of the Protestant Party in these Kingdoms, is the readiest way to indanger, conquer, ruine all other Reformed Churches in the world, and extirpate the Protestant Religion in all other Coun∣tries; as they there likewise Declare. 2. That the Pope of Rome, Jesuites, Priests, Papists, and their Confederates, upon this ground, have for many years last past, by open force, and secret practices, endeavored
the extirpation of the Protestant Religion and most zea∣lous Professors thereof throughout these Kingdoms, and made it their chiefest designe to reduce them to their pri∣stine obedience to the See of Rome, which by the Popish Negotiations with Spain, the Papisticall Match with France, the Agency of the Popes Nuncio's, the practices of Priests and Jesuites in England (countenanced and protected a∣gainst the force of Lawes) and the confederacy of Popish Prelates, Clergie-men and Courtiers with them in these De∣signes,Exact Colle∣ction, p. 4. to 14.97.98.508. they had almost totally accomplished and brought to full perfection in all our Realms; as the whole House of Commons in their Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, 15. Decemb. 1641. and other subsequent Declarations; and they and the Scottish Commissioners in their Impeachments against the Archbishop of Canterbury, largely remonstrate. 3. That the most zealous Protestants, then branded with the name of Puritans and Presbyterians in England and Scotland, were the principall and only obstacles to the fi∣nishing of this their neare compleated Work. Whereupon the Exact Colle∣ction, p. 10.199 492, 493. Jesuiticall, Popish and Prelaticall prevailing Fction resolved to root them out of this Kingdom by force, or drive them out with fear, and rid them all out of the way. For the better effecting whereof, they thought it necessary to reduce Scotland to such Popish Superstitions and Inno∣vations, as might make them apt to joyn with England in that great change which was intended: Whereupon new Popish Canons and a Liturgy reformed much after the mo∣dell of the Papists Misalls, were prest upon them; and all the Arminian and Popish Doctrines broached, maintained, and new Popish Ceremonies practised in England, were in deavoured to be planted and set up in M. Baylies Canterburians Self-convicti∣on. The Scots Im∣peachment a∣gainst Arh¦bishop Lawd. Scotland. 4. That this their dangerous ripened Designe finding no publike, but onely private opposition in England by parti∣cular persons, who were ined, Exact Colle∣ction, p. 10.11.12.492. pillori'd, stigmatized, de∣prived of their ears, close imprisoned, banished and ruined by the Star-Chamber and High-Commission, to the publike terror of all others; thereupon the Scottish Puritans and
Presbyters were the first visible Instruments raised by God to give a publique check to their successefull design, beyond their or our expectations. 5. That hereupon the Exact. Cl¦ction, p. 10.11.12 3 97.492.508.894.595 A Col∣lion, p. 308.309.354.417.419.457.458. Jesuiticall and Prelaticall Popish Party raised two severall Armies successively to suppresse and extirpate the Puritan and Presbyterian Party in Scot∣land, as the only remoa's to their design; and were most ac∣tive and forwards in their leavies and contributions against them; indeavouring to ingage the Protestant Party in both Nations in a bloudy civill Ware to their mutuall ruine; to which the Puritan and Religious party in England were most averse. First privately murmuring, and afterwards publiquely protesting against this Warre, as dishonourable and dangerous to Religion and both Kingdomes in the Par∣liament, in April 1640. purposely summoned to raise mo∣neys to carry on that War, which they refused to grant to so ill a purpose, and did all they could to blast their malicious designs and warre against Scotland; whereupon the Popish party caused that Parliament to be dissolved, and did all they could by violent arbitrary courses, and illegall Loanes and Taxes, to raise Forces and moneys to maintain a warre against them; imprisoning and prosecuting those, who resi∣sted or refused to assist them in this warre, in the self-same manner as those in present power have done, divers of their Christian Brethren for manifesting their dislike and back∣wardnesse to assist them in this ungodly invasive warre a∣gainst their Protestant Brethren in Covenant against many publique Ingagments, and not giving publique thanks to God for their late overthrow. 6. That the Scottih Puritans and Presbyterians advance with their Army into England, in the year 1640. of purpose to preserve the Religion, and protect themselves and their English Brethren from slavery and ruine; was the Exact Colle∣ction, p. 11.12.13.199.492.493.508. prici∣cipall and only means under God, of preventing their own and our thraldome to no pry and Tyranny, of frustrating all the Jesuites, Papists and Prelaes designs, of securing Religi∣on, Laws, Liberties, and conveing the last Parliament;
which through Gods blessing on their indeavours, through the assistance of the Scottish Commissioners, and counte∣nance of their Army, over-powered the Popish and Prelati∣call Faction, brake all their former Projects in pieces, sup∣pressed all their Popish Innovations, Doctrinall and Cere∣moniall, reconciled the differences between both Nations, setled a firm unity and amity between them, by an Act of Oblivion and Pacification, abolished the High-Commission, Star-Chamber, Extravagances of the Councell-Table, the Bishops Courts, and Votes in Parliament, Ship-money, Im∣positions, and all other illegall Taxes; quickned the Laws against Jesuites, Priests and Popish Recusants; passed a Law for Triennuall Parliaments, and another against the untime∣ly adjourning, proroguing and dissolving of themselves at the Kings own pleasure, and thereby put our Religion, Laws, Liberties and Propertis in a farre better condition of security, and the Popish and Prelaticall party into a farre worse, and more hopelesse and desperate condition then e∣ver heretofore. 7. That to prevent and frustrate these Laws and this secu∣rity, the Exact Colle∣ction, p. 17.18.98.229.493. Jesuiticall and Prelaticall party whilest they were in agitation, indeavoured all they could by subtill practices, slanders, and private solicitations, to raise jealousies and di∣visions between the Scottish Commissioners and Army, and the Parliament, to ingage the Scottish and English Armies each against other, or to make the Scots stand neutrall to the Parliament, that so they might bring up the English Ar∣my from the North to London to over-awe and suppresse them, and hinder the Union between both Kingdomes; which through the fidelity of the Scots, and of some Offi∣cers in the English Army, was timely discovered, preven∣ted, and a firme Union between both Kingdomes setled by Acts of Parliament, passed in the Parliaments of both Nations. 8. That these Acts of Pacification and Union between both Kingdomes, and the Religious party of both Nations, the extirpation of Prelacy and the Popish Hierarchy, and
the establishing of a Presbyterian Government and Unifor∣mity in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline in both King∣doms were apprehended, prosecuted and resolved upon by the most religious Protestant party and Exact Colle∣ction p. 594.  605. A Coll∣ction, p. 309. to 313 327.358.359.30.399 404.41.420. to 428.458.453. Parliaments of both Nations, as the readiest, probablest, and most effectuall means under God to preserve and secure their Religion, Lawes, Liberties, against all future invasions, and to frustrate all Popish and Prelaticall Designs against them, and were accordingly Exact Colle∣ction. p. 97, 98 218.564. esteemed and looked upon by the advese Po∣pish and Prelaticall party, who thereupon attempted with all their policy and power, to uphold Prelacy, and retard and prevent the establishment of resbytery, as fatall to all their hopes and Designes; and thereupon improved all their intrest both at home, and with forraigne rinces, to raise what Forces they could, to break this Dsigne and the arliament too, before they should accomplish it. 9. That when the Jesuiticall, Popish and Prelaticall party in England, Ireland, Scotland, and forraigne parts, had ta∣ken up Arms, and raised great Forces to hinder the settle∣ment of the Presbyterian Government, suppresse the late Parliament, subvert the Protestant Religion, introduce Po∣pery and Tyranny, extrpate the Puritan and Religious par∣ty in England and Ireland, and were grown very strong and pevalent in both, the Exact Col. p. 56.57.58.666 564 to 605. A Collection, p. 308. o 312.354.355.363.371.372.428.441.467.677. &c. 66.711.767.798. to 810.933. Scottish Presbyterians (now inva∣ded and defeated) out of their brotherly love, and Christi∣an affction, in this extremity of danger, for the preservation of our Religion, Liberties, Lawes, Parliament, and the godly party in England & Ireland, at both Houss earnest solicita∣tio, did readily and chearfully assist us with their Forces in both Kingdoms, and thereby, through Gods bessing, were a great means of weakning and subduing our Enemies, and preseving our Religion, Lawes, Liberties, Lives, from utter destruction; which brotherly assistance, with so powerfull an Amy of above twenty thousand Hose and Foot in our greatest dangers, was so welcome to us, that the House of Commons on the second of February 1643. A Collecti∣on, p. 428. Ordered, pub∣like thanks should be given in all Churches for the aid and
assitance come in by our Brethren of Scotland: And when the malignant party there, in their absence for our preser∣vation, had peviled and routed only some few of their Force (nothing considerable in comparison of those lately slain and defeated) left behind for their defence, both Hou∣ses were so sensible thereof, that they appointed a speciall Dy of Humiliation for the miseries of Scotland through∣out all the Parliaments Qarters by their A , p. 721. Order of 2. Sep∣tember 1645. which was accordingly observed; so much did they and we then condole th least overthrow and misery of our Scottish Brethren in Covenant being members of the selfsame Body of Christ) as if it had been our own: Where∣as now on the contrary, we invade, slay, dstroy and ruine these our brotherly Assistants, rejoyce & triumph at their mi∣sery, appoint publike Daes of Thanksgiving throughout the whole Nation for their grat slaughter and overthrow, and hang up the Ensignes taken from them in Westminster Hall, as publike trophies and testimonies to succeeding ages of our gratitude and brotherly kindnesse towards them, and of our religious observation of our solemne Nationall League and Covenant with them, not long since made and entred into upon their coming in to our assistance. 10. That in the extremity of our dangers, by the prevai∣ling Popish party, the A Collecti¦o, p. 309.310 311.312.327.358.359.39.399.404.416.42 to 428.458.459.694.751.768.769.798.802.806. &c. 878.879.889. Parliaments, Ministers, and religi∣ous people both of Scotland and England did resolve it most necssary, and essentiall for Gods glory and their sfe∣ty, to enter into a more sacred and stricter union then for∣merly, for defence of their Religion, King, Parliament, Lawes, Liberties, the extirpation of Popery, of Prelacy, and the bringing of all our Kingdoms to uniformity in Do∣ctrine, Worship and Discipline, by a solemne Nationall League and Covenant, as the onely means under God, to prevent all future differences and breaches between all the godly people of both Nations, to preserve and secure Reli∣gion, Lawes, Liberties, and priviledges of Parliament, a∣gainst all present and future attempts whatsoever, and dash in pieces all the designes, practices, hopes of the Jesuiticall
and Prelaticall Faction in all our Kingdoms: which League and Covenant was accordingly agreed upon by the Parlia∣ment, and Assemblies of Divines in both Kingdomes, and af∣ter that most chearfully and solemnly taken and subscribed, not only by the Scottish Parliament, Army, Clergy, and Ge∣nerality of that Nation, but by all the Members of both Houses of our Parliament, the generaity of all the godly Ministers and people in England and Ireland; and by all, or most Officers and Souldiers in the Parliaments Armies; who many of them carried it in their hats, hands, and fixed to their pikes as they marched, and amongst others it was ta∣ken and subscribed by A Collecti∣on of Ordi∣nances, p. 426. Oliver Cromwell himself and Ireton; and every man by Ordinances of both Houses, was disabled to injoy or exercise any Civill or Military Office, or place of Trust whatsoever in the State or Army, who did not so∣lemnly take and subscribe it whereupon it was almost uni∣versally taken and subscribed in a most sacred and solemn manner throughout the Kingdome, and followed with ma∣ny glorious Victories and Successes, till the Popish and Pre∣laticall Malignant party in England were totally subdued; all Counties, and Garrisons fully reduced to the Parliaments Command; and a happy Peace and settlement of our Reli∣igion, Laws, Liberties upon most safe and honourable terms, indeavoured, expected and almost accomplished by a personall Treaty, with the KING in the Isle of Wight. 11. That to prevent this Peace and Settlement; the The History of Indepn∣dncy. Offi∣cers of the Army (who love to make a Trade of War, there∣by to gain and keep all Civill and Ecclesiasticall power in their own hands, and to inrich themselves with our three Kingdoms spoils and ruine) confederating with some few Members of the Commons House against their Trust, duty, Oaths, Protestations, the very Letter of this solemn League and Covenant, and all the ends thereof; forcibly seized, con∣demned and beheaded the late King, secured and secluded the greatest part of the Commons House addicted to the Presbyterian Government, suppressed the whole House of
Lords, disinherited the Kings Posterity of the Crown, sub∣verted the fundamentall Government of the King∣dome; usurped all Regall and Parliamentall Authority to themselves; and by colour thereof, now trample all Laws, Liberties, and Priviledges of Parliament under feet; remove all or most zealous Presbyterians (though never so eminent Actors and sufferers for Religion and the publique weal) out of all Offices and places of power and Trust throughout th Nation; discourage and discountenance all or most Prsbyterian Ministers, especially the most pious; banish some, imprison others, recall the Sequestrations, and sub∣stract the Agmentations, and Tithes of all or most of them, to starve and ruine them; withdraw themselves from their Ministery, suborn or tolerate their monethly Prognostica∣tors, and Diurnalists to revile and rail openly against them in print, without the least controul, and to prognosticate their and their Presbyterian Gouernments downfall, to in∣cense the people against them and it; invent and prescribe new Oaths, Ingagements, Publications, Observations of Thanksgivings, and Humiliations, and other snares and en∣gines, thereby to insnare either their Consciences, or indan∣ger their Estats, Liberties, Ministery, Persons in their plun∣dring Committees, and new Arbitary Judicatories; declare against the solemn League and Covenant as expired, aboli∣shed, yea, and dangerous and unlawfull to be kept, set up and inforce an Anti-Covenant Engagement to frustrate, null, and abjure it, debar all from all publike Offices, Pre∣frments, Augmentations, degrees of Learning, the practise of the Law, and the very benefit of the Laws of England, (for which we have so long contested with the Kings Par∣ty) who will not out of conscience or Loyalty subscribe it; oppose and traduce the Presbyterian Government, as Pa∣pall, Antichristian and Tyrannicall; exempt all Sctaries whatsoever from all Penall Laws, in not repairing to any publike Ordinances or Churches; Authorize them freely to meet when and where they please in private Conventicles, (where running Priests and Jesuites may and wil easily seduce
them) without the least danger or disturbance: and because their brethren of Scotland stick close to their Presbyterian Government and Covenant, and have closed with their King at last, according to their Covenant and Allegiance, and will not disinherit him as they have done; they thereup∣on have recalled Cromwell out of Ireland from prosecuting the Irish Papists and Royalists, made him their Generall in∣stead of the Lord Firfax, and sent him in to Scotland, with∣out any real provocation on their part, to invade them with an Army, where he entred without the least resistance, seized some of their Towns and Garrisons, provoked them oft times to fight, when they declined fighting, and at last gave them battle in their own Countrey, routed their whole Ar∣my, and though he lost not forty men in the fight yet he and his Forces, out of their Christian charity cut down near 4000. of them in the pursuit, maimed and wounded above 5000. more, whereof many are since dead, and more like to die; took 10000. of them prisoners, 5000. whereof are sent Captives into England; since which he hath taken Eden∣borough and Leith, prosecutes his Victory with all vigour, sends up all the Scots Colours to Westminster, where they are publiquely hung up in the Hall for triumph. And for this great slaughter and overthrow of our Presbyterian Brethren, a solemn publike day of Thanksgiving hath been prescribed to be strictly observed throughout the Nation, and celebra∣ted in many places accordingly, to involve the whole Nati∣on in a double guilt of their bloud: First by their Contribu∣tions to pay the Army sent against them, next by publike Thanksgiving to God for their destruction, and that in those very Churches and places, where we not long since lifted up our hands and subscribed our Names, when we took the forementioned Leaga and Covenant in the presence of God himself, Angells and men, A Collecton, of Ordinan∣ces, p. 424.425.426. sincerely, really. and constantly to preserve their Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, Government, and with our Estates and lives mutually to preserve the Right and Priviledges of their Kingdome and Parliamnt, and to bring all to condigne punishment, as
Malignants, Incendiaries, and evill Instruments, who should indeavour the dividing of one of the Kingdomes from ano∣ther, and each one of us, according to our place and Inte∣rest, to indeavour that both Kingdomes may remain conjoy∣ned in a firm peace and Union to all posterity; and that we shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoe∣ver combination, perswasion, or terrour, to be divided or withdrawn from this blessed Union, which so much con∣cerns the glory of God, and good of the Kingdomes, but shall all the daies of our lives zealously and constantly con∣tinue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power against all lets and impediments whatsoever, &c. which how well and really we have per∣formed, let that Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts in whose presence and Name we made and subscribed this Covenant, judge, and our own consciences, as we shall an∣swer the contrary at that great day, if we seriously repent not of it now, whilest we have time, and space of repentance given us. 13. That upon the due consideration of all these Premises, we shall not conclude as some rigid Presbyterians do, perchance not without good grounds; That this inva∣sive Warre with our Brethren of Scotland is an apparent vio∣lation of every clause and branch of the solemn Brotherly League and Covenant, and a very strange Act of Ingratitude and Injustice in invading their Kingdom, because they will have a King, according to their Ancient Constitution, Go∣vernment, Laws, Covenant; and in indeavouring to deprive their King of the Kingdome of Scotland, because they have injuriously and peridiously dispossessed him of his two King∣doms of Englnd and Ireland, against their National League and Covenant, and other oaths, for fear his possession of that his Hereditary Kingdom should be a means to regain the other two, (which is as unconscionable and unreasona∣ble, as if a great Statesman or Commander should wrong∣fully deprive his Neighbour of all his Lands and goods in a third Parish or County, because he hath forcibly dispossessed
him of all his Lands and Goods in two other Parishes or Counties, that so he might never be able to recover them by suit of Law, having no means left to maintain his suit a∣gainst him) but rather infer from thence, First, that this War with Scotland is not only exeeding scandalous, dishonourable, and disadvantagious to all the Professors of the reformed Protestant Religion in both Kingdoms, and throughout the Christian world, to behold Protestant Brethren in Covenant thus invading, slaughte∣ring and destroying each other upon such slender unchristi∣an carnall grounds, but 2 Chro. 11.4. c. 28.6, 7.8, 9, 10.11. 2 Sam. 26, 27. Acts 7.26. Gal 5.14, 15. Obad. 10. &c. 1 Cor. 6.1.6 7, 8. 1 John 3.12. ungodly too. Secondly, That this invasive war, and great slaughter of the most zealous Scottish Presbyters, is a matter of greatest joy, triumph and advantage to the Jesuiticall, Popish and Prelaticall party, and tending much to the present promo∣tion and future accomplishment of all their former frustra∣ted, successelesse, and almost hopelesse malicious designs a∣gainst the Puritanicall and Religious party in both King∣doms, and the intended accomplishment of the Presbyteri∣an Government, and Rformation of Religion in them, which they so much feared, and opposed by open force of Arms and secret policies, who will now indeavour to conti∣nue and heighten our open divisions (first plotted by them) till we have weakned and destroyed each other by our ci∣vill wars, and made our selves fit to be suddainly surprised and destroyed by their party, when we have consumed and undone each other. Thirdly, That in these respects, the Successes, great Victo∣ries, and slaughters in this unnaturall and unchristian Warre against our Protestant Brethren in Covenant, are no matter of publike joy, thanksgiving and triumph to the Conque∣rours, as some vainly conceive, but of greatest publike la∣mentation, Humiliation and mourning, (it being both un∣naturall, uncharitable, and unchristian for Members of the same body of Christ, and sworn Christian Brethren, ingaged by Covenant, and God himself, to protect and John 13.34, 35. c. 15.12. Rom. 12.9, 10. c. 13.8, 9, 10. Gal. 5.13, 14. Ephes. 1.15. Col. 2.2. 1 Thes. 3.12. c. .4.9. Heb. 13.1. James 2.8. 1 Pet. 1.12. c. 2.17. c. 3.8. 1 John 3.11.14 16, 17, 18.23. c. 4.7.11.12.16.20.21. c. 5.2. 2 John 5. love each o∣ther with a pure heart fervently, to murther and destroy
each other) an argument of Gods heavy wrath against us tending to our desolations, as the sacred Texs and Presi∣dents compared together, will fully resolve the conscienti∣ous perusers of them. Iudg. 21.1. to 18. 2 Sam. 1.12.17, 18, &c. 2 Sam. 2.12. to 29. to 3.30. c. 39. c. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. c. 19.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Chron. 28.5. to 16. Ezek. 19.12.2.33.14. Ezek. 35.1. to the end. Obad. 1. to the end. Amos 1.9, 10, 11, 12. Gen. 37.26, 27. 1 Sam. 14.7.7. 1 Kings 13.30. Psal. 35.14. Isay 9.19, 20, 11. c. 19.2.3. 2 Chron. 15.5, 6. Ier. 22.17, 18. Ezek. 38. 21, 22. Mich. 1.2. &c. Zech. 7.9. to the end. Mal. 2.10. Mat. 10.21. &c. 1 Iohn 3.10, 21, 12. Exod. 2.11, 12. Iudg. 9.5. to the end, a sad story, 1 Kings 12, 14.15. 2 Chron. 11.4. c. 21.4.12, 13, 14. &c. Neh. 5.1. to 10. Iob 6.14, 15. Prov. 6.16.19. Isay 66.5. Acts 7.26. Mat 12.25. Mar. 3.24, 25, 26. Gal. 5.14, 15. Iam. 3.14, 15, 16, 18, 18. c. 4.1. 9, 10, 11. Fourthly, that the continuance of this unbrotherly Warre with Scotland, will be the utter ruine of all the Presbyteri∣an godly Party in that Nation if God shall frown upon them; and the utter subvertion of the Presbyterian Govern∣ment there, where the Prelaticall and Malignant party will soon get head and sway all, to the strengthning and revi∣ving of their numerous party in England: or in case God give them after some overthrows, a glorious Victory over the English Independent Forces (as he did to the defeated Israelites over the Benjmites, Iudg. 20.) it will certainly ru∣ine all the Independent party in England, who have so chea∣ted and tyrannized over all sorts of men, that they will ne∣ver be able to make head again, if once defeated, and find all mens hearts and hands against them, for their manifold ex∣travagances and tyrannicall proceedings against all ranks and degrees of men, & subverting the whole frame of our ci∣vill and Ecclesiasticall Government. And if the Presbyteri∣an party in Scotland be much weakned and impoverished by the Victory, and the Presbyteriall Ministers and Gentry of England discountenanced, and thrust out of all power and reputation in the interim, as they are through their cowar∣dize and folly; how far this may indanger and expose them
to the Popish and Prelaticall parties power and malice here∣after, is very considerable; and how far their present Con∣tributions (though not voluntary) without distresse or for∣cible coaction against their King and Brethren of Scotland, and sitting still like idle neutrall Spectators, without contri∣buting the least visible assistance to either of them, may be interpreted by their King and them, to be a beach of heir Nationall League and Covenant, and of their Allegiance to their Soveraign, in case they should prevail, and restore the King to the Crown of England by their own Forces only, without the English Presbyterians assistance, to the indan∣gering of their persons and Estates, and the losse of all that favour and respect from either (which their actuall conjun∣ction with them might procure) to the ruine of the Presby∣terian, as well as Independent party in England, and setting up of the Popish and Prelaticall Malignant party in Su∣preme power and favour in this Realme, is very conside∣rable. Fifthly, that if the Scottish Presbyters, and the Kings par∣ty in Scotland shall be both conquered by the English Inde∣pendent Forces, and unable to defend themselves, or their King, and to settle him in his Kingdoms, then greater dan∣gers are like to insue to our Religion and Kingdoms, then otherwise in some wise mens judgments; because the Inde∣pendents (as their present violent proceedings manifest) wil probably use their Presbyterian Brethren in England, no bet∣ter then those in Scotland, and extirpate them if they can; and the King then will be necessitated to cast himself whol∣ly upon the assistance of forraign States, and Kings, and their Forces, as his last refuge; which he hath hitherto declined as dangerous both to himself and his people. If he in this extre∣mity throw himself upon any Forraigners, they must be ei∣ther Papiss only, or Protestants alone, or both of them joyntly. If on Papists only, which some think most probable; First, in regard of his Queen Mothers great interest in that party, both in France and Italy, being of that Religion: Secondly,
in respect of the open differences and Wars already between us, and France, and Portugall, two Popish Kingdoms, which are like, to continue and grow greater every dy: Thirdly, in respect of that parties constancy and fidelity to the King and his Father: Fourthly, because that party is most powerfull, and most likely to close with the King for the advantage of the Catholike cause, and reducing of England to it's former obedience to the See of Rome; so that without Gods infi∣nite mercy, it will necessiate him for a full compliance with them: First, to match into some great Popish Family, upon the same and harder Aticles, then were inforced on his Fa∣thes by Spain or France: Secondly, to alter his Religion, and professe himself a Roman Catholike, and obedient son to the Roman Pontife, as King Henry the fourth of France did: Thirdly, to Covenant and ingage with them for an utter ex∣tirpation of the Protestant Religion; and of all Independents and Presbyterians, as not only Heretikes in Religion, but Regicides, Traytors, Rebells, Covenant breakers, prjured per∣sons, who make no conscience of Oaths, Vows, Protestations, Declarations, and professed enemies to Monarchy, who have murthered his Father, banished his Mother, disinheri∣ted him of three Crowns; and indeavour to imbroil and subvert all Monarchies and Kingdoms in Christendome: Fourthly, to swear and ingage to set up and tolerate none but the Roman Religion in his Kingdoms, when he shall be restored to them by their assistance and Forces: Fifthly, to promise satisfaction of the greatest part of their expences in this war, out of the Puritans and Protestants estates, who have been in Arms, or any ways acted, or contributed assi∣stance of moneys against his Father or him, and to make full reparations of all damages to such Papists, who have left their estates and fortunes to assist his Father or him. Upon these terms he may easily gain the joynt assistance of all Po∣pish Kings, Kingdoms, and States in Europe, through the Popes powerfull mediation. And if hereupon, through their aid, he should so far prevail as to get into actuall possession of his Thrones and Kingdoms by the meer power of the
sword, without any terms or conditions by way of Treaty, of which there will be little probability; we can then expect nought else but these dismall consequences. First a totall ∣radication of our reformed Religion, and of all zealous pro∣fessors thereof, especially such who have acted any waies a∣gainst the King or his Father, a full repeal of all penal Laws, against Jesuites, Priests, Papists, and a publike profession and practise of the Romish Religion, and of that only throughout our Kingdoms. Secondly, a totall subversion of all our for∣mer Laws and Liberties, and a full exercise of all arbitrary and tyrannicall power over our lives and estates. Thirdly, an absolute confiscation of all our Lands and Estates, together with our lives, to satisfie the Kings debts, gratifie his Assi∣stants, and repair the losses of his faithfull Catholikes, whom we have undone by adhering to his party. Fourthly, an absolute inslaving of our whole Nation to these forraign Conquerours; if not a totall banishment, and extirpation of them out of their native soil; the case of the Ancient Gildas. de excidio Britan∣niae. Fox Acts & Monuments. Vol. 1. Bri∣tains, when conquered and driven out of this their Countrey by Saxons, and the extraordinary Pestilence and Famine sent amongst them for their sins, and then a dieu both to our Religion and Nation. But in case the King should not pre∣vail to conquer us by their power, the least we can expect is, First, a continuall long lasting Warre, and open hostility by Land and Sea with all Romish Kings and States, the very charge whereof, now we are almost quite undone and begge∣red already, which will utterly ruine and undo us. Secondly, losse of Trade and Commerce with all those Kingdoms and States, with whom we are in hostility; which will utterly break us in one year or two for want of venting our Native commodities, our chiefest inablement to maintain the Wars. Thirdly, intolerable uncessant Taxes of all sorts, which will every moneth grow heavier and greater then other, which accompanied with want of Trade, will cause a generall In∣surrection at last both of poor and rich against those in pow∣er, and put all into confusion, to the enemies great advan∣tage. Fourthly, a necessity of seizing and selling all Col∣ledges,
Corporations, Companies, Hospitalls and Gleab-Lands throughout the Realm; and of new Projects to make new Delinquents, of purpose to raise moneys to defray the extraordinary expences of the Armies and Navies: And what garboils this will produce, all prudent persons may ea∣sily conjecture. Fiftly, a generall decay of Religion, Piety, Learning, Law, and all Arts, Sciences, Trades. Sixthly, an ex∣traordinary new effusion of Christian bloud. Seventhly, an inundation of all kind of sin, wickednesse, Atheism, Heresie, Blasphemy, Murders, Rapes, Robberies, Oppressions, Whore∣dome, Drunkennesse, Dissolutenesse, Barbarousnesse, and diso∣bedience to Laws, Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, and other disorders. Eighthly, Free-quarter, insolences of Souldiers, spoiling, plundring, if not pestilence and famine, the usuall Concomitants of Warre, which will reduce us to a conditi∣on worse then nothing in conclusion. If he cast himself upon Forraign Protestant Kings, Princes and States alone, the far better, though unlikelier of the two; yet this will certainly prove, 1. A great dishonour to God, and scandall to reformed Religion, to see them so un∣naturall and unchristian as to imbrue their hands in one ano∣thers bloud. 2. An extraordinary ground of joy and triumph to the Pope and his Confederates, to behold their enemies thus murthering, invading, and destroying each other by their mutuall dissentions; when they by all their power and policy were unable to accomplish their ruine, and do them so great mischief. 3. A great indangering of all the Prote∣stant Churches and States in Europe, by incouraging their Popish Adversaries to invade and ruine them, whilest thus ingaged in an unbrotherly and unchristian Warre between themselves, and weakening, impoverishing and destroying each other. 5. An effusion of much precious Protestant bloud, which will Gen. 4.10, 11. Jer. 51.35. Ezek. 35, 5.6, 7, 8, 9. cry for vengeance to heaven against the origi∣nall Authors and Occasioners of such a Warre. 6. If the King shall inthrone himself, and regain his Kingdomes by their assistance; though the profession of the Protestant Re∣ligion may still be continued, yet we may justly fear, 1. That
the purity and power of Religion will be much abated. 2. That our Lawes and Liberties will be much indangered and Eclipsed. 3. Our estates confiscated to make them re∣parations, and satisfie the Kings Ingagements. 4. Their removall hence will be disputable, when once possessed of our Country; as the history of the Danes invasions of this Island heretofore, and the Saxons full possession thereof, with the Britains expulsion, will manifest. 5. If the King and they be repulsed by us, yet this will prove a seminary of lasting wars and breaches between us and most Protestant Kingdoms and States; It will hinder all commerce between them and us, to the destruction of Merchandize and Trade; destroy the Protestants strength and interest; impoverish us through Taxes, fill us with dscontents, augment our divisi∣ons, if not conclude in our beggery and ruine. If he throw himself upon forraign Papists and Prote∣stants joyntly, then, First, the Wars are like to be more ge∣nerall, dangerous and costly to us, and of longer continu∣ance. Secondly, The divisions and dangers from at home are like to prove the greater, since all discontented and op∣pressed Protestants and Papists will then be apt upon all oc∣casions and advantages to joyn with that forraign party they best affect, and from whom they may expect the most favour and the best conditions. Thirdly, If the King pre∣vail, then both Parties must be satisfied, and his debts de∣frayed out of our estates; both gratified with a free tole∣ration and exercise of that Religion throughout his Realms as both sides professe: and between them both all will be plundered, impoverished, ruined, and perchance inforced to quit the whole Kingdom to one or both of them, who will challenge an interest therein by conquest and the lon∣gest sword, and hardly part with it when once pos∣sessed thereof. Fourthly, If the King and they should be foiled by us, yet the wars and differences would survive, all commerce and trading lost, Armies and Navies must still be maintained, and Garrisons in all our Kingdoms to secure us; taxes, oppressions, and all publike grievances continued and
muliplied, and thereby new intestine commotions raised; which of themselves alone will destroy us without any othe enemy, And suppose the King himself should miscarry in these Warres, yet the Title and Right of the Crowns of our thre Kingdoms srviving to his Brothers, or if they miscarry, to his Sister, matched to the Prince of Aurenge; or if they all should fail, descending to the Queen of Bohemia, and Prince Elector Palattine; their severall new Titles and Interests will find means to infest us with new Warres, till they have either obtained their rights, or ruied both themselves and us. So that unlesse God put so much widome, and spirit to the English Nation, as to restore the King to his just Rights upon safe and honourable terms, according to their Oaths, Covenant, Protestations, Declarations to all the world, and Principles of their Religion; we can in humane probaility expect nought else, but the utter ruine, both of our Religion, Nation, Kingdoms, and totall extirpation by Forraign ene∣mies. And certainly if we seriously consider, 1. The infinite divisi∣ons, discontents, & oppressions that are every where amongst us. 2. The Heresies, Blasphemies, Sects, and Schisms that are lately broached, and publikely countenanced by us. 3. The Generall contempt and neglect of the publike Ordinances of God, and free toleration granted to all to withdraw them∣selves from them, without the least censure or punishment. 4. The generall contempt, hatred, discountenancing, revi∣ling, and persecuting of godly and faithful Mnisters throughout the Nation, and the snares that are daily laid to intrap and ruine them. 5. The extraordinary Apostacy of many Professors, from the truth, purity, and power of Reli∣gion, almost to professed Atheism, contempt of the Word, Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, and all other Odinances, to meer licentiousnesse, lukewarmnesse, and Prophanenesse. 6. The generall inclination of the people to errours, Ethusiasmes, and seducing spirits. 7. The little cordiall reall love and affe∣ction between Professors of Religion, and the great animosi∣ties,
hatreds and divisions amongst them, both in Opinion Practise and affection. 8. The little conscience of Oaths, Pro∣testations, Covenants, Promises; and great hypocrisie, cove∣tousnesse, oppression, self-seeking, envy, hatred, and malice that is in the Nation, and amongst those especially, who professe themselves Saints of the highest form. 9. The univer∣sall inundation of all kind of sin and wickednesse, and open profession thereof in all places. 10. The extraordinary In∣justice, Tyranny, Cruelty and Mercilesnesse that all parts of the Land complain of, and groan under. 11. The great effu∣sion of Christian bloud, and of the bloud of our Christian Brethren in Covenant, that our whole Land is polluted with; and our rejoycing in this bloud-guiltinesse, instead of repen∣ting and mourning for it. 12. Our present decay of Trade and Merchandize. 13. Our intolerable Taxes and Impositi∣ons o all sorts. 14. The extreme poverty of our Kingdom, and increase of poor people in all parts, which have little work or none, and will not stave. 15. The divisions of our Forces into Ireland and Scotland, where standing Armies and Garrisons must be constantly maintained for fear of revolt. 16. Our great breaches with France and Portugall, and no good quarter with any Forraign States or Kingdomes, which as yet will neither own, nor hold full and open correspon∣dency with our new Governours or Government. 17. The revolt of most of our Forraign plantations from us, and the late Declaration against them, as Traytors, and Rebells, who count us such. 18. The Negotiations with the Pope and Po∣pish Kingdomes, and most Protestant Princes and States to incense them all against us, as enemies to all Magistracy and publike Government, and to mankind it self, as Salmatius hath published us in print. 19. The spreading the pestlence in many places, and the feared famine throughout the Realm. 20. The manifold injuries and afronts offered to all the Nobi∣lity, and most of the Gentry of the Naion, and the whole Nation it self, in the change of the Government, without and against their consent, in contining and increasing their bur∣thens, Taxes, and out-lawing many of them, because they
will not subscribe the Ingagement, in erecting new High Courts to take away their lives, without any legall Triall by their Peers, for offences punishable by no common Law. 21. The Excution of so many Protestants, and not of one Papist whatsoever by these or other Courts of Justice, though the chief contrivers of our late unhappy Wars, and discontinuance of all Capitall proceedings against Priests and Jesuites, since the abolishing of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, made principally against them and the Popes U∣surpations and practises. 22. The injustice of our present cause and Warre, meerly against Monarchy, Presbytery, and old English Peers and Parliaments, purposely to support the pre∣sent Government, set up by the meer power of the sword, yea founded on the bloud of a Protestant King, and ruine of the very best of Parliamens, to prevent a settlement of peace and Religion by an unbloudy Treaty. And then com∣pare them with the Premises, and Cardinall Richelieu his In∣structions and advice to the late French King, a little before his death, (published by an Italian of good note, and prin∣ted in Italy. Anno. 1645.) to foment the late differences be∣tween the late King and Parliament all he could; and if pos∣sible by the solicitation of his instruments, to draw the Com∣mons to change our Monarchy into a meer Republike, there∣by to imbroil all our Kingdomes in civill Warres against each other, as the only and best policy of all, to weaken and destroy both our power and Religion, and advance the inte∣rest of France and Catholike Religion, which we see now accomplished according to his advice; and then we have just cause to fear an inevitable approaching ruine, both of our Religion and Nation, notwithstanding our late Victories and Successes; which do but weaken, impoverish, destroy our selves, and promote the designs of our common enemies, un∣lesse God give us a timely sight and Reformation of this our impolitick oversight, and incline our hearts to a gene∣rall peace and unity thoughout our Kingdome, by resto∣ring every man to his just right and inheritance, from the highest to the lowst, and abolishing all future seeds and oc∣casions
of our intestine Warres: The serious consideration of all which Premises, are a sufficient satisfactory Apology for all Ministers or others, now questioned for the Non-obser∣vance of the late Thanksgiving day, or the great rout and slaughter of our Protestant Presbyterian Brethren of Scot∣land, against all their persecutors. We shall therefore close up all with Abners Speech to Ioab, in case of the civill Wars between the House of David and Saul; wherein the Isae∣lites (of the same Religion and Nation) unnaturally fought and slew each other, Ioabs souldiers pursuing and slaughte∣ring Abners, whom they had discomfited in battell, addres∣sing to those in present power, 2 Sam. 2.26, 27, 28. Then Ab∣ner called to Ioab, and said, shall the sword devoure for e∣ver? knowest thou not that it will be bitternesse in the lat∣ter end? how long shall it be then ere thou bid the people return from following their Brethren? And Ioab said, as God liveth, unlesse thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from follow∣ing their Brethren. So Ioab blew a trumpet, and all the peo∣ple stood still, AND PURSUED AFTER ISRAEL NO MORE, NEITHER FOUGHT THEY ANY MORE: which we heartily pray may be the fruit and issue of these sad and serious Meditations of those who drive on no o∣ther design, but the preservation of Religion and their na∣tive Countrey from totall and finall desolation. FINIS.
A brief DESCRIPTION Of the future History of Europe, from Anno 1650 to An. 1710. Treating principally Of those grand and famous Mutations yet expe∣cted in the World, as, The ruine of the Popish Hie∣rarchy, the final annihilation of the Turkish Empire, the Conversion of the Eastern and Western Jews, and their Restauration to their ancient In∣heritances in the holy Land, and the FIFTH MONARCHIE of the universall Reign of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth. With principal Passages upon every of these, out of that fa∣mous Manuscript of PAVL GREBNER extant in Trinity-Colledge Library in Cambridge. Composed upon the Occasion of the young KINGS Arrival into Scotland, to shew what will in probability be the Event of the present Affairs in ENGLAND and SCOTLAND. Ludit in humanis Printed in th
TO THE Ingenuous and wel-affected Readers. GENTLEMEN, I Here present you with a mishapen Embryo, having neither had time for Perfection, nor life to actuate Acception. A meer Chaos and disordered Dis∣course is it, yet for matter treating of wonderfull and famous Events, which i this European world are quickly to be per∣formed. It is true, that Primi foetus sunt horridiores, a commonly defective in mature Conceptions and ripenesse of judgement. Yet they that reade this Pamphlet seriously, will finde those Passages opened (I will not say fully explained) in Scripture, which Commentator never yet disclosed nor Di∣vine unfolded. In such a intricate Larinth it is easie to stray: therefore I am confident, Charity will usher your Iudgements, and your love cover mine Infirmities. I know I have slipt in many places, but for the present can neither tell where, nor how Some Ariadne might do well to lead the way, and I shall be as ready to follow: Secundae cogitatio∣nes sunt meliores: If I finde those Non-entities to be accepted with, but as much respect as worse ware every day is, it shall not irk me to bestow a week or two in licking it over into a bet∣ter form and putting a handsomer Coat upon it's back. There are several passages in it, which (I know) will not resent with our Great Ones: but Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates,
yet Magis amica veritas, which shall prevail, though all the world gather in battalia against it. I must confesse it is too too abortive: for it came into the world in fewer hours, then Tostatus bestowed in translating the five first Chapters of Genesis out of Greek into Latine. I wish it may obtain the end for which I made it: that is, to move us all with repent∣ance to meet God in these great Mutations and Changes he is bringing upon us in this Land; that every one would strive to reform one from Hereies, Sects and Schisms, to suffer the Scriptures to be our Rule, and the holy Ghost our Guide both in Faith, Religion and Discipline, that so God may put out his hand in amending the Body Politick in the whole, that judge∣ment may depart from us, destruction flee far from us; that Peace may dwell within our wals and plenteousness with∣in our Palaces. I study multum in parvo, and hope to give satisfaction to all, but such as are wedded more to their wils then reasons. For these I have no more but this, A good winde at their backs to the Anticyra's, that they may drink Hellebor lustily to purge their Brains, that they may be more quick, and their Eye-sight clearer. I quote strange Authors in this Work; and good Reason, for the Work it self is strange. Yet they in whose hands these Authors are (and they are not in every Library) shall finde I have both dealt with them truly, and cited them faithfully. And for the Tractate it self, it will with the lear∣ned be either Laudatus aut saltem excusatus; either of which shall content me at this time. Farewel.
A brief DESCRIPTION OF THE Future History of EUROPE, from Anno 1650, to An. 1710. 1. HAving with silence and admiration beheld these ten years,The Occasi∣on of writing this Treais. the horrid Broyls and civil Tumults in these Western Coasts of Europe, I cannot but adore the Justice of God upon his ene∣mies, and his paternall chastisements upon his Church for sin. It hath made me oftn wonder, to behold how virulently and barbarously Protestants could oppose and massacre one another, when the Romish Froggs can live in an established amity among themselves, and laugh at our follies. I will not say, it is Jesuiticall projects which sets us by the ears together, so much as our own Seditious and Schismaticall spirits, and want of Charity. If we would but ponder, how much Popery hath won upon us by these Warres and Divisions, what fearfull occasions we have gi∣ven to the professed enemies of Christ to blaspheme his Name, and deride our Religion, it would much provoke us to end our Controversies, and band against the common Enemy. The Empire hath got but a wofull Booty, by her 30 years Warres, having weakned her self with the losse of Six Millions of valiant Souldiers, and enticed that Imp of Mahomet to prepare an Army of 200000, now in the Field, and ready to march within the bowels of Germany. We in England have gained no better by our civil Warre but in stead of one Tyrant to advance a douzen over us, and from the height of Liberty to runne the broad way up the next hill, to the height of Slavery. Our Western Sun is set, on whom the eies of all Protestants were ixt, to
have composed their differences, and united them into a mutuall League a∣gainst the Romish Dragon, and the false Prophet. Nor was any insuffi∣ciency in him to the performance of so glorious an Enterprize, had not the sins of his own Subjects, hastned his untimely Fate. Behold then what profits our Warre hath brought us! and what a blessing our sins have depri∣ved us of! How fearfull are the Judgements of God and his anger against sin, when the Church is dilacerated, the Commonwealth disjoynted and dismembred in every part thereof, the lust of Tyrants, the pleasure of Pesants, the barbarousnes of Souldiers, dissentions of Churchmen, sad and tragicall ends of Nobles, confusions in Families, countenancing of Heresies, and applauding of Blasphemies are so rife and ripe amongst men! On the con∣trary, how happy are Kingdomes, how blessed be Commonwealths, when Princes, Magistrates, and other subordinate Officers, each in their severll place and calling, strive to promote the glory of God, with the Liberty, Honour and Tranquillity of Subjects; where the Ministry is incouraged, Universities countenanced, Courts of Judicature upholden, Subjects be unanimous and accustomed to the Exercise of Piety and Godlinesse: lastly when both Prince and people aim joyntly at the advancement of the Gospel and mutuall commodity of one another, so that there be no decay, no leading into Captivity, nor complaining in their streets! II. Th subject ttr of is ensuing Discourse.The disparity of these two contradictory conditions, and the fearfull effects, which they in all ages have wrought in the Consciences of men, have made me at length after a long time of silence put Pen to Paper, and through the intricate Labyrinth of those portions of Scripture which never Commentator yet ever medled with (I mean, the twelve last Chapters of Ezkiel, the three last of the Revelation, the last of Daniel, with some pas∣sages in Hosea and Zechry) to descry when We People of England with all Protestants in Europe shall see an end of these our Warres and Tumults, what shall be the Estate of our Churches, States and Kingdomes, from this present year 1650, to the beginning of the Fifth and last universall MO∣NARCHY of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth, which shall begin in the year of our Lord 1710; and in what year we may expect the down∣fals of the Beast of Rome, the Red Dragon of Constantinople, the totall Conversion and restauration both of the Eastern and Western Jews within their holy Land of Iury: all which must mot certainly be fulfilled before the end of the World. Of these high Points and Mysteries, I finde no∣thing in any Commentator upon the last of Daniel and the Revelations, save only Brightman, who being acquainted in Leiden with Ioseph Scaliger, got some (but those very imperfect) notes of Grebner concerning those Numbers in Ezekiel and Daniel. But that excellent Manuscript, which Iohannes Baudenis writ of the Life and Writings of Grebner, declareth all
these things most plainly and punctually, how that greater Troubles, fer∣fulle Combustions, direfuller Devastations shall come upon the Western Kingdomes of Europe, then yet ever did, before they can expect the down∣fall either of Turk or Pope, or the universall Monarchy of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth. In which incomparable Work the Learned Astrologer bringeth Divine and Heavenly Reasons, why Europe (for the space of thirty seven years, after that fearfull blazing Comet in 1618.) should with amazed eyes behold the infinite and sudden mutations and downfals of flourishing States and potent Kingdomes, the deformity of Empires, and mournfull faces of Commonwealths (as is lately happened in En∣gland, Portugall, Swethland, Bohemia, and Denmark) the Devastations of whole Kingdoms at a clap, and burning six or seven Nations at once in their ashes and cinders (as of late in Germany) not to make them ask whether there be a God, Heaven and Providence, or not? or whether Empires and States depend wholly upon the will and power of man, or upon secret and hidden causes beyond the thoughts and expectations of the World? but to praise God for his paternall corrections, seeing by this they know he remembreth them, and that through this Fire and Water of Affliction he will bring his Church to a finall Conquest ove her Enemies, and both the Congregations of Jews and Gentiles to an universall Monarchy over the face of the whole Earth. Severall passages of which Manuscript I will insert here and there in this ensuing Discourse, as Method and Matter shall require. III. Since the spirituall sword was sheathed in England (which lopt off the serpentine Heads of Heresie and Schisme,The Confu∣tation of the wicked Opi∣nions of the Millenaries of the Perso∣nall Reign of Christ upon Earth after An. 1700. while they were yet growing) it is a wonder to see how all Sects and Schismaticall Opinions in the world have (like devouring Weed) overgrown and choked the seed of the Word. Above the rest, the Millenaries have exalted themselves, whose abominable Pamphlets have flown abroad like Atomes, wherein they dream of a Personall Reign of Christ upon Earth, how he shall descend from Heaven An. 1666, destroy all the works of darknesse in every corner of the Earth, make an easie passage to men from Earth to Heaven, so that they may ascend into Heaven, and leap down to Earth again, as oft as they list: how he shall keep a Quarter Sessions or Goal-delivery in his own Person upon Mount Olivet, call all Nations before him, rebuke them of sin face to face, and shall cut out of them their stony hearts, and shall sew in their bellies hearts of flesh in stead thereof: that An. Dom. 1700 shall be the day of Judgement, and that the Judgement shall last other 1700 years, because otherwise the glorious Attributes of Christ's Mercy and Justice cannot be sufficiently explained to the World and the Consciences of men. All which Fopperies with many mo too horrid to
relate, are contained in M. Archers Personall Reign of Christ upon Earth, Rich. Stirreys Kingdome of King Jesus, and in A.R. his Caelestis Hierusalem, Printed A. 1642, 1644, and 1645. Now having unmasked the vanity of this Error (ut contraria juxtà se posita magis elucescant) I will epitomize in this Section the truth of the future estate of the World, from this time to the end, which afterward I intend (God willing) further to dilate and prosecute in this Treatise. This year 1650 all Europe are in civil Warres. These civill warres shall not cease till they have mustered out a great Army of the true worshippers of God to ruine Rome, which shall be about Anno 1666. Rome thus destroyed, the Western Jews shall begin to learn the waies of God, and believe his Gospel (which they cannot do so long as Rome standeth) and shall Anno 1683. enter upon the conversion of their Eastern brethren (the 10. Tribes now invisibly hid in Tartaria and India) and they two (none else) shall ruine the Mahumetan Empire about An. 1698. and so shall be restored to the holy Land to reinhabit Jerusalem. Then must be∣gin a comparative felicity of the Church of God upon earth, because after these times both Turk and Pope shall be destroyed. Neverthelesse this felici∣ty must be mingled with internall troubles and persecutions, within the bow∣els of the Church, because the Church shall never be wholly at rest, while the world standeth. Lo, here the difference betwixt Truth and Heresie, betwixt the opinions of the Millenaries and right sense of Scriptures. The Millenaries say, Christ must descend personally from heaven: The Scriptures on the contrary say, he shall not come from Heaven personally till the last day, when he shall descend with his holy Angels in flaming fire to judge the quick and the dead. He shall send power and strength from heaven to his true Worshipppers (as he hath done hitherto) to destroy Tuk and Pope, from Heaven he shall give power to his ancient people the Jews, to regain their ancient Land of Judea, and not by his corporeall presence upon Earth: from Heaven about An. 1700. he shall transferre his Gospel from Europe, as he hath done from Asia, and raise up and inspire godly Ministers after his own will, who shall implant his holy word in all and every of the King∣domes and Provinces of America, and in all countries of the Southern and Eastern India, China, Tartaria, and in all the regions of the North unto the worlds end, and make it shine in as great purity and glory as ever it hath done in England or Germany. This is the felicity of the Church, the fifth Monarchy in Nebuchadnezzars Image, the ministeriall (not perso∣nall) Reign and Kingdom of Christ upon arth, which must not endure for ever (as Archer would have it) nor for a 1000 years (as Alsted dreams) but for a very short time, that all Nations (none excepted) may professe Gods worship, and none plead ignorance before his Tribunall, pre∣sently after which the dissolution of the world shall come, after which time shall be no more.
IV. This Digression made, I return to my purposed method. That fearfull and ominous Night-torch,A Dclarai∣on o the efects of the blaving Co∣met, Anno 168. which prognosticated all that misery to Germany and great Brittain, which they have now suffered, was the forerunner of all our evils. This Comet Longomontanus and D. Bam∣bridge say appeared but 28. dayes, indeed it was neither observed in Denmark nor at London before Novemb. 18. or 21. but Erycius Puteanus observed it Novemb. 11. the first time, as he testifies in the first book of his learned Pa∣radoxologie, pag. 33.38. so it appeared for the space of 37. or 38. dayes, foreshewing that first Germany, Livonia, Swethland, with other North-parts of Europe, then Scotland, England and Ireland, should feel the terrible effects thereof in warre and famine, for the space of 37. or 38. years, even from An. 1618. till An. 1656. This Comet was strengthned by a fearfull conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, An. 1616. July 18. The effects of both which were not to be confined in those terrible concomitants of war perpetra∣ted in Germany (which L.B. and D. Vincent so pathetically delineate) but were to end in the judgements of God upon Europe for neglecting the down∣fall of Antichrist, ruine of Rome, annihilation of the Sodomiticall Order of the Society of Jesuites, and in the extirpation of all Kingdoms and free States of Papists, to make way for the Lion of the North to erect his FIFTH MONARCHIE in the ashes of Germany, wherein shall be established the eternall felicity of the Church, by the conversion of the Jews and fulnesse of the Gentiles. M. Shirley Fellow of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, once shewed me a Letter from his learned friend Buxtorf, dated An. 1624. May 3. wherein was contained a Prognostique Prophecy of the before-mentioned Comet and Conjunction, sent him from that incomparable Astrologer, Iohannes Baudensis Nephew to Paul Grebner, which for the strangenesse and rarity of it, I will here insert. Caeterùm, quòd de patriae nostrae afflictissimae statu consilesco, indignaris; nihil profectò scribendum nunc habo, nisi omnia (ut Poetae verbis utor) in pejus ru∣ere, & retrò sublapsa referri. Tam Danus quàm Caesar nixè laborant, ut mise∣ram Germaniam quamprimùm pssum iri spectem: Nec milites utriusqùe quie∣quam aliud meditannr, nisi strages & vastitatem. Accepi nudiustertiùs à Jo∣hanne Baudensi (amico mihi multimodis charissimo) sententias nostratium Astrologorum de horribili illo Comet, qui Anno 1618. apparuit, & nuperri∣mâ Saturni & Iovis Conjunctione. En tibi vaticinium, si no Apostolicum, at longè (ni fallor) plusquàm Astrologicum. Surrexit Deus & gladium eduxit. Clades magnorum Imperatorum, strages populorum, regum funcra, rerum-publi∣carum eversiones, monarchiarum mutationes, assassinationes principum & ducum illustriorum, violenta & superba consilia, proditiones & rebelliones inter Subditos in hoc coelo nostro Europico exorientur. Exporientur religiosi à potentioribus Le∣gum
& institutorum Ecclesiastiorum mutationem, à plebeijs novarum rerum in∣explebilem cupiditatem. Boreales Europae partes ferro, morbo & peste labora∣bunt, depauperabuntur divites, Principes Dominijs exuti erunt, exulabunt pa∣tres & filij post longum turbrum intercapedinem in integrum restituentur. Hic quoque Cometa terribilem Romae ruinam, singulisque Europae civitatibus in∣cendia minitatur Clerici Papicolae praecipuè Cardinales de gradibus suis dejici∣entur, Loiolistae ubique ad mortem rapientur, nec Gallis aut Hispanis ani∣mus erit carnificum lqueos evitare. Quinimò cernimus etiam in terrâ sanct à veteribus incolis oriturum Regnum, quod rit Christianis miraculum, & Orbi terriculamentum. Novique Imperij Revolutio istis succedet, sub quo generale gaudium, laetitia & voluptas humano generi subministrabitur, improbis ubique de medio sublatis. Haec omnia per Regem quendam Borealem peragentur, qui pa∣cem, Religionem, & Securitatem per totum Orbem miraculosè stabilibit. Whereas you are angry that I keep silence concerning the estae of our most distressed Countrey. Truly I have nothing now to write, but that all things (that I may use the words of the Poet) grow worse and woese. As well the King of Denmark as the Emperour earnestly endeavour to see miserable Germany destroyed as soon as may be; neither do the souldiers of either of them, think of any other thing then slaughter and desola∣tion. I received the other day, from my dear Friend Iohn Baudensis, the opini∣ons of our Astrologers concerning that terrible Comet which appeared Anno 1618, and about the later Conjunction of Saturn and Iupiter. Behold thou then a Prophecie (if not Apostolical) yet (if I mistake not) far be∣yond Astrological. GOD hath arisen and drawn his sword: There shall happen in these our European Regions, the destruction of great Emperours, the slaughter of people, Funerals of Kings, subversions of Common∣wealths, mutations of Monarchies, massacres of Princes and illustrious Commanders, violent and proud Counsels, Treasons and Rebellions amongst Subjects: Clergie-men shall finde a change of Laws and Ecclesia∣stical Constitutions, by those of greater power, and an insatiable desire of new things amongst common people. The Northern parts of Europe shall be greatly oppressed with Warre, Sicknesse and Pestilence. Rich men shall be impoverished, Princes cast out of their Dominions; The fathers shall be banished, and after a long space of trouble their children shall be restored to their former condition. This Comet also threatneth the terrible ruine of Rome and burnings in all the Cities of Europe. The Papistical Clergy, especially the Cardinals, shall be cast down from their Dignities, the Je∣suites every where shall be drawn to death, neither shall the French-men or Spaniards have courage to save their necks from the halters. Further∣more, We discern a Kingdom to arise of the most ancient Inhabitants in the holy Land, which to Christians shall be a Miracle, and to the World a terrour; and these shall obtain the Revolution of a new Empire, un∣der which shall be administred universal Gladnesse Joy and Delight to mankinde (the wicked being every where taken away.) All these things shall be effected by a certain Northern King who shall miraculously
establish Peace, Religion and Security throughout the whole world. Thus far the words of this Letter. And how punctually all these things are come to passe, let the world judge. We in England have felt the misery of the one, and are ready stript to suffer the calamities of the other, having for the present lost what is impossible to be regained, and seeing a new storm of Devastations hanging over our heads by the young Kings late arrival in Scotland (where he is received as absolute Soveraign) which fil mens hearts with pensive thoughts and doubings what will be the end of these wo∣full beginnings. For my part, I am a zealous adorer of a Parliament, nor deserve I to censure the Actions of our Representatives, yet will I not promise the Term of an Age to our novel Government, but think veily, a change to the old Model is nigh at hand. It is casual to the best Kingdoms to have Interregnums, but as we stand now, we shall nether be for six years together a Body Politique, nor a true Church of God. That excellent Astrologer of Misnia, Paul Grebner, was more then an In∣quisitour into the Effects of Starres, being questionlesse indued from a∣bove with a Prophetick spirit, not to be desired, much lesse expected of all. He plainly affirms, That as England ever was a Monarchy within it self, since it was discovered by the Romans, so shall it so continue and remain, even then when all other Kingdoms and States in Europe are swallowed up of the FIFTH MONARCHIE of the Lion of the North. His Prophecie of our Civil Wars, of the Fate of our late King, and the Restauration of his Son to his Fathers Dominions, runneth thus in Ban. 72. Per idem tempus Rex quidam Borcalis (nomine Carolus) Mariam ex Pa∣pistic religione sibi assumptam in matrimonium conjunxerit,Grebners Prophecie of our lae King, and his Son now King. ex quo evidet re∣gum infelicissimus. Unde populus ejus, ipso abdicato, Comitem quendam per∣antiquae Familiae regno praeponet, qui tres annos, aut circitèr durabit; & hoc quoque remoto, Equitem quendam bellicosum in ejus locum assumet, qui paulò ampliùs regnabit. Post hunc eliget nullum. Interea, unus è stirpe Caroli in lit∣tore regni patres sui cum Gallicis, Suevicis, Danicis, Hollandicis, Burgur∣dicis & Germanicis auxiliis stabit, omnes inimicos suos cruentissimo praelio su∣perabit, & posteà regnum suum felicissimè administrabit, eritque Carolo mag∣no major. And in Ban. 74. he saith, Circà Anno 1663 Brittaniarum Rex antiquum cum Belgarum Ordinibus foedus & amicitiam rumpet, ob ereptas sibi ab ipsorum piratis naviculas quasdam, qui pertrepidi ad novum Danorum Regem (nomine Christiernum) confugient, qui utrosque primò compositissimis orationi∣bus, deinde muneribus in concordiam alliciet. About the same time a certain Northern King (named Charles) who shall marry Mary of the Popish Religion to his great unhappinesse, so that his people (rejecting him) shall set up an Earl of a very ancient Family, who shall continue three years or thereabouts, he dying they shall elect in his stead a warlike Knight, who shall rule a little longer: after him they elect none; But in the mean one of Charles his Stock shall land on the Sea-coasts of his Fathers Kingdom, and with French, Swedish, Danish, Hollandian, Burgonian and German Forces, in a most cruel battell shall vanquish all his
Enemies, and afterward most happily govern his Kingdom, and be greater then Charls the Great. And about the year 1663, the King of the most ancient Brittains for the losse of some Ships at Sea shall break his League and Amity with the States of Holland, who fearing, shall to the new King of Danes (named Christiernu) for succour, and he by fair Intreaties and large Gifts shall win either side to Agreement. Nor ever doth he speak of England in all that famous manuscript, but as of the most warlike and potent Kingdome in Europe. Therefore all good Christians ought to wish the new Warre were concluded rather by an happy Agreement and Composition, then by Sword and Musket, and the King placed on his Throne rather with the hands of his loving and and rejoycefull Subjects, than with the swords of Forreigners. For if the beginning of his Restauration be in bloud, and tumbling of garments in bloud, the Accomplishment of it will be with burning and fuel of fire.
That this future History of Europe, may be more fully and clearly understood, I intend to set it down by way of Chro∣nology upon the principall passages in Ezekiel and the Reve∣lations, as I lately collected it out of the two MSS. of Grebner and Ioannes Baudensis, and afterward subscribed certain Notes and Animadversions upon the same. THe woman travelleth, viz. The Jewish Synagogue bring∣eth forth Christ, whereupon ensueth the battel between Michael and the Dragon (Christ and the Devil) Christ being persecuted of the Devil by Herod in his Infancy, flieth into Aegypt, in his appointed time of 34 years, suffereth and ascendeth into Heaven; The Devil en∣raged  that he could no more persecute Christ, raiseth persecutions   against the Primitive Church by Nero and others, Revel. 12. per tot. The first Seal opened The white Horse and his Rider, with  the crowned Bow, signifieth the purity of the Gospel in the Primi∣tive Church, Revel. 6.2. Satan is bound for a 1000 ears from raging against the Church, Revel. 20.2.8. The second Seal opened, The red Horse is the massacre of  Christians in the ten general Persecutions about Ano 65, to An. 330. Revel. 6.3, 4. The third Seal opened, Simon Magus, Ebion and Corinthus trouble the Church with damnable and infectious Heresies, Revel. 6.9, 6. The fourth Seal opened, Horrid Famine, devouring Pestilen∣ces  and outragious Wars, waste and depopulate the Roman Em∣pire for cruelty to Christians, Revel. 6.7, 8. The fifth Seal opened, Mutual Massacres of the wretched Cae∣sars, beginning at Pertinax, and ending at Licinius, slain by Constantine the Great, Revel. 6.9, 10, 11. The sixth Seal opened, Dioclesian and Maximilian give over  their Caesarships, because they could not eradicate Christianity. Constantine strengthened with their Armies and Provinces, warreth upon Licinius, slayeth him, destroyeth the Pretorian-Camp, abo∣lisheth Heathenism, and setteth up the true Worship of God, Revel. 6.12. to the end.
The seventh Seal opened, And silence in Heaven for half an hour, viz. The Church enjoyeth rest thirty years, all the time that Con∣stantine  the Great reigned, Revel. 8.1. Yet clouds of persecution   arise in the interim in the sky of the Church; and the seven An∣gels  prepare themselves to blow the seven Trumpets for the space of 23 years, even all the reign of Constantines three sons, Revel. 8.2, 3. Iulian that wretched Apostata bending his utmost endeavours to  ruine the Gospel, licenceth 17000 Jews to return to Ierusalem to rebuild their Temple; but God destroyeth them all by Light∣nings and Pestilences: Horrible Earthquakes cast up into the Air the foundations which had been buried in rubbish till then. Therefore Daniels compute of the Temples finall ruine must but begin then; there begin his two Numbers (Chap. 12. ver. 11, 12.) of 1290, and 1335, which in all must but make 1335 years, which added to 363, make up and point to Anno Christi 1698, the joyfull Jubile of the Churches Deliverance from all Adversity. The first Trumpet blown. Fire and hail (war and bloudshed) cast into the troublesome Sea of the Roman-Western-Empire by Valentinian, and the succeeding Emperours, untill the end of the Western-Empire, The savage Inundations of Goths, Huns, Van∣dals and Bulgarians into Italy, Revel. 8.7. The second Trumpet blown, Boniface that Mountain of fiery  Combustions obtaineth of Phocas the Popish Supremacy. Hence wars betwixt the Emperours and Popes, Revel. 8.8, 9. The third Trumpet blown, The Romish Bishop (the great  Star of the Western Christian Clergy) falleth from the Heaven of Truth and Godlinesse, and of a vigilant Pastour becomes a ravenous Robber of the Church, and the gifts thereof, Revel. 8.10, 11. The fourth Trumpet blown, The Pope fallen from Piety, and his Clergy from the Pulpits, Christ the Sun of righteousness with his Merits, the Church the Moon, and the Ministers the Stars thereof are eclipsed, and vilified by Sylvester II, Revel. 8.12, 13. Satan loosed out of prison beginneth to rage by Gregory VII  against the Gospel of Christ, Revel. 20.4. The fifth Trumpet blown, The Vicar of Christ with his  Keyes openeth hel's mouth to let out his Cloister-fiends and sata∣nical Locusts to overspread the Earth of Christendome, described by Iohn most graphically, Revel. 9.9. to 13. The sixth Trumpet blown, The Ottoman Empire ariseth, in∣vadeth  first the Eastern-Empire of Constantinople, and winneth it: then flieth upon the Germane Emperour with barbarous milli∣ons of invincible Armies, Revel. 9.13. to the end.
The saying, Revel. 9.15. of the Turks preparation for a day, a moneth, and a year, beginneth now. Which Number allegorical∣ly taken maketh 398 years:☜ which added to A. 1300, the year of the original of the Turkish Empire, sheweth that A. 1698. shall be the final downal of the same. The last Trumpet is blown, The Thrones, Principalities and  Dominions in Heaven rejoyce, that God would now at length take his Churches Cause in hand, and raise up Luther, and other Sons of Thunder to vindicate the quarrel thereof against the Romish Antichrist to the ruine of his Kingdom, Revel. 11. from ver. 15. to the end. By eating of the Book,☜ Chap. 10. Measuring the Temple and slaying the Witnesses, Chap. 11. is understood the Re∣formation by Luther, and downfall of the Papacy under Charles the fifth. The first Vial poured out, England, Scotland and Ireland by  the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, renounce the Papacy; which ge∣nerates the ulcers of spight and malice in the Romish Church against England, Revel. 16.2. The second Vial poured out, Martin Chemnitius and others, pro∣nounce  the vengeance of God against the mortiferous Sea of the Councel of Trent, Revel. 18.3. The third Vial poured out, The stinking Waters of the Papacy  are infected with bloud in murthering of the Popes and Romanists in Rome, the slaughters of the Spaniards in the Low-Countreys, and the Discomfiture of the Spanish-Armado in Anno 1588. Revel. 16.5, 6, 7. The fourth Vial poured out, The Protestant Champions Pa∣reus, Polanus, Whitakers, Perkins, Andrews, King Iames and others, pour light upon the Sunne of the Gospel, in writing against Bellarmine, Stapleton, Campian, and other Papists, Revel. 16.8, 9. The fifth Vial is now pouring out, The Swedes in Germany, An. 1632. The English in England, 1640, combine against the Papists, Jesuites proscribed in Poland and Swethland, Anno 1648. This Vial shall end in the ruine of Rome, Anno 1666. Revel. 16.10, 11. The sixth Vial beginneth to be poured out, Three barbarous  Nations sack Hydruntum in Apulia, made enrodes into the East∣ern Coasts of Italy, and sack them with fire and sword. Factions and Massacres in Rome and Tuskany. The Pope contemned and invaded, The Western Christians make an Army, and fire Rome in the 2419 year after Romulus laid the foundation thereof, as Sibylla prophesied. Oracul. lib. 4. Revel. 16. from ver. 12. to 17. The faithfull and true Warriour riding upon a white Horse
descendeth from heaven with his Souldiers riding upon white hor∣ses, to fight against the enemies of his Church. The Angel in the Sun calleth to all the fowles of heaven, to come to the feast of God, to eat the flesh of Kings, Captains, mighty Men and horses. Rev. 19.11, 17, 18. And I saw the beast and the Kings of the earth, and the Warriours gathered together, to warre against him that sate on the horse, and against his Souldiers. But the beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet, that worketh miracles before him, whereby he deceived them that have received the beasts mark, and them that worship his image: These two were cast alive into the lake burning with fire and brimstone, &c. Ibid. 19, 20. Vrbs antiqua ruit, multos dominata per annos: Destruitur{que} armis gens scelerata suis. Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, nor receive of her plagues. Forasmuch (O Rome) as thou glorifiedst thy self, and livedst in pleasure, saying, I sit a Queen, am no wid∣dow, and shall see no sorrow: therefore shall thy plagues come up∣on thee in one day, death, sorrow and famine, and thou shalt be burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God that judgeth thee. The Kings of the earth shall bewail thee, and thou shalt never more be inhabited, the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee, and the voice of the Bridegroom and of the Bride shall be heard no more in thee. Rejoyce (O heavens!) for righteous are Gods judgements, He hath condemned the great Whore. Then they sung Hallelujah, and her smoak arose up for evermore. Rev. 18.7, 8, 20. & 19.3. Rome being destroyed, Jews dwell amongst Protestants, and be∣gin  to search into the Scriptures, and learn the waies of God. A geat Conjunction of Saturn and Iupiter in Leo. The Jews  converted in the West, prepare to unite with their Brethren in the East, and raise a Combination to propagate the Gospel and destroy the Headless Turks. Praise our God all ye his Saints and Servants, and ye that fear  him both small and great. And I heard the voice of a great mul∣titude both small and great, as it were the sound of many Waters, and as the voice of strong thundrings, saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord our God reigneth. Let us rejoice and be glad and give glory to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath  made her self ready, Rev. 19.5, 6, 7. The dreadfull and terrible Battell of the Jews with the enraged  Turks in the land of Judea, where the Turks are destroyed with an eternall destruction. Ezech. 38. & 39. chap. all. Gog and Magog, (viz. Turks and Tartarians) gather them∣selves together to battell, whose Number is as the sand of the Sea, and they went up into the plain of the Earth, and incompassed the Tents of the Saints abot, even the beloved City, but fire came
down from God out of Heaven, and destroyed them Revelat. 20.8, 9. THE FIFTH MONARCHY. ANd I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven  and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea. The new Jerusalem came down from God out of heaven, trimmed like a Bride to meet her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, behold the Glory and Tabernacle of God with men, and he shall dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God with them: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the first things are passed away. Rev. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, &c. No more Germany, no more any Western Empire or any foot∣step  thereof; for God hath now transplanted his Gospel from Europe unto a more gratefull and pregnant soyl, which will bring forth the fruits thereof in due season. Iam nova Progenies coelo demittitur alto, Exoritur{que} atris Lucifer albus equis. The holy Temple restored at Jerusalem: the holy utensils pre∣pared: the glory of God fileth the house, God lovingly upbraid∣eth the Israelites for their infidelity and Idolatry, for which they were Vagabonds in all Coasts of the World 2400 years, without King, Law, Priest and Temple, and rehearseth their blessed and joyfull estate now being converted and victorious over all their enemies. Ezech. 12. last chap. per tot. Behold I make all things new. Rev. 21.5. The Jewish Magistrates and Ministers labour in the Conversion  of the World to the Gospel of God. Ezech. 46. per. tot. The seventh Viall powred out, And now are all things fulfilled  which are contained in the Scriptures. After which all Nations may expect the comming of the great Judge, to render to every man according to his works. Thus farre reacheth the Observations of Grebner and Bau∣densis.
VI. BEfore I come to comment upon this Chronologicall Index, it will not be amisse to deliver that saying,A true Ex∣plication of th Number in Rev. 20.8. Revel. 20.8. (And the Saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years) from all those false Interpretations which have been fastned upon it, by Papias, Bucholcherus, Scaliger, Brightman, Alsted and others, and declare the true sense of it, as remotest from Innovation, and coming nearest the intention of the H. Ghost. There is in this 20 Chap. two severall Epoches of a 1000 years, which are two severall waies to be interpreted. The first is in vers. 2. of Satan being bound for a 1000 years; which must begin either at the Instant of our Saviours Incarnation, and end at An. 1000, in the 2 year of the Popedome of Sylvester II, that infamous Sodomite, Necromancer, and Conjurer, under whom the filthinesse and Idolatry of the Romish Church was brought to the height: or rather they must begin at the Destruction of the 2d Temple by Titus, which was An. 71, and end in An. 1071, in the Popedome of Gregory VII, aliàs Hildebrand, who first broke bonds of Allegiance with Henry the Emperour, excommuni∣cated him, set the Gospel in a totall Eclipse, and Europe in the mournfull Flames of a civil Warre: but of this in the Chronology. But this in the 8 vers. of the Saints reigning with Christ a 1000 years, Alsted, Bucholcherus and others expound of a Comparative Felicity of the Church on this Earth, for a 1000 years, beginning An. 1694, when they say all visible Enemies of the Church shall be overthrown, and must end An. Ch. 2694. after which shall be the Warre of Gog and Magog against the Church, which shall be prevented by the coming of Christ to judgement. But in this Alsted is wide from the right mark: for this number must begin An. 1072, at the expiration of the former, and must be interpreted for all that time that the World shall last after the aforesaid An. 1072. And the holy Ghost doth term this indefinite and unlimited time by the Number of a 1000 years, for three speciall Reasons: 1 Because a 1000 years are the Number of Perfection and of Eternity, and doth most aptly serve to expresse the End of these Earthly Troubles, and the beginning of that Time which never shall have end. 2 Because those things which the holy Ghost in the Scriptures affirmeth are yet to come, must not be plenarily accomplished till after An. 1830, it may please God that the glorious and flourishing estate of the Church and Gospel here upon Earth, may continue much of 200 years longer, to increase the number of them who shall be saved, and to amplifie more the heavenly At∣tributes of Gods Mercy, Righteousnesse, Truth, Holinesse and Omnipo∣tency in the Salvation of the Just: and his Equity, Judgement and Upright∣nesse in the firebrands of destruction. 3 Because a vicissitudinary time of Affliction and Ease, Persecution and rest, pure Doctrine and Heresies, is signified to be the whole continuance or most part of a 1000 years, wherein those who are to suffer for the Testimony of the Word of God, and the truth of Jesus Christ, shall have their reward after the expiration of that time, which cannot be till after the last generall Judgement. The fearfull and er∣rible
Warre of Gog and Magog (viz. the bloudy Warre of Turks and Tar∣tarians with the Jews newly converted in the Land of Iury, in which the ve∣ry name of Turks shall be rooted from off the Earth) must be before the be∣ginning of this glorious Estate and Felicity of the Church of God here upon Earth, and therefore the 7, 8, 9, and 10 verses, are in order of time before the 5 and the 6. The Devil and Antichristianity must be chained up in the dungeon of Hell for the space of a 1000 years after the Incarnation of Christ. An. 1000 must the Devil and Romish Idolatry by the Popedome of Sylvester the second, be let loose to range upon Earth, and tyrannize over the Church for the most part of another 1000, ever till An. 1698 (numerus completus being put here pro incompleto) before an happy and comfortable Estate of the Gospel can be brought forth to the World.The estate of England with other Prvinces of Europe from Anno 1650. to An. 1698. herefore all Christendome from this year 1650, must expect very sad and wofull daies, much persecution, bloodshed and savadge tyanny in every Kingdom of Eu∣rope (especially in France, Spain, Italy, Swethland, Germany and England) untill An. 1698. Some of those Kingdoms which have abandoned the superstition of the beast, shall by subtle allurements be perswaded to readmit and reesta∣blish the same. Wofull and unsupportable Afflictions shall befall both the European Jews (which are the two Tribes of Benjamin and Iudah, now re∣sident in Christendom and Turkie) as likewise the ten Tribes, the Kingdom of Israel (who shall insensibly and miraculously arise out of the bowels of Tartaria and India, about An. 1669.) who neverthelesse shall be so extraordi∣narily supported by God, that they shall stand in little or no need at all of the Christians. Because from this time of the Conversion of the Israelites for the spac of 30 years, these 12 Tribes shall suffer much trouble, Heathens, Papists and Mahometans, shall strive to eradicate their name from under hea∣ven, and yet all in vain; for an illustrious and heroick Prince (è Tribu Neph∣tali oriundus) shall be their valiant and fortunate Commander, called Michael, not proprio nomine, but because he Dan. 12.1. shall stand up and shew himself the Assertor and Protector of their Religion and Liberty. In which time shall be such troubles as never were, no, nor ever shall be to the end of the world. For like as the Christians had rest 30. years from the Ascension of Christ, and now have endured the fiery triall almost these 1600. years, since that time from the Heathen Emperors, and the Beast; so the Israelies, which shall 1600. years till Anno 1668. live without Prince, Law, Temple, Sacri∣fice, and true Religion (as Hosea prophesied ch. 3. v. 4, 5.) beginning now to be converted to Christ,Certain re∣markable Numbers in Scripture, whereby he Epoch' of the ruine of Tuk, Poe, and the con∣version of the Iews are more ully strengthned. shall have savage times of affliction and Butche∣ries for other 30. years (to welcome their conversion withall) till Anno 1698. when God shall grant rest from their enemies, and begin a peaceable estate of the Church. VII. Entring at length upon my Notes on the afore-said Chronology, I think it meet first to strengthen the former Epoch's of the ruine of Rome, down∣fall of the Turk and Tartar, and the Conversion of the Jews by the Con∣duct
of certain memorable Numbers in holy Scriptures. Grave and judicious Authours have with wonder and admiration observed the heavenly and ini∣mitable Method of holy Scrjptures, how all the Mysteries and memorable Occurrences in the same are comprized in Numbers, how within the com∣passe of such a Quantity of years, God alwayes divulged his Counsels, and manifested what he purposed should be wrought among the children of men. So that in considering the admirable consent and agreement of Times by  things past, we may probably conjecture of things to come. From the Creation to the Floud was 1656 years: the Floud was a sign of the Con∣summation of all those things which are to be fulfilled before the conclusion of time. Anno Christi 1656, let the Church of God expect with joy and comfort, the acting of the first Scene of the Tragedies of all those European Kingdoms, which have been implacable Persecutours of the Gospel of  Christ. The whole Government of Moses (who was a second Noah to the Church) is a shadow of the Kingdom of Christ. The Law continued in force 1529 years to the Passion of Christ: But 1598 years to the Destru∣ction of the Temple by Titus: The Destruction of the Temple by Titus was according to the accompt of Dionysius Exiguus, A. C. 69. From thence rec∣kon the Number of 1598 years, and you come to A. 1667; which is the year which shall smoke with the ascending up of the Flames which consume  the Kingdom of the Beast. From the Nativity of Christ to his Re-nati∣vity in the preaching of his Gospel by Luther and other eminent Ministers are 1517 years: And from the beginning of the Reign of the Maccabees un∣till the Birth of Christ are 169 years: Put these two sums together, and you come to Anno 1686, in which God having 18 years before enlightned the eyes of those who for almost 2000 years have sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death, and having laid the Kingdom of the Beast and the false Prophet in the lowest dust, shall bring that people into the bosome of the true Church, which within 13 years after shall deliver his children from all  adversity. From the universal Deluge of man-kinde by the Floud to the beginning of the universal Captivity of the Church under Nebuchadnezzar beleaguering Ierusalem are numbered 1698 years: So likewise from the Birth of the King of Kings unto the final Consummation of the Miseries, and restauration of the Felicity of the Church by the Destruction of Gog and Magog, shall be reckoned the very same Number of 1698 years. From the  Confusion of the Tower of Babel to the return of the Jews from Babel, are 1666 years: and from prophane Pompey's spoiling of the Temple at Ieru∣salem (when the Kingdom was taken from the house of David, and Super∣stition and Gentilism began to spring up amongst the Jews) to the Birth of of Antichrist and Apostasie in the Church of God are 666 years; from thence eckon a 1000 years wherein the Saints must suffer Persecution and Martyrdom for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and the truth of a good Conscience, Revel. 20.4. and you come to A. 1666, in which shall be ful∣filled all those things which are mentioned, Revel. 18, and the 19 Chapter.  So likewise from the Departure out of Aegypt, untill the Death of Christ, are numbered 1542 years: to these adde hose 169 years, which are from
he beginning of the Reign of the Assomonaei or Macchabees to the Birth of Christ, and you come to Anno 1711; which year shall be wonderfull and terrible to all the world, because that in the year next going before (viz. Anno 1710.) the abominable Names and mention of Papists, Turks and Tartars being eradicated from the memories of men, the glorious Estate of the Gospel, and the terrestial Felicity of the Church of God shall begin over the face of the whole Earth. From the Birth of Moses untill the De∣struction  of Ierusalem by Titus (which typifies the end of the world) are 1646 years: so many from the Incarnation of our Saviour, denoted that year, whose influence hath begun, and shall prove fatal to most of the King∣doms of Europ: adde to these 20 years to come after, from that time (which 980 years ago were prophesied of, to be those years, in which the Kingdom and the Dominion, and the greatness of Kingdoms under the whole Hea∣ven, shall be given to the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7.17.) and it will amount to the year of the fatal Ruine of the Beast, Anno 1666. From these few Particulars of the Consent and Agreement of times in the holy Scri∣ptures, I infer thus much.A Prgno∣stick of the Estates of ctain years Of An. 1657 About the year 1657 shall be great Changes and Alterations in Government in every Kingdom in Europe, as well Pro∣testant as Papist, attended and accompanied with such horrid Combustions and Massacres, as hath not been before since the memory of man. This shall make way (as I said before) for the Protestants to unite in a general Combination to send Forces under the Conduct of an invincible Cyrus over the Alps to harrow Italy with fire and sword, and after level the wals of ome with the lowest dust, Anno 1666. For as in the year of Grace 666, Popery was brought to a full maturity in the Womb by Vitalian (who or∣dained Latin-Service in the Church, contrary to Christs Institution, and the precedent Primitive times) and as 1000 the Number of Perfection and Eternity is seldom used in our ordinary Computes, but left out for brevity sake (as we use to say, The Spanish-Armado was in 588 for 1588, and the Powder-plot in 605 for 1605.) so it is most certain and indubitable, that as the Birth of Antichrist was in Anno 666, so the death of it shall be Anno 1666, though the Carkasse of it may lie unburied for 30 years after, yet questionlesse it shall with Gog and Magog b cast into the Lake of Gods wrath at one and the same time. This ruine of Rome shall make way with∣in ten years after to the Conversion of the Jews: For seeing the Kingdom of Antichrist (as now it is) is the only Let to their Conversion (for all the Jews that now are, live within the Papacy, and are prohibited from turning Christians, partly because of the Idolatry they see amongst the Papists in their worshipping of Images (the Jews being Zealots in the second Com∣mandment) partly because at their Conversion with the Papists they must renounce all their goods as ill gotten, which rigid Condition a worldly peo∣ple will never yield to) therefore till the very name and power of Popery be destroyed, and they admitted amongst Protestant Kingdoms, there can be small hope of their Conversion. But now Antichrist totally destroyed, they begin to see into their Errours and Ignorances, endeavou to learn the wayes
of God, and that the Saviour of the world (whom they so long expected) is come so many years since and suffered. This Conversion of the We∣stern Jews shall be compleated in that fatall and terrible year 1683. And six years after that shall they be united with their Eastern-Brethren the 10 Tribes captivated by Salmanasser, who have for 2433 years lien invisible in the bowels of the Kingdoms of Turks and Tartarians. The Christian world neither must nor ought to enquire, how this people which have lien hid and obscured so long a space, shall in so small a time as a year and an half, so vi∣sibly, so powerfully, and so magnificently arise to the Terrour and Con∣quest of the whole Earth. The holy Ghost declareth, Ezek. 37.8. by the dry bones, fleshed and indued with life in an instant, so that they stood up∣on their feet, and became a great Army; what a strange, horrid and won∣derfull thing this shall be, and how terrible it shall appear to the sight of the world in that year; which within 15 years after (viz. Anno 1698.) shall fight that famous and fearfull pitcht-field with the united Fors of Turks and Tartarians, which shal prove the Deliverance of the Church of God from all adversity. Thrice shall Europe within this time strive to establish that power, which Superstition and Tyranny first proreated: Thrice shall the children of this world raise innumerable Forces to destroy the Saints of the most high: Thrice shall the Power of Godliness prevail in the hearts and arms of those, who shall make the Land thrice drunk with the bloud of the Enemies of Christ; and whose grand Ancestours stew'd it so oft with the bloud of the Prophets and Apostles. Preparatives to these fearfull Wonders shall be those horrid and ominous Eclipses preceding the year 1660, fatall and con∣spicuous to Europe; signs both of God's paternal Chastizements for Sects and Schisms in the Church, and of his consuming Judgements impending upon the implacable Enemies thereof. In the year 1654, August 2. shall happen a fearfull and lamentable total Eclipse of the Sun in the 39 Degree of Leo,Of the E∣clipse in An. 1654. about half an hour before high Noon, where shall be seen the mighty hand of God working Wonders in Italy, Sicily, Bohemia, Greece, Armenia and Syria, the Kingdoms subject to Leo. The body of the Sun in this Eclipse will be totally darkned for the space of two hours and 29 Minutes: it will be so great, the like hath not been before, nor after shall be: greater then that Eclipse of the Sun which was Feb. 25. 1597. commonly called the dark Saturday. Of this Eclipse thus Baudensis M.S. fol. 105. Exercit. 59. Papa,Baudensis Prognostica∣tion of Anno 165, 1658, 1661, 1663. dum Petri patrimonium dilaturus, Italicum quendam Ducem possessionibus spoliabit avitis, &c. The Pope attem∣pting to enlarge Peter's Patrimony by seizing upon the ancient Estate of an Italian Duke deceased without Issue, sets his own Nest on fire, and Rome in a Combustion. This year shall a new Sect of Sodomitical Monks arise, which being tollerated by the Pope, sets that Quarrel betwixt him and the Duke of Florence, which shall prove the downfall of both in a few years. This is affirmed likewise by Grebner, Ban. 75. Yet in the interim (saith Baudensis) God shall promote the happiness of Ierusalem, Peace shall be within her wals, and plenteousness within her Palaces. And fol. 134. Exerc. 67. he saith, The years 1657, 1658, 1661, 1663, shall be formida∣ble
to Austria, Silesia, Hungary, Holland, France and Portugal, because that every one of those years shall be attended with four Eclipses apiece, por∣tending the Mutations of all those several States, and that the Revolution of time is come, wherein they must give place to the Lion of the North, whose Scepter shall bruise their power to nothing, and his Gauntlet lay their Forces prostrate at his feet. At which time all Europe shall sing this mournfull Ditty; Heu mala progenies fatis servata nefandis, Gensque nefandarum domitrix altrixque ferarum, Quid fueras, quid isque vide: tua prima propago Bella gerit, ibolémque petet lues atra secundam. At Leo terribilis Borealibus editus oris Fammiferam ex Orco & pelagi plangentibus undis Educens aciem, pecudes urbésque virósque Sternet, & antiquis Solem Lunámque movebit Sedibus; ille etiam pacrio jure infima summa Reddet, & Occasum sub leges mittet inermem. Thus Englished. Alas ill race, to dismall Fates reserv'd, By whom dire Beasts are tamed and preserv'd, See what thou wert and art: Thy first issue Inclines to War, Plague doth the next subdue. But Lion fierce sprung from the Northern shore Shall bring from deepest Hell and waves that rore A blasing Army, he shall men o'rerun, Cities and cattel, yea the Moon and Sun Shall he remove; and Father-like the least Make highest, and give Laws to the weak West. Yet he that returns back in reviewall of the conjunctions and fiery Tripli∣cities,A Descripti∣on of the 7 iery Tripli∣cities. may see how they have in part prognosticated the present troubles and and distractions of Europe, with the Common-wealths of England and Scot∣land. Anno 1603 in the first great conjunction of Saturn and Iupiter, in the fiery triplicity, K. Iames came to the Crown of England, and so was fulfil∣led that Prophecie which an holy Anchoret made 890 years agoe, English men for that they wonneth them to drunkeinesse, to treakson, and rechlesenesse of Got's house, firsten by Dancs, thenth by Nortmans, and the thrid time by Scots, whom they holden lest worthen of all, they shallen be overcompn. Then the world shallen be un∣stable, and so various and diversable, that the unstablenesse of thoughts shallen b be∣tookeineid by many manner diversity of cloathing. This could never be fulfilled but by a Scottish King swaying the English-scepter; and therefore never came to passe till the Union of the two Kingdoms under the said King. As the second Conjunction, Anno 1623. found Germany and most of the West in∣volved
in civil Wars, and as the third An. 1643. found the King and Sub∣jects of England in the field one against the other; so the fourth Conjuncti∣on, An. 1663 in Sagitarius shall begin those destructive Combustions in Italy, which shall allure the Protestant Armies to make a third all-conquer∣ing Party in the same; and the fifth An. 1683 in Leo shall bring forth the Conversion of the Jews: but the sixth Conjunction happening in Taurus, An. 1703, shall behold that which many glorious Saints and children of God have read of, and ejoyced and desired to see, and yet could not see them. For now Revel. 22.1. hall the Sea (that is, the miserable estate of the World by Wars, Desolations and Sicknesses) be destroyed, and no more ex∣tant. Now shall the time of Tribulation, War and desolation, the time of torments, temptation, heresie and persecution be utterly abolished from the memory of men For a new Heaven and a new Earth, a renovated Church, purified Saints shall succeed in the room of those Wolves, who in sheeps-cloathing devoured the Flock of Christ. These are the dayes, for the hope of which the stones of ion cry day by day, though little esteeming seven thousand deaths in regard of that precious assurance gaven in their Brests, that they shall then, and in that day behold the Lord, which hath mercifully gathered them from all Nations, and hath so wonderfully preserved them from the sorcery of Babylon (which hath destroyed all the Earth) that lead∣eth them in and out befre Pagans, Hereticks and Idolaters, before the co∣vetous and foolish-wise of this world, so prudently and so invisibly, that they seeing are not seen, and living are not known. The Exposi∣tion of Nebu∣chadnezzar Image, in Dan. 2.But from these low things let us ascend up to Scripture further to prove the certainty thereof. Daniels Image as it gave the first, so it gave the fullest Knowledge of this great Mystery of the Church of God, Dan. 2. per tot. In which Image is described in brief the Estate of the World, from the very day God revealed this to Daniel, and he to Nebuchadnezzar, to the full and final End and Conclusion of time. By the golden Head, silver Arms, bra∣zen Belly, and iron Legs, we must understand the Chaldean, Persian, Mace∣donian and Roman Monarchies, which successively one after another, tyran∣nized over mankinde by cruelty, and by cruelty came to as miserable Destru∣ctions in the end. The feet part of Iron, and part of Clay, denoted the decli∣ning Estate of the Roman Empire (after that indiscreet Division of it under Charles the Great into the Eastern and Western) under the present Papacy, and now-vulturizing house of Austria, which hitherto doth and shall continue until An. 1694. Therefore the Stone cut without hands (in the 34 verse) (which smote the Image on his feet, that were part of Iron, part of Clay, and so brake them to pieces, that the Iron, Brasse, Clay, Silver and Gold became as chaff of the Summer-flowers that the winde carried them away, and no more place was found for them; And the Stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and filled the Earth) must needs be understood of a glorious Monarchy of the Church of God upon Earth, which by the Conversion of the Universal Na∣tion of the Jews shall overcome all her Enemies, and reign triumphantly in all Nations under Heaven, in universality, uniformity, integrity and inn∣cency of life and conversation.
This blessed and happy estate of Christs Church upon Earth (after the aforesaid battel of Gog and Magog described Ezech. 38. and 39 Chap. of which enough before) is graphically deciphered in the nine last Chapters of the same Prophet,The Exposi∣tion of the 12 last chapters of Ezeckiel. beginning at the 40; where under a specious and large type of restoring the old Jewish Temple with the Sacrifices (chap. 40.) the measuring, ordering and disposing of it in every thing thereto belonging (chap. 41.) as the chambers of the Priests in the Temple, the holy Utensils (chap. 42.) the glory of God filling the house (chap. 43.) his paternall up∣braiding the Israelites for their antient Idolatry, and demonstrating his great and affectionate love to them for the present (chap. 44.) is contained (as I said before) a pithy discourse how powerfull and magnificent these new con∣verted Christians shall be; how holy, learned and unanimous their Mini∣sters should be, how ardent and studious they shall be in communicating the Gospel of Christ to such as yet sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death (chap. 45.) how vigilant their Princes and Magistrates shall be in being keepers of the house of God, that is in incouraging the Ministers, tam prae∣mio quàm paenâ, to instruct the people in the knowledge of the truth, that so both Ministers and people may render due obedience to their common Savi∣our, in love to God, and charity toward men. And again, the reserved por∣tions of Land for the Temple, City, Priests and Princes all in just measures and dimensions, the waters issuing out of the Temple, ever increasing in La∣titude and Profundity, the severall divisions of the particular lots of Priests, Temple, Levites, the City and the Princes secondarily repeated in the 45, 46, 47, and the last Chapters, evidently declare the undoubted certainty and verity of this wonderfull mystery, that the Jews shall repossesse their antient possessions and severall inheritances in the Land of Iudea; how devout, pious and chearfull they shall be in the worship and service of God, intimated by the frequent performing of spirituall Sacrifices and Oblations: how potent and spatious their Church shall be, how great and infinite the Priviledges, and never decreasing Graces of God shall be to it, signified by the depth and latitude of the spiritual waters of Life. Thirdly,The Exposi∣tion of the end of Dni∣ls 11 chap.  Daniel in the end of his 11 Chap. doth above all other, most plain∣ly and specifiquely picture the two grand preparations to this spirituall Mo∣narchy of Christs Church in the end of the World: viz. 1 the  of the enemies of God, and 2 the Conversion of the Jews. For in the 40, 41, 42, and 43 verses of the said 11 Chapter, declaring first, what Victories, the Saracens should get over the Roman Empire, by saying, that the King of the South should push at him (viz. the Saracens should invade the Emperour) and secondly, what lamentable havock the Turk should make of the Roman Monarchy by conquering and subduing from them all the Eastern Empire of Constantinople, in these words, And the King of the North shall come against him like a whirlwinde, with charets and horsemen and many ships, and shall enter into the Countries, and shall overflow and passe thorow; which was verified in the Turks conqueing all Greece, Scythia, Moldavia, Servia, Asia, Syria, Mesopota∣mia and the Isles of the Aegean sea: And he shall enter into the pleasant Land, and many Countries shall be overthrown, but these shall escape out of his hands,
Edom and Moab, and the chief of the Children of Ammon, which also came to passe when Selimus I. invaded Egypt, slew Tomumbey the Sultan thereof, eradicated the very name of the Mamalucks, and so got all the wealth and treasures of Memphis and Grand-Cairo, and added also Iudea as a member of Egypt to the Turkish Empire, An. 1517. His son Solymon the Magnificent, awed India and Ethiopia, and his Grandchilde Selimus II. conquered Tunis and Algiers in Afrique, yet neither of them medled with the Arabians, Edo∣mites or Moabites, as thinking them a people not worth conquering. In the 44 verse, Daniel saith, But tydings out of the East and West shall trouble him; the conversion of the Eastern and Western Iews, shall so inrage the Turke, that he shall levy innumerable Forces, and march forth in great fury to de∣stroy and root them out: And he shall pitch the Tabernacle of his Palace between the seas in the glorious and holy Mountain, shall fight a most terrible and bloudy pitcht Field with them in their own Land of Iury, and yet shall he come to his end, his power, by God's Providence, shall be overthrown, and totally era∣dicated by them from off the Earth, and none shall help him. The Exposi∣tion of Rev. 9.15.Lastly, S. Iohn in Revel. 9.15. setteth down in plain and evident numbers, the very beginning, increase and downfall of this hellish generation. For in saying the Turkish Armies shall be prepared at an hour, a day, a moneth, and a year, he analogically declareth the very time of their birth, and the year when they shall come to a finall annihilation. Here a Day is to be taken prophetically for a year, a Moneth for 31 daies, which likewise make so many years, and a year for the daies of a bissextile Iulian year (which are 366) making in the same manner as many propheticall years as in the former Epoch's of Da∣niel and Ezekiel So the sum's of 366, 31 and 1, make a compleat Product of 398 years, which added to An. 1300 (the year in which the Ottoman Empire first saw light in the world) plainly demonstrates, that as the Tur∣kish Empire began An. Christi 1300, so in An. 1698 shall be the fatall end and finall downfall of the same. Thus it is evident, that as the downfall and captivity of the Jewish Nation fell in the building and birth of that City, which was afterward the fourth Monarchy; so in the buriall and ruine of the same City and Monarchy shall be their conversion to the Gospel of truth, and the institution of the Fifth Monarchy; in which all power, and earthly magnificence must submit to the Kingdom of the Saints of God, and all Sce∣pters bow to the Authority of the Church of Christ. VIII. The cōmon Objection of Divines a∣gainst the V. Monarchy and the uni∣versall king∣dom of the Gospel here upon Earth, drawn from the badnesse of the Times, Answered. Against these former Assertions it is thus objected: That these are but the Dreams of idle-headedmen, considering the sad Method of the World in the continuall increase of sin and wickednesse, and degeneration of all sub∣lunary things daily more and more to worse; and because our Saviour said, at his second coming he should scarce finde faith upon Earth. But to this I answer; No time is God's time for the propogation of the Gospel, and en∣largement of his Church, but in the Deluge of sin and inundation of impiety: then is his Power most manifest, when man is weakest; his Decrees most
effectible, when we think him the furthest off; and his Providence nearest execution, then, when the world is most irregular, and incapable of a Re∣formation. When the Abominations and Paganismes of the old World had destroyed all true worship of God, and an 120 years of repentance did no good, then was God's time to separate the Wheat from the Chaffe, and by saving of Noahs family to preserve a seed for the implantation of a new. So in the nw World, when Idolatry had overspread all, the Judgement and Mercy of God most appeared in Abrahams Vocation, by selecting his Church from the rest of mankinde, and continuing it above 2000 years in the House of Heber, the true Heir to Grace and Salvation. Thus was it in the destruction of Sodome and Gomorrha, in the Babylonish Captivity, in the Reformation by Luther, when all the world were become Apostates, God's Providence shone out brightest, and was most conspicuous in propagating Religion, maugre all the opposition the devil and the world could invent or deise: So shall it be in this prefixed time: though the world must degene∣rate more and more in civility and humanity; Christianity be eclipsed in a higher measure, and the true Worshippers of God decrease above what ever yet hath been done: though Protestantisme in many Coasts and Kingdom shall be totally swallowed up of Popery and Mahumetanisme; more lamen∣table Warres and fearfull Massacres rage through England, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and all European Monarchies, then we have yet beheld; and though some of these Kingdoms wholly revolt to Popery, others be luke∣warm and at a stand, until An. 1686; yet all these shall but make way for the finall Eradication of the enemies of the Church, and the glorious and wonderfull Birth, and erection of the FIFTH MONARCHIE UNIVERSALL, which by these pangs and sorrows of Christendome shall be brought forth about the time of the totall conversion of the Jews. For the season is now come, when Judgement must begin (not at the Tem∣ple of Antichrist) but at the House of God; and what bloud soever is shed upon the soyl of the Church, shall be no other then fruitfull showers and warm seasons, to make the Field of Christ more pregnant in production of that glorious Harvest of Saints, which shall cover the Earth. For as it shall be in the end of the World, this old, decrepit, and corrupt world must be purged and refined with the fire of the Lord, before there can be placed in stead thereof a new Heaven and a new Earth: So in the finall Conclusion of the troubles of the Church, warres, Apostasies, alterations and changes in Kingdoms and States, the  of Gog and Magog, and all the enemies of Christ, the amputation of unprofitable Trees, and eradication of noxious Weeds out of the Garden of the Church, shall facilitate and prepare the way for the ingresse of the Monarchy of the Gospel into the eyes of the world. Far wide therefore is the Surmise of those Christians, how this doctrine of the universall Regiment of the Church upon earth is a vain-glorious and fanta∣stick dream, considering the hopes of it now are small, and like to be lesser, because charity and devotion daily decreaseth: Nay rather this is the most evident sign that it speedily approacheth, because the malice of the devil with the corruption of mankinde, hourly augmenteth and strives to stifle and pre∣vent
it. If God be known to be God by bringing light out of darknesse, and manifesting his power in weaknesse; then certainly shall these warres and schismes among Christians, the barbarous invasions nd conquests of Turks and Tartars, the encreasing Idolatry of the Western and Eastern Indians, be an Axe in the hand of God, to lop off all superfluous branches from his Vine, to make it overspread with nourishing fruit, the Globe of the whole Earth. IX. Certain Epi∣grams of Pe∣trus Damiani of he ruine of Tuk and Pope, &c. never yet before print∣ed.And that these are no novell Opinions, these following Testimonies may give sufficient evidence, Petrus Damiani flourished Anno 1060. a laborious Divine, an acute Philosopher, and a witty Poet. Gesner and other Bibliothe∣caries say nothing of him is extant. Yet I have seen in the Library of Trini∣ty-Colledge in Cambridge certain Latine Epigrams of his, Of the conver∣sion of the Jews, Of the destruction of the world by fire in the last day, Of the ruine of Rome, and Of the last Judgement, which Latine Epigrams I finde translated into English Stanza's in an old Manuscript of L. B. intituled The Dove. 1. Of the Burning of the world by fire. Primum foedavit mundum scelcrata libido, Cujus quàm ad coelum flammea massa venit, Diluvium immissum est, immensumque obruit orbem, Vt mala tanta pijs eluerentur aquis: O dira Ebrietas mundi faex prima secundi, Te opposita interiment atque elementa prement. Iustitiam Domini in cunctis sic cernimus actis, Vnda lavat venerem, pocula flamma bibet. Thus Englished. As the first world did first by lust offend, Whose burning rage to such a height did win, That God to quench the same a Floud did send, O Drunkennesse, the second world's first sin! The course of Vice that Element must end, Which is opposed to that which did begin. In every thing Gods justice we may spie, As Flouds drown Lust, Flames Drunkennesse must dry. 2. Of the ruine of Rome. Effuge, Grex Christi, peccati à Gurgite diro. Cui meretrix odio est, atque corona triplex,
Effuge, dum Tempus datur, & fera praelia cessane; Ne ut tu delitias, sic sua damna feras. Quum jam funestos Agnus superaverit hostes. Pingue gregique epulum militibusque dabit. Se mentem metet haec meretrix, quam sevit, eandem: Iam Sathanae sedes, quae Domina orbis erat. Thus Englished. Fly, Faithfull Christians, from that Sea of sin, Who hate the Whore, and the two-horned Beast; Fly, fly, in time before their griefs begin, Lest as their pleasures, so their plagues you taste. When once the Lamb the victory doth win, He of fat things will make his Flock a Feast. Who as she sowed, so shall she reap those evils, Once the worlds Mistresse, now a Cage of devils. 3. Of the conversion of the Jews. Postquam Evangelium toto narretur in orbe, Fulget & ignotis nostris genitoribus oris, Quum Gentes Christum agnoscunt generalitr . Qus Deus aeterim aetherea dignabitur aulā. Tunc amplectetur verum Solynaea propago, Quod priùs invidid tam aversabatur iniquā: Vltima Evangelium, Legem quae prima recepit. Quos dcuit primos, postremos Christus habebit. Thus Englished. The Gospel once being preacht in every place To lands of which our Fathers could not tell, And when the Gentiles all are drawn to Grace, Which in the new Jerusalem should dwell. Then shall the stubborn Jews the Truth embrace From which with such disdain they did rebell: Who first the Law, last shall the Gospel have, Christ whom he first did call, shall last receiv. 4. Of the last judgement. Indictum Tempus, quod totum territet orbem, Per praedicta homines signa monere solet.
Praelia, Evangelium mundo vulgatur, adorant Iudaei Christum, cognita jam meretrix: Zelus hebet, Stellaeque cadunt, fera crimina regnant, Aegra fides languet, Daemonis ira furit: Vltima jam genus omne malorum buccina clangit, Supremamque diem signa tremenda notant. Thus Englished. That threatned time which must the world appall, Is that all may amend by signs foreshown. Wars rumor'd are, the Gospel preach'd o're all, The Jews convert, the Antichrist is known. Devils rage, Vice reigns, Zeal cools, Faith fails, Stars fall, All sorts of plagues hath the last Trumpet blown. And by prodigious signs 'tmay plain appear, That of the Son of man the time draws near. Prophesies of Hierony∣mus Savana∣tola.Thus by this great Divine living in the mistiest times of Popery, it may plain appear, that it was a received opinion that the total destruction of Rome, the conversion of the Jews, and the fifth Monarchy should precede the end of the world. And this is also confirmed by Hieronymus Savanarola (who died a Martyr at Florence, A. 1498.) whose Prophesies are extant in the works of Franciscus Mirandula. That in the last times Jews, Turks and Moors should be converted to Christ, a man like Cyrus with a numerous Army of true pro∣fessors should come over the Alpes and destroy Rome, and ruinate all the Kingdoms and States of Italy. That grievous Wars, Bloud-sheddings and Massacres should arise in the world by a Northern King for a happy Refor∣mation, who should carry the Gospel out of Europe into a vast and unknown world in the end of time. That an Eastern King should blow the Trumpet of God from Tartaria, which should reform all the Islands of the Indian In∣fidels. He likewise prophesied in particular of Iulio the second, of the trou∣bles of the Duke of Mirandula, Of Luthers Reformation, Of the Persecuti∣ons of Merindol, Chabriers, Angrogne, the Valtolin, and other places of France, all which most evidently came to passe. A Prophecy lately found in France, of the future ∣stte of the world till An. 1710.Thirdly, A Prophecie of the estate and condition of the times unto the end of the world, was found written in Hebrew under the Foundation of the Church of S. Denis in France, A. 1616. by the Sexton of the place, as he dig∣ged for the erecting of a Monument for the Lord Teligni. He gave it unto the Popes Nuncio (who rewarded him with 200 dollars for his pains) from him it was sent to the Cardinall of Bruges, who presented it unto the young K. Lewis XIII. It was written in parchment, and wrapped in lead in the form of an Heart: Hebrew numericall letters were set at the side of every Line, sig∣nifying in what Year of our Lord every accident should come to passe, and be manifested to the world. Out of Hebrew it was translated into Latine by Iohannes Parmarino Secretary to the said Cardinall.
The Prophesie runs thus. Obruit Italiam saevo Mars impius aestu. Vnica sint Christo pascua, campus, oves. Totum operit mundum terror & ira Dei. Pauci Iehovam venerantur. Inclytus exurgit factis Heros. Europa tremit: Asā urget metus. Generalis Terrae motus ruit. Agnoscunt omnes Gentes Deum. Flumina siccentur ubique. Pastor & Ecclesia unica. 3 Alephs. The heat of war doth Italy surround, Let Christ's pasture be one, his sheep and ground. Gods wrath and terrour doth the world confound. But few that God do reverence. A Prince shall rise of eminence. Asia doth tremble, Europe shake. Now is a generall Earthquake. All Nations Gods knowledge partake. Rivers are dried every where. Pastor and Church only one are. By this Prophecy great troubles must arise in Italy within this small time, cruell wars afflicting every State thereof, which must be preparations to the eternall destruction and ruine of Rome the head City thereof: Rome can ne∣ver be destroyed except Protestants lay aside their unnecessary civill contenti∣ons, which may (God so disposing) come to them about Anno 1665. After which great commotions are like to aris in Europe, till a noble Hero arise, which shall quench those evils by imploying Christians in mutuall Leagues against the Turk. Suddenly after which comes troublesome daies in Asia and Africk. Then follows universall peace and quietnesse of Nations, prophesied
of by Ezechiel and S. Iohn in the Revelations, which must bring forth the pu∣rity and perfection of the Gospel over the whole Earth. X. The true Ex∣planation of the Prophe∣cy o the cō∣tinunce of he Turkish Empire, found in M. Fox's Act and Mon∣ment, pag 746.Of how large an extent the Turkih Empire should be, how far it should prevail against Christendome, when it should be at the height, and whe Christians should begin to cry quits with them by victories and conquests, is long since exant in ancient Prophesies. One whereof M. Fox in his first Volume of Acts and Monuments, pag. 746. antiq. edit. relates he found in the Persian language in a Manuscript of Bartholomary Georgienitz: the substance whereof in Latine is this. Imperator noster veniet, Ethnici Principes Regnum capiet, rubrum quoque po∣mum capiet, inque suam potestatem rediget. Quod si in septimum usque annum Christianorum gladius no insurrexerit, uque ad duodecimum annum eis dominabitur. Domos aedificabit, vineas plantabit, hortos sepibus muniet, liberos procreabit, & post duodecimum anum Christianorum gladiu apparebit, & Turcam quaque versum in fugam aget. Our Emperour shall come, he shall take the Kingdom of a heathen Prince, he shall also take the red apple, and subdue it to himself. But if the Christians sword shall not arise by the seventh year, he shall reign over them to the twelfth year, he shall build houses, plant vineyards, hedg in Orchards, and beget children, and after the twelfth year shall the Christians sword appear, and put the Turk to flight on every side. M. Fox expounds these 12 years to be 12 Turkish Emperours prevailing against Christians, beginning at the first Emperour Ottoman An. 1300. and so Solyman the magnificent to be the twelfth Emperour, and the last that should prevail against Christians; who began his reign An. 1519. and died An. 1567. But I think rather it must begin at Mahomet the II. winning of Constantinople (called here rubrum pomum) An. 1452. and must end at the late Emperour Mahomet the IV. his death the last August, 1649. My reason is this: Other Emperours have prevailed against Christians, since Solyman the magnificent. For Selimus the II. his son wan Cyprus from the Venetians. Armurath III. took the Fort Guiermo from the Hungarians, and his son Mahomet III. took Agria in Hungary, and had he pursued his victo∣ry, had won that whole Kingdom in lesse then a year: So the late Mahomet is the 12 Emperour from Mahomet the II. and now fter his death shall the Turks prevail no more against Christians. For fourty years agoe that King∣dom was at a stand, and is declining to an eternall destruction. The sword of the Christians shall now arise and prevail againt the Turks ill An. 1696. when the converted Jews shall gather head to overcome them in a bloudy pitcht field, and root out their name from off the Earth. By this young Em∣perours decease without issue, the Ottoman Line is extinct, and none left. One Sultan Hali (a Persian by birth) is now Steward of the Ottoman house, and the Crim-Tartar by old composition and agreement layeth claim to the Turkish Empire, which at present is in combustion because of this.
And though above 200000 Turks are in the Field, with an intent (as is thought) to invade Germany, yet if Christians could but leave o their unnecessary divisions, they might soon ruinate the Turkish Empire. For since Armurath IV. his death, An. 1642. (who began to reign, An. 1623.) all the time of this late Mahomet's reign, since there hath been continuall con∣tentions and massacres amongst the Turks, the Jannizaries eluding and de∣spising the young and weak Emperour, which terrified the Mufti and the Bassa's sore, because they had a prophecy, that as a Mahomet wan Constan∣tinople, so a Mahomet should lose it again to the Christians. However the matter goes for the present,A Prophecy of the year 198, found in the study of Iust Lypsi the year 1698 shall be fatall both to them and to the Pope in both their ruines, and the beginning of the comparative felicity of the Church of God, as may be further manifested by an excellent Pro∣phecy, which the learned Erasmus received from Reuchliuus, and was found in the study of Iustus Lypsius by Ianus Douza the younger, running thus. Post mille expltos à partu Virginis annos, Et post sexcentos rursus ab orbe datos, Nonagefimus octavus mirabilis annus Ingruet, is secum gaudia laeta faeret. Corruet hoc anno Turcarum ivisa propago; Roma, tuum in libris fabula nomen rit. Omnia tunc mundi sursum ibunt at{que} retrorsum Imperiae, ut populus sceptra novella premant: Vt{que} suum cunct as Verbum diffundat in oras. Christus, & imperitet nomine ubi{que} suo. Thus Englished. Six thousand years from Virgins birth expir'd, Six hundred after that acquir'd, The famous ninety eighth year shall come on, Full of great Contentation. This year the Turkish hatefull race shall rue, Rome shall a fable be, not true. Then shall be tost all Kingdoms of the World, And into a new Kingdom hurl'd: That into all coasts Christ his Word may spred, And be alone the Peoples Head. XI. The two Books of Esdras are thought (and that by none of the least learn∣ed,A true Ex∣position of a Esdr. 11. c. as Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose, Tostatus, Scaliger the elder, Melanthon, Arrias Montanus, Bucer, and Bibliander) to be Canonicall, because of the most evident fulfilling of many predictions in them contained. In the 11 chap. of the second of those Books, there is under the type of an Eagle, a ma∣nifest
prophecie both of the Roman Heathenish Empire, as likewise of the Papacy with her chief Leagurers to this present time throughout the whole Chapter. This Eagle is that Roman Heathenish Empire; her twelve fea∣thered wings are the twelve first Emperours from Iulius Cesar to Nerva Coc∣ceius. The three Heads are the three Kingdoms of France, Spain and Ger∣many, preordained of God to uphold and maintain the power of her pride, when all her wings (her heathenish and tyrannicall Cesars) should fail her. Neverthelesse, under her 12 first Cesars are comprehended in generall all the Emperours which reigned in her from Iulius Cesar (who first crackt the strings of her liberty) to Augustulus Momyllus (her last Roman Cesar) for the space of 474 years. Her 8 contrary feathers are the 8 terrible Inundati∣ons of severall Nations from the North (God's scourges) which over∣whelmed her fairest Provinces, sunk her State in bloud, and by fire and sword humbled her as low as the dust she trod on; viz. 1 Alaricus and his West-Gothes, 2 Attilas and his Hunnes, 3 Gensericus and his Vandals, 4 Odoacer, 5 Theodoricus and his East-Goths, 6 Totilas and his Spaniards, 7 Alboinus and his Longobards (who deposed her diminitive Cesar Augustulus Momyl∣lus) 8 and lastly, the intestine homebred Faction and Conspiracy, which proved more pernitious then the rest (as all included diseases are the worst) which in the reigns of Otho the Great, Otho III, and Frederique II, so often strove to eradicate the Papall Superiority, and reedifie her S.P.Q.R. buried so many ages ago out of the ruines of the City. The Head in the midst is the Germane Empire, begun An. 801 on Christmas day, by Charles the Great, which though vers. 32. it long did and yet doth put the Earth in great fear, yet vers. 33. must vanish in an instant, as did the Wings, and come to nought. The Germane Empire thus destroied, vers. 35. The Head on the right side (the Kingdom of Spain) must devour the Head on the left side, which is the Kingdom of France. Therefore it is manifest, That the Kingdom of France, though now it flourisheth in what Glory and Mag∣nificence Earth can afford, must ere long be humbled by the power of Spain, with many Discomfitures, and brought to dolefull streights and great per∣plexities. I my self have observed one remarkable Adjunct of that King∣dome in particular, how that year (in which the Figures of the Golden Number were equall to the Figures of the year of Christ) hath ever proved fatall to that Monarchy for Warre, Bloudshed, Pestilence and Famine. It was so with them from An. 1570 to An. 1576. in all which seven years, the Guisian faction made lamentable havock of the Church of God and the Kingdom; so shall it be in that year in which the finall Tragedy of that Kingdom shall be acted, six years after which France shall be no more. But when that shall be, no sign of Europe shall remain, nor remembrance where the wals of Rome stood. The LION (which vers. 37. and chap. 12. v. 31. came roaring out of the Wood speaking to the Eagle, and rebuking her for her wickednesse) is the WIND which the most high God hath kept for Rome and her wickednesse till the end, even the LION OF THE NORTH (of which you shall hear anon a Prophesie of the true Merlin) which shall reprove the Roman Empire, and cast before her her spoils; he
shall set her alive in Judgement, rebuke and correct her, and deliver the re∣sidue of Gods people by Afflicton which are preserved upon his borders and make them joyfull untill the day of Judgement. In the 13 Chapter, Esdras beholds a vision of a man rising out of the Sea, and devouring the multitudes of fighters that came against him, neither with sword, spear nor any instrument of Warre, but only with the fire and storm that came out of his mouth; which is Christ the son of man, who through a sea of bloudy persecutions and tribulations propagated his Gospel over the Earth, con∣founding and devouring the multitudinous Pagans and Idolaters fighting against Christians, by the invincible force of the Gospel. After a long time of the obstinate wilfulnesse and fulnesse of the Gentiles, he shall call to him∣self another peaceable multitude, vers. 12, 40. even the whole Nation of the Jews, out of Armenia, Tartaria, and the Eastern India, whom God shall defend and convert to the Gospel, when he shall destroy all other Nations upon Earth. These are called the peaceable People, because after the con∣version of the Jews, shall come that Ministeriall Monarchy of the Church over the whole World; that peaceable and still Time, when all Kingdoms under heaven shall forget fighting one against another, Warres shall cease in all the World, and swords and spears shall be beaten into Plowshares and pruning hooks. When the seventh Angel blew the Trumpet, Luther began his Reformation, then it is, when the Multitude stood before the Lamb, and sung the new song of Moses; and then neverthelesse is but the vail only of the Tabernacle opened in heaven, and a great cloud and smoak covered that Glory. But it must be 180 years after, when the Kingdomes of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and those be destroyed that destroyed the Earth. For then and not till then shall the Temple of God be fully opened in Heaven, and the Ark of his Testament (the very same modell, which God shewed to Moses in the Mount) shall be seen in Ierusalem, not in a Tabernacle, but in that Temple, which the power of God shall make. Then shall lastly, the four Beasts, the Elders, with all the Angels of Heaven, and all the creatures of Heaven and Earth, and of the Sea and under the Earth fall down before the Throne, and give glory, honour, blessing and praise unto him that sitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever, and the four Beasts shall say, Amen. XII. I have heard many Jews discoursing of this their glorious Restauration and Religion to come.Evidences out of Scrip∣ture that the ten Tribes shall be brought out of Tartaria & India, and converted to the Gospel, as well as our Western Iews. They say, they never possessed (no not in the time of David and Solomon, when their Kingdom was largest) an half of that which God promised in Deuteronomy and Ioshua. Indeed it is said in Ioshua, No good thing failed of what God promised, but this is to be understood of their peaceable settlement in what Ioshua then conquer'd, not of the utmost bound∣ders of what they were to possesse towards the end of Time. From Euphrates to the red Sea, all the Coasts on the West to the great Mediterranean Sea, with Tyrus and Sydon, on the North Hemath and Celsyria, even in length
from Lbanon to Egypt, was to be the confines of this sacred Commonwealth. Now if we consider, what a Moity of this was possessed by Lot, Ammon, Esau, the Kings of Tyrus and Sidon, the Philistines with Syria, we may plainly see, that more then an half was never their own, of what God promised. In confi∣dence of possessing which, and all the world beside in time to come, in their great Hosanna they shake Palmes in their hands, in triumph towards the four coasts of heaven, to intimate that in their universall Empire every tree of the wood shall clap hands, and sing for joy. It is strange, and makes me give more credit to Esdras then otherwise I would, to see how pat he goes with our Saviour Christ, in affirming the second Captivity of the Jews to be long, and that their return should be about the ruine of the Roman Empire. He relates how the ten Tribes (soon after their Captivity by Salmanasser) travelled through a great River or strait (perhaps the Streits of Anian) in a long journey of many moneths or years to a Country not inhabited. Yea many good Authors, who write of the Histories of America, relate how the Maxicans have a Tradition (delivered from father to son, time out of minde) of a great multitude coming a great journey into those parts with an Ark car∣ried before them on mens shoulders, with their God inclosed therein. These people certainly were Jews, from whom they learned Circumcision (which our travellers finde in most of their Coasts) with other Rites of Tribes, Heads of Tribes and Families, with some handsome Ceremonies of Mar∣riages, Funerals and Washings, directly the same with the Jews or Israelites. But to prove, that the Israelites were first placed in Media and Carmania, and from thence removed into India,A large Dis∣course of a probable cojecture that the ten Tribes of Is∣rael were placed by Salmanasser in Armeia and Media, & that from thence they passed into Tartaria, and so into India. let us return a little back, and survey Scri∣ptures and some approved Authors. When Salmanasser King of Assyria car∣ried the ten Tribes into Captivity (in the fifth year of the reign of Hezekiah King of Iudah) he was a Prince of spacious Dominions and invincible for∣ces, as comprizing within his Empire all Media and Persia, Mesepotamia, Assy∣ria, all Arabia and Ethiopia inferiour to the confines of Egypt, all Syria and Palestine (save only the poor exhausted Kingdom of Iudah) and lastly Armenia with all the Coasts bordering upon the Caspian and Euxine sea, as farre as Tartaria. By this it will be hard to define in which Province of his Empire he placed them, out of his Dominions we may well think he would not abandon them. In the 2 King. 17.6. it is said that he placed them in Hala and Habor by the River of Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes. Which Hala (or rather Chala) and Habor by affinity of pronuntiation, can be no other then Colhies and Iberia, two Provinces of Armenia, the first bordering upon the Euxine, the latter upon the Caspian sea and the confines of the Tartars. East of Armenia lies Media, in the Cities of which, a great part of the Isra∣elites were likewise placed to inhabit. North of Armenia is the entrance in∣to those immense and indiscoverable Nations of Muscovites and Tartars, the utmost limits of whose Kingdoms were never yet fully known. The chief River of which Countries arising farre beyond the Hyperborian Territories, after a wearisome travel through many Nations and Provinces, disburthens it self at last into the Caspian sea, at the very entrance into Armenia, where it is called Zolga (though our Mariners call it Wolga) which is nothing else but a
Metathesis or a bad pronunciation of the word Gozan. So that that saying of Ben-Gorion is true (if that Manuscript be his which Gallo-Belgicus fathers upon him, yet visible in Bibliothecâ Florentinâ) Salbumadzar (saith he) rex Assyrius, exciso Samariae regno, decem illas Tribus, quae à divino cultu tandiu ante desciverant ad Idololatriam, abductas in Captivitatem conlocavit in Fasso, Alvati, Loride, & Bascapante civitatibus Colchidos & Iberiae Armni∣carum provinciarum, & in Ecbatan & Bocchu urbibus Mediae juxta Pontum Euxinum, & mare Caspium. Thus by the testimony of this great Rabbi it is manifest that the Opinion of those men is fond who think the ten Tribes to be utterly lost; thus likewise is it plain that the Jews Conversion must first aise out of the East, and that Fassum, Alvatis, Loris, and Bascapan Cities of Colchis and Iberia, and Ecbatana and Bocchu Cities of Media were the pla∣ces, where Salmanasser (called here Salbumadzar) placed these Israelites in name, but Pagans in nature. And Iohn Lunclay in his Pandects of the Turkish History, fol. 769. writes, how there are certain Hoords (Troops or Families) of people near the more Northern parts of Tartaria, which retain the names of Dan, Zbulun and Nepthali, and in the vicinity of Rega there is a certain barba∣rous Nation of Letti, which for three moneths in the year perpetually wander up and down the fields, having these words Iure-shel-mashalom continually in their mouth, as a kinde of lamentable tune or mournfull Ditty: by which words Authours credibly suppose are meant Jerusalem and Damascus the two head cities of Judah and Israel. He that diligenly reades the history of these X. Tribes in Scripture, after their revolt from the house of David, and com∣bination with Iroboam in erecting Idolatry, may see that they were a Nati∣on quickly overgrown with Heathenism, cruelty, and barbarousnesse, wholly become abominable Pagans in nature, manners, life, condition and conver∣sations; as if they had had Numa Pomphilius to their Father, and not Abra∣ham the faithfull: they only kept Circumcision and the names of their Pro∣genitors in remembrance, but had quite forgotten the Stories of their religion and piety, thence it came to passe that in this their Captivity, being transpor∣ted and implanted among those Nations, they quickly conjoyned and couni∣ted with them in marriage and affinity (being already long before coupled with them in Idolatry) and so ceased to be called Israelites, but being now all one people, were called by the names of Armenians and Medes. That these Israeltes likewise inhabited part of Tartaria, and from thence spread in∣to India and the East, and that they likewise possessed a part of the Caucasian Mountains mingled with a people, which Herodotus calls  (a word not unakin to Turks) is manifest by these undeniable Reasons. 1. Because the Colchians, Iberians, and a great part of Tartaria used Circumcision in most ancient times, long before the building of Rome, which they could not have received from any people else but from these Israelites, who 30. years before the foundation of Rome were sent to inhabit among them. 2. The Crim-Tartars derive their Progeny from Sampson (hence so many of them have been called Camson, an obscure Notion of Sampson) and in imitation of him wear long hair; which could not have been, except they
had had their Originall from those people from whom they had the memory of Sampson. 3. The names likewise of Moses, Aharon, Cham, Selim, or Solyman (a vi∣tious Pronunciation of Shlemo or Solomon) were proper names of men amongst the Turks long before ever they broke into Asia. Now what times the Turks first broke into Asia, Chronologers agree not among themselves: Some say they broke through the Caspian Streits into Armenia major (now Turcoman∣nia) An. 844. But I rather suppose their first Irrption into Asia was 20. years after the death of Alexander the great, about An. M. 3718. when the Parthians shook off the Macedonian yoke, and began their Empire: for in those times we reade in Mela, Pliny and Herodotus, that a babarous and savage people from the North had invaded and possessed Carmania, which could be no other then this Nation of the Turks. Thus it is plainly manifest, that when these Israelites passed into America, they left a great part of their Bre∣thren behinde them in Asia, Tartaria, and India. Millions of them are in Per∣sia, and their domineering at this present day in Carmania, is rightly obser∣ved by Benjamin the Jew in Eyre, by Mrcator, Ortelius, and other Geogra∣phers. XIII. Other ex∣cellent Proofs of the future con∣version and Monarchy of the Iews, Abraham was told in Genesis, His seed must thrice be like Dust, and then afterward like Stars (Stars not for multitude, but for Piety and Glory) onc in Aegypt; secondly in Babel; thirdly throughout the world in the Roman Empire, and afterward in the beginning of the FIFTH MO∣NARCHY must enlighten the whole world with the Glory of God. And the Jews themselves have an ancient tradition, That they must have two Messiahs;From A∣braham The first should come about what time the Government was taken from Iudah; he should lay the Foundation of their Redemption, af∣terwards be betrayed, crucified, and die by their own hands, and leave them in a dolefull plight in the jaws of destruction by the Gentiles: him they called Ben-Ioseph or Ben-Ephraim, alluding to sorrowful Ioseph, who endured so much hardship, being sold by his brethren into Aegypt, and estranged from his fathers house; and to the unfortunate Attempt of the Tribe of Ephraim (soon after that barbarous Edict of murthering male Infants came forth) to deliver themselves and the Israelites by force of Arms from Pharaoh some 12 years before the Birth of Moses; when Pharaoh levying an huge Army, made fearful slaughters of them, forcing them to return to their old obedi∣ence, of which you may reade in Psal. 78.9. In this doleful misery they should remain so long till their second Messiah came and delivered them from the hands of all their enemies, restored them to their native Land of Iudea, and reigned over thm in equal fame and prosperity with David their father. Him therefore they call Ben-David. From I∣saac.Secondly, Isaac was mo wayes then in his Immolation a figure of Christ. He had two sons Esa and Iacob, of whom it is said, The Elder shall serve the younger Edom (which Jews interpret to be the Roman Christian Church,
the First-born to Christ from Isaac) must come to serve the younger, The Iewish converted Church in the end of time, when it is once come up. Thirdly,From Iacob. Iacob a Type of Christ in his Descent to Aegypt had two wives, Leah a Type of the visible Church of carnal Jews using and leaning upon ceremonious shadows in stead of the true sacrifice from Moses to the end of the second Temple: as likewise of the Church of the Gentiles, which from the Ascension of Christ was to continue in vicissitudinary fortune to it's end, full 1668 years. Thus Leah was blear-ey'd, but fruitfull in her posterity, yet not so acceptable and lovely in the eyes of her husband as Ra∣chel (a Type of the glorious Jewish Church in the end of Monarchies) who was to be many dayes barren, even from the end of the second Temple, till Anno 1683, then brings forth Ioseph, leaves her fathers idolatrous house, within a few years after travels again, and brings forth the staff of Iacobs old age with the losse of her own life. Fourthly,From the New Testament, Act. 1. That the Jews were to have a temporal Monarchy in the end of the Roman Empire, is evident likewise out of the New Testament. In the first of Acts our Saviour Christs Disciples shewed how greatly the Jews expected for this time, when their Messiah should deliver them from the yoke of the Romans, and restore them to their temporal Kingdom in Iudea; as likewise how near they thought the season and period to be in our Saviours time, when they came to him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? Our Saviour in his Answer doth not deny but that such a time was to be, when the Jews should be restored to their temporal Kingdom in their own Land (which should exceed Davids and Solomons in magnifi∣cence, and should extend over the whole world) but only blames and checks his Apostles for enquiring of that which neither was needful for them to know, neither should be in their dayes; as likewise for being too inquisitive in the times and seasons when it should be, and was to begin, Which (said he) the Father hath put in his own power. And whoso reads Hos. 3.4, 5. the four last Chapters of Zechary, Mich. 7.15, 16, 17. Esa. 2.2, 3, 4. and Chapter 27. 12, 13. with Ier. 24.6, 7. with divers other passages in Scripture, may plain∣ly see that neither Solomons house nor the Maccabees ever obtained their full propriety, nor were those Prophecies of their universall Soveraignty ever ful∣filled in the Old Testament. Fifthly,From Mo∣ses Song, Deut. 32. The Song of Moses in the 32. of Deuteronomy, is clear, that many and great afflictions shall befall them in the latter daies, even all the time of their first Messiah, and the Roman Empire. No Jew in the world ever ex∣pounded otherwise from the 36. verse to the 43. of that Song. And to this place they referre their afflictions which they have, and shall suffer all the time of the Roman Empire till their Restauration. There is but few of them now, but will confesse that their Messiah Ben-Ioseph, is come already, but their Ben-David is yet hid in the depth of the Sea, and will arise from thence about the finall end of the destruction of the Gentiles. Sixthly,From the history and life of Ioseph The life of Ioseph in Genesis hath in it more then History. At 17. years of age he was sold by his Brethren, and stood before Pharaoh to ex∣pound him his Dreams at thirty. So he lived above 12. years in misery and
irons. And for those 12. years God rewarded him with 80. years of govern∣ment in and over all the land of Aegypt. His brethren came and bowed to him according to his Dream of the sheaves; his father also was inferiour and subjected to him as he was Viceroy in the government of Aegypt: and was nourished and maintained by him according to his second Deam of the Sun, Moon, and the eleven Stars crouching and making obeisance. Though his Brethren pitied him not in the anguish of his soul, yet he forgiveth and pre∣serveth them in Aegypt, and at their deliverance thence marcheth triumphant∣ly before them to Canaan in his Coffin. But yet neverthelesse Iacob was to stay in Canaan, and Ioseph was to be unknown to his Brethren till Aegypt be destroied by Famine, and yeeld if self to Ioseph. And the bons of Ioseph too must stay in Aegypt till 600000 men besides women and children be delivered them by the hands of Moses and Aaron. No departure from Aegypt, no passage through the Red-Sea without the bones of Ioseph. Edom in the dayes of Mo∣ses, and Babylon in Daniels time suffered the severest punishments God could inflict upon a people, and all for afflicting Eber. And here is a mystery not so observed as observable in Scripture. As Aegypt was broken before the first Tabernacle was set up by Moses: as Edom was harrowed by David before the first Temple was erected by Solomon: and thirdly, as Babel was Brought to nothing by Cyrus before the second Temple was built by Zorubbabel and I∣hoshuah: so shall both Edom and Babel, Turk, Pope, and all Monarchies in the Earth be brought to dust, before the third Temple be built by the con∣verted Jews in their native Land of Iudea and Ierusalem. Ierusalem now in∣habited by Turks and hereticall Christians shall at that time be purged from filth, and be the only Receptacle of the children of God. But when that time shall be, I have abundantly shewn in the Sections before. And in that season shall Benjamin be sent down from his good father in the power of his right arm, and Ioseph (even Ben-Ioseph) shall make himself known to his Brethren, who did hate him, shoot at him, cast him into the pir, and deli∣vered him to the Gentiles. Which excellent Parallels of Ioseph and Christ are fully explained in the Massorch, Zoar, and in Rabbi-Asse, besides Ezechiel and S. Iohn in the Revelations. Notwithstanding in citing these Jewish Traditions, I would not be mistaken, as if I maintained a second descention of our Saviour Christ from Heaven, as the Millenaries do; or that the Jews must have him come personally dowm from heaven to destroy the whole world, and restore them to their Land of Iudea, I mean no such thing. God hath other means to bring his purposes to passe then, by sending his Sonne Christ to sojourn the second time upon earth. A second Moses, yet a King, must work all this for them: yet not a Moses of their own bloud, but a Cap∣tain from the North; who shall work the works of God in righteousnesse, and make peace like a mighty stream overflow the whole earth.What uses Protestants ought to make of this blessing of the conversi∣on of the Iews XIV. The consideration of these future great blessings of God towards this Na∣tion of the Jews, and in them to all the world in the advancement of the Go∣spel;
as likewise the laying to heart the grievous calamities which have so long tossed the Kingdomes and Free-states of Europe,Description of the four Monarchies. should move all men with repentance to prepare themselves to meet those great and fearfull muta∣tions which God is bringing upon all the European Coasts of the world. Hi∣storians have made their four Monarchies according to the rise or fall of se∣verall particular Nations. 1. Assyrians. 2. Persians. 3. Grecians. and 4. Ro∣mans: but this is a lame Division, and comes far short of that transcendent Metamorphosis of humane affairs, which (by comparing of Histories, ob∣servation of new Starres and Comets of late, with the consideration of the manners and conditions of the sonnes of men) we may easily perceive must within these few years be brought upon the world. The learned Mathemati∣cians and Philosophers (who have more throughly searched into the secrets of Astrology) rightlier place their four Monarchies according to the four coasts of Heaven. 1. The Eastern Monarchy of the Assyrians. 2. The two Southern Monarchies of the Persians and Grecians, bounded within the circumference of 3600 miles, or 11 degrees of latitude. 3. The Western Monarchy of the Romans. 4. and lastly, the Northern Monarchy (but in right accompt the fifth) must be of the Northern LION, which to the amazement of Christendome, shall arise from the Northern Sea, and pitch his Tents in the ashes of the Eastern and Western Monarchies. But now having made menti∣on so oft of this V. Monarchy in this Pamphlet,Reasons of the V. Mo∣narchy. I think it meet to produce two or three Reasons of the truth and certainty of it, deduced out of the holy Scriptures and humane Authority. First, The Jews have a Tenet among them, That their Messias must not  come in the Flesh till the destruction of the fourth Monarchy in Daniel, which is the Roman: and so will not beleeve Christians professing him to be come already: but say, this coming is deferred till the Roman Empire be totally abolished; which because it is not nor must be yet, they will not beleeve he hath appeared. But the Jews are deceived in this, for Dan. 2.44. and 7.9, 22. the Incarnation of our Saviour Christ was promised to be in the very nick of the constitution and establishment of the Roman Empire, and not after the ruine of it (which was performed accordingly) else should there have been six Monarchies before the end of the world. For the dispersion and rejection of the Jews, the revelation of Antichrist with the Fulnesse of the Gentiles, was prophesied to be accomplished in the fourth Monarchy, all which we see are punctually fulfilled. None of which should yet have come to passe, if our Saviour Christ was not to be incarnate before the end of the Roman Empire. Therefore as the rejection of the Jews with these other signs and things was to be in the fourth Monarchy; so their conversion and remission into the Church, and the glorious estate of the Gospel upon earth must be in another fifth Monarchy, which is yet to come. Secondly, So many Empires as are comprized in Nebuchadnezzars Image  (Dan. 2.) must come to passe before the end of the World: But five Monar∣chies are comprehended in that Image, Erg. The major is manifest, The minor is thus proved: Nebuchadnezzar himself was the Golden Head of this Image, as he was in another respect the Feet of the old decrepit Assyrian
Monarchy, which by his Chaldean Empire and the ruine thereof (which was approaching) should totally be annihilated. The Armes and Brests of Silver are the Empire of the Medes and Persians. The Belly of brasse is the Empire of the Grecians by Alexander the Great. Lastly, the Iron Leggs and the Clay Toes depictured the Roman Empire, with the present declining House of Austria, and the breathlesse Papacy. Therefore the Stone cut with∣out Hands which brake this Image in pieces, and became a Mountain and filled the Earth, must be understood (as I touched before) of a Fifth Monarchy yet to come, in which, by the Conversion of the Jews and fulnesse of the Gen∣tiles the Gospel shall shine in majesty over all Kingdoms upon Earth. Thirdly, If the rejection and dispersion of the Jews were to be in the fourth Monarchy, as is apparent by Gen. 49.10. and Numb. 24.24. then was their conversion not to be till the beginning of the fifth, and towards the end of the World, as is manifest by the Apostle, Rom. 11.25. But the first is true and therefore the latter also. Fourthly, the conversion and restauration of the Jews to their antient In∣heritances in the holy Land (which Ezekiel hath so largely described in his twelve last Chapters) and the glorious felicity of the Gospel of Christ pro∣ceeding from their conversion, must either be in the fourth Monarchy, or not untill the fifth. But in the fourth Monarchy it cannot be, for among the Turks the Jews are kept in extream slavery, Idolatry and ignorance: and under the Papacy they are not permitted to use the new Testament (by which only they must be saved) and besides they are so inraged against Christianity, by the Papists Image-worship, that there is a flat impossibility (much lesse any hopes) of their conversion, so long as either the Turkish Empire or the Papacy stands in force. Ergò their conversion and restaura∣tion cannot be, till both Turk and Pope eternally be destroyed, and so the fourth Monarchy finally ended. Prophecies of the LION of the North.Thus having delivered the reasons of a fifth Monarchy, I come to describe the LION of the North, as I finde it in an antient Prophecie of the true Merlin, and by Grebner. Of the true Merlin in K. Lucius daies, An. Ch. 130.First of Merlin. Many Scholars have often disputed what Merlin should be, who he was, what time he lived in, whether those Prophecies be true, and his, which go under his name, or not: how he came by them, and last∣ly, what reckoning is to be made of them. Of every of which somewhat. It hath fared with Merlin, as with Tostatus in Spain, and many Learned in our times; who for the eminency of their Learning, and approbation of their writings, became so famous, that Pedlar Authors father'd bastar'd ware upon them in every corner for easier vent. Merlins there were severall of old; one a Welsh-man in the daies of Edgar the Monarch, of an austere li∣ving and Monkish conversation. He lived for the most part in the Isle of Anglesey, where he had familiarity and acquaintance with the Bards and Druides then not wholly extinct, who had incomparable skill in Divination by Birds, and other kinde of Magique. He was an excellent Astrologer and a great Chymist: so that many think those Prophecies, that are like his, to be deducted from no more then naturall reason. All those Prophecies
which I have seen of his (some of which I have) I cannot see how they smell any whit of a prophetique spirit; they speak him a great Scholar in Astrology, but no Prophet. But there was living in K. Lucius daies another Merlin (called the first) a Scottish man, and he is the true Merlin, and if any Prophecies could be found of his, great credit was to be given to them. He was a great friend of K. Lucius himself, and his daily companion. Of his there is but one Prophecie extant, which I found in that antient Chro∣nicle of Nennius of Bangor of the Saxons (who yet lives in Manuscript) K. Lucius being as yet unconverted from Paganisme to Christianity, would needs joyn in confederacy with Santoline a King of the Scutti (now Scots) to raise warre against the Roman Emperour; to which purpose he asked councel of Merlin what he should do in this matter; who earnestly dehorted him from his purpose; and in the end prevailed. Merlin prophesied to him, That within lesse then a sesquidecumane period of time, the Eagles head should be cloven in two; one part whereof Agar should burn with fire, and Iaphet the other after the grand revolution of daies. Mark (O King) saith he, and consider, Samothea shall be quickly overflown with a vaga∣bond Army of an unknown Originall, spued out of a land toward the East, which a floud from the North shall quickly possesse. I know thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart; thou seekest Friendship from a people, whose weaknesse shall be thy glory, and their greatnesse thy ruine. A squadron of Fishers are risen up from the East, which shall ascend un∣armed upon the world without spear and shield, to whom all Nations shall in time obey. They shall destroy the Temples of thy Gods (O Lucius) and convert them to the service of their eternall King, who only can rescue from the grave, and deliver from the snares of death. Behold I see a great Sun arise isensibly upon us Brittanes! But (woe is me!) what black seas of darknesse, and rivers of bloud pursu after it? Hast thou not heard of the valiant Angles, of barbarous Neustria, of yonder terrible Picts thy perfidious enemies? These shall overflow thy Land, and possess the Ci∣ties thereof, till the old age of Empires, and Government shall flow upon the world. Illis autem temporibus revolutis, Cauda Virginis Leonem intrabit, & Sa∣gittarii dorsum Scorpius ascendet. Borcalia Regna à Messoribus obterentur, Austra∣les Principatus in statum pulvereum dinet, & insulanarum Monarchiarum po∣testates sine fraeno aut milite ephippiabuntur; bella atrocia ventis dissipabúntur, & pessum ibunt judiciali grandine, quae per baculum ortum habuerunt, per spuris juventutem. Sol ipse tympanizabit miniato clamyde indutus, & Luna cineritiis cothuris ad nundinas tolutabit. Rides, O Rex? At quibus haec supervenient, luctu & maerore contabescent. Haec omnia vix plenè peragentur, qum Princeps regali origine coronatus ex Borealibus plagis proveniet, suis inexpectatus, alieni∣genis desideratus; qui ò quòd Lone ferocinte inignietur, Leo nuncupabitur, Non conquiescet, donec Synodo per eum convocat minis{que} dissolutâ, victricia arma in hostes transferat, & lamentabili successu vicinorum Principum ditiones pes∣sundet. Alexandrum Magnum virtute, Cyrum felicitate superabit: freta transna∣vigabit; à multis regibus Imperator saltabitur; & Urbem quandam vetustam solo aequabit. Intereà ex Oriente Princeps bellipotens illum praelio lacesse, con∣trà
quem Leo cum omnibus copiis procedet, & is Euphratem positis castris illum expectabit. Si Princeps flumen transibit, Leo superabitur; at ipse exercitu flu∣vium transducto hostem cruento conflictu superabit, & universum Orientem in potestatem rediget. Dum haec agentur, complures Reguli ex India in Suriam cum ingentibus irrumpent excercitibus, & circà vallem Iehosaphat praeliabundi Leonem opperibunt, ubi ab ipso ad internecionem omnes delebuntur. Nec multò post, Leo ipse fatis concedet, postquàm regnum Transfugarum mirand pietate in perpetuum fundavit. Those times being past, the tail of the Virgin shall enter the Lion, and Scorpio shall ascend the back of Sagittary: The Nor∣thern Kingdoms shall be wasted by Reapers, the Southern Principalities shall end in dust, and the powers of the Iland-Monarchies without either bridle or souldier shall be harnessed. Cruell warres shall be scattered by the windes, and quell'd by a revengefull hail, whose beginning were by a staff, their growth and continuance by bastards. The Sun it self shall play on the tim∣brell clad with a vermilion coat, and the Moon with dunne buskins shall amble to the fair. Laugh'st thou, O King? But those on whom these things shall come, for grief and sorrow shall pine away. All these things shall scarce be accomplisht, when a Prince of royall stock shall come forth crown∣ed from the Northern parts, as to his own people unexpected, but desired by forreigners, who because he shall bear a Rampant Lion, shall therefore be called a Lion. He shall not rest, till having called a Synod and after dis∣solved it by threats, he shall advance his conquering arms against his ene∣mies, and by wofull successe shall harrase the territories of neighbour Prin∣ces. He shall exceed Alexander the Great in vertue, and Cyrus in successe. He shall passe the seas and be saluted Emperour by many Kings: A certain antient City shall he lay even with the ground. In the mean while a power∣full Prince out of the East shall provoke him to battel, against whom the Lion shall march with all his forces, and pitching his Camp on this side Eu∣phrates, shall expect him. If the Prince shall come over the river, the Lion shall be overcome: but he shall passe his army over the river, and give his Enemy a bloudy defeat, and be master of all the East. While these things are in action, divers petty Kings from India shall break into Syria with mighty armies, and provided for battel shall wait for the Lion about the valley of Iehoshaphat, where they shall by him be all wholly cut off. Not long after shall the Lion himself decease, after that with eminent piety he shall have established the Kingdome of fugitives. This is all that is ex∣tant of this former Merlin, whose glorious works and inestimable Prophe∣cies are utterly lost to the great detriment of learning. Of GreberNot much unlike this, is that of Greber, Ban. 73. Europae labes & im∣becillitas singulorum ejusdem Regnorum sedem mirabilitèr struet QVINTAE MONARCHIAE, quae sub tempus exitii Imperii Romani ad terrorem totius mundi ex ruinis Germaniae refulgebit. Haec triennii spatio caetera Europae regna aut vi perdomitabit, aut belli metu ad socitatem perpellet: quò universalem Li∣gam & Unionem omnium Protestantium eicit sub specie bellum Poloniae infe∣rendi, re autem verâ Imperium Austriacum Italiam{que} invadendi. Nec eum spes fefellerit. Nam circà hoc tempus SECTA quaedam manachorum adeò abomi∣nabilis,
obscaena, & seditiosa in Papats si orictur; ut compellet tam Prote∣testantes quàm Italiae Principes extremum Romae exitium moliri. The corruption of Europe, and the weaknesse of her several Kingdoms shall strangely make way for the FIFTH MONARCHY, which about the time of the fall of the Roman Empire to the terrour of the whole world shall appear out of the ruines of Germany. She within three years shall either subdue by force the rest of the Kingdoms of Asia, or for fear of war shall bring them to a league, whereby she shall conclude an universal confederacy, under colour of making warre against Polonia, but in deed to invade the Austrian Empire and Italy. Neither shall her hope fail her: For about this time a certain SECT of Monks shall arise in the bosome of the Papacy, so abominable, obscene and seditious; that it shall urge both the Protestants and Princes of Italy to endeavour the utter subversion of Rome. Thus having shewed the Seat and Certainty of this V. Monarchie; I come to declare what People or Kingdom in Europe shall obtain and rule it,Who shall be King of this V Mo∣nachy. and whose it shall soly be. Of the European Christians two several King∣doms long since, and of late have mainly striven for the FIFTH MO∣NARCHY. First,Not the Spaniard. The Kingdom of Spain hath alwayes for a matter of 170 years ago by incorporating it self with the House of Austria, and the most potent Families of Germany and Italy by strange Marriages and odde medlies la∣boured extremely to bring all Europe under her Wings, that so she might be∣come the glorious Sun of the West. On the other side, the Swede of late by keeping an high hand over the King of Poland, and fixing his glorious Trophies of Conquest in all corners of Germany; hath brought the Em∣perour to so low an ebb, and hath of late become so terrible to the Pope and Spaniard: and lastly can in an instant enleague himself with all Protestant Kingdoms and States, either for fear or favour upon any necessary occasion, that many account him the man that both goeth the directest way, and whom heaven hath ordained to sway the Imperial Scepter within the limits of the Church. But neither of these are they who are ordained to the Empire of the fifth Monarchy. Not the Spaniard, because he is for his inhumane cruelty so ge∣nerally hated of Christians, all men avoiding him and flying from him, as the Serpent from the Ash: His Indian Plantations both thrive nor, and likewise for their barbarousnesse are so detested of the savages worse than vi∣pers, and upon opportunities are accordingly massacred. Yea, those places of Italy which are under his Protection, as Florence, Genoa, Millain and other Cities afford him as much affection, as the Spider doth the Serpent. Thus is He the universal Odium of all the world, thrives in no place, and like oyl over-swiming all other liquids, and can hardly incorporate with any; so seldom is he conjoyned but in natural Antipathy with all Nations. Adde hereunto the austerity and unpleasantnesse of his Government, chusing ra∣ther to domineer over subdued Countries by rapine and cruelty, than to go∣vern them by Love and Piety. And lastly, his Governours in every Province aim at their own ends, pilling and squeezing the Subjects, so that his Name
and Government is every where abominated, no Province continuing loyal any longer then they can get arms and stoutly rebel. The injustice of which hath caused Portugal to be rent from him, which while the world standeth shall never be his again. And moreover the Oracle tels him, that Naples, Navar, his reconciled Provinces in Belgia, with his Indian Plantations (the best Jewels he hath) shall be pluckt within 30 years to come from his ambi∣tious Crown, never to be recovered again. Nor the Swede.Secondly, The Swede cannot be Paramount in this Monarchy, because of the various Sects and Schisms he is pestered with, so inveterate and so pre∣dominant, that no Reformation can purge him of them. The male Line of that Royal Pedegree is extinct, and only a weak young Princess surviving; the whole Kingdom shared and governed by factious Nobles and covetous Ge∣nerals, and while every one sucks from the veins of the Body Politique to cram his own, it will be soon evacuated, both of life and nourishment. Besides, it hath been since prophesied to Sweden, that he shall not be so much as a tributary Kingdom to this great Soveraignty, but shall be the first, that shall be made a slave to that famous Northern Lion, who shall wear the Crown of that transcendent Monarchy. As for France, Denmark, England, and the free Cantons of Germany, they make account for the present they d valiantly if they can well husband what is got already. And for England in particular, if it chance that she make war upon any neighbour Enemy, and enlarge their Dominions by Conquest, it is more to secure her self, and pre∣vent the Invasion of the great Eagle, and her chief feathers, then any gre∣dinesse of extending her Bounders by the Conquest and ruine of others. If she keep her ancient soil and possessions in those times, it is as much as hea∣ven hath ordained her,Object. and more she shall not have. Who then must be Lord of this Monarchy? Or what people shall be parts and members there∣of? Even a Nation which at this day is hid invisibly within the bowels of Europe,Answ. which seeing are not seen, and living are not known: Which shall by a miraculous Resurrection (like the Jews from India and Tartaria) be raised to destroy all Idolatry and abomination out of every corner of the North, with the weapons of an holy warfare tending to the glory of God, and the Honour of their King. His Sword shall be Religion, and his Ensigns Righteousnesse and Piety. All the godly in every Kingdom and State in Europe, the converted Jews conjoyned and united with them in spi∣rit and habitation, shall (as I said before) root out all names of Iniquity, and be this Monarchy, which shall only consist of, and subsist by Holinesse, and an unquenchable desire of propagating the Glory and Gospel of God: according to that of Daniel, Chap. 7. ver. 27. And the Kingdom, and Domini∣on, and the greatnesse of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High,Of the Ef∣fects of that fatal Star, which ap∣peared in the head of Cassiopea, An. 72. whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. The first preparation to the Birth of which, was that ominous and fatal Starre which appeared in the head of Cassiopea, An. 1572, the effects of which shall begin to operate upon Europe, and the Eastern Coasts of America, An. 1699, in bringing a Mystery to light which all the sons of Adam are not able to effect. Of this fatl and omi∣nous
Starre (or Comet, chuse you whether) I finde several Tractates written. One Nuntius Propheticus in Print: Magell de quintà Monarchiâ, & Open∣heims Ephemeris Caelica, both Manuscripts, both excellently discoursing of the Effects thereof: How that, Quo tempore accidet septima & ultima-maxima superiorum Planetarum Conjunctio, princeps erit Monarchia prima, quae caput ex ruinis quarti Imperii erexerit. Currus Lunae Zodiacum perturbabit, Cauda Draconis coget Pliades in fletum prorumpere, dorsum Delphini ascendet, & flores Virgineos obfuscabit: continuae turbae, seditiones, bella civilia, strages, pano∣lethriae luctuosissimae omnia illa regna & illustres Familias persequentur, ex qui∣bus ista Monarchia orta est, aut ei ullo modo obviabunt. Burgundiae domus fiem accipiet, Sileiae libertas Gallico Neroni prostituetur. Belgarum Ordines potentiae & Aristocratiae suae finem videbunt, &c. Openheim fol. 86. But Magel is most plain above all three, fol. 67. col. 8. Fateor majorum Luminarium deliquia sine insigni hominum pernicie pecorumque strage nunquam extitisse: Regnorum mutationes etiam, populorum clades, regum funra, bella & incendia in ipsorum Deliquiorum Articulis, aut paulò post evidentèr apparuisse. Fateor etiam superiorum erronum coitum malorum ut plurimùm Iliade comitari: atque hanc stellam (quae hoc An. 1572 in vertice Cassiopeae illuxit) suprà omnem elementarem regionem collocatam novi Imperij Revolutionem Dominiumque signi∣ficasse. Quae tamen effecta haec aetas nostra minimè perspiciet: reservanda nihil∣ominùs in gentem quandam etiamnum inviibilem, cujus magnitudinis radij in uni∣versum caeli terraeque ambitum extendetur. At what time the 7th, the last and greatest Conjunction of the chief Pla∣nets shall happen, the first Monarchy shall reign, which shall lift up her head out of the ruines of the IV Empire. The Chariot of the Moon shall disturb the Zodiack. The Tail of the Dragon shall force the Pleiades to break out into weeping, shall ascend the back of the Dolphin, and shall darken the lustre of the Virgin: Daily troubles, seditions, civil wars, slaugh∣ters, and most lamentable universal Destructions shall vex all those King∣doms and eminent Families, from whence that Monarchy sprang, or which shall any way crosse it. The house of Burgundie shall be at an End: the Liberty of Silesia shall be prostituted to a French Nero. The Estates of Belgia shall see an end of their Power and Ari∣stocracy. I confesse Eclipses of the great Luminaries never hapned without the no∣table Destruction of men and slaughter of Cattel: the Changes also of Kingdoms, the Deaths of People, Funerals of Kings, Wars and fires have broke forth either in the very time of their Eclipses, or within a little after. I confesse also the Conjunction of the higher wandring Starres is for the most part attended with an Iliad of mischiefs: and that this Star (which this year 1572 appeared on the top of Caiopaea) being placed above the whole Ele∣mentary Region, did signifie the Revolution and Dominion of a new Empire. Which effects shall not yet be seen by this our age; yet are they reser∣ved for a certain Nation, as yet invisible, the beams of whose greatness shall be extended through the whole verge of Heaven and Earth.
The Descri∣ption of the flourishing Monarchy of the Gospel in America and India a∣bout Anno 1710, and A. 1763.In that same year shall the kingdom of salvation be preached by the Mi∣nistry of the Saints the most High, to those immense and unknown Ame∣rican Coasts, to whom as yet the Name of Christ was never yet revealed. And that people who from the Creation till that time were the Empire of Satan, shall be called the specious and spacious Church of God. The gates of which shall be open continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring unto them the riches of the Gentiles, and the treasures of the Kings of the Earth. All Nations and Kingdoms, that will not serve her, shall perish and be destroyed for ever. Within whose land shall be heard no violence nor destruction, nor desolation within her Borders, but Salvation shall be her wals, and praise her gates. Her Government shall be peace, and her Exa∣actors Righteousnesse. Hr Sun shall never go down, nor her Moon ever be hid, for the Lord shall be her everlasting light, and the dayes of her sorrow shall be ended. The people within her shall be all righteous; for ever shall they possesse their proper inheritances, for God shall make them an everlasting Glory, and a Ioy from Gene∣ration to Generation. Therefore ought no man to be sorrowfull for the Ca∣lamities of Europe, or the afflictions of the times; nor grieved with the mutations and Downfals of Kingdoms and Empires, neither should he be afraid because Wars and miseries rage in all Coasts of the world. For this is the eternal Law of Creatures (which the Creator imposed upon them at first) that the Birth of one thing should be the Death of another, and that the order of Nature should be preserved by the vicissitudinary course of alter∣nate Mutability. And why should we be offended at warres amongst men, when there are daily and continual Conflicts between the Elements them∣selves? Cities, Republiques, Empires and Families are mortal as men, have their states of Birth, Infamy, Growth and Old-age as well as they. Glory, Majesty, Arts and Soveraignty began in Asia by the Assyrians; from them departed to the Medes and Persians; and from them (before they had well tasted the sweetnesse of them) translated to the Grecians, and next to the Romans: The Glory of the Roman Empire was eclipsed and humbled by the barbarous Inundations of Goths, Huns, Vandals, and other savage Nations, who being themselves once civilized and mollified by the Effeminacies of Ita∣ly and the West, were in 560 years space overthrown by the Potency of Char∣lemain and the Germans. Germany hath now fully possessed the Imperial dig∣nity 790 years; and before fifty years moe be past, shall be made a scorned Servitor of the King of the North, whose Power and Religion shall transcend the utmost Confines of East and West. In the beginning of which Empire, Venice shall not brag of being inaccessible by the circumfluent Ocean, and London, Paris, Antwerp and Prague, the IV Ladies of Europe shall be hum∣bled to sit in the dust of eternal Destruction. The consideration of this must teach men humility in prosperity, carefulnesse to know God and keep his Commandments, seeing every Plant which he hath not planted shall be pluck∣ed up, and nothing can be permanent but by his favour and protection.
XV. Thou therefore the eternall and incomprehensible Father of lights,A Praye to God to uite his Church, end the af∣flictions of it, and to hasten the conversi∣on of the Iews, with the monar∣chy of the Gospel. the indivisible God of peace and unity, look down at length upon the afflicted estate of thy Gospel and mournfull face of thy Church, clouded with sects and schisms, rent by civill combustions, dying by the wounds which her sons have given, and wallowing in that gore which was shed by the hands of her own children. Though our sins have deserved that we should for ever be cast out of the sight of thy countenance, yet respect thou the bloud of thy Sonne, crying better things then that of Abel, and be once at one again with thy in∣heritance Abraham knows us not, Israel is ignorant of us, but thou art our Father, and in thee shall be all our afiance, with whom even the worst of men have found mercy. Extend the light of thy loving-kindenes to the Tribes of Iacob, and return to the many thousands of Israel, for the time to build up Zion is come, and the daies of restoring Jerusalem cannot be prolonged. For why? Thy servants think upon her stones, and favour the very dust thereof. But remember Edom, O Lord, as thou remembredst Babel, which have cryed so oft, Down with it, down with it to the very earth. Pour thy-vengeance down upon the Beast of Rome, and the red Dragon of Constantinople, who never knew thy name, that so the sorrowfull sighings of the Prisoners may come before thee and thy servants be preserved that are appointed to die. Let thy work be upon the MAN of thy right hand, and upon the Son of man whom thou hast made so strong for thy self, that Pharaoh, Elam, Mesheck, with the sonnes of Tubal may fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword, and may descend into the midst of hell with all that help them, even the whole multitude of the Uncircumcised, whose Lot is to goe into the ne∣ther parts of the Earth. There shall they have their beds with the Uncircum∣cised near those Valiants, which are gone down to the grave, with their wea∣pons of war, and have laid their swords under their heads, because they were the fear of the mighty in the Land of the Living. But what shall be said to the Captain of the Nations, or to the Angell destroying Edom and Babylon? Even this, That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it. He will leave an afflicted people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord: He shall give them a pure Law, that they may pray to him with one consent. He shall open the doors of darknesse, the gates of ob∣scurity shall he break down, that the world may be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea. O thou sower of discord, and Cap∣tain of iniquity, how long wilt thou delight to murther, spoil and pursue the distressed? Knowest thou not that it will be bitternesse in the end? Command the people to return every man from pursuing his brother: for lo, a Nation is risen against you, a mighty Nation and terrible from the East, whose horses ace fire and his Chariots flames of fire to devour: his men are as swift as the Eagle, who will have no compassion on the fruit of the womb, nor shall their eye pity: They shall encompasse hy Tents with an intent to lay all waste before them, but neverthelesse be conident and bold
in the Lord of Hosts: for fire shall come down from Heaven and return their wickednesse upon their heads, and their doings upon their own pates. O thou worship of Israel! how wonderfull art thou in thy doings toward the children of men Bringing light out of darknesse, strength out of weaknesse, and ma∣king Justice the mean to the manifestation of thy goodnesse and glory! As for me, I will expect him who is as well the King of Salem, Peace, as Melchi∣sedck, the King of Justice, all my daies: and will heartily pray for his coming, who shall bring every work into judgement, and every thing to a legall triall, whether it be good or evill. He is the Lamb upon the white Throne, before whose face Heaven and Earth shall fly away, and the Sea be no more found: Death and Hell shall give up the dead that are in them, and every Name that is not written in the Book of Life, shall be cast into the Lake of fire. For which time all the Creation groaneth, crying out to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, and restored to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, that sin may be destroyed for ever, and righteousnesse eternally established in stead thereof, Amen. FINIS. Foritan hunc aliquis verbosum dicere librum Non dubitet: forsan multò praestantior alter Pauca reperta puet, quùm plura invenerit ipse: Dess & impatiens nimis haec obscura probabit: Pro capt Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli. Sed me juditij non penitet: haec benè vobis Commis, quibus est amor & sapientia juxtà, Et Labor in studijs ijsdem celebratus inhaeret: Vos sequar: in vestro satis est examine cautum.
