r414 12577067 63637
A SHORT and PLAIN ACCOUNT OF Religion, For the Instruction of Fami∣lies, by being often read in them. Recommended especially to those under his Charge. By Geo. Raymond, A. M. Minister of St. Law∣rence in Ipswich. LONDON, Printed by J. Brudenell in Jewen-street, 1700.
To Governours of Families. YOƲ have here laid before you a Scheme of Religion, or the Substance of those things which the Ministers of Christ are continually in∣culcating; and in the Method you are wont to hear them from me. And you are earnestly Be∣seeched and Exhorted in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to study these things your selves, and to Instruct your Families in them; and for that end to cause this Account of Religion to be frequently and seriously read to them. That so both you and they may have Minds stored with the Substance of Religion, and may attend on the Publick Preaching thereof, with Conscience and with Profit; and may thereby be edified in Knowledge and Holiness unto Life Eternal.
A Short and Plain ACCOUNT OF RELIGION, For the Instruction of Fami∣lies, by being often read in them. IT is sad to consider, how all sorts of Men put off from themselves the Care of Religion; which is every ones most necessary concern, and chiefest interest. The Richer sort, are so taken up with the pleasures and de∣lights of this World, that they have no time for it: The Poorer, so busied to get the necessary accommodations of Life, that they take themselves to be wholly excus'd from minding it. Put set both consider what Religion is, and they will dis∣cern the vanity of their several please and excuse. For, Religion is the Skill of ordering our selves, so, as to please God,Religion every ones duty and interest. and to obtain eternal Life. Religion consists in the Government of our Desires, Inclinations and Affections, that they may not lead us into an unreasonable and pernicious Choice, or engage us in evil Works. The Rule or Religion is the Will
of God, declared by our Conscience, and in his Word: The End of Religion is to render us capable of the favour and love of God, and of a happy Portion in Life Eternal. Now what in all Reason should every one be so concerned for, as that he may not dishonour and abuse himself, nor be engaged in shame∣ful and pernicious ways? And what greater interest can any Man have, than to make God his Friend in this Life, and to be happy for ever in the next? And what is more fit and just both in it self, and in order to so great an end, than that the Righ∣teous Will of God be heartily done by us? Without Reconcili∣ation unto that Will of God, it is impossible to have him our Friend here, or hereafter; but being in a State of Enmity and Contradiction to him, we must be under his displeasure, and li∣able to his Almighty Anger, which is the most miserable Con∣dition that can be. (Joh. 17.3. Job 8.28. Eccles. 12.13. It is therefore ignorance of Religion, that rendereth Men to negligent thereof: Whereas right Knowledge doth in a manner constrain Men to practise accordingly; or else leaves them self∣condemned, and stung most grievously by their own Minds, if they are not prevailed with, to do what is reasonable, just and good, what is their necessary Duty and highest interest. It is therefore a most charitable Design to the Souls of Men (which this address to them travails withal viz.) to give such a brief and plain Account of Religion, as may help them to a right Know∣ledge thereof, and influence, and perswade to a suitable Practice. Now. the Being of God is the first and great Prin∣ciple of Religion;The grounds and principles of Re∣ligion. the Nature of God is the Rea∣son; and the Will of God the Rule of it. If there be one necessary supream being that is the cause of all things;The Being of God. then we (and all things) depend upon this Author of our Beings; he hath a Right as well as Power to dispose of, and rule us as he pleaseth; and we are bound to be observant of him, to submit our selves to his Rule, and to be satisfied with his Will: And that there is such a Being above us, whose we are, and upon whom we entirely depend; no Man can doubt, that will but open his Eyes and use his Reason. For how else came this World to be made? Or how came the first Man into Being? Whence are those perfections in Men, and those excellent properties in other Creatures, which neither they them∣selves, nor blind Chance can be the Authors of, but are mani∣festly the Effects of some most excellent and perfect Cause? We
are therefore the Creatures of God the Great Creator, subject to him that made us, and to that Law of our Creation which he hath put us under: i. e. We are bound to keep that Station and Order in which he hath set us, both with respect to himself, and our fellow Creatures, and to observe and do those things which are agreeable thereunto. If a Father hath such right in his Children, as to Rule and Govern them for their good; and the Rebellion of Children against their Parents is Monstrous and Unnatural: How much more so is our Rebellion against God our Heavenly Father? For we are his off spring, and his eternal power and God-head are seen from the Creation of the World, so that we are without excuse. (Acts 17.25, 28. Rom. 1.20.) This God our Creatour is insinitely Great, and can Control, Punish and Destroy, or Help,The Nature of God. Re∣ward and Bless us as he pleaseth; so also he is infinitely good, Righteous and True, and re∣quireth nothing of us but what is right and good. Such is the excellency of his Nature, that we may expect from him all that is sit and good, all that benefit and kindness, that is, Consistent with Wisdom and Holiness. Such a Father we ought most readily to Observe and Obey; and we imitate his amiable Nature, when we do his righteous Will. (Deut. 32.4. Psal. 73.25. Mat. 19.17. Mat. 5.48.) The Creatour is the Lord of all things, hath a Right in, and Authority over them;Providence. and God who is all Power, Wisdom and Goodness, can't be thought to neglect and desert the Beings which he hath made, but doth actually inspect and govern them. So that we come into this World, continue in it, and go out of it, by his Provi∣dence: Are always under his Eys, and in his Hand; and there∣fore continually obliged in Duty and Interest to Observe and Regard him. Acts 17.24. Dan. 4.34, 35. 1 Tim. 4.10.) By what we know of God, of our Selves, and other Beings,Difference of moral good and evil. we unavoidably discern a dif∣ference of moral Good and Evil; and it is through horrible neglect and abuse of our selves, that our Consciences retain not a Evely and pow∣erful Sensation thereof. Some things will appear (upon the least Consideration) to be just and reasonable, good for us and for all Men, perfective of our Nature and Kind: Others to be Unreason∣able, Unrighteous, Shameful, Pernicions, contrary to Nature, destructive of ourselves, and of Mankind. By following the for∣mer, we imitate God and become like him; by the latter, we
debase our selves, walk contrary unto God, and become unrea∣sonable and like the Brute Beasts, yea worse than they who do ac∣cording to the Nature and Powers that God hath given them. This then is the Law of God witnessed in our Consciences, That we abhor that which is evil, and cleave unto that which is good; by shewing us what is good, he declareth what he requireth of us; for his Will is, That we do what is right and good towards our selves and others; that we reverence the God that made us, and keep that Order which he hath established for the common good. So that Vertue is both our Wisdom and our Duty; but Vice is Folly and Rebellion: It resists the Constitution and Authority of God, and worketh confusion in his Kingdom. Therefore Con∣science that condemneth vicious Actions, doth also terrifie the doers of them with the expectation and fear of Divine Vengeance. (Isa. 5.20. Rom. 2.15, 16 Gen. 4.7. Isa. 45.9.) From the former Premises 'tis reasonable to conclude,Future State. That the Holy and Righteous God will for ever maintain that difference of moral good and evil which he hath made: and since this is not sufficiently done by his present Providence, that he will determine the future States of Men, according to what they have been and done in this. Righteous Men have reason to hope, that their good God and Father will do them all the good they are capable of; and consequently make them happy in a better State after this, as they are capable of being. For Men by Virtue im∣prove their Capacity of future Happiness: but Vice lays a Foun∣dation only for Misery and Wretchedness. (Rom. 2.6. &c. Rom. 6.23.) Now if we firmly imbrace these Principles, they do mightily engage us to a suitable Reli∣gious Practice.Rules of Pra∣ctice. If we thus think of God our Maker, and of our selves his Creatures, we must see the Reason and necessity of keeping the Laws of our Creation; which require us to be and do what is right and meet, towards God, to our fellow Creatures, and to our selves. Whenever we seriously think and reflect upon the former Principles, we are convinced of the necessity and goodness of the following Laws or Rules of Practice, viz. That we ought to study the Divine Nature, and meditate upon the Excellencies thereof,Piety. and to acknowledge them by suitable affections of Reve∣rence, Love and Trust; to give unto God supream Honour and Worship; and to submit our selves to his most wise and holy Will. (John 17.3. Mat. 4.10. Acts 5.29.)
That we carefully abstain from doing injury to others;Justice. and that we make restitution for any wrong which we have done; and that we do them all the right we can; and as we our selves would not have our Lives assaulted, our Reputation lessen'd, our Trust abused, our Bed defiled, our Relations debauched, our Estates damaged by Violence or Fraud; so must we be careful of the like rights and interests of other Men, doing unto them as we would they should do unto us, (Rom. 13.7, 8. 1 Thes. 4.6. Mark 10.19. And as we would not be treated rigorously by others, so must we deal equally with them:Equity. favourably interpreting severe Laws, not in∣sisting upon our utmost right to their great damage, not ex∣acting their Labour or Service beyond their Strength, not grieving or discouraging them by the use of our Authority, nor offend∣ing them by the use of our Liberty. (Mat. 7.12. Coloss. 4.1. Rom. 14.15, 21.) It is also reasonable and good, and the Will of God,Charity. that Mankind should heartily Love each other; taking pleasure in the content and profit of their Brethren, and doing them what good they can, and forgiving their involuntary or retracted injuries: For he that honoureth another, doth himself desire to be esteemed; and he that pitieth and relieveth his Brother, hath also infirmities and needs of his own. Every one in his turn needeth forbearance and forgiveness; and all Men com∣mend in others, and expect from them, Candour, and Gentle∣ness, and Kindness, and other such like Fruits of Sincere Be∣nevolence. (Rom. 12.10, 13, 15, 16. Gal. 6.1, 2.) It is likewise fit and necessary, that we should be peaceably minded,Peace. and that we love and maintain good Order; that we be content with our Station, and study to be quiet and to do our own business; that we endeavour to maintain a right Understand∣ing and good agreement amongst Men, and to reconcile and make them friends again, when they happen to differ; for these things are good and profitable for Men. (Rom. 12.18. 1 Thes. 4.11. Mat. 5.9.) It is our Duty and our Interest also, to mo∣derate and govern all our Inclinations and Passions by Reason,Sobriety or Puri∣ty. which God hath given us for that purpose. Reason being in Man (what instinct is in Brutes) his Nature or Governing Principle
and Faculty. This is the most difficult part of our Duty, and that which secures the whole. In the disorder of our Inclinations and Passions lies the Force and Strength of Temptation, and he that hath attained to the due government of these, will have but little provocation to do contrary to his Duty either towards God or Man. Now the Rules of this Self-government are such as these, That we think no better of our selves than we deserve; but keep always a just Sense of our absolute dependance upon God, and of our great Weakness, manifold Errours, Imperfections and Faults, which is Humility. (Mat. 5.3. Rom. 12.13.) That we moderate the desire and use of all Delights, by Rea∣son, and the expectation of a better Life; and gratifie no Ap∣petite with the dishonour of God, or to our own, or other Mens Dammage, which is Temperance. (John 6.27. Coloss. 3.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.11.) That we suffer no Passion to put us out of the use of our Reason, or to vent it self in Expressions and Actions that are in∣decent or injurious, which is Moderation. (Mat. 5.22. Ephes. 4.31. Phil. 4.5.) That we be content with our Condition of Life, and bear with an even and calm Spirit the Vicissitudes, Misfortunes, and Afflictions which are common to Men, fearing more to do than to suffer evil, and studying to adorn every Lot, which is Fortitude and Patience. (Heb. 13 5. Phil. 4.12. Rom. 12.12.) That we study the Conduct and Government of our selves; aim at those things which excel, and contrive to do our good Works in fit Season, and in the best manner, which is Prudence. (Mat. 10.16. Eph. 5.15. Phil. 4.8. Prov. 14.8.) This is the Law written in the Heart; the fitness and necessity of these Rules is witnessed in every ones Conscience; and the Lve and Practice of them is that Religion which Divine Reve∣lation Travails to restore and maintain. If we Consult and Re∣verence our own Consciences and the Word of God, we shall be very uneasy upon every Transgression of any of these Laws, but find great peace and satisfaction of Spirit in the keeping of em. When through the neglect of God, and abuse of themselves,Depravation of Religion, and Corruption of Mankind. Men had depraved this Religion, by wicked Lives and Idolatrous Worship; they became Reprobate in their Minds, and vile in their Affections; and sunk into a degenerate and forlorn Estate; that was as Wretched as it was Sinful. (Gen. 6.5. Rom. 1.21, 26, 28.)
Since our first Parents indulged their Appetite against Reason, and so Transgressed the Law of God, their Posterity are sunk into Sensuality; and by their own unreasonable Inclinations, by the wicked Example of others, and the Temptations of the World, are betrayed into powerful evil Habits; which make their return to God, and their Duty extreamly difficult. When Men become Enemies to God, in Tem∣per and Life,Paganism. they can no longer bear the true Knowledge and Worship of him; whereupon wicked Spirits and evil Men take occasion to set up a false Religion, that may gratifie such who are departed from the True. Such who will not keep God's Laws, are yet willing to compound for their Sins, by costly Sacrifices, and a pompous Service: And this gave occasion and rise to Idolatry, and that to polytheism or the serving of many Gods; and that service was made up of magical Rites, and the most unnatural and abomina∣ble Customs, humane Sacrifices, and filthy Mysteries. So that Re∣ligion (whose end is to Unite and Assimulate Men unto God, and to perfect their Natures) became the Instrument of Mens Alie∣nation and Departure from God, and of Debauching and En∣slaving their Minds, and of filling them with Brutish Lusts, and Diabolical Passions. (Mich. 6.6, 7. Rom 1.21. 2 Cor. 8.5. Ezek. 16.20. Rom. 1.28. &c.) This growing impiety God testified against and opposed,Patriarchal Religion. by the Instructions and Example of those holy Patriarchs, whom he raised up, by frequent intercourse with Men, and special ma∣nifestations of his Soveraign Dominion and Power amongst them: By the Translation of Enoch, who walked with God, by the De∣luge of the Old World, and the signal Destruction of the Sodomites and others, who had forsaken God, and abused themselves in a most horrible manner. These holy Instructions and Examples, and Divine Facts, were designed to put a stop to the Corruption of Religion and of Men; to enforce the Laws of God, to en∣courage the Righteous, and to awe the Wicked, and to awaken in them a becoming Sense of God, and of their Duty. But at length God Applyed a most gracious Remedy for the de∣plorable Condition of lost Men, by a Standing Revelation of the true Religion, given first by Moses, and then by Christ. The Holy Scriptures were written by Holy Men, moved and guided by the holy Ghost,Holy Scriptures. and contain a true History and Account of such Divine Facts, Messages and Revelations, as God saw need∣ful
to be transmitted to all Ages of his Church, for the Instru∣ction and Benefit thereof. (2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Tim. 3.16.) These Scriptures are the Records of the First Covenant, or old Testament; that is, the Religion which God set up among the Jews by Moses: And of the Second Covenant, or New Testament, i. e. the Religion which God hath set up for all Men by his Son Jesus Christ. (Heb. 7.8, 13.) The Ten Commandments are the Substance and chiefest part of God's Covenant with Israel;Mosaical Religion. and to keep them in the Worship and Obedience of the True God, was the design of that Dis∣pensation; and the Political and Ceremonial Laws, did Minister to the same End, and were subservient to the Moral, to Effect and Enforce the keeping of them. The Rites were such as the Temper of that People, and the Circumstances of those times re∣quired; and they were so many Signs between God and his People, Badges of the Servants of the True God, and Memori∣als and Monitors of their Obligations to him. God their Crea∣tour, their Redeemer, and their King, dwelt in the midst of them, That his Fear might be before their Faces that they might not Sin against him, and he sent them Prophets and Preachers of Righ∣teousness and Repentance, to reprove and threaten their Dis∣obedience, and to perswade them to return to their Duty. And by these he foretold the Coming of Christ, and the setting up of a better State of Religion by him. Now in these last Days God hath spoken unto us by his Son,Christian Reli∣gion. that Divine Person in whom the God-head dwelleth Bodily, i. e. really and ma∣nifestly; who came into the World that he might destroy the Works of the Devil, i. e. Idolatry and Immorality; that by his Doctrine he might Teach the Laws of God; and by his Obedience unto Death vindicate the Honour of them, that he might bring in Eternal Righteousness, and set up the Kingdom of God, by means most proper, and fitted for all times; and therefore made Perpetual and Unchangeable. (Heb. 1.2, 3. Colos. 2.9. 1 Joh. 3.8.) For he hath taught and assured us in the Name of God,The Principles or Doctrine. Ʋnity of God. That there is but One God the Creatour of all things, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and thereby condemned Polythe∣ism or the Worship of many Gods. (Mat. 4.10. 1 Cor. 8.6.
That God is not to be Worshipped with Sa∣crifices or by Images,True Worship. or with the Pomp intro∣duced by Idolatry; but with the Natural Acts and Expressions of Divine Honour, and proper Tokens of Respect and Reverence; and that the best and most acceptable Service of God, consists in a holy imitation of him. (Joh. 4.24. Mat. 5.48.) That God who is Propitious in his Nature, is reconciled to sinners in his Son;Reconciliation. whose Obedi∣ence unto Death, doth worthily vindicate, and greatly honour the Laws of God; and his voluntary Sacrifice of himself was so well pleasing unto God, that he did thereupon enter into a Covenant of Grace and Mercy with Mankind; where∣in he hath engaged himself, to forgive the Sins of those who Believe and Repent, and to make them partakers of eternal Life. (Mat. 5.45. Mark 10.44. John 10.17. Mat. 26.28.) That God sent his Son to be the Saviour of the World,Glory of Christ. and hath appointed him the only Mediatour between God and Man; in whom God speaketh unto us, and by whom we have access unto God, that God hath given him all Power, and made him King and Lord of all things, That he may be the Author of Eter∣nal Salvation to all them that obey him. (Mat. 3.17. 1 Tim. 2.5. Joh. 5.22. Mat. 28.18.) That this same Lord Jesus shall come in Glory to Judge the World,Resurrection and Judgment. and shall raise the Dead, and shall doom the Wicked to the Dam∣nation of Hell, and receive the Righteous into Life Eternal. (Mat. 25.31, 46. John 5.27, 28, 29.) The Doctrine of Christ then Teacheth, and his Religion obli∣geth us, to Worship the one true God in a right manner, through one Mediatour; to look for the Mercy of God upon our Repentance without costly Expiations and Sacrifices, and to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly in this World, looking for the glorious Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Raise the Dead, Judge the World, and render to every Man according to his Deeds. The Laws of Christianity. Principal and Primary.The Laws of Christ are either Principal and Primary, or Secondary, institution s Subser∣vient and Ministring to the former. The Prin∣cipal Laws, which contain the Substantial part of Religion, are the same with those Laws of our Creation, or Rules
of Piety, Righteousness and Purity, which are before recited, and these are delivered and explain'd in the Sermons of our Lord, and inculcated in the writings of his Apostles: and to these he hath added The Law of Faith; that we believe and acknowledge Jesus to be the Christ the Son of God,Faith. perswading our Hearts of the Truth of his Divine Mission and Doctrine; and of the importance of both; and that we publickly profess our Faith and Hope in him, and confess him (if need be) even with the hazard of our Lives. (Rom. 16.26. Rom. 9.10. Mat. 10.32, 33.) The precept of Repentance enjoyns, that we carefully turn and abstain from all that is evil;Repentance. that we Live with great Care and Obser∣vation of our selves; that we frequently examine our Principles and Practice; that we sorrowfully confess our Faults to God, and ask forgiveness for them; and that we do the same towards Men, in Case of Injury or Scandal. (Acts 3.19. 2 Cor. 13.5. Jam. 5.16. Mat. 5.23.) The Law of Christ Obligeth us likewise, to Love and Pray for and do good to our Enemies;Love of Enemies and of Christians. and to bear a most tender Affection, and shew singular kindness to our fellow Christians. (Mat. 5.44. John 15.12. John 17.21, 23.) It is also the Duty of Christians, to Think of,Heavenly-minded∣uess. to Affect, to Desire and Hope for that im∣mortal Life and Bliss, which the Gospel hath brought to light; and to have but little consideration of the things of this Life, for which the Gentiles served their Gods, and the Jews the God of Israel; but to do good and to suffer patiently, Looking for their Reward in Heaven. (2 Cor. 4.18. Colos. 3.2. Phil. 3.20.) And so it is also, to Study and imitate the Life of Christ;Imitation of Christ. and having such a Pattern and Guide, to endeavour to excell in puri∣ty of Heart and Life, the best Examples of all other Institu∣tions. (John 13.14. Mat. 11.29. Mat. 5.46, 47.) The positive Institutions of Christ, are the means he hath appointed for the better observance of these primary Laws of his Religion,Secondary Instructi∣ons. and they are, Prayer both Private and Publick, which is both an Act of Religion,Prayer. and a special mean to keep up
the Sense and Power thereof in our Hearts and Lives. (Mat. 6.6. Luke 11.2, 13.) And so is the Ministry of the Word, by an Order of Men fitted and appointed for that purpose;Ministry of the Word. an excellent mean, for informing the Judgments, awakening the Consciences, per∣swading the Hearts, and influencing the Lives of Christians. (Eph. 4.11, 12, 13.) Besides these Moral means, our Lord hath instituted two Rites, as Instruments and Helps of Religion. By the one, Baptism, we are made Disciples of Christ,Baptism. to learn that Religion which God the Father Taught by his Son, and confirmed by the holy Ghost: and oblige our selves to the Study, Profession, and Practice thereof. (Mat. 28.19, 20.) By the other, the Lords Supper; we make a solemn Commemoration of the Death of our Blessed Lord and Saviour,The Lord's Supper. which was the Sacri∣fice for our Sins, and at, and by which his Religion was set up, and are thereby put in mind of our mighty Obligations to Holiness, and of the great Assurance there is of Remission of Sins, and Resurrection to Eternal Life, for all those who Believe and Obey the Gospel. (Luke 22.19, 20. John 6.39, 40.) This is the Religion of Christ: The proof whereof is contained in the History of his Life,Demonstrations of Christianity. and Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and sending of the holy Ghost If we consider these Facts, we must be convinced that Jesus is the Son God, and that his Religion is Divine, and that they who Believe and Obey him, shall be Happy by the forgiveness of their Sins, and a Resurrection to Life eternal., To set up such a Religion was a Work worthy of God, and to Receive and Obey it, is the greatest interest and concern of Men. We can neither blame the Doctrine, nor refute the Proofs of it; but Men become unbelievers by being resolvedly wicked; for they being Enemies to the Truth, will not receive it. We have more reason to give Credit to the things reported in the Gospels than to any thing else which we have not seen with our Eyes; and the Religion founded upon these Facts, is what we should with to be true; and we run a mighty and a most desperate haz∣zard, even of the loss of our immortal Souls, by our neglect of it. By our admittance into the Church, and the fellowship of Christians,The Church. we are freed from those Chains in which Satan holds
the Children of Darkness; we are mightly prevented with the Grace of God for our Instruction and Perswasion in the Truth; and mightily assured of his continual Assistance and Blessing up∣on our Religious Endeavours. That therefore which is incum∣bent upon us, is, by a due use of those helps and means graci∣ously afforded us, to get such Religious Knowledge as is needful; and by the Divine Assistance (which is promised) to master our naughty Inclinations and vicious Habits, that we may Practice ac∣cordingly. By being of this reformed Church of England, we have vast advantages for Religious Knowledge and Practice, which they want, who live where Christianity is Debauched, and blended with Paganism: and how then shall we answer it to God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; it by the abuse of his Grace, and of our Selves, we continue Ignorant and Vicious as Papists or Pagans. Let us not then Reproach the Author of our holy Religion, by being careless and negligent thereof; as if God had sent his Son in vain, and given the holy Ghost to no purpose, and set up a Religion that is not worth our minding, nor let us be so foolish for our selves as to perish by sloath and ignorance, in our Rebellion against God; who of his infinite Mercies hath taken so much Care to Redeem us, and to make us Wise and Good, and so eternally Happy. FINIS.
A Prayer. O God the Father Almighty Maker of Heaven and Earth, we thy Creatures fall down with all humility to Worship thee; in whose Hands our Breath is, and before whom are all our Ways. It is but just and meet that we should Honour and Serve, Fear and Love, thee above all; for thou art the Author of our Beings, the Fountain of all our Enjoyments, and the God of all our Hopes. All thy ways towards us are Mercy and Goodness; thy loving kindness is better than Life; thy Service is perfect freedom; all thy Commandments are Faithful and Right; and in keeping of them there is great Reward. Thou, O God, art Righteous, but we have done exceeding wickedly in following the imaginations of our foolish Hearts, to offend against thy holy Laws: We have provoked most justly thy Wrath and Indignation by our wicked Works; and have most grievously sinned against our own Souls. But blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who so loved the World, that he hath given his only begotten Son, that believing in him we might not Perish, but may have everlasting Life, and hath exalted him to his own Right hand, to be a Prince and Saviour, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins! We beseech thee for his sake to pardon our manifold Sins and Errours, which we humbly and sor∣rowfully confess; and to grant that from henceforth we may cleave steadfastly unto thee in Righteousness, and Purity, in Humility and Charity, and all those Divine Vertues of which our blessed Redeemer hath given us so great an Example. Give us Grace to withstand the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; that with pure Hearts we may follow thee, the only God, treading in the blessed steps of thy Son our Saviour Jesus Christ. Make us Faithful in the use of all those blessed Advantages thou hast given us, for the renewing of our Minds, and restoring thine Image in us; and bless all thy sacred Appointments, for our increasing in Righteousness and Holiness. That so whilst we live here, a good Conscience may be our greatest Care, and Holiness our chief Delight; and we being reconciled to thy will, may Live and Dye in thy Peace and Favour, and at last through thy Mer∣cy may be found meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Life. Hear us most grcious Father through the mediation of thy Son our Blessed Lord and Saviour, in whose most holy Name and Words we commend to thy Mercy and Protection our Selves and all Mankind; saying, Our Father, &c.
