s194 11902968 50622
A Full and True RELATION Of a New Hellish Popish PLOT IN IRELAND, Carried on by the PAPISTS in the Province of MUNSTER. With the manner how they would have possessed themselves of that strong City of Limerick, and the Castle thereof, in order to the receiving French Forces in the great River Shanon, and for their Landing there. Express'd in a LETTER from a Friend virbatim, dated in Dublin this 6th. of December 1679. London, Printed in the Year 1679.
A full and true Relation of a New Hellish Popish PLOT in Ireland, carried on by the Papists in the Province of Munster. In a LETTER to a Friend. SIR, BEing so long silent, (occasioned as you shall another time hear) I could not in Modesty have troubled you with this, had not both your Com∣mands, (which yesterday by accident I came to know) and the new as well as strange Discovery I give you an account of, been powerful Interce∣ders; but shortly you shall hear from me. Therefore without troubling you any further, know, That about a year since, there was some small Discovery made against the Earl of Tyrone, in relation to a Plot in Munster: On which he attended the Councel, and was for some time confined to his Chamber; but there being but one Witness, he was dismissed his attendance for that time. Since then, on Thursday last, he was committed to the Castle, on new Evidence, for the former Business. There is one Bourke, Mac-Nemarre, and Fanagan, come in as Evidences against him; all speak much to the same purport, and the effect of all is, That he had engaged the Province of Mun∣ster, (to wit, the Roman Party) in the Cause, and in a short time doubted not to secure many others. The Castle and City of Limerick was to have been betrayed, and after this manner: There were to be Five hundred, besides a Party in the City, Three Hundred whereof were to be lodged in the Irish Town without the Gates, and the other two hundred to be plac'd con∣veniently near the Castle, and in the morning when the Trevally beat, (at which time the Town-folks were presumed to be drowsie, and in their Beds) the three hundred were to enter into the City, and on the Alarm, their Party within were to cut the Protestants Throats, and make themselves Masters of the City: And the other two hundred were plac'd as aforesaid, to prevent any Succour from the Castle, and were likewise to endeavour the Surprize of that; and all this for the dear sake of the French King, who was to have Landed in the great River of Shanon with an Army. Thus far all the Wit∣nesses agree; but Mac-Nemarre, who appears to be an Ingenuous person, goes farther, and produced a List (as he says from the Earl) of a hundred of the principal persons concerned, and said (as I am informed) in Councel, If he made not out his Allegations, he would be content to have his Throat cut. He also gave an account how he became first concerned, being thus: The Earl taking him one day into his Lordships Garden, informed him that he had a business of great Weight to impart to him, and knew no person so qualified for such an Undertaking as he was. And after promising him great Rewards, and proposing a way how he should not only get, but secure a considerable Estate; He was wrought upon, and did declare his readiness to serve his Lordship in any thing, to the utmost extent both of his Life and Fortune. Whereupon his Lordship informed him of the whole Design of bringing in the French King, and laid open the feasibleness of the thing: And Mac-Nemarre demanding, how they could deal with the Protestants, they being generally
well furnisht with Arms, &c. and able to make a considerable defence; he said, That his Party were about, and hoped in a short time to effect the pla∣cing of Irish Servants in all Protestant Houses, especially in Munster, and these Servants either to deliver against such a day, the Keys, with the stamp in Clay, or fire the Houses; and said, In bringing in the French King, he would desire only Estates to be secured for him and his Adherents, and the rest of the Kingdom as the Monsieur thought fit, and by that means said, he hoped to be revenged on that K— and enemy of his, Ormond his Son Ossory, and the Knave Villers; (who you may remember had a Suit with him.) This is all I can yet learn of this Affair, only that one Reyly, (as I remember) Cor∣net to the D. O. Troop, is so far engaged in the Business, as to have a promise from the Earl to be a Major, a large step, if he overstride not himself. I hear of a new Witness this day come in against the Earl. Likewise there is one Plunket, titular Primate of Ireland, committed, on the former Proclamation for Papists departing, &c. POSTSCRIPT. HEre are different Apprehensions of the Authors of this Plot, if not of the Plot it self, some believing as the prosecutors make out, others considering what wretched Endeavours have been lately with you, by sinister and indirect means in the Papists, to lay their villainous Plots upon the Protestants, do suppose that the Earl of Tyrone is dealt withal by these his prosecutors, as your supposed Presbyterians were to have been dealt withal by their prosecu∣tors, had they succeeded; the Earl having many years since openly avowed himself a Protestant, and by many noble Services both by Sea and Land, de∣monstrated himself a loyal and valiant Subject to his Majesty, whom God pre∣serve, and defend from all his Enemies. This is all at present from, Your affectionate Friend, W. S. Dublin, Decemb. 6. 1679.
