S2511 11907279 50746
The Fourscore and Eleventh Epistle OF LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA The PHILOSOPHER. WRITTEN Ʋpon Occasion of the sudden BURNING OF Lions in France. Translated out of the Original into English Verse. LONDON, Printed by William Godbid. 1666.
The Fourscore and Eleventh Epistle of Lucius Annaeus Seneca the Philosopher: Written upon occasion of the sudden Burning of LIONS in FRANCE. OUR Liberalis is with grief and Pity Fill'd at the burning of his Native City. This direful accident might any move, Though to that City not concern'd in love: And even to his mind might add more strength: Who, what he fear'd, has found to come at length. But this un-look'd for chance, and which is more Un-heard of, 'tis no wonder that before 'Twas heard or thought on, it was fiercely sent, Since it was also without President. A raging Fire hath very much annoy'd And damag'd Cities, but hath none destroy'd. For where quick fire is thrown with hostile hand, Houses un-touch'd in many places stand. And no Earth-quake hath been so fatal known, That a whole City hath been overthrown.
And no consuming flame hath been so dire, But it left something for another fire. So many famous Piles, which singly might Crace several Cities, fell down in one night. And in a time of Peace as much fell out As scarce a cruel war could bring about. Who could believe wars ceasing every where When through the World no dangers did appear, That Lions so renown'd should by that chance Be sought and doubted, where it stood in France. Fortune permits even those who suffer woe, To fear the ill they were to undergoe. Great things have time before th' are overthrown, This famous City in one night was none. Lastly, I'm longer telling thee the thing, Than all those Buildings were in perishing. These things disturbe our Liberalis mind, To patience in his own affairs confin'd. Nor is he so perplex'd without a cause, The un-expectedness of chances draws More trouble, and the novelty of things To all calamity Addition brings. And there's no mortal man, being struck with wonder, But some conceived trouble must lie under. Wherefore in nothing we should be surpris'd, Our minds in fore-sight should be exercis'd, To weigh not only what's un-usual But to consider too what may befall.
What is so strong, gainst which when Fortune's bent Though glorious, cannot receive detriment? Or which she do's not shake, or more molest By how much it was greater than the rest? What's difficult by Fortune to be done? She walks in no way always, nor alone. Somtimes our own hands 'gainst our selves she bends, And then without an Author mischief sends. No time is free, our very pleasures turn Into great woe, and often make us mourn. War sometimes rises in the midst of Peace, And that which seems our troubles to release Turns into fear: a Friend do's love forgo, And a Companion is become a foe. A Summers calmness many times do's draw A Storm more fierce than any Winters flaw. VVithout an Enemy we find a war, Such is our fate, that many times we are By our too great Felicity, to woe Expos'd, when we no other causes know. Diseases the most temp'rate will assail, The Ptissick on the strongest will prevail. Upon the guiltless punishment is laid, And tumults will mens quietness invade; Fortune oft chooses something new, whereby On those who have forgot her power, she'l fly. Whats'ever many ages have erected, By the gods favour, and mens pains effected,
One day dissolves. He gives a long delay To hast'ning Evils, who allows a day. An hour, a moment is sufficient space Great Kingdomes to throw down, and quite erace. It would some solace to our weakness bring, And to th' Affairs of men, if every thing Did not increase with slowness, and with hast Dissolve and fall. There's nothing that stands fast Private or publick. Fear in those things which please And flourish most, do's soonest on us sease. And ills which are by us least thought upon, Without tumultuous causes will fall on. Kingdomes which have endur'd both Civil wars And Forrain, have without publick jars Been ruin'd. And few Cities have enjoy'd Felicity, and never been annoy'd. We therefore should weigh all things, and advance Our constant minds, gainst ev'ry sad mischance. Think therefore still on Wars, and Sicknesses, On Shipwracks, Banishments, and the Excess Of Torments. Think thy Country may be taken From thee, or else by thee may be forsaken. Think Fortune may expose thee in a rude Desert; and think that where a Multitude Is stifled, there a Desert may be made. Let the condition of Mankind be laid, Before our eyes, and let's not only weigh What happens often, but let's think what may
Befall: and would we not our errours rue, Mistaking things un-usual for new, Let us on fortune look in her full power. How many Cities did her rage devour In Asia and Achaia by one way? How many in Syria, and Macedonia? Cyprus in many parts could not avoid That fate, but hath been many times destroy'd. How oft hath Paphus Earthquakes felt, and sped As ill, in her own ruines buried. We who have often heard of Towns thus tost, How small a part are we of men so lost? Then let us gainst Misfortunes our minds raise, And think th' are not so great as rumor says. Fire hath consum'd a City great and rich, The Ornament of Provinces, in which It did both seated and exempted lye, Yet built upon one hill not very high. Nay, all those Cities famous through the world, VVill at the length be into ruine hurl'd. And there will not in future time appear A Mark, or any Footstep where they were. See'st thou not that Achaia's stately Towns Are so destroy'd, that there remains no Bounds Nor yet Foundations to make it good To the Beholders, where those Cities stood. Not only what is fram'd by hand and art Time do's consume, the tops of Mountains start
And tumble down, whole Regions have been found To sink, and many Countryes have been drown'd Far distant from the sea. High hills which were Famous by fire, fire did in sunder tear. And Promontories, which have been a Mark For Marriners to guide and steer their Bark; At fight whereof they usually have joy'd, Have been laid flat, and utterly destroy'd. The very works of Nature troubled are, And therefore we with equal minds should bear All Cities fate. Things made, were made to fall, And Dissolution waits upon them all. VVhether the violence of inward wind, Striving a passage through the Earth to find, Shakes the great weight of Earth? Or whether Those hidden torrents joyn their force together? Or that the heat of inward flames do's wast The Ligaments of Earth which ty'd it fast. Or whether Age 'gainst vvhich there's no defence, Does by degrees effect this violence. Or that a poysonous Air the Land bereft Of People, and infected vvhat vvas left? To repeat all the vvays of destiny VVere long, but by experience I Am sure of this, that mortal things are all Condemn'd into Mortality to fall. VVe live not where vve can find any thing That is secure, but daily perishing.
These comforts and the like I re-commend To Liberalis our un-doubted friend, Exceedingly inflamed with the love Of his own Country, whose sad fate may prove No small advantage; for perhaps that chance Ordained was its glory more t' advance. Many great things have faln, to rise more high, And often are improv'd by injury. Timagines, a foe to th' happiness Of Rome, would often when 't was burnt profess, The burning he did not so much deplore, As that it would rise greater than before. And in this City we may well suppose No labour will be wanting, till it grows From a vast heap of ashes and of dust, Greater and firmer than it was at first; I whish 't may last, and being built again With better Omen, longer may remain; For since that Town was built, it is not past An hundred years, an age wich some men last. Plancus, by fitness of the place first made The Town a great and noted Mart for Trade. VVhich notwithstanding hath endur'd much rage VVithin the space but of a humane age. And therefore let us be prepared still To suffer patiently all sorts of ill; And know there's nothing Fortune cannot do, Both to advancement and to ruine too.
And that her power on Empires do's prevail As upon Emperours, and do's assail Cities as well as Men; at which things we Should not repine, or discontentd be. We are brought into a World where we must live Under those Laws. Do they thee please? Then give Obedience. Do they displease? Thou art At Liberty at all times to depart. Thou might'st complain if any of these were put And thrown on thee alone unjustly, but Since this necessity as well do's wait On high as low, be reconcil'd to Fate, Which all things will dissolve. Reason presents No cause at all, that we by Monuments And Tombs should measured be. One fate attends On mortal men, and brings them to their ends. W' are born un-equal, but we equal dye. The same of Cities as of Dwellers, I Do here declare. Ardea was as well Taken as Rome, though this did that excell. The great Ordainer of all humane right Makes no distinction of us by the bright Splendour of birth and titles, longer than We are alive, and conversant with men. And when we end this Mortal life, begon From hence, says he, depart ambition; All Mortals walk one way, and all things ly Equally under common destiny.
None, then an other can be more secure, Or know what he to morrow shall endure. Young Alexander King of Macedon Geometry unhappily begun To learn, the smallness of the Earth to know Whereof the least part did him homage owe. Unhappy, I say, in that he should have known How false a Sir-name he did vainly own. For what can in a little place be great? The points whereof the Master did entreat Were subtile, and not easily discern'd, But with a diligent attention learn'd; Not apprehended by a Frantick man Whose thoughts did rove beyond the Ocean. Teach me, said he, those things which will be made More easie to me: T' whom the Master said, These things are still the same, alter'd to none, And are as difficult to all, as One. Think Nature thus to all men does declare Those things at which you grumble, the same To all, nor can they be more easie made To any, but whosoever shall perswade Bt himself, without compulsion, to forsake All fear of chances, will them easie make. But how? By equalness of mind. Th' art born To endure sorrow, hunger, thirst, and scorn. And if thou longer shalt with men remain, Thou fickness, loss, and ruine may'st sustain.
But yet there is no reason thou should'st give Belief to those things which about thee strive. For none of them are ill, or hard to bear; It is report of men that brings this fear. And what can be more vain, than to be vex'd At rumour, and to be for words perplex'd? Demetrius that he might drive away Such foolishness, oft wittily would say, I care no more what foolish people speak Than whether wind upward or downward break. It is a madness we are brought to, when We fear to be defam'd b' infamous men; As thou without good reason did'st fear fame, So what thou didst not fear, when once the same Shall bid thee, thou wilt fear; can it be thought A good man suffers by false rumours, fraught With scandals? Nor is Death hurt, by what Is said of it, though some be scar'd there-at. None, who accuse Death, have experience got. 'Tis rashness to condemn what we know not. But this we know, that 'tis a benefit To many, and that many are by it Discharg'd from torments, poverty, and grief. And find in weariness, and wrongs relief. If Death be under our own power, then where Is any other power that we should fear? FINIS.
