S3506BA 99831082 35544
The Famous History of the Valiant London-Prentice. Printed for J. Back, at the Sign of the Black-Boy on London-Bridge. 1686.
THE Famous History OF AURELIUS, The VALIANT London-PRENTICE SHEWING His Noble Exploits at home and abroad, his LOVE, and Great Success. Very Pleasant and Delightful. Written for Incouragement of Youth, By J. S. This may be Printed, R. P. Printed for I. Back, at the Sign of the Black Boy on London-Bridge.
The History of the London-Prentice, &c. CHAP. I. An account of his Birth, Education, and ear∣ly Valour, &c. IN times past, there was Born in the Famous County of Cheshire, a young Man of excellent beauty, promising ve∣ry great things, even in his infancy; to promote which, his Parents being weal∣thy, spared not to Educate or bring him up in the best manner the Country wou'd afford, nor did he, as he grew up, fail in any thing their expectation. In learning he was well seen, and in many other mat∣ters, but nothing so enflamed his mind as the desire of Exercising himself in eats of Arms, and was the more incited thereto by Reading the Famous adven∣tures of Knights-Errant how successful they were in over-coming Gyants and
Monsters, and rescuing beauteous La∣dies from death and misery; and as these heroick thoughts increased, so he found his strength abound, nature not sparing to give him manly limbs and an able bo∣dy, so that in his Childish Encounters, those that far surpassed him in Years, were not able to resist his force, nor come near him in Wrestling, Iumping, Run∣ing, casting the Bar, Stone or Dart; which made not his Parents but a little proud of such a blessing, whom they had named Aurelius, as one that promised great things. CHAP. II. An account of his first adventures and En∣terprizes, where he won the Virgins hearts, &c. WHen Aurelius was at the age of four∣teen, he went to a Wake or Mercy meeting to recreate himself with other Youths of the Country, where he so well behaved himself, that his courage, acti∣vity, strength and beauty, gained great applause, and took so mainly with the Virgins, that some of them began to fee
a Feavour in their minds, which Cupid who at such mercy meetings is seldome wanting in Promoting the Business of Love, failed not to increase, but he as yet not capable of feeling the flame of pas∣sion that way, regarded not their amo∣rous glances, nor understood the silent Language of inflamed hearts, though it notwithstanding created him those Ene∣mies that were causelesly jealous of him as a most dangerous Rival, and who ga∣thered their reason for it from the many praises their Mistresses bestowed on him in his absence. CHAP. III. How the fair Lucinda fell in love with him, and how those she despised for his sake, conspir'd against him. OVr Youth increasing his Strength and beauty with his years, and con∣tinuing as occasion offered to appear in publick amongst those admiring Virgins that in a manner doted on him, and often wished to be Mistris of his affections: Lucinda the fair Daughter of a Wealthy Shepherd was the chief who sought by
many ways to oblige him, and to let him understand her passion; but Mo∣desty sealing her Lips, he did not, or wou'd not Interpret her dumb signs, but kept on his Merriment, without any regard of her passion; which made her sigh and grow Melancholly, refusing to entertain the Address of those that adored her, and doted on her Beauties more than she did on those that adorned our Heroick Youth. This sudden alte∣ration made them restless till they knew the cause of it which was not long e're they did from her Virgin Compan∣ons to whom she had droped some words of her passon; as likewise by a Letter she had written in order to send to him by a trusty hand, but had accidentally droped it, in which were these words: Dear Aurelius, seeing you do not un∣derstand the Language of a Love-sick Vir∣gins Eyes, pardon my Boldness, if with Blushes I have taken the liberty to let you know Lucinda doats on you, and begs you wou'd requite her Love with Love, who for your sake, renounces the rest of Man∣kind: Then have Compassion or Lucinda must be miserable. Subscribed Lucinda.
This giving the Amorists a full know∣ledge upon whose account they found such cold Entertainment from their be∣loved Mistris, whom every one of them feared to loose, they bent their study how to remove that Screen that stood be∣tween them and their much-desired hap∣piness; some were of opinion that no∣thing but the death of Aurelius could ef∣fect it; but others of a milder dispositi∣on, declared, that it would not onely be too much Cruelty, but bring their own lives in question; therefore considering woman-kind was generally more taken with the Beauty of the Body, than with that of the Soul, they thought it fit to Deform him with Poyson, but where to get it they knew not, and so came to re∣ut, that disfigure his Face, &c. with Wounds might work the same effect, and put an end to the passion of their dear Lucinda, which they knew not any other ways to distinguish.
CHAP. IV. How they attempted to destroy Aurelius, but were overcome and left naked in the Wood. THe Plot thus lay'd against our va∣liant youth, many ways were sought for an opportunity to put it in practice, till at last they understand he was gone to pay a visit to an Aunt of his, who li∣ved at a Village about two miles from his Fathers house, and that he must return by a Wood: This Lucky opportunity, as they imagined it, made them all Leap for Ioy, there being four in number, they Armed them with mischievous Weapons, and in disguise, placed themselves in Ambush under a Thicket of Trees, in the way he must pass, each Swearing to the o∣ther to keep the thing secret, though they keep not their Oaths, as you will hear. Long they had not stayed, but as they wished, our Valiant Youth not dreaming of such Treachery, came on, but hearing the Bushes rusle, he made a halt to see what it meant, when out leaped the Lovers, and incompassing
him, after they had uttered many big words, and reviled him at an unseemly rate, they made in to graple with; who ignorant of their intent, and scorning to stoop to fear, took the two foremost in either hand, and by main force brought their heads together, that they rung like a Barbers Bason; so that stunded with the violent Knocks, after stagger∣ing some paces, down they fell; and having by this time wrested a Weapon from one of them, he set upon the other two with such fury, that giving them several Wounds, they, when they found the blood run about their ears, fell on their knees, and cryed for mercy, as did the other, who by this time were re∣covered from their Trance; yet could not they obtain their wish till he had Thrashed them into a Confession of the whole matter, and thereby became sen∣sible of the Love Lucinda bore him; and that she might come to the knowledge of what had happened on this occasion, and that their Treachery might be re∣warded with disgrace, he caused them to unstrip, and with such Tackling as their Garments afforded, he bound them to four several Trees stark-naked, where
these hot-brain'd Lovers took a fit of Cooling till the morning, which dis∣covering the whole Intreague, their rash Valour became for some time aft∣ter, the Mirth of the Country; but most of all it pleased the fair Lucinda, whose favour they lost thereby. CHAP. V. How his Father put him Apprentice to a Merchant, and the leave he took of Lu∣cinda. THe Father of young Aurelius having received an exact account of all that had happened, and fearing these Lovers might study a further Revenge to re∣pair their Disgrace, as also to prevent any Amours that might happen between him and Lucinda, to whom he was not willing he should be Married; he took an opportunity to discourse him about putting himself in a way that might render him capable of living in Credit in the World: when finding him plya∣ble and ready to submit to what he should propose, he told him it was his pleasure he should go to London, and there be put an Apprentice to some Honourable Cal∣ling,
that he might be a comfort to him in his Old days; and that it should be in his power to chuse him a Master of any Profession. Vpon this he had not long considered, e're he repy'd, That seeing it was his pleasure, he was con∣tented; and for the desire he had to Tra∣vel and see strange Countries, he could fancy none better than a Merchant. To this the Old Man agrees, and short∣ly after he was sent up to London, and placed to a Turkey Merchant upon Lon∣don-Bridge, and upon his departure di∣rected these Lines to Lucinda. Pardon me Beauteous Maid, if Love as yet No power a Conquest o're me has to get; That you deserve what e're Love can bestow I must confess, but I, alas! must go And wander o're the World e're I can Love Then be contented, and for me ne'r grieve. Subscribed Aurelius. This flat denyal made the fair Lucin∣da shed many tears, and bewail her hard fortune, in loving where she was not repayed with an equal passion; but soon after a Rich Farmers Son offering ser∣vice to her, she having with much strug∣ling over come her former affection, she
changed her passion, and Sacrificed her Virginity to the pleasure of this new∣come Lover, where Revelling in excess of joy, we will leave them, and follow Aurelius to his new preferment. CHAP. VI. How he gained the love of his Master, and became Enamoured of Dorinda his fair Daughter. OVr Youth upon his Tryal proved so diligent and respectful, that it was not long e're he was Bound, accor∣ding to the Custom of the City; and then doubling his diligence, he won the love of the whole Family, not omitting any thing that might please or be for his Masters Interest; and what time he had to spare, he imployed in Manly Exer∣cise, of recreating himself in the Fen∣cing-School, and in Martial Exploits, gaining every where the name of a bold and hardy Youth, and one that promi∣sed great things. In this happy state he lived near three years, when Fortune who is as unconstant as the Wind, con∣spired to give him some disturbance, for Dorinda his Masters Daughter, a beau∣tiful
Virgin of about 14 Years of Age, returning from the School where she had been brought up at Board, her Mo∣desty, winning behaviour, and Charm∣ing Graces, by his often gazing on her, prompted him to admire her, and by de∣grees, to conceive such a passion for that excellent Creature, that he was no longer master of his heart, which his eyes had given away: A while he smo∣thered the flame, but in the end it broke out the fiercer, and then he knew expe∣rimentally what Dorinda had suffer'd often, he attempted to discover his pas∣sion, and as often fear to offend, stayed the words at his Tongues-end, and all he could do, was to sigh and stand con∣founded in her presence; whilst the in∣nocent Lady would frequently ask the reason, but had no answer, but what his eyes delivered in burning Glances. Thus he continued for a month or more, at the end of which, he resolved one way or other to make his passion known, and soon found an opportunity to drop a Letter in the way of the lovely Do∣rinda, containing these words: Beauteous Dorinda, after many sighs and eager looks, I have presumed to let you
know, if this come to your fair hand, that I love you dearer than my own life, and to be requited with your Love, there is not any thing so hazardus that I would not un∣dertake for your sake; the inequallity I must confess, is great, yet Love is a power obedient to no Law but his own: pitty me then as a Lover, that love you above all Earthly things, and look not on me as your Fathers Servant, but your devoted Slave, by whose Smiles I live, and without which, my Life must need; be miserable. Subscribed Aurelius. This did not a little surprize the beauteous Maid, who considered, that although she might have cause to love him, yet he being as then a Servant, it would be highly displeasing to her Parents, if she should countenance his affections; wherefore preferring her du∣ty and obedience before her fancy or the passion of Aurelius, the next time she met him her words were, That she cou'd not but wonder, he should presume to make Love to her who was his Ma∣sters daughter, e're half his time was expired, & wished him not to make men∣tion of it any more by Letter or Word,
least her Father were made acquainted with it, to his prejudice; and so with a kind of a scornful frown, left him as one in a Maze of Grief. CHAP. VII. How he got leave to go for Turkey, and what ensued. AUrelius being thus repulsed in his first Love, found himself altogether restless, and that as often as he beheld his beautiful Mistris, his flame increa∣sed, and his torture was more and more augmented; and though he tryed ma∣ny ways to give way to his labouring mind, he found them in vain, and there∣fore concluded, unless he was removed from the lovely Object, he must be al∣ways miserable; and perceiving her looks and carriage every day more scornful towards him, he resolved to request his Master that he might go for Turkey as his Factor, in the next Fleet: Which Request of his was granted without much difficulty, and in a gallant Equipage took leave, though not without some tears of his scornful Mistris, who by this time, be∣gan
somewhat to relent that she had so unkindly repulsed his Address; but being young and beautiful, and consi∣dering that those advantages, her In∣dulgent Father would add a large Por∣tion, her thoughts of a higher advance∣ment, hushed that care, and so they parted, the valiant Aurelius to the Ship, and the Lady to her Chamber, where we must leave her, who shortly after Marryed a Rich Merchant, and fol∣lowed him into Turkey. CHAP. VIII. How he arrived in Turkey, and of his Re∣ception: How he overthrew the Turks, and killed a Turkish Prince. THe gallant Aurelius having passed the danger of the Seas, and a while contended with the Storms of Winds and Love, Landed at Constantinople, where he was received with much re∣spect by the English Merchants and Factors residing there, and behaved himself so well in the Management of his Affairs, that he gained a general Esteem; and in all this, he forgot not to exercise his Valour as occasion re∣quired;
and being by this time grown to his full strength, he found none able to Encounter him, though he was too Modest to boast of his own Abilities: Now it so fell out, that upon the Mar∣riage of one of the Turks Daughters, great Sports and Shews were prepa∣red, and all the Valiant Knights sum∣moned to Exercise at Tilt and Turna∣ment, in Honour of the Ladys, and of their Countries. This News pleased Aurelius so well, that he resolved to make one amongst them, and shew his Prowels for the honour of the English Nation, against the proud Infidels, and thereupon provided Armour, a Horse, Sword, and Launce, bearing in his Shield a Golden Phoenix, to signifie he was a Subject to a Virgin Queen, and under it Neptune Bridling the Ocean, shewing that the Seas Soveraignty de∣pended on her Will; as for his Armor, it was White, signifying Innocence. Thus bravely Accoutred, he hasted to the List to await the Trumpets sound, where all the Nobles and Ladies were Seated in their Degrees, clad in Gold and Gems, when on a sudden, three Turks well Mounted and Richly Armed,
Advanced with their Mooned Shields, and with a loud voice, did Defiance, as the Bridegrooms Champions, to all the Knights of Christendom; which made Aurelius mad to let them know what English Valour was; but perceiving the Champions of other Nations prepa∣ring for the Encounter, he forbore till he might by a witness of their Fortune, and that his Honour might be the grea∣ter, in overcoming their overcomers, nor did amiss, for the Turks being of a Monstrous size, and wll Managed to such Feats of Arms, at the first En∣counter cast them from their Saddles, and so passed on, and did the like to three others, which made the bold Aurelius believe it was time for him to Advance, and thereupon seing Spurs to his Horse, he met the foremost with a full stroke on his Breast, that it tumbled him with his heels upward, quite over the Crup, and passing on, struck the second on the Crest with such force that he broke it, and the Launce entring his Brain, he fell breathless to the ground, which the third perceiving, who was of a Gyant-like Stature, came upon him with his Sword, and with a full blow,
cut through his Shield, and much brui∣sed him, but he Charging furiously up∣on the Infidel, soon made him give ground, and after divers Wounds, o∣bliged him to kiss the Earth, and beg quarter for his Life. To revenge this disgrace of his Cham∣pions, the Turkish Prince, with the leave of his Father-in Law, entred the List in great rage, and defied the bold Aure∣lius, Swearing by Mahomet, he would Chastize the great Affront, and with many reproachful wods, bid him come on, upon which they set Spurs to their Horses, and met with such fury, that their Launces burst, and shivered in the Air, when the Turkish Prince drew his Sword, but Aurelius neglecting to do the like made at him with the Trun∣cheon of his Spear, with which he gave him such a waighty blow on the top of his Helmet, that broke his Neck  sun∣der, and down he fel in a Morca trance; after which, the Turks strained Com∣plement, and none durst undertake the Valiant English Champion.
CHAP. IX. How he destroyed two Lyons prepared to Devour him, and had the King's Daugh∣ter in Marriage. THe Great Turk upon notice that Prince Grodmon his Son-in-Law, whom he thought had only been stunn∣ed, was dead, vowed that Aurelius, whom he called English Boy, should dye the cruelest death that ever man dyed, and thereupon sent a strong Guard to seize him and convey him to Prison, till he consulted what manner of death to put him to to, which in the end was con∣cuded, that he should be cast alive to two Lyons, who to be the greedier in devouring, were kept fasting many days. The day of his death, as by appoint∣mnt being come, and the King, his Nobles, and all his Ladies seated to behold the Execution, the brave Aure∣lius was brought forth in a Shirt of Cambrick, and Drawers of white Sat∣tin, Ambroidered with Gold, and a Crim∣son Cap on his head, but had scarce time to bow respectfully to the Ladies, who greatly praised his Manly Beauty, and began highly to pitty his misfor∣tune,
e're the Lyons were let loose, who at the sight of their prey, easting their eyes upon him, began to Rore horibly, insomuch that the Spectators trembled; but behold Aurelius, whom Death could not daunt, laying aside all fear, as they came fiercely at him with open mouth, charged his Hands into their Throats, and e're they had power to get from his strong Arms, forc'd out their Hearts, and lay'd them dead at his feet, demanding of the King what o∣ther dangerous Enterprizes they had to put on, and he would gladly do it for the Honour of his Queen and Countries sake; when immediately the Turk de∣scending from his Throne, tenderly Em∣bracing him, Swearing he was some Angel, withal, Pardoned him, and gave Beauteous Theraza his Daughter in Marriage, with great Riches, who for his sake became a Christian; and after spending some time in that place, they both returned to England with great joy, where they lived many years very Loving and Happy. FINIS.
J B John Back, at the Black-Boy, on London Bridge, Furnisheth any Gentlemen or Chap Men with all sorts of BOOKS, BALLAD and all other Stationary-Wares, at Rea¦sonable Rates.
