S377 12393686 61065
portrait of King Charles II CAROLUS II DEI GRATIA ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIA REX ETC.
An Impartial and Brief DESCRIPTION OF THE PLAZA, Or Sumptuous Market-Place OF MADRID, AND THE Bull-Baiting THERE: Together with the History of the Famous and much Admired Placidus. As also a large Scheme, being the Lively Representation of the Order and Ornament of this Solemnity. By James Salgado a Spaniard. LONDON, Printed by Francis Clark for the Author, Anno Dom. 1683.
TO THE MOST SERENE and MIGHTY CHARLES II. By the Grace of God of Great Brittain, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty, YOur Royal Name was prefixed to this other Ma∣nual of mine the last year, but I had not the Confidence to present Your Sacred Majesty with the same: It was not that I judged the Subject matter altogether despi∣cable,
and unworthy of Acceptati∣on; but because my Timerous and Bashful Disposition induced me to believe that it was every way suffi∣cient, to be Honoured with the Name of such an Inestimable and Noble Patron: But yet for all that, my Pinching want has, now at length, prevail'd with me to shake off these Thoughts; in regard that so great an Honour, attended with somthing else (Your Majesty con∣ceives my meaning) would, beyond all peradventure, contribute the more to my present Straitned condi∣tion. Wherefore I Prostrate my Self and Labours at Your Royal Feet; looking upon it as my greatest Happiness, if Your Majesty may be pleased to spend some few Mi∣nutes
for a Recreation, in the per∣usal of this short Description of the Bull-Baiting at Madrid: But if good Fortune deny me this Ho∣nour, I must Patiently share in the Lot of my Country-men, who now a-days are generally Unfor∣tunate. However, Your Ma∣jesties long Life, Prosperous Reign, and Eternal Happiness, shall in all Circumstances, be the most Ear∣nest Prayer of Your Majesties most Devoted Supplicant, James Salgado a Spaniard.
TO THE READER. Reader, I Have taken a view of Spain, France, Ita∣ly, and the United Netherlands, but I must confess, I did never see (except here in England) such a crowd of Authors, Printers, Book-binders, Stationers, Gazetts, Observa∣tors, Pacquets, Mercuries, Intelligences, and Bills of Chyrurgions, calling themselves Doctors forsooth: Whileas, in very deed, they ought to be stiled Mountebanks. In a word, I don't remember to have seen a People so much busd with, and Fond upon No∣velties. While therefore I stood amaz'd, behold pinching Want, and simple Bashful∣ness (by way of a Dialogue) made their ad∣dress unto me; the former in these following words. I see you are a Stranger, and ought
to be encouraged by, and sheltered under the Protection of the Generous English Nation: For that cause, I judge it your near concern∣ment to come with a full hand, if you look for any gracious acceptance. On the other side Shame replyed, Mr. Salgado believe my un∣dissembled Simplicity; The English are most Ingenuous, and of a Pregnant Wit: What then can you expect by publishing any thing but Scorn and Contempt? For many will be apt to say, what meaneth this Ʋgly Pale Spaniard, who with his Whimseys and Trifles busies our Printers, and creates us much trouble? What (answered Necessity) Hunger constrains him to take such a course: For, Mr. Salgado (I'm confident) by all Laudable means endeavoureth to eschew hard Straits, not hunting after Airy Praise, and a great Name. Which the one saying stopt the mouth of Blushing Shame. Thus being past Shame, I do set this Treatise on the Pillory, i.e. I stick not to expose it to the Censures of Carping Criticks. But methinks I hear a great many entertain∣ing a Discourse to this purpose. 'Tis not
worth our while to take strict notice of a Poor Distressed man past Shame, seeing Ne∣cessity has no Law. Wherefore, most Noble, Puissant, Anci∣ent and Generous English, or rather Ange∣lical Nation (for you are my Tutelar Angels, in regard that these five years, and above, I have enjoyed Life and Sanctuary by your Protection and Benigne Generosity) I present you with this Solemnity of the Bulls at Ma∣drid, my Native Soyl. If any thing therein be amiss, I claim an interest in the clemency of your Promise; but if otherwise, look up∣on it as a Testimony of my undissembled Gratitude. Farewel.
a bullfight The Bull a Hunting The Place there: of in Madrid 1 The King and Queene 2 The Kings Counsell 3 The Embassadors 4 The Gentlemen with their Lackeys hunting ye Bull 5 The Young Placito 6 The Bulls Stablls
An Impartial and Brief Descripti∣on of the Plaza, or Sumptuous Market-place of Madrid, and the Bull-baiting there. SIR, I Am certisied by your Letter, that a commen∣dable Curiosity has induced you to Travel through France, Italy and Germany; adding further, that, had you not been perswaded to the contrary by a certain person, (one who, I'm apt to believe, has no good will to my Country) the Pleasures and Rarities of Spain had not escap'd your Impartial and Diligent Consideration: Assure your self, none could be more concerned to enjoy your Fellowship there; nor readier to do you good Offices, than I, up∣on consideration of the manifold, and signal Ob∣ligations laid upon me by a person of your worth. But seeing it is to no purpose to repent what is past, I shall forbear to enlarge on this Sub∣ject: Yet because you seem to be not a little dissatisfied that you had not the good Fortune of seeing Spain, and more especially the Esurial,
and the yearly Festival at Madrid; I shall en∣deavour, according to my Bounden Duty, to satisfie your Curiosity in this point; insomuch, that from your Closet you may receive a full view of the Spanish Court, and its Magnificence, as also the goodly and large Fields of Madrid, without expending much, or exposing your Per∣son to danger after the manner of most Travellers who repair thither; and for your greater clear∣ness in the matter, I send you this large Scheme. In describing the matter in hand, my Stile shall be plain, and the Relation Impartial; in re∣gard that I bear no liking to disingenuity, or the forging of Romantick Novelties and Fictions. As for the Escurial, we shall have a fairer oppor∣tunity to treat on it at another occasion: This in the general you may know, that, (according to the unanimous consent of all who have travel∣led thither) it is a thing very well worth the while. Our present Discourse then shall be whol∣ly confin'd to the Bull-baiting (as it is called) at Madrid. It has been the Fate of Spain, as that of other Puissant Nations, not to have escaped Scot-free of the frequent, and noisome In-roads of many Cruel Adversaries of different Languages, Laws and Constitutions; so that some Vestigias of the one must be supposed to remain, as well as the other. Those who did bear chief sway there, were the Romans, Vandals, Goths and Saracens; insomuch that the Spanish Tongue appears to be an Aggregate of the Latine, German and Ara∣bick.
The Saracens obtaining the latest Con∣quest, their Laws and Language leave the deep∣er Impression. Among other their Constitutions, this Festival which we are about to describe was one. You may easily object that it is a Cruel and Barbarous Recreation, which I am ready to grant, and so much the rather, that its Original is de∣riv'd from such a Barbarous Rable as the Turks were, and are to this day: Nevertheless, an un∣controull'd Custom of long continuance has given it the force and validity of a Law, and the most Honourable designation of a Royal Festival, which if any person of what Quality soever, once endeavoured to Rectify, he should inevitably in∣cur the risque of Reproach and Shame, if not a more sad Fate. It being therefore altogether extrinsick to any purpose and concernment, as a private man to determine any thing against the Lawfulness and Unlawfulness of this Solemnity; I shall content my self by making a clear discovery thereof, for your greater satisfaction. Lincolns-Inn-Fields are neither so large, nor spacious, as this place of publick resort at Madrid, which is exactly Square, being surrounded with Houses Uniform all along in all their Dimensions, erected to the Altitude of five pair of Stairs, with a great many most Curious Windows, and Bal∣conies over laid with the purest Gold. More∣over the Square is Level, to the end that the Foming Bulls, and Prancing Horses may run their Courses with the greater easiness and cele∣rity.
From the ground to the first pair of Stairs are reared up Theaters made of Timber for the People: The Thirty Balconies set apart for the King and Court, are Sumptuously Furnish'd with the Richest Tapestry and choicest Velvet that Money or Art can purchase. Here it's obser∣vable that all Noblemen, whose lot it is not to at∣tend the Court for that present Quarter, are de∣nyed the priviledge of these Balconies; where∣fore such persons may possess whatever other places they judge most convenient. In Spain there are divers kinds of Councels, as the King's Councel, that of the Inquisition, War, India, Italy, the Low-Countries, and Arragonia, and consequently Councellors of different degrees and qualities; for which cause it is appointed, that each of those have their Balconies apart, Beautified with Silks and Tapestry of Colours differing, according to the diversity of those Offices and Officers. All Ambassadors from Foraign Kings and Po∣tentates are Treated after the same Fashion, ex∣cept the Pope's Legate, whose Modesty and Piety (forsooth, layes such a restraint upon him, that that Prophane Festival, not being of the Churches appointment) must not be Honoured with his Pre∣sence. All other ranks of persons Assembled thi∣ther, may possess what Seats they are able to pur∣chase: This I say, because the general Confluence to this Common Play from all Corners, makes such a Crowd, that notwithstanding the great num∣ber of Theaters, Balconies, and Windows, men∣tioned
elsewhere, none can purchase a Room in the first pair of Stairs, at a lower rate than 200. Crowns, yea and those places which are not ex∣posed to the Scorching Heat of the Sun after four a Clock, must be supposed to amount to a greater sum of Money: Above the first Row of Win∣dows, places may be got more easily. Seeing this Festival falls out yearly in the Months of June and July, any person may imagine that a Refreshing Shadow cannot be enjoved without much Money and great Moyan, because of the then extra∣ordinary Heat of this place, which ordinarily is known to be a most Hot Climate. In the Cool of the Evening, (a most dangerous Season I con∣fess) all persons promiscuously Throng thither, but chiefly about Ten of the Clock at Night, when the Affections are much delighted with a most Sweet Melody and Consort of Instrumental and Vocal Musick, and all occasions of that na∣ture, the Guitar and Harp are most frequently used; because generally the Spaniards can Dex∣trously Play on those Instruments. Where it's observable, that all Musitians are had in great account at such a time, not respecting what per∣sons they be, which is hardly discernable, in re∣gard that all are disguis'd by most Gorgeous Ap∣parel. It is further to be observed, that if the Jealous Spaniard can espy any man Comple∣menting his Wife with Jocose Words or Kisses, without any consideration, he'l Furiously Assault such a person with Sword and Cudgel, whence arise many most lamentable Tragedies; for the
preventing of which, the Law has wisely ap∣pointed a considerable number of Allquaciles, whom we here call Constables, whose proper and sole Office it is, to mediate betwixt those persons, rewarding them with Bonds and Fetters for the commission of such Horrid Outrages. The ensuing day about eight of the Clock in the Morning, no place can be found empty, whileas none of the Members of the Court are present, but the Mayor and Aldermen. This Morning Game or Recreation (called Encierro, or the bringing forth of the Bull) is thus performed. There is a Gate in Madrid, De la vega by name, nigh to which a large Room is appointed for the Reception of the Bulls the day precedeing this Solemn Feast, where they are Gently Fed, rather to render them the more Furious, than in the least to strengthen the miser∣able Creatures. It's certain that for the most part, Bulls are more Furious in Spain than any other part of the World; and there more espe∣cially, such as Feed by the Rivers Tago and Ja∣rama flowing betwixt Toledo and Madrid. But to return to our purpose; There is a long and straight Street or Lane adjoyning to the House in which the Bulls are shut up, and terminating in the place of publick resort, where all Passages are carefully stopt, only over against the fore∣said Street there is another large Room left wide open, whether the Mad Animals do Throng, finding no other place of refuge left them; by which means a most easie course is contrived for
leading them forth to the Slaughter. I shall not detain you longer by relating other Passiges of the Encierro; for its a matter scarce worth our while, as being destitute of Order and Orna∣ment, by reason of the Courts Absence. About two of the Clock in the Afternoon twelve Gla∣diators repair to the place, where all are per∣mitted to Fight whom Magnanimity, or Bold∣ness shall excite thereto; which Liberty would unquestionably produce Sad Tragedies, if full Goals and Empty Purses were not sufficient means to stop such Disorders. Two hours after, there appear the Nobility in their Stately Coaches, all the ground being Sprinkled over with Water, because of the Burning Heat of the Sun. Which while its a Setting, the King and Court, with the Councellors and Ambassadors are to be seen to the great satisfaction of all persons. Up∣on the back of this the Royal Constables, being twelve in number, in good Equipage, and moun∣ted on Horses with the Richest Harness imagin∣able, drive away all persons and Disorders; in∣somuch, that in a very short time the Constables are to be seen and none else in the plain Square. Afterwards twenty and four Hogsheads of Water are carried in Waggons, resembling so many green Mountains, because of their bigness, and being covered over with most Fragrant Herbs; those large Vessels are the Seats of twenty four men, who, upon demand, open the Bung-Holes, so that in an Instant the whole Plain is Besprink∣led with Water. In the next place, the Kings Life-Guard
consisting of 100. Spaniards, and as many Germans, attend His Majesty all along, be∣ing Armed with Halberts; whom Coats of Red and Yellow Silk, and Caps of the choicest Black Velvet, adorn exceedingly. By this time methinks you have got a pretty clear Idea of what is Antecedaneous to the main thing in hand: So that, if the most Stately Bal∣conies and Theaters, if the vast number of People, if the Nobility Gorgeously (I had said wonder∣fully) Arrayed, if the Kings Constables main∣taining good Order, if in the last place His Ma∣jesties Life-Guard: I say, if each, and all of those be Impartially Canvassed by such a Consi∣derative person as you are; I doubt not but you'l be constrain'd upon the most solid grounds and reasons imaginable to joyn with me in the com∣mendation of this Festival beyond any Recreati∣on in the World. I confess France and Italy Vaunt very much of their Splended Games, (as they call them) and the English upon more just grounds extol the Costliness of their Prizes, and the Stateliness of their Coursing-Horses: But in my humble Opinion, what I'm a describing, may claim right to the Preheminence. Yet, if what has been hitherto said cannot sufficiently evince the Truth of this point, I shall endeavour to drive out one Foming Bull, that by seeing the result of such an Enterprise, your Curiosity may re∣ceive the greater satisfaction. We told you that the Bull was shut up in a large Room, therefore the person, whose undaunted
Courage or Boldness sets him a work to Encounter with this Raging Creature, stands to his Posture at the Door of the said House with a long and sharp-pointed Launce in his Hand, having one of his Knees set to the ground: Immediatly after the Sound of a Trumpet, a Constable runs with all pos∣sible speed, and sets the Door of the Room, where the Furious Animal is enclosed, wide open. Way being thus made, and all persons Attentively look∣ing on, the man is by and by Assaulted with great Violence, which on-set, if by Dexterity or good luck, he can evade; there is a fair occasion presented him for Killing or Wounding the Bull to purpose; which if he miss to do, his Life or Members are in Jeopar∣dy. It's a thirsting desire after some imaginary Ho∣nour that sets such Bold Fellows upon the exposing of themselves to those dangerous circumstances, ra∣ther than the advantage of getting the Beasts which they have Killed, or Wounded to purpose. That the next Bull may be rendred the more Fu∣rious, they set up a quantity of Wool, in Figure representing a man, with a considerable weight at his Legs; which while the Beast pusheth in a most formidable manner, the weight keeps it in a straight Position, by which means the Bull is wonderfully enraged. Sometimes a very despicable Peasant is set upon a Lean Deformed Horse, and exposed very often to a Violent Death, because of his Antago∣nists Strength and Rage. For dragging out the Bulls once Killed, six Mules of divers Colours are ap∣pointed, which, by the conduct of four men, ac∣complish this work with all possible Velocity and Artifice. Six Foot-men are ordain'd to Encounter
with the four Beasts yet remaining, to whom no other Weapon is granted, but a Dagger with some few Rexones in a Bagg, which in length exceed not six or seven Inches, having Hafts well ordered with Bunches of Garlands, and Points exceeding sharp for the more ready carrying on of the Intendment. Such as be thus Stated are commonly most dextrous, whom it behooves to Fight with the Bull Face to Face; he who doth otherwise, will undoubtedly incur the risque of Imprisonment, with most abash∣ing Reproaches, and the loss of a considerable Prize. Some men are so Nimble, that by a Gentle motion they can easily evade the Bulls Fury, and at∣tain their design. Thus matters go on until such time as the Trumpet Sound; then Butchers-Dogs, and men Armed with Broad-Swords quickly dis∣patch the Strength and Violence of those formidable Animals. Some years ago I remember upon an occasion of this kind to have seen a thing admirable indeed, viz. A Young man of Twenty years Encountring with a big Bull, escaped all his Comminations by the Nimble and Dextrous motion of his Leg; after∣wards he did spring upon his Back, and catching hold of his Left Horn, Wounded him in several places with the Rexones: In which Posture he con∣tinued until the Trumpet was about to Sound, then (and not till then) he dispatched the Foaming Bull with his Dagger, having sustain'd no prejudice ima∣ginable. All persons present were possest with a wonderful Opinion of the Youth, because of his surpassing Agility, Courage, Dexterity and Bold∣ness. But seeing this example is remarkable, we shall insist on it at greater length hereafter.
It will not be amiss here to mention what fell out upon such an occasion as this in the presence of Charles the first, of Blessed Memory: Who, while Prince of Wales, repaired to the Court of Spain, whether to be Married to the Infanta, or upon what other design, I cannot well determine: How∣ever all Comedies, Playes and Festivals, (this of the Bulls at Madrid being included, were appointed to be as decently and Manificently gone about, as possible, for the more Sumptuous and Stately En∣tertainment of such a Splended Prince. Therefore after three Bulls had been Killed, and the fourth a coming forth, there appeared four Gentlemen in good Equipage; not long after a Brisk Lady in most Gorgeous Apparel, attended with persons of Quality, and some three or four Grooms walked all along the Square a Foot. Astonishment Seized upon the Beholders that one of the Female Sex could assume the unheard Boldness of exposing her self to the violence of the most Furious Beast yet seen, which had overcome, yea almost Killed two men of great Strength, Courage and Dexterity. Inconti∣nently the Bull rushed towards the Corner where the Lady and her Attendants stood, she (after all had fled) drew forth her Dagger very unconcernedly, and thrust it most dextrously into the Bulls Neck, having catched hold of his Horn; by which stroak, without any more trouble, her design was brought to Perfection; after which, turning about towards the King's Balcony, she made her Obeysance, and withdrew her self in suitable State and Gravity. Sir, did you ever see or hear, any example to parallel this? Wonderful indeed! that a Faint-hearted feeble
Woman (one would think) should stand in the Fields Undauntedly, after her Attendants had quickly made their escape, yea and have overcome such a Furious Creature as that Bull was. This be∣ing a matter of Fact, which I thus branch forth into divers circumstances; I hope my Fate shall not be so bad, as to be called a Lyar: Nevertheless, in re∣gard that I judge you one of my best Friends. I will not conceal the Mystery of the matter from you. This person was a man, though in the Habit of a Woman, of grat Experience, Agility, and Resolu∣tion, who had been well inured to this hard Labour at several other occasions, whom they appointed to be disguised so much the rather, that the Prince of Wales might be the more taken with the thing. But not insisting further on this, I shall proceed to the remaining part of my Relation with all Brevity and Perspicuity possible. Noblemen of singular Magnanimity, being moun∣ted on Horses, incomparable Nimble and Pretty, with costly Harness beseeming the Dignity of their Riders, and the Splendor of the Festival; appear in great State and Pomp. Whose Grooms in a most decent manner carry the Launces with which their Masters intend to dispatch the Bulls. (Their Pro∣vince and Charge is to irritate the Rage and Fury of the formidable beast) Those Heroick minds ma∣naging their Launces most Dexterously, accomplish their Noble purposes very often by Killing or Wounding the Foaming Animals: Which if they fail to do, then the Horses sustain great prejudice, in so much that their Riders are Dismounted, whom it behooves in that case to Encounter with the Bulls
a Foot, Lashing them with Broad-Swords; which if any decline to do, he is Baffled, and Branded with the Character of Pusillanimity and Cowardice. You may easily imagine that Generous Spirits will pre∣fer Death to such an Ignomy and Reprach. Thus three or four persons of Quality continue until it be pretty late, at which time they drive out a Bull co∣vered all over with Artificial Fire, by which he is rendered most Furious and Hurtful: For Curiosity and want of further order, induces the Rable to ap∣proach so near unto him, that by his most dreadful pushings many sustain Mutilation, yea and Death it self; in so much that a Tragedy is often times the Conclusion of this Solemnity. In the last place of this Relation it may be worth the while to give a brief Account of a notable in∣stance of Folly in a Young Lady, and Passionate Te∣merity in three Gallants, while the King and No∣bility were present. Three Gentlemen, Marcus An∣tonius, Charles and Lodovicus fell over Head and Ears in Love with a certain Lady of good Extract and Education, being the only Child of her Parents, and then about the Age of Twenty Years, whose Name was Margareta. Those Rivals could hardly look upon one another without Menaces and blows, of whom while any one endeavoured, after the Spa∣nish Custom, to make a Sweet Pleasant Melody in the Hearing of the Lady, then the other two di∣sturbed him; which did breed many and great Quarrellings in the Streets each Night, insomuch that the Ladies Parents and all others dwelling nigh that place, were highly offended; which when Margareta had Espyed, having (it seems) very
little Affection for any of them; directed Letters to them severally, for preventing of all such Disorders for the future; of which Epistles the sum and Te∣nor follows. Gentlemen, I Cannot be induced to believe that Musick accom∣panied with scandalous Disturbances, can be termed a Testimony of sincere Affection; yea, it seems that you aim more by such a course to disgrace and baffle my Name; than to testify any real respect to my Person: Therefore I earnestly intreat you may be pleased to desist from such a Foolish, Ʋnmannerly and Scandalous Action. But if all this cannot be suf∣ficient to put a stop to the Folly of your Exorbitant Affections, I shall pose you with this experiment. Whoever resolves to express his Dexterity, Courage and Agility to all Beholders sufficiently, and his Ar∣dent Love toward me, let him Buckle with the Bull to Morrow in presence of all the Assembly, and he who shall be so Fortunate as to cut off his Neck, and present me with his Horns, may be assured by my Subscription, that I shall not decline to own him for my Husband: Which if any or all of you refuse to do, get you gone; for Effeminate men are none of those I aim at, or desire to be joyned unto. Farewel from Margareta. This pertinent and smart Letter Non plus'd all the Rivals, seeing thereby a Province was prescribed them, which they never dreamed of, nor judged
any ways Honourable; because Noblemen (such as those were) how dextrous soever they be, are never desired to Grasp with the Bull a Foot, and very seldom on Horseback; yet notwithstanding all opposition and Reluctancy, lest they should be branded with the detestable Character of Pufilla∣nimity, they unanimously consented to the Propo∣sition, each of them signifying a part by a most Passionate Letter, that he was absolutely determin'd to satisfy her demand, or die. Wherefore, till the time appointed, they remained with the Rable, that more easie and speedy Access might be attained to appear in the performance of a thing in which their Credit was so nearly concerned, where they com∣posed themselves, until the Noble-men well Moun∣ted were about to Encounter with the fifth Bull; at which time Marcus Antonius steping down, got most Nimbly on the Bull's back, intending by that means to dispatch him quickly with his Broad Sword. Next to him appeared Charles, whose busi∣ness and work it was to Catch hold of the Peasts Horns, which fell out so Fortunately, according to his desire and design, that the Bull stumbled by the first Assault; so that Antonius fell to the ground. Lodovicus, espying Charles sticking fast to the Horns, and Antonius Dismounted, with a Dexterous and Seasonable stroke, cut off the Bulls Neck. Charles immediatly got to the Lady with the Head, signi∣fying that the condition of the Compact was ful∣filled, and therefore he claimed an Interest in her for his Wife. Lodovicus did take it very ill to be thus Trapan'd by Subtle Charles, seeing he it was who cut off the Neck, and therefore concluded the
Prize to be his in all Justice. Antonius moreover being the person who gave first proof of his Magna∣nimity, (making way for the other two) concluded it highly reasonable that he should be preferr'd be∣fore either of them. Which did breed such a wrang∣ling among them, that had not the Alquaciles or Con∣stables interpos'd, they would have committed a most lamentable Tragedy; being now led to the King, they give an Account of the matter, which when His Majesty heard, he commended, in some respect, their Valour, but could not approve of their Incon∣siderateness; seeing therefore he understood it to be Vanity, if not Cruelty, in the Foolish Lady, rather than any sincere Love, to demand such a dangerous attempt; strict Orders were given that none of the Rivals should persist or proceed in a course so very Foolish. Thus the debate ended. We have now Impartially described what is con∣siderable in the yearly Festival at Madrid. I grant indeed, (as before) that it is a recreation scarcely beseeming Christians, whose meekness and Gentle∣ness should not admit of such Barbarous Diversions. Nevertheless, (to speak no more of that) it is ge∣nerally concluded, that persons appointed for such an Exercise, ought to be furnished, not only with suitable Courage, but also with Agility and Dex∣terity, to evade the Assaults of a Violent Brute, by which means many become Famous. Here we may observe how much the Roman Playes come short of this Game: For Criminals were thre compell'd to Graple with Boars and Lyons most Tru∣culent Creatures, of which few can promise them∣selves the Victory; and thus poor Convicted Pan∣nals
suffered a most Cruel Death: To which it may be added, that those Games were chiefly designed to satisfy the Bloody and Vindictive Humours of the people, who rejoyced in such lamentable experi∣ments. It is otherwise here, in regard that no man is constrain'd to undergo this hard labour; neither are Criminals punished with such a Death; but Masculine and Noble Minds desire an occasion of this kind, whereby proof may be given of their Agility and Undaunted Courage. However (as I told in the beginning) it is not my work to praise or con∣demn this most Ancient and Uncontrolled Custom. All I aim'd at was, to satisfy your commendable Curiosity by describing this Festival, which is judg'd in Spain a most Noble Recreation. Our next businss shall be to enlarge a little on the History of Placidus, of whom mention was made elsewhere. The History of Placidus. THis Placidus (a youth very much admir'd and prais'd because of his Valiant Exploits) was the Son of Fadrique who play'd the Merchant with one Antonius in Sevil, a City in Spain well known, and much commended by Travellers of all Nations and Languages who resort thither. Undaunted Courage set our Placidus a work to Graple with a most Violent Brute, after he had re∣mained sometime in Madrid, whether he repaired without the knowledge and Consent of his Indul∣gent Parents for this very end, that in the Flower of
his Age, all persons from the King to the Peasant, might receive a sufficient (I may say wonderful) Specimen of his surpassing Fortitude and Magna∣nimity. Here its observable, that Fadrique and his Hope∣ful Son seemed rather to be one Person, than two; for in Nature, Demeanour, Stature, Speech and Countenance, they resembled one another so much, that a quick-sighted man could hardly distinguish betwixt them: Yea, although the Father was a man of 50. and the Son but of 20 years, yet any who look'd upon their Pictures, affirmed stiffly that the one was an exact Pattern to the other: And had not the Eyes of men been a demonstration to the contrary, I am apt to believe that the possibility of such an univer∣sal similitude (so to call it) would be thought a Chymaera. Yet if we consult Authors of good Note and great worth, many instances of this kind may be found. Valer. Max. with great Confidence affirms that Pompey the Great, Ʋrelius and Publeius Libertinus differed in nothing, but their Vestments; so that if two of them were Arrayed after the same Fashion, a quick-sighted person could not assign a diffe∣rence betwixt them. It is also written by Pliny, that two Boys (the one being a Syrian, and the other a French) were so very like to one another in every point, that a certain person sold them to Mar∣cus Antonius under the notion of Brethren. Anto∣nius perceiving their Language to differ, Threatned the person who had thus impos'd on him, to whom the other replyed, If they had been Brethren, I would not require so great a sum of Money, because
in that case Nature could not be said to bring forth so great a wonder, as now you see. If it be true in any respect, that (according to the Philosopher) similitude begets Affection, how much more in this instance of Fadrique and Placi∣dus, whose mutual love was wonderful beyond that of most persons in such a Relation. Yet by the Interposition of Agnes, a Young Lady of singular Endowments and Education, the Brightness of this Splendid Passion suffered in some measure an Eclipse. This Beautiful Object became the Center of their Desires and incontaminate Love, which could not be smothered long: Wherefore they discovered their Maladies to one another in a most Friendly manner, and determined (after a Serious and Ma∣ture consultation) to submit the event of the matter in hands to the Young Ladies and her Mothers Arbitrement; insomuch that the person excluded, should remove from his Native Country, lest by his Presence way might be made for Jealousy, whose effects are more dangerous no where, than in Spain. After this both of them met with bad Entertain∣ment, and small Encouragement at the hands of Agnes and her Mother: Yet in Process of time Fa∣driques Riches and Constancy, had great influence on the Matron. It is true the Youth of Placidus was no small motive to obtain the respect of the Pretty Lady: Nevertheless Baggs of Money were an Argument a fortiore. After both Parties had pondered sedately the Circumstances most remark∣able, the Mother speaks to her Daughter after this manner.
My Dear Child, you see there is no Solid Objection which can be brought against those Worthy Persons who have set their Affections on you; and therefore, I judge it most reasonable, that you freely declare your own Sentiments in this Affair. I know the Neatness and Youth of Placidus, will have great weight with you; and on the other hand Fadrique's declining Age will in some measure alienate your Affections from him: But hearken diligently my Daughter to the Dictates of right Reason, rather than fond Fancy, which misleads many in your Circumstances; and you shall find Riches, and Experience more eligible, than undaunted Youth, or any other imaginary founda∣tion, on which the Superstructure of your Desires and Designs are fixed. That this may yet have the greater weight in your estimation, consider how much Riches contribute to beget Esteem and Honour in this City where we live; So that Persons of Noble Extract, lose their Dignity frequently with their Wealth. What is Beauty but a Fading Flower, which Nature in a short time, or some unexpected Accident will prey up∣on, and reduce to nothing? Let a Brisk Gallant dis∣charge to admiration all the Punctilio's of Court-Edu∣cation and Activity; will that purchase Food and Raiment? Whereas Money Answers all things; with∣out which Trading and Commerce should die. I judge it superfluous to make an enumeration of the qualities of Gold which we Eat, and with which we are cloathed: Hence arose the Proverb, That is Gold which is pur∣chased by Gold; which saying renders it most uni∣versal, seeing all things are valued at some rate or other. It is true, I confess, Placidus is inferior to few Gentlemen in Probity and Reputation; but its as
true, his Father, (though Rich) has many Children, and may in all probability beget many more; what then will the Riches amount to, which must be divided among so many? You know if it were possible to di∣vide the Ocean into many Rivulets, this vast Col∣lection of Waters would appear very inconsiderable, in respect of what it now is. But I pass by this Topick; lest that you may suspect Interest prevails with me. In the next place therefore, let us consider whether or no you can promise your self as great satisfaction in the one, as the other: Not at all; for, whoever is Married to Placidus, must necessarily be in a Slavish subjection to his Father, his Brethren, Sisters and Relations; whereas the Wife of Fadrique will enjoy Immunity from such a bitter lot, as being above and beyond the reach of all those Censurers. Alas! alas! Woful experience the School-mistriss of Fools, has furnished me with this Observation; as witness those Gray-Hairs, brought forth untimously by Excessive Grief and Sorrow. Shall you deck your self with the Finest Needle-Work, and most Gorgeous Raiment possible; then Black-mouth'd Back-biters will readily misconstrue your Neatness. If on the other hand, such a decorum be neglected, why (say they) she is not content with her Lot and Condition. You cannot frequent Divine Worship without the Cha∣racter of Levity or Hypocrisy, nor forbear such a Re∣ligious Observance; but immediatly occasion will be taken of branding you with the stigma of an Irreligi∣ous wretch. In fine, the Eyes of all Relations will be sixed upon you, that you cannot promise your self Satisfaction and Tranquility in the most minute cir∣cumstance. And it may be added further, that such
an uncharitable multitude may so influence your Hus∣band with prejudice, that in a very short time, the greatest of all your Miseries shall arise from his Jeal∣ousy or unbeseeming carriage towards you. If so be then, that by being Espoused to Fadrique, no such Inconveniencies can in reason be suspected; what remains, but that in obedience to those pressing Arguments of your Loving Mother, and in relation to your own future Contentment, you cheerfully assent to the Proposals of the Father without the least Reluctan∣cy imaginable. Those Pithy motives founded on Reason and Ex∣perience, wrought a sensible and suddain change upon Agnes; insomuch, that in a thundring manner, she decided the whole matter in Favours of Fa∣drique; which conclusion produced no less Sorrow to Placidus, than Contentment and Joy to Fadrique. Whereupon dejected Placidus, (according to his Passion) without any more delay, forsook his Na∣tive Country, having got from his Father about 1000 Guinies, who left it to his choice to suspend his time in India, Italy, or the Low-Countries, be∣ing to receive Money upon Bill according to the Custom and Necessity of Gentlemen while Abroad. When he had come to Naples in Italy, his Genius inclined him to play the Souldier, as being an Im∣ployment, by which Honour and lasting Renown is most attainable. After a few Months there, he enjoyn'd his Trustee to certifie Fadrique and all Re∣lations of Placidus Death, that Entercourse of Letters might be stop'd, which he judged the fittest course and method to free him from Pensive Melan∣cholly; but all this could not Eradicate a Passion so deeply rooted.
Fadrique by Successful Traffique attained quickly to vast Possessions, which with a Virtuous Wife, might be supposed a Pleasant Condition. Yet, not∣withstanding all this, the want of Children was matter of great Grief to him: Wherefore, (that his Memory might not die with himself) he resolves, without delay, to distribute his Riches among his Nephews, Charles and Bernard, who are brought to him for that purpose. Their Uncle and his Lady Entertain the Boyes with all the Expressions of Joy and Kindness possible. In a very short time their good Behaviour and Affability did procure unto them a great many Friends and Acquaintances in Sevil, where they pass under the Notion of Fa∣driques Sons. The Old mans love to his Nephews rose to so much the greater height, that he perceived himself decaying more sensibly than could be ex∣pected by the course of Nature, not being as yet 60 years, whereas Agnes appeared more Brisk than ever. Thus Charles and Bernard discerning that their Uncle had in a manner centered the Comfort and Tranquility of his Decript Old-Age on them, waxed Insolent and Disrespectful towards Agnes, whose Prudence taught her to obviat the very beginning of this evil, by representing such Enormities to her Indulgent Husband, The Old man complying with his Wife, appointed a Lodging elsewhere for his Nephews, with all things necessary, and suitable to their Condition: which course no ways abated the Insolence of the Young men, but rather increased the same; insomuch that they branded Agnes with Incontinency, and many other Vitious qualities.
At this time Placidus (having Travelled all Italy over) came to Bononia, where his Life was in Jeo∣pardy: For happening to be late out of his Lodg∣ing, the second or third night after he came to Town, he wandred in the Streets by reason of Darkness, and his Unacquaintedness with the se∣veral Corners of the City; at length espyed in a place, some what remote, a Glimmering Light, whether when he had approached, three Cut∣throats are found Assaulting one Gentleman with all possible Fury. The Compassionate Placidus think∣ing that a fit season for Charity and Fortitude, became the Oppressed Gentlemans Assistant, by which means two of the Rogues were Grievously Wounded, the third being Smote with the Edge of the Sword. Having thus Rescued the Italian from Eminent Death, not without some danger (for he sustained the prejudice of 2 or 3 Wounds) he calls his Servant to bring his Horse. James Viteli, in whose behalf he had Seasonably appeared: Answered, saying, Sir, Your Ineffable Kindness and Courage calls for my Attendance as a Servant, who am ready and willing to wait upon all opportunities, whereby I may express my Gratitude. I know diligent search will be made for us by and by; therefore (seeing I take you to be a Stranger unacquainted with this City) I in∣treat you may be pleased to accept of my Company; and by the Grace of God, we shall escape the Rage and Fury of our Adversaries; and I promise to Dress and Cure your Wounds in a very short time. Placi∣dus concluded it highly Reasonable to lay hold on such a good motion: Wherefore James Viteli con∣ducted
him from one Street to another, until at last he came to an House, where, it's probable, he had been known; upon which consideration, he knocks hard at the door, until such time as a comly Youth had given him access; forthwith, (according to his duty and promise) he dressed the wounds of Pla∣cidus, which were not deep nor deadly; enjoyning withal that the Student should go in all hast to such a Street by name, and return with one exact account of all emergents: whether when the young man had come, he sees all things in a hurly-burly, one man being dead, on whom a great number of Citi∣zens are gazing; and orders given to apprehend such as could be suspected any way accessary to such an Assassination. Where also he heard a certain person imprisoned, confessing that he was the Ser∣vant of one Placidus, a Spaniard, who had killed the man. When the Youth returned, he gave an impartial account of all occurrences observed by him. The Gentlemen perceiving what might be the result of such a commotion, slipt away quietly, in regard that they concluded it most dangerous to stay so near the place of Justice, where a strict search was to be made. Having thus escaped hazard, Placidus is curious to know the original of his companions misfortune, in being assaulted by three men in such a place. To whom Viteli answered thus: My dearest Placidus, I determine to disclose this secret to no man living, yet considering you to be my greatest friend upon earth, who in my cause ex∣posed your Noble Person to danger; (and negle∣cting all the important affairs which induced you to
see Bononia) has continued my companion in af∣fliction (tho' a Stranger) I say upon these, and many other weighty considerations (which my shal∣low brain cannot comprehend, nor my stammering tongue express) I will with the greatest candour and ingenuity imaginable, discover this matter to you. I was born at Rome, the Queen and Mistress of the World, where (when I was very young) my Honourable Parents gave up the Ghost. After that I had sucked in the first and common principles of Learning, my good Friends and Relations sent me to the famous University of Bononia, where I made no despicable proficiency in Philosophy, and all the Languages professed there, which are the Spanish, German, French, Hebrew and Greek: All which could not satiate my thirsting desires after Know∣ledge, until the study of Physick became my work and business. But a Lady of singular Endowments and Quality, being pleased to honour me with the strongest Testimonies of sincere affection, diverted my thoughts from prosecuting the most pleasant of all Studies. How secret soever this matter was kept, the Ladies Brother understood it; which prompted him, with two other Conspirators, to lie in wait for my Life: and undoubtedly had become a prey to their Fury, if (by the Divine Providence) one of the three had not signified to me the method of this most horrid Plot. Then I determined to travel through Spain and other Countries, but (being driven from Genoa by a most violent Tempest) I was enslaved to the Turks, who first brought me to Argiers, and then
to Constantinople, where I was sold very often un∣der the notion of a Slave. At length I am present∣ed to one of Mahomet's Physitians, who finding me pretty expert in the principles of Medicine, was pleased to encourage me with his Fellowship and In∣struction, to my great advantage (I must confess) in some respects; whose gentleness was such, that he would not thwart my inclinations of returning to Italy, but rather encouraged me by the Gift of 2000 Guinies. After a tedious and dangerous Voyage, I came to Venice, where (being unknown) the People look∣ed upon many of my Operations and Experiments as Miracles, rather than the product of natural Knowledge; for which cause the Magistrates en∣couraged me with promises of a very considerable Salary. But all this could not induce me to stay, seeing my thoughts and desires were much cencerned with returning to Bononia, where I had enjoyed so many pleasant daies. I could not imagin that it was possible for any in that place to know me after the absence of six compleat years; which time also might quench the ardour of Camilla's passion (Ah! her name cannot be concealed, nor my love towards her supprest.) Upon those considerations I came to Bononia, where I was entertained with great Cour∣tesie by all persons of knowledge, to whom I dis∣covered my various misfortunes and difficulties; by which means the noise of my being in Town came to the hearing of Camilla; who incontinently saluted me by a most pathetical Letter, as you may easily imagin. Thus our love was renewed; and so much the more, because she came the ensuing day disguised to my
Chamber, where we entertained a most comfortable Dialogue founded on the solid hopes of obtaining our longed for desires. I seemed to decline and re∣ject the profession of Medicine in the University of Bononia, meerly, that Camilla's Brother, and his Associates, might not in the least suspect me whom they hated with an inveterate hatred, which time nor dignity could not eradicate. Nevertheless, by debating, I obtained the honour of that place. Then Engines of Cruelty are set a work to dispatch me some way or another: and (I must confess) the Rogues had accomplished their corrupt design, if by the Divine Providence, your seasonable Cha∣rity and Magnanimity had not rescued my Life from their malice. In Testimony therefore of my gratitude, I protest to remain your most faithful friend and Servant while I breath, declaring to that end a willingness of accompanying you to Spain, or any where else. Placidus was very much taken with the grateful acknowledgments, and protestations of lasting kindness, so pitifully expressed by Viteli: Yet, (being unwilling to divulge or disclose the hidden sorrow which burdened his spirit) he answered the other in a most courtly and complementing strain. Sir, you may confidently assure your self of my un∣alterable good-will, where-ever you be, or how∣ever stated. The pregnant Viteli, by a groan at∣tending those words, perceived Placidus to be a little discomposed: wherefore he resolved to know the cause of so great grief at a more seasonable oc∣casion. In the meanwhile, they entred into a strict League of Amity, having all things common; in
which real kindness consists (if we hear the Philo∣sopher). A few daies after they come to Genoa where (as all along their Perigrination) their thoughts were alleviated, by giving an impartial and free account to one another of their diverse mis∣fortunes, and so much the more, in regard that Vi∣teli, by his superlative knowledge, and jocose brisk disposition, was a Physitian no less capable to re∣move the sorrows of the mind, than the Distempes of the body. Yet Placidus, in some measure, con∣tinues dumpish and pensive; so that Viteli intended to expiscate and extort from him the original and cause of so lasting a Grief, and did carry all things on in order to his conclusion so wittily, that Placi∣dus is allured to discover the perplexity of his mind, after this manner. Your probity and gentleness ex∣tracteth from me a secret which I never purposed to disclose. After which he makes mention of Fa∣drique's compact with him, (while both of them had a longing desire to enjoy the vertuous and beauti∣ful Agnes) who, by the instigation and perswasion of her covetous Mother, rejected him, embracing Fadirque. In a word, he did not omit the least Punctilio, which could satisfie the curiosity of Vi∣teli; who replying, answered thus: My dear Placidus, Be of good chear: for there is no Malady so great, which admits not of a Reme∣dy applied with so much the better success, that the Patient can discover his Distemper distinctly, as you have done, and therefore I constantly promise (being taught by experience, what such a case meaneth) to remove your trouble and grief, by an experiment at first (its probable) strange in your
eyes; though, after mature deliberation, most obvious. All I crave is, that you condescend yet once more, to walk with me in the Streets of Sevil. Having thus Embarqued at Genoa, they arrived at Barcelona; from whence they sailed by Tarragona, Valentia, Alicant, Cartagena, and the borders of Granada, until they came to Malaga, and at length to Cadiz, the Haven of St. Mary and St. Luke, and sailed thence all along the River Betis to Sevill; where (being in strangers apparel) they search for a convenient Lodging; in which Placidus abode, while the intelligent Veteli went abroad, inform∣ing himself, the best way he could, about the state of Affairs in Fadrique's House; which he under∣stood exactly, and returned to Placidus, signifying how indulgent dying Fadrique was towards his in∣solent Nephews, Charles and Bernard; as also that Agnes look't as brisk as ever. In a word, he ans∣wered the most particular questions so fully, that Placidus's Grief was in a great measure asswaged. The learned Viteli gave such proof of his know∣ledge in Physick by sundry wonderful Experiments, that in an instant his Name spread abroad. Agnes therefore hearing of such an expert Physitian, thought it her near concernment and duty to consult with him concerning the nature of Fadrique's disease which was concluded mortal by all other Physitians in Sevill. Viteli, having visited the old man, dis∣cerned Nature shrinking, and Death approaching: Nevertheless, to encourage the Lady, he confident∣ly affirmed, in the presence of many Learned and Judicious men, that his Disease was not mortal;
which assertion he confirmed with reasons and argu∣ments founded upon the most solid and genuine Philosophy, so that no place was left for cavils, all Physitians there present, being perswaded of the truth of his Discourse. Which comforted Agnes so much, that with great intimacy in private Confe∣rences, she searched into Viteli's sentiments in this affair. The expert Physitian failed not at such a time, to make mention of Placidus, whose valiant exploits he praised with such Eloquence and admi∣ration, that the Ladies pristine love revived, and prompted her to enquire very concernedly where he liv'd, and whether there was any truth in the noise of his Death. The smart Viteli by such que∣stions, perceiving much affection to center in the Ladies breast towards Placidus, answered her thus: Madam, I am obliged to declare the truth, and cannot sufficiently declare what is true concerning his lasting renown abroad; nor how constant and Christian his love has been to you: otherwaies, the excessive grief of his spirit, had undoubtedly ren∣dred him desperate, and accessary to his own death. The rumour of his Death, implied that his love might be termed dead, because without the hope of enjoying its object. God knows (said Agnes) how much I desired to be married to him: but Fortune has so ordered, that I should be the Wife of Fadrique, though much against my inclinations. Yea, I must add (seeing this Subject is pleasant) that the love of Placidus is of great force with me to this hour. It is true, I am obliged every way to bear a suitable respect to
Fadrique, who has continued all along a kind Hus∣band, never believing the odd aspersions with which his insolent Nephews Charles and Bernard en∣deavoured to brand me. I know (said Viteli) that many Waters cannot quench Love, but it must break forth after some manner or other. And methinks, the Divine Pro∣vidence has conducted me hither in a good season; therefore, seeing that I am perswaded that (ac∣cording to the course of nature) Fadrique cannot live fifteen daies. Madam, (if you be pleased) I shall, in the mean time, contrive and carry on matters so dextrously, that by your Husbands last Will, and without the lest opposition, you may en∣joy your beloved Placidus instead of his Father. I have heard Fadrique (replied the Lady) at sun∣dry times, in a most pathetical and passionate man∣ner expressing sorrow and grief for the Death of his great, and real friend Placidus (as he called him) For (said he) if my Son were alive, I would dispose of my substance to him and you; ordering withal your co-habitation under the noti∣on of Husband and Wife. But (supposing Placi∣dus be yet alive) our union will meet with great opposition from Fadrique's insolent Nephews. Nay, Madam (said he) leave that to me: for I am wil∣ling to lose the reputation of a Gentleman, yea, and life it self, if I do not carry on the matter so wit∣tily, that in great peace, without the least shadow of fear or danger, you shall enjoy Placidus for your loving Husband. Thus Agnes went to her Closet with great Joy. Placidus could not easily be per∣swaded of the possibility of the matter; yet hi
companions pregnant wit and knowledge, added some confidence to him, for Viteli had undertaken, not only to remove Fadrique's present Distemper, but also to renew his Youth and strength, chiefly that by such means (a sophism indeed) Placidus might attain to the enjoyment of his longed for Agnes: For which cause (said the ingenious Ʋiteli in the presence of learned Physitians) you shall in a very short time perceive, Fadrique brisk and vi∣gorous, with Teeth, Hair, and Colour sutable to the age of thirty or forty years. Those learned men laughed him to scorn; and the Lady doubted of the matter greatly. But to put an end to doubt∣ing, and mocking, he spake to the Physitians in the presence of Agnes, Charles and Bernard after this manner: I must confess the opposition of such Judicious men might terrifie Galen, Hyppocrates, and Escula∣pius, of whom it's reported, That he raised him∣self from the Dead. How much then may a Novice (such as I am) tremble when I consider that I have undertaken in your presence to demonstrate, how the radical moisture may be restored; insomuch that decrepit old Age shall be constrained to Cloath it self with the Colour, Vigour, and other quali∣ties of brisk Youth: Nevertheless, the strength which attends truth reduced to practice, revives my fainting Spirits; so that with confidence I affirm the certainty (as well as the possibility) of my demonstration, which I shall endeavour to evince in the Spanish Tongue (though with the greater dif∣ficulty) for the satisfaction of Agnes, Charles and Bernard, the Parties mostly concerned.
Gentlemen, You know very well, Experience, Authority and Reason, are the surest foundations by which any truth can be supported; From all which my Proposition shall be made evident. The Learned Arnaldus, Villa Nova, Tully, Para∣celsus, Cardanus, and others, whom we need not mention, favour us in this point; as also the Alchy∣mists Arbor vitae: so that Authorities abound with us. In the next place, Blaicus de Taranto affirms that in Saguntum in the Kingdom of Valentia, there was a Nunn of sixty years, whose age was renewed, having Teeth, Hair, Colour and Vigour, as if she had been but thirty years old. And Antonius Torquemada in his Dialogues, gives us an account of an Old Man who was restored to strength, being one hundred years old; after which wonderful change he lived fifty years. From which Author and common Tradition, we hear of such an instance in Toledo. All learned men know that passage related by Ferdinandus de Castaneda, lib. 8. And by Petrus Malfeus, lib. 3. Hist. Ind. how that a Noble Man of India lived Three hundred and forty years, in which time his Age was renewed thrice. If we consult reason, we shall find her no less fa∣vourable than Authority or experience: For what
is Youth, but an equality or proportion of natural heat and radical moisture? Yea, according to Ga∣len and all other learned Physitians, the difference of the Ages is deduced from the different operati∣ons of the natural heat. And Aristotle affirms, that the nature of Old Age consists in Frigidity and Sic∣city; from whose Explication, Lib. de Long. & brev. vitae we learn, that such men wax old soonest, whose Life has been attended with greatest labours and cares, which cause a dispendium of the natural heat. Therefore (if this be true) it seems that Humid Medicaments, with hot Potions and Appli∣cations may restore decaying Age, by reducing the radical moisture, and natural heat to such a propor∣tion as they enjoy in Youth. And it is observed, that the Divine Providence has furnished divers Stones, Herbs and Waters with qualities, which, (if known) would silence all cavillings in this matter. It is reported by Cardanus, Langius, and Petrus Chieza that in Bonica and Lucaya Wells are extant whose Waters are more delicious than the choicest Wines, having in them vertue to renew a mans Age; this is testified by Aris. lib 3. Hist. Ani∣mal. Cap. 12. and other Authors of good note. Homer also mentioneth the like of Herbs. And me∣thinks although the Simples requisite for producing such strange effects be not commonly known, yet it's a male Sequitur to infer, therefore no man knows them: Yea, no man in sober reason can de∣ny, that Spirits are contained in Herbs, Waters and Stones; which being once granted, it necessarily follows that these, when well extracted and applied, may serve to carry on such a rare work, as I now
mention, and am about to demonstrate. Further, it's observable that I have been travelling many years, by which I had occasion to discourse with Mahomet's Physitians, as also with Arabians, Persi∣ans, and Phenicians; upon which consideration it may be suspected that I know things not discovered as yet in this place: Wherefore, I shall, (with God's Grace) restore Fadrique to strength and health, seeing I perfectly understand his malady and Complexion. But you may ask, if in such a case he may be called young? I answer, not at all; but that he is in a better disposition for life according to his nature. Now if this Theory suffice not to stop the Mouths of Wranglers; the matter shall be put beyond all doubt by practice. Thus ended Viteli his pertinent Discourse. Who (after the dying Old Man had been committed to him) made a paction, that none should disturb him by coming into the room where he was to tarry with the sick Person, except such as he called; and that Apothecaries should grant him what Simples he pleased to ask; all persons consented to those demands: but none more cordially and chearfully than Agnes, who was privy to Ʋiteli's design. The next day was appoint∣ed for the work. Ʋiteli having repaired to his Lodging, discovered to Placidus how much he was applauded by the Physitians; and also that Agnes was exceeding glad, the young men Charles and Bernard being much dejected: and he persisted in the former confidence that all things would succeed aright, and be brought to an happy issue. He strict∣ly charged Placidus to eschew all Society, consider∣ing that the Non-observance of that Rule, had a
necessary tendency to marr the curious contrivance. Then he returned to the Patient, to whom he gave a portion, which being mingled with a little Poyson, set the Old Man's Tongue at work, giving vigour and Agility to his body in a short time, to the ad∣miration of all Beholders. After which Ʋiteli spake privately to Agnes, say∣ing, Madam, Fadrique will not in all probability live nine daies: therefore it's convenient to call Placidus, seeing the Old Man in his last Will has made you his heir, appointing a thousand pounds for each of his Nephews, to either of which if you be married, the Possessions set apart for you are lost. But, if you choose Placidus for your Husband, he must in all reason receive the half of his Fathers sub∣stance. Now you see how nearly you are con∣cerned to hearken to my Propositions, seeing mat∣ters shall be so dextrously carried on, that all per∣sons will conclude Fadrique yet alive. This I hope will prove acceptable and comfortable to you and Placidus, whom I ought to serve according to my capacity while I live. The Old Man, will go down to the Grave with Joy, by this course, which will create affliction to his insolent Nephews. Not long after Fadrique dyeth, and is buried after a most clandestine man∣ner; in whose place they substitute Placidus, whom all persons affirmed to have been Fadrique restored to Health and Vigour. Which business being fully concluded to the satisfaction of the Parties mostly concerned; Ʋiteli prosecuted his design of Tra∣velling.
This Relation discovers much of the Worlds Deceitfulness, which is frequently defend∣ed by great Authorities improved with disinge∣nuity. Sir, I shall add no more concerning the Solemni∣ty at Madrid, and the History of Placidus, wishing that your pleasure in reading may correspond to the desire I entertained to satisfie your curiosity in writ∣ing the same. Farewel. FINIS.
