S4051 12727595 66375
A COLLECTION Of the several Writings and Faithful Testimonies OF THAT Suffering Servant of God, and Patient Follower of the Lamb, Humphry Smith, Who Dyed a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, in Winchester Common-Goal the 4th day of the 3d Moneth, in the Year 1663. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not only to me, but to them also that love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew Sowle, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch, 1683.
George Fox HIS TESTIMONY CONCERNING Humphry Smith. NOW concerning our dear Friend and Brother Humphry Smith, who formerly had been a Prea∣cher, and a Man of Note; but when it pleased the Lord to call him by his Grace, and reveal his Son in him, he came to be an able Minister of Jesus Christ, and freely did preach the Gospel, as he had received it freely; and was cast in Prison for the Testimony of Jesus at Eversham in Worcestershire, where he suffered very much in Oliver's days, about the year 1655. and besides, several other Goals, that it may be party said of him, as it was of Paul, who had been zealous among the Letter-Profes∣sors, and who had then esteem of him; but when he came to possess Christ Jesus, and to preach him, then they hated him and persecuted him. Yet through the Eternal Power of the Lord, he was upholden through his Suf∣ferings, and travelled through many Hardships for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and did convert and turn
many to the Lord Jesus Christ that had been outward Professors, as he himself had been, to the Possession of Christ; so that he did see and was comforted in the Fruits of his Labours in Christ and his Grace. And at last he was cast into Winchester-Goal, where he ended his days and finisht his Testimony in an hard Imprison∣ment, who there dyed in the Lord, and rests from his Labour, whose Works follow him: Whose Memorial is blest among the Righteous in the Lords Heritage; for he was a worthy Souldier and Follower of the Lamb, and kept his Habitation in Christ Jesus, in whom he now sleeps. G. F. London, the 8th of the 11th Moneth, 1682.
A TESTIMONY Concerning the Servant of Christ, Humphry Smith DECEASED; With Respect to his Life, Testimony and Service for the Lord in his day. ALthough I have not read all the Books and Writings given forth in Truths behalf by our dear Friend and Brother Humphry Smith, and therefore cannot knowingly give particular account thereof, as to all his Writings, though many sound and weighty Experimental things I am sure he has written, yet from the knowledge which I had of him, his Conversation and Testimony, and the living Society I had with him for some time before his Course was finished, I have this Testimony nakedly and in the sight of the Lord to bear, That he was a man fearing God and hating Iniquity, fervent and zealous against Deceit and Hypocrisie, and endued with a hea∣venly Gift and Gospel Testimony, which he faithfully bore in his day, according to his Ability, and the Lord was with him, and he was well beloved among his People. He endured the Cross, and bore Afflictions patiently; and he was a great Sufferer in divers Goals and Persecu∣tions for the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his
Testimony which he declin'd not. And he was (in the Name of the Lord) instrumental and helpful with other faithful Brethren and Servants of Christ, to break through rough Oppositions, perverse Gain-sayings and Persecu∣tions of many Adversaries to the Life of Christianity, even in those days of great Hardships and deep Sufferings, not long after the first breaking forth of the Gospel Day to many in this Age; and in divers parts of our profes∣sing Nation, the Exercises, deep Sufferings and Tryals of that day and time, many now have not known the sharpness of, since which the Lord has been with his faith∣ful Servants all along, and prospered his Work among the sincere Receivers of his Truth in the love thereof; and the Lord our God hath crowned the Labours of his faithful Witnesses, whose Dayes are ended in Peace, among whom this Honest and Upright hearted man Humphry Smith had his Share and Portion, and hath his Crown that fades not, and his Inheritance Everlasting, in the Kingdom of his and our Heavenly Father, among the Spirits of Just Men in Glory, I am really satisfied, as knowing the End of the Upright Man to be Peace, and that in the sight of the Lord the Death of his Saints are Precious, as their Life is Acceptible: And I pray God that all Friends, and all those that yet remain with a Testimony for him and his holy Truth, may be pre∣served in (and with tender Regard unto) the same Footsteps of the faithful and blessed Flock to the end of their Dayes, as those that truly have respect to the Re∣compence of Reward and Kingdom that's set before, which will remain and stand us in stead when our Dayes, Times and Years here are expired and gone. George Whitehead. London, the 4th of the 8th Moneth, 1682.
THE Faithfulness of the Upright MADE MANIFEST. Being a Testimony concerning the Life, Death and Suffer∣ings of a precious Servant of the Lord, called, Humphry Smith, Who dyed a Prisoner for witnessing unto the living Truth, in Winchester Common-Goal, the 4th day of the 3d Moneth, 1663. ARE thy famous Works ever to be forgotten? Are thy Noble and Valiant Acts to be blotted out of the Memory of the Righteous? Is thy holy, innocent pure Life to be buried in Oblivion, as not to be remem∣bred by us any more? Are thy Sufferings, with all thy valiant Engagements with the Enemies of thy God to be blotted out of the Record of the Children of the most High? Oh! what saith my Soul? Nay, nay, let it be had in living Remembrance among the Followers of the Lamb, and let it be written upon the Tables of their Hearts, even to all Generations. And as concerning this man, he from his Youth up∣wards had desires after the Lord, and he was often check'd by his Father because of his Solidity; he mourned
mightily after the Lord while he was yet a Child, yea, and panted after the God that made him: He followed the zealous Professors, and encreased mightily in that Knowledge which stands in the Comprehension, yea, exceeded many of his equals; but at last the Lord sepera∣ted him for his own glory, and sent him forth in his own Power and Eternal Name, so he led him by the hand through the Wilderness, and bore up his head above the Waves which sought to destroy him; he became a Talk and a By-word unto them with whom (before) he had his Conversation; yea, they sought to destroy him in a moment, but yet the Lord led him in the way, and gave him the threshing Instrument that belongs to Worm Jacob, despised of men, and he threshed and beat the Hills to Dust, and rooted up the Disobedient that desisted Gods coming; he spared not, but cut on the right hand, and slew on the left, and made the Arrows of his Quiver to strike into the Bowels of Gods Enemies; but the preach∣ed Peace to the Captive, and uttered his Voice to the Pri∣soners of Hope, which lay groaning for Deliverance; he was sent to publish Salvation, and to cry the acceptible year of Redemption, though the Rulers of the Earth dealt very hardly with him, and the Priests cryed, Away with him, he is not worthy to live; the Professors envied him because of his upright dealing; and the Prophane hated and reviled him because of his Innocent Life; he was often times cast into several nasty Prisons; he was divers times whipt with Cords; he was haled be∣fore Magistrates that had no pity nor compassion of him; he divers times ventured upon hard service, and broke through an Host of Wicked and Unreasonable men; the Priests fell before him like Tow, and the Professors were scattered like Chaff, the Wicked and Prophane were even
confounded and amazed when his Arrows so sharp did enter within their dark Dwellings; but to the Seed he uttered his Voice, and it dropped like Wax into the Bowels of the tender hearted: Verily the consideration thereof doth even melt my heart, and makes me to say, Oh! how delightsom was the pleasantness of thy Beauty! and how desireable was the habitation of thy Dwelling? and how prevalent were thy Prayers, and thy Supplications with thy God? who answered thee every Morning, and satisfied thy Soul every Moment, which made thy Cup to overflow, and the pleasant Streams to run over its Banks, because of the fullness thereof; and Wo to him that lifts up a Tongue against thee, and let him not be reckoned among the Congregations of the Righteous, that slanders thy Innocent Life, let him be smitten with Terror that whisper's or speaks Evil of thee in a Corner; for I know the Lord loved thee, and hath taken thee from the Evil that is to come upon the Inhabitants of the Earth, and out of this dark World that is not worthy of thee. But to proceed; he was visiting Friends in and near London, and he told some of them there-a-wayes, That he had a narrow Path to pass through; he also said, (several dayes before he was taken up) he saw that he should be im∣prisoned, and that it might cost him his Life; and taking his leave of Friends in them-parts, he set forward in the Will of the Lord Westward, and having a Meeting at Alton, some envious men hearing thereof, sent Armed men to the House where he was, commanding him forth, and having him before Humphry Bennet and John Norton, Deputy-Lievetenants of the Country, both great Enemies to Gods Truth, and though he gave a good account of his business, which was to visit his Son, which was a Child farther Westward, yet they without pity or com∣passion, equity or justice committed him to the stinking
close Prison at Winchester; but to leave them without excuse in the day of the Lord, which hastens to come upon them, he wrote unto them, signifying how illegal∣ly they had dealt with him; also sent them back an Answer to that which they charged against him, likewise shewing that they laid nothing to his charge but what was charged against Gods Servants in the dayes of old, and moreover proved unto them, that they had acted contrary to the King's Laws, Declaration and Word; yet though all this and much more might be written, both of his Usage in the Prison, and likewise how close a Hole it was, sometimes other Prisoners, Fellons or such taking his Food from him, and other Abuses which he bore very patiently, which will be too tedious at present to relate; and likewise John Norton and Humphry Bennet sending men and robbing him of all his Papers, rifling his Pockets, Boxes and other places, yet he was very quiet, and lay down content; but the next approaching Sessions being come, he laid something of his suffering Cause before some of those called Justices, and at that time some of them were willing to have released him, but some others of them being contrary minded, saying, That it was the Deputy-Lievetenants of the Shire that committed him, and be∣cause they were not there they would not meddle with the thing: So the innocent Sufferer was let continue a Prisoner till the next Assizes, and he then laid the thing before Judge Terril, who before had been pretty moderate to Friends, and the Judge gave him this answer, That if he would give Bail for his good Behaviour and Appearance at the next As∣sizes (though no evil Behaviour at all was laid to his charge) which when this innocent Sufferer heard, and being satisfied that he was not guilty of the Breach of any Law, neither was there any that laid any thing to his
charge, he was content to remain there, rather than to do such a thing; and so remaining there from Sessions till As∣sizes, and from Assizes till Sessions, and until that Assizes a whole year was over; then Judge Terril came again the Western Circute, which Humphry Smith hearing of, wrote unto him, signifying how contrary to any known Law he had been dealt with, and requiring Justice, and that true Judgment might proceed from him, and leaving him without excuse he sent it to him, which he understood he read, and about the latter end of the Assizes he was call'd for, where having divers words with the Judge, he again said, That if he would give Bail for his good Behavi∣our and Appearance at the next Assizes, he should be released; which he answered thus, That he had lain in Prison so long, and nothing of evil Behaviour laid to his charge; and likewise saying that if any man there should con∣vince him of any evil Behaviour, he should willingly acknowledge the same, unto which they were all silent; then the Judge said, If he would meet no more, and promise not to break the Law, he should be released; unto which he answered thus, I think it is sufficient that I suffer if I do break the Law, and not to suffer because I cannot pro∣mise not to break it, saying also, That he knew no Law that required any such thing; so it being near the time of their breaking up, he was put aside, and others called, and soon after they dismissed the Court for that Assizes at that Bench; but as the Judge was passing forth, Humphry Smith being at the Bar among the Fellons, he spake these words unto him, Friend, remember I have been above a whole year in Prison, and no breach of any Law proved against me; which the Judge heard, but passed away and said nothing to it. So he was had back to Prison again, where having been not above three weeks, but he fell sick,
first it took him like an Ague, and afterward with the Feaver following it, and in a short time it grew very violent upon him, insomuch that in five days time he was so weak that he could scarcely help himself, then he also sent a Letter unto Judge Terril, signifying his Illegal dealing with him, and also gave him to know, that he was very Ill, but there was little done in the thing; so he grew weaker and weaker, so that two men did turn him in his Bed; and in the time of his Sickness he spake several pre∣cious words to Friends, signifying unto them, That he was given up in the will of the Lord, either in Life or Death; and as he lay under a great sit of the Feaver, he said; My heart is filled with the Power of God; and then said, It is good for a man at such a time as this to have the Lord to be his Friend; Another time he said, Lord, thou sentst me forth to do thy Will, and I have been faithful unto thee in my small measure which thou hast committed unto me; but if thou wilt yet try me further, thy will be done: Also, he said, I am the Lords, let him do what he will. And near the time of his departure, he cryed earnestly unto the Lord, and said, O Lord! hear the inward Sighs and Groans of thine Oppressed, and deliver my poor Soul from the Oppressor: O Lord, hear me! O Lord, uphold and preserve me; (I know that my Redeemer liveth) Thou art strong and mighty, O Lord! with several other precious words. Also, about the same time he prayed unto the Lord, That he would deliver his People from their cruel Oppressors; and that those that were convinced or brought forth by him, that the Lord would be their Teacher. He lay very quiet and still, and not any unsavoury word proceeded out of his Mouth all the time of his Sickness, but he behaved himself like a Lamb, and he was very sensible unto the last Moment; he was faithful unto the Lord in his day, and a Crown
Everlasting is upon his head, which shall rest upon him when all his Oppressors shall gnash their Tongues for pain and vexation of Heart (as some of them have felt already) yea, and the full Cup of the Lords Indignation is preparing for all them who delight in Cruelty: He was very meek, and of a quiet Spirit, very loving to all that had the least appearance of the Light springing up in them; yea, if any knew not the Light which con∣demns the sin, then in the Meekness of the Love ever∣lasting, he would open unto them the way thereunto, and labour mightily to bring them to the knowledge of it: Oh! how great was his love to the eternal Truth, which abounded in his heart! and how would he groan for the lost Sheep! surely his Love was more than my Tongue can express; and his Courage did abound in a great measure; he delighted not in vain Janglings nor Disputings of men of Corrupt Minds, but in the simpli∣city of the Gospel of Peace, which is his Crown forever and ever. What shall I say? his Life is swallowed up in Immortality, and is no more to be seen in the visible, yet he reigns over all Whisperers, Back-biters and Slanderers of his innocent Life forever. Thou Renowned Judge in Israel, thou Valiant Souldier of the Lambs Host, Peace is thy Portion forever, Bles∣sings will fill thine House, and Fruitfulness will attend thy Seed, as they abide in the Counsel of him who was the Bishop of thy Soul. N. C.
BUt O you Rulers of England! what shall I say unto you? Must you needs be made a perpetual Reproach unto all that come after you? And is your delight wholly in Persecuting of the Innocent? O Cruel Men! O Mer∣ciless Men! Will nothing but the Lives of Gods dear Servants satisfie your bloody Wills? Surely the Lord God will visit you in his Wrath, and sweep you away in his sore Displeasure; yea, in the dreadful Flames of the Burnings of his Vengeance will he cast you: Oh! you Unsatiable, Vigorous, Tyrannical, Idolatrous Men! What! is Cruelty your Delight? And is it Blood that you thirst after, as after Wine, which will not satisfie your Lustful Desires? And is it nothing but the eternal Truth which you would not have so much as come into your Coasts, worse than Barbarians? How do you evilly intreat those who come in the love of the Lord, to preach Repentance in your Streets? and you take away the Lives of such who come to publish Salvation unto poor Sinners? Surely your Unjust Dealings are come up be∣fore the God whom you so much contemn in his Servants, and your Unrighteous Actions against them whom he hath sent in his own Name, are pierced into the Bowels of the God of the Humble hearted, who will surely plead with you in his Indignation, and utterly destroy you in his Wrath, if you Repent not speedily, and humble your selves under his Righteous Judgments: Where∣fore, I say, Repent, Repent, for the Consumation is at hand, yea, the swift Vengeance of the Eternal God is nigh to be revealed upon all the Disobedient, and the utter Wo and Calamity of all the Merciless (with the cruel hearted) is coming, (yea, nigh to come) which shall make a final End of all the Rebellious and Stiff∣necked
Ones, whose Hearts are hard as the Adament; Wherefore, Awake, Awake, sleep not in your Wicked∣ness in this day which is coming as a Thief in the Night upon you, but arise up from Cruelty, and shake your selves of the Garments of the Pollution of Blood, which hath stained you: Cleanse your selves of your Idolatry, and clear your selves (if you can) of the Lives of Gods Servants, which have dyed in your Prisons; but if you cannot, then known be it unto you, That God will not spare the best of those that have had a hand in these things (and shall persist therein) but will destroy them utterly, and Curse them from his Presence for evermore; and in this I shall be clear of all your Blood, when it comes upon you. Nicholas Complin. Written the 21th of the 4th Moneth, 1663.
William Jenings's Testimony concerning Humphry Smith. THis is my Testimony for that man of God (viz.) my dear antient Friend Humphry Smith, who dyed a Prisoner for the blessed Truth in Winchester Prison; I being, with divers more Friends, in Prison with him (for the Truth's sake) a long time before, and also at his de∣parture, have this to say of him (viz.) That he was a man whose deportment and behaviour amongst us in Prison, was comely, yea, even as a Father that takes care for his Children, even so was his care and oversight over us; he was a faithful Overseer indeed, and one that mind∣ed the Lords business, and certainly its well with him: He was kept very sensible in his sickness whereof he dyed, & was not heard to speak one unsavoury word, although his exercise was not small, through much weakness; and in the time of his weakness, near his death, his crys were to the Lord, for the preservation of his People, who were dear and near unto him: so that he left a good savour behind him; for even such as were not Friends in the Prison (where he dyed) were made to speak well of him, he was so inno∣cent in his Conversation towards all People. William Jenings. South-hampton, the 11th of the 12th Moneth, 1682.
The Testimony of Nicholas Gates con∣cerning Humphry Smith. DEar Friends, Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus, and all tender hearted People, to whose hands thess Testimonies of our dear Friend Humphry Smith may come, these few words arose in my heart to signifie concerning him, I having had good experience of his Labours and Travails in the preaching of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, with many more, who were often comfort∣ed and refreshed in the sence of the Lords blessed Power, which attended him in the living Testimonies he did bear concerning that Gift of God which is to be known in man; he was a faith∣ful Labourer in the work and service of the Lord, and a patient Sufferer under the many Tryals that did befall him in his day; he never murmured at the Exercises that he met withal, through Wicked and Ʋnreasonable men; he constantly testified of and unto the Light of Christ in the inward parts of men and women, directing all to that of God in their own hearts, affirming, with the holy Apostle, who said, That which was to be known of God, is manifest in man: He was very powerful, through the help of the Lord, to the convincing of many, and turning them to the Light of Christ in themselves; his Testimonies yet live in the hearts of many, though he be outwardly removed from us; and many have cause to praise the Lord, in that he raised him up, with many more Brethren and Sisters, to testifie of and concerning the Light of Christ within man, by which we are made nigh unto the Lord, who were afar off; To whom be Praises and Thanks-giving forever. Nicholas Gates, senior. Alton, the 10th of the 12th Moneth, 1682.
James Potler's Testimony concrning Humphry Smith. GOd having raised up Humphry Smith, with many other Brethren, to publish and make known his Name in this the Land of our Nativity, after a long and tedious Night of Apostacy; and though the Name of the Wicked shall Rot, yet the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Re∣membrance; and many are the seals of his Ministry, that were begotten to a lively hope in Christ Jesus, through the Word of Life in him; besides, the many Testimo∣nies left upon Record by him, which though he be taken away, yet live in the hearts of many, bearing Testimo∣ny that he was of God, and that his Word dwelt plenti∣fully in him; yet I being a Sufferer with him for more than a years time in that streight noisom Prison at Win∣chester, and in my measure sensible of his faithfulness to God in that work and service which God had called him to: I say, the Love of God in my Heart to his Truth, and to my deceased Brother, constraineth me to give in my Testimony in few words, with others of my Brethren, to the many Testimonies left by him, That he was a man that loved the Lord with an upright heart, and that it was as Meat and drink to him, to do the will of God, delighting more in it than in his daily Food, being dili∣gent and laborious in his day and time, desiring to spend and be spent for the Gospels sake: He was a man very bold and valiant for the Truth, and for the Testimony thereof suffered many sharp and hard Imprisonments
in several Prisons in this Nation, besides very much cruel and inhumane Usage by Wicked and Unreasonable men. He was released out of Prison, that time which I was Prisoner with him, but was afterwards taken from a Meeting at Alton (where much of the Lords heavenly Presence was manifested through him) by a company of rude Souldiers, and had before some Magistrates, and committed to the same Prison at Winchester again, where, after he had been continued some time, it pleased the Lord to visit him with sickness, which with much patience he passed through; yet in all the Lord was good unto him, and preserved him in Peace, and Contentedness, and Submission to his Will, magnifying the Name of his God through all, being kept sensible, and in good and perfect Memory to his decease. JAMES POTTER. Winchester-Prison, the 8th of the 12th Moneth, 1682
Edward Waldren's Testimony concerning Humphry Smith. I Hearing that the Work and Testimonies (left upon Record) of that true and faithful Servant of the Lord, (in whose work and service Humphry Smith was found unto the last) are printed in one Volumn, I found much stirring and freedom to write this Testimony con∣cerning him, that it might be inserted in the Book, he being a man that I greatly loved, having Acquaintance with him, and by him first convinced of the unchange∣able Truth and Way of the Lord, through the power∣ful Operation of the Spirit and Word of God that dwelt plentifully in the heart of this faithful Servant of God, who loved not his Life to the Death for his Testimonies sake, by which he overcame, and was found faithful to the end, which he finished with joy, as by his last words spoken to some Friends, doth manifestly appear a little before his decease or laying down of the Body, in this close, strait, nasty, stinking Prison or County-Goal in Winchester, to the which I this day and time belong, and am a Prisoner under the sentence of Praemunire, for no∣thing else but obeying the Doctrine and Command of Christ Jesus, because for conscience sake only towards God I cannot Swear at all. Humphry was the first in scorn called a Quaker, that ever had a publick Testimony for God in the Town of Andever, it being a great Meeting, in which by his powerful clear Testimony several were convinced, though he was then opposed by rude Souldiers. Not long after he was cast into this Prison, some of
those that were convinced by his Testimony, that had a love raised to the Lord, and some knowledge of his Way and Truth; some of these in Andever being thereby led forth to visit Humphry in Prison, both Priests and Pro∣fessors began to stir, and be in a rage against; and at the breaking forth of Truth in that Town, I then being weary of Priests and seperate Professors, seeing their Pride, Avarice, Evil Lives and Conversations, though under a specious pretence of God and Godliness, but void of the saving knowledge of both; I being sensible that this was my Condition, and finding and feeling the Judg∣ments of the Lord, and the weight and burden of Sin and Iniquity, (being in the bondage of Corruption, like them I had been among) under all groaned to be deliver∣ed from under the weight and burden thereof, into the glorious Liberty and Freedom of the Sons and Daughters of God; and being unacquainted with the Way of the Lord, or how to do his Will, or to have any entrance into the Kingdom that consists in Righteousness, Joy and Peace in the holy Ghost, which the Priests and Professors could not teach, but were almost as ignorant as those that in time past had not heard of any such thing, and void of the saving knowledge of Jesus, the way of God, and could not say, that he was the Christ by it; I then hearing that in this Prison was that faithful Servant of the Lord, and having longing desire to see him, went with some of Andever that used to visit him, there being that day a Meeting in the Prison, which day I hope shall never be forgotten (by me) nor that faithful and able Mi∣nister of the new Testament, knowing that which only and alone is made alive by the Spirit, and quickned and reached unto by the Ministers thereof, which Humphry Smith was one, to the turning of many from Darkness
to the Light, from the Power of Satan to the Power of God, by which alone People come to receive Remission of sins, and an Inheritance among them that are sancti∣fied; through the great Mercy and Loving-kindness of God was he an Instrument in convincing and turning me off and from the Worlds by-Paths and crooked Ways of the Wicked, (which were and are Darkness, in which there is no Peace to them that walk therein) to the Light of Jesus, the Way of the Lord and Path of the Just, which is a shining Light, which shineth more and more to the perfect Day, and to the fear of the Lord, which ever was and is the beginning of Wisdom, and will be forever (to all that do abide therein) a Fountain of Life to depart from the Snares of Death. I have cause for∣ever to praise the Lord, in the behalf of this tender in∣nocent, faithful man to God's Truth and People; his Memorial cannot pass into Oblivion by any that had a true knowledge of him, (dear Humphry Smith) whose Health was impared, him suffocated, and visible Body destroyed by this bad corrupt Prison; though thou wast here destroyed, thou art greatly rewarded, God having proved thee and found thee worthy for himself: The Memorial of the Just is blessed; the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance, and the Name of the Wicked shall Rot; but they that were and are wise shall shine as the Bright∣ness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteous∣ness, as the Stars forever and ever. Edward Waldern Winton-Prison, the 8th day of the 11th Moneth, 1682.
Humphry Smith's Testimony concerning his Father. COncerning my dear Father, who to his unspeakable gain, but to my great sorrow and loss, the Lord took from me to himself, whilst I was young, besides the natural and dutiful Remembrance of so dear a Father, I and many others who knew him, can say of him, The Righteous shall be in Everlasting remembrance; in which I may say, by way of Introduction unto many who never knew him, and have since received the Truth, un∣to whom these his works may come, for their encourage∣ment to read them, That the Lord of the Harvest, who among other faithful Labourers, sent him forth into his Harvest, did sanctifie and prepare him to so good a work, and prospered it in his hand, so that many were turned to God by him, notwithstanding the great Opposition of Malicious, Cruel and Ungodly Men, by whom he suffer∣ed, more especially in Cromwel's time, Imprisonment, Dungeon, Whipping, and much Affliction and Hard∣ships; but being zealous for the glory of God, and the good of Souls, he valiantly endured it all, and broke through the Ice-like hardness of envious Professors, who having been first some-what warmed by that which formerly stirred up good desires in them after God, but not keeping thereto, became the sooner and harder frozen. And as his diligence was great in this great work, so was their Envy great, in endeavouring to hinder him therein, by many long and hard Imprisonments,
which brought great Sicknesses upon him; yet upon all occasions he was given to Hospitality, apt to teach, and in his place taking care for the Church of God. As his Admo∣nition was tender, so his Reproof was sharp, not neg∣lecting the one, nor refraining the other, but dealing with every one according to their Condition; not spa∣ring me his only Son, any more than another, having in his last Letter to me, written a little before his Death, these words among many tender Expressions; And now although, as I said before, thou art my only Son, yet if thou refusest the Instructions of thy Father, and shalt reject the Counsel of God, and not walk in Gods holy fear, nor keep in the way of Truth, then let the Judgment of Friends pass upon thee, let the Law of God seize upon thy Conscience, &c. The last time I saw him was about a year before he dyed, at which time he gave me such Advice and Warn∣ing, as thereby I perceived I should never see him again; so great a sight of things and men had he, that I may truly say, he had the necessary Gift of Discerning of Spirits, with frequent Visions and Revelations from God, by which he foresaw and prophesied of many things, some whereof he saw fulfilled, others are since, and the rest will certainly be fulfilled in their appointed time; some of them are herein extant, dispersed among his Works, which are now printed for thy benefit (sober Reader) it being agreeable to words he wrote to me in a Volumn of Books he caused to be bound for me, That I should keep that Book safe, and not spoiled any way, that in years to come, Ages may read and see my love to the Seed. This in short I have written concerning him, know∣ing there be many still living, who have a larger Testi∣mony in themselves concerning him. And some who were his Fellow-Labourers in the Word and Doctrine, whom he
did (and I do) love, and in Honour Prefer, counting them worthy of double Honour, some of them having more knowledge of him, are able, as they see meet, to give a larger Testimony concerning him. I shall conclude, desiring that my self, and all the Children of faithful Parents, may walk in the good Way they walked in, and not like that Generation mentioned, Judges 2. 10. Who arose after the Death of Joshua and the Elders, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the Works which he had done for Israel; but that we may follow the Lord fully and faithfully, and he may raise up in us the same Love, Zeal, Diligence and Vallour, as he did in our Pa∣rents, is the earnest Desire of Humphry Smith. Saffron-Walden in Essex, the 13th of the 9th Moneth, 1682.
Dear Friends; BE pleased to take notice, that dear Humphry Smith was a man that suffered many long and crue Imprisonments for his Love and Testi∣mony he bore to Gods blessed Truth and People, in his day, which occasioned part of his Writings to be scattered about in Manuscript, and not found till part of this Book was printed, where∣by some few of them are mis-placed, as to the years in which they were written; but the fol∣lowing Table of Contents will direct to the particular Heads of such collected, and here printed.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS, Or Chief Heads contained in this VOLUMN. THe Sufferings of the Saints at Evesham; Or a short Description of the first Ground of the Persecution of the Servants of God. Page A Warning to the Priests, Magistrates, Rulers and Inhabi∣tants of Exon, pag. 1. Some of the Effects of the Priests Ministry in Devonshire, p. 6. The first and second Priesthood declared according to the Scrip∣tures, p. 10. An ALARUM sounding forth unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, as a Warning before the Vials of Everlasting Wrath be poured forth upon them, p. 19.
A sad and mournful Lamentation for the People of these Nations, p. 28. Idolatry declared against, p. 46. Man driven out of the Earth and Darkness, by the Light, Life, and Mighty hand of God, p. 52. I. Concerning my Call out of the World, or my going out from my House, Country and Imployment, p. 55. II. Concerning my publick Preaching, p. 62. The Wandering Star discovered, or something in Answer to a Book called, The Quakers Blazing-Star, or The Worlds Wonder, p. 68. A Word to all Professors, p. 86. The just Complaint of the Afflicted (against the Rulers, who oppress the Innocent) to be delivered to the Judge of the Sessions at Winchester, after pag. 92. To them who have lately believed in the Light, and are waiting to receive the Life, p. 93. The Two striving within, p. 98. The Love of God declared, and Satans Wiles discovered, p. 102.
The Ground, Foundation, Beginning, and Father, and Chil∣dren, and Compass, and End, and the Effects of all the Harpers, Musitioners, Singers and Dancers, p. 108. Divine Love spreading forth forth over all Nations; Or, the Glorious Day of Ʋnity, Peace and Concord, p. 116. To all Parents of Children upon the face of the whole Earth, p. 123. The true and everlasting Rule from God discovered, and that which proveth all things published from the Spirit of Truth, p. 135. A Testimony of the true Prophet, who was to come, is come, and there is not another, p. 155. An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ, p. 164. The sounding Voice of the dread of Gods mighty Power, p. 167. To all that want Peace with God, To the Sheep every where not brought home, To the thirsty breathing Soul, and to the Seed, though in Captivity among and in the midst of all Professors, p. 175. I. Concerning Mofes's Ministration, p. 177. II. Concerning Christ and his Ministration, p. 179.
III. Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit, p. 185. The Vision of Humphry Smith which he saw concerning London, in the year 1660. p. 195. To the great Flock of the imprisoned Servants of God Al∣mighty, p. 201. A Warning to New-England's pretended Christians, p. 207. The Lamb and his day proclaimed, p. 211. Six Proposals stated for the Honour of the KING; I. By his Subjects Ʋnity one with another, p. 214. II. By his Subjects submission (actively or passively) unto all his Laws, p. 216. III. By his Subjects faithfulness unto him, p. 217. IV. By his Subjects Ʋprightness in their Traffick with other Nations, p. 218. V. By his Subjects departing from that which dishonoureth both God, the King and themselves, p. 218. VI. By his Subjects being the peculiar chosen People of God, p. 220. To the Lambs of Christ, p. 223.
To such in whose hearts the spirit of the Lord is beginning to move his Truth to declare, p. 226. Sound things asserted, 1. In the Kings own words; 2. from late Experience; 3. From Scripture-Truth; 4. Accor∣ding to Reason and Equity. p. 229. Forty four Queries propounded to all the Clergy-men of the Liturgy: Also, eleaven Reasons why these Queries are proposed, p. 236. An Epistle to all the Meetings in Dorsetshire, p. 258. To the despised, rejected and persecuted Lambs of Christ in the County of Dorset, p. 263. One Hundred and Forty four Lines of secret inward Melody and Praise to the Lord, p. 269. Hidden things made manifest by the Light, in a plain distinction between Condemnation and Temptation, p. 272. Concerning Temptation, p. 279. A Direction in the way to that within the Vail, by which Temptations are overcome, p. 285. The Meditations of an humble Heart, p. 290. To the espoused Virgin, p. 293.
Something how the Marriage of the underfiled Lamb; and Virgin came at first to be, P. 295. To all dear Friends who keep faithful in their measures to the end, P. 297. To the meek and open hearted Lambs and Flock of Heaven, P. 301. The Cause of the long Afflicted and sore Oppressed, sent forth from Winchester Prison, P. 309. The Answer to the Mittimus, P. 310. A Copy of a Paper sent to the Sessions, P. 312. To the Sons of men, P. 317. To Friends at Ailsbury (Prison) and in them parts, P. 323. To the the Young and Tender, and to the late Convinced People of God, amongst the rest of the Elect and already Chosen, P. 328. Concerning Tythes, P. 335. To my nearly related Friend Elizabeth Smith, P. 363.
THE Sufferings, Tryals & Purgings Of the SAINTS at EVESHAM; Who by their Obedience to the Lord in their Measures, do overcome their Enemies, by their daily suffering under them. Or, A short Description of the first Ground of the Persecution of the Servants of God, occasioned by the Priests, and the continual Proceedings of the Magi∣strates against them called Quakers. AS the Priests were always Enemies unto Christ and his Disciples, so do they continue persecuting the Saints, laying Snares for the Innocent, and smiting with the Tongue, Jer. 18. 18. and stirring up the Rulers and the rude Multitude, making Uproars and Insurrections against the Saints, as they did against Christ and his Ministers; for the chief Priests, assem∣bled with the Scribes and Elders of the People, consulted how they might take Jesus by subtilty and kill him; yet they would not do it on the Feast day, lest there should be an Ʋproar among the People, Mat. 26. 3, 4, 5 But the chief Priest and Rulers in Evesham, after their Consultations (how to ensnare the Innocent) did come on the first day to ensnare us, but (standing in the counsel of God) we were preserved from their first Snare which they laid for us (I having notice of it before) in bringing the whole multitude to provoke or entrap us; the which when they could not do, though hundreds of them gathered together about the Door,
(where I and many of the Servants of the Lord were) like those that gathered together about Lot's door, Gen. 19. 4, 5. yet none of them could provoke us to words, nor had they any way to ensnare us then, as afterwards will appear. And after the chief Priests had hired Judas for thirty pieces of Silver to betray Christ, Mat. 26. 15. and after Judas had brought again the thirty pieces of Silver, then the chief Priests took the same Money for the which Judas had sold Christ, and with it they bought a field of Blood, Mat. 27. 6, 7, 8. So the chief Priests have purchased (unto themselves and all their Ge∣neration) with the price of Blood a field a Blood, to bury all those that are strangers to the Covenant of Grace: So Gog, who makes War with the Saints, hath a place of Graves in Israel, Ezek 39. 11. & ver. 19, 20. and the dead are burying the dead; for both Priests and People are prophane and dead in Trespasses and in Sins, their hands being guilty of the Blood of the Righteous. And after Christ was betrayed by the means of the Priests, (and when Pilate, who would have re∣leased him) they taught the People to ask for a Murderer, and and destroy Jesus, Mat. 27. 20. (and such teachings the Priests do use now) And after Jesus was by their means crucified, and after he was risen, then they consulted again with the Elders; and they gave large Money unto the Souldiers to tell Lyes, and taught them so to do, that their murdering Actions might be hid, and the Disciples falsly accused, Mat. 28. 11, 12, 13. And the Servant is not greater than his Master, whom they have called Belzebub, much more them of his Houshold. And as the chief Priests have consulted against, and crucified Christ, and denyed him in the Resurrection, so they still continue persecuting and consulting against his Members, harmless Lambs and faithful Ministers; and there is little Persecution in England but the Priests have a hand in it, if not the first Actors of it, as thou George Hopkins Priest of Evesham hadst in all the barbarous Persecution there; for after I and other Friends kept Meetings in private at Bengard in this Burrough of Evesham, and none did make Insurrections against us, neither did we give offence to any, therefore thou couldst not find any ground at all to ensnare us by. Then upon the 19th day of the 6th Moneth,
1655. on that day didst thou with the Magistrates, and the rest, seek to ensnare us, it being the First day of the Week, and I being at Bengard, at an appointed Meeting, and thou being in thine accustomed Steeple-house in Evesham, both parts of the day, as thy custom was; and after thou hadst done, according to thy custom, then thou and the rest came from that Steeple∣house, to the Steeple-house in Bengard, and with thee didst thou bring the whole Congregation, both the called Justices and Magistrates, and rude People several hundreds, the like seldom heard of. And that thou camest on purpose to entrap us and stir up Persecution, and smite with the Tongue, will appear by these things following: 1st, Thou wast not use to come to that Steeple-house, neither didst thou come there in the like manner before. 2dly, In thy coming that day on which I was there; for I was there but seldom upon First days. 3dly, In that thou hadst thy Congregation with thee in thy Steeple-house at Evesham, where thou mightst have said any thing to them then and there, as well as to bring the same Congregation to another Steeple-house to hear the same man. 4thly, There were no People in Bengard, but did or might come to hear thee in thy accustomed place, as they were used to do. 5thly, In that thou hast not been in that Steeple-house since that day, it being now fifteen weeks. 6thly, In that when thou wast come there, thou didst speak evil of things thou didst not know, and back-bite others. And those thou didst bring with thee, even this one Congregation, to them distst thou say, O foolish Galatians! who hath bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth? And I say unto thee, if thou hadst not bewitched them, they would not have obey'd thee (but the Truth) to come there to hear thy Lyes; for many there thou didst declare, as to thy face was proved by Robert Smith, for the which he was imprisoned eleaven weeks. 7thly, It will appear by thy Sorcery which thou didst then vent forth, making that thy ground in Gal. 3. 1. thy heads thereof in short (as it was brought to me in writing, witnessed by many, and not denyed, but confessed with thy own Mouth since to me)
are as followeth: Thou didst liken that which is called Quaking, 1st, Ʋnto Witch-craft; 2dly, In three Respects worse than Witch∣craft: 3dly, Ʋnto Pharisees, who ware Hats like Morters: 4thly, To Papists in some things, and in some things worse; And thou sayst, Some sold their Bibles, and others cast them behind their backs. For the which thou wast declared to be a Lyar at the Sessions. Lastly, Thou didst conclude thy Sorcery with stirring up them called Justices and Magistrates, to put the Oath of Abjuration in exe∣cution; telling them, That if men might refuse to swear, out of tenderness of Consciences, then that might be a Cloak long enough for all the Jesuites that might come into England. And after thou hadst done, (and returned) not meeting with any opportunity to ensnare me, being I did not speak to any of you, but con∣tinued with Friends until Constables came that night and took me out of the House, and brought me before thee, and two others that are set to do Justice (but since I and many more have seen them and the Mayor to be most barbarous Heathens) And when thou couldst not entangle me in my words, whereby to send me to Prison, at last you tendered the Oath of Abjuration unto me, who am bound for Conscience sake not to Swear at all, but to abide in the Doctrine of Christ, Mat. 5 34. Therefore at last I was sent to Prison, though thou at that time wast twining like the Serpent, to wash thy hands like Pilate, as if thou hadst not been the cause of my Imprisonment; for thou didst say, Thou didst believe that I did refuse to Swear out of tenderness of Conscience, and bid the Justices do their Wills by me: And thou didst see their Wills were to send me to Prison, because I could not Swear, unto the which thou hadst before stirred them up. So Pilate said of Christ, I am innocent f the Blood of this Person, whom Pilate him∣self acknowledged to be just, and could find no cause of Death in him, yet he delivered him up to be crucisied, Mat. 27. 20, 24, 26. And when we were first brought into the House then John Nickles, one of the Constables, smote Thomas Cartrite on the head, and the Justices stood by and cared not for it; and afterwards our Hats were taken off our heads, and thrown among the feet of the People: Then they asked me from whence I came? I answered, from Aegypt. Then there was a Laugh∣ter among them, both Priest, Justices and People; for the Fools
heart is full of Laughter. And after they had continued so, I was moved of the Lord to speak to them thus; O People! is there no fear of God before your Eyes? Did ever the Saints of Christ live in Laughing, Mocking and Wantonness? Then the Priest, to uphold them in it, said, That Elijah did Mock Baals Priests. Answ. Though he did so, yet it is not convenient to bring that Scripture to justifie the People in Mocking. Then Theophilus Andrus said, He hath spoken enough already; what need we have any further witness? Therefore make him a Pass to go to Aegypt again, and let him be whipt out of the Town; for there is an Act of Parliament against such as wander up and down under the Name of Aegyptians. Then some asked, When I came from thence? others mocked. So I was a sport unto them, as Sampson was unto the Philistians, Judg. 16. 25. and I stood silent; but at last the Lord moved me to speak, saying, Why People are you altogether blind in the things of God? Of Aegypt and Sodom I was, where our Lord was crucified, Rev. 11. 8. and in Darkness and Bondage did I dwell, being a Child of Wrath as well as others; but the Lord by his living Power hath brought me from the Land of Darkness to the Light, and from Bondage to the Land of Rest, and into the Liberty of the Sons of God. Then Theophilus Andrus said, Speak on, for I never heard the like of this before. But I was not to be subject to their Wills, but to stand in the counsel of God. Question; But you have had some outward Beeing or Family, had you not? Answer; I had a Farme of 30 l. by the year, at little Cowrne, in the County of Hereford, not thirty Miles off this place; but I have now left part of it, and my Wife and Children are in the rest; and there I was a great Professor and a publick Preacher in many places thereabout daily, and then I was owned by the Justices and great men of the Earth, and many Hundreds did resort to hear me, where I came, and I was then beloved of many; for the World loves his own. But now I come to witness the Power of that which then I did but profess, and now am I hated by the World. And after other words from them called Justices,
and others, and they could not entangle me in my words, then the Priest with the subtilty of the Serpent, seeing they could not ensnare me, he then began, like those that came to Christ and feigned themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, and deliver him to the Power, Luke 20. 20. And like as the Saduces came to entangle him concerning the Resurrection, saying, Moses saith thus, but what sayest thou? So the Priest George Hopkins, among his many subtil Questions, said, Thus Solomon saith, The just man falleth seven times; What say you? or the like. And there is not a man upon Earth that doth good and sinneth not: How do you expound that? A. I am redeemed from the Earth. Q. But do you not walk on the Earth? A. I walk in the Light, which leads out of the Earth. Q. But are you not upon the Earth? A. As for this outward Body being upon the Earth, Enoch was for a time upon this outward Earth, yet he walked with God. Q. But do you walk with God? A. They that are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God, as God hath said, I will walk in them. Q. But Solomon saith, There is not a just man upon Earth, that doth good and sinneth not: Now therefore answer to the Question, do you sin, yea or nay? A. He that is born of God sinneth not. Q. But are you free from sin, yea or nay? A. If I were not free from sin, will it therefore follow, that no man is? Q. Do you believe that any man can be free from sin whilst he is here? A. Yea, I do believe it. Then the Priest said, it was a Popish Tenure, and he could shew me a Book that the Papists do hold, That men may be free from Sin in this Life. Then I said, the Papists do hold, that there is a God, and that Christ dyed for Sinners, and so do I: Therefore if the Papists do hold a Truth, must I deny it because they hold it? or must the Truth therefore be called a Popish Tenure because they hold it?
The Priest said, Nay but in such things as these, that are in dispute between the Papists and us, which is, That men may be free from Sin, and that they are justified by Works wrought in them. I answered, It is God that worketh in us, both the will and the deed, who hath wrought all our works in us and for us. And I have heard that the Papists do hold, that there is a Purgatory (which I deny) to be purged in from Sin after Death; but I seldom hear that they did hold, that men might be free from sin here. And if they are free from sin whilst they are here, then they need not hold, that there is a Purgatory to purge them after. Then I asked the Priest, if men should be free from sin whilst they are here? The Priest said, Nay. Then I asked him, if men should be purged from sin after Death? The Priest said, Nay. Then I said, if thou wilt not have men cleansed from sin neither before Death nor after Death, then when wilt thou have them cleansed? The Priest said, What if God will forgive men, and cleanse them from their sin at the very time of their Death, as Christ did the Thief on the Cross? Ans. Thou art not to question what God will do, or may do in that; but canst thou prove by Scripture, that God doth so? And if thou wilt say, the Thief was purged from sin when Christ spoke to him, then that was before his death. So when the Priest was almost taken in his own Snare, then the Serpents Wisdom began to twind out of that, and asked me How I was justified? But I seeing his subtilty, was not careful to answer him in that matter, Dan. 3. 16. but stood silent, as Christ did before the high Priest, Mat. 26. 62, 63. So then there was a stir among the People, because I was not hasty to utter words before the Lord; but after the Priest had urged very much, then I said, Thou dost wait to ensnare me; and if I should say, that I was justified by Faith in the Blood of Christ, thou wouldst but seek to entangle me in it. Then the Priest asked, If I were justified by the Blood of Christ? Ans. Yea.
Qu. Are you justified by that Blood of Christ that was shed at Jerusalem? A. By the Blood of Jesus Christ (the Son of the living God, who was the express Image of his Fathers glory, in whom dwelt the fullness of the Godhead really, who suffered at Mount Calvery by Jerusalem, for Sinners) am I justified. Q. But are you justified by the Blood of Christ without you, or with∣in you? A. Though Jesus Christ has shed his Blood for Sinners, yet I remained in my sin until I came to witness the Blood of Christ in me. Q. Are you not justified by the Blood of Christ that was shed for you? A. If the Blood of Christ was not shed, then Sinners could not be justified by it. Then the Priest said, You do not answer me plainly, whether you are justified meerly by that Blood which was shed upon the Cross, or meerly by something in you. A. What! wouldst thou have me say, that all Swearers, Lyars and Drunkards (that live and dye in their sins) are justi∣fied, because Christ shed his Blood upon the Cross? The Priest said, Nay. Then I said, The Blood of Christ that was shed upon the Cross I do not deny; but though he hath shed his Blood there for Sin∣ners, yet none come to be justified, or have benefit by it, as to Salvation, but those that the Blood and the Life of Christ is raised up in; for they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his, and such are not justified by him; and though he hath shed his Blood upon the Cross, yet the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: And wouldst thou have me say more, but that thou waitest to ensnare me? Then the Priest gave over that also, and went to entrap me in another thing, and said, One of you that are called Quakers, and is a Teacher among you, did bid me give over deceiving the People, in telling them, That the Scripture is the Word of God: Now do you own the Scripture to be the Word of God? A. The Scriptures I own, and witness to be a true Declaration, Luke 1. 1. spoken forth by holy men of God, as they were moved by the Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21. and they are those that testifie of
Christ, John 5. 39. to be the Light of the World, John 1. 9. and the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. Q. Are not the Scriptures the Word of God? A. The Scripture saith, God is the Word. Q. Are not the Scriptures necessary to Salvation? A. They are useful for Doctrine, for Exhortation and Re∣proof. Q. But are they necessary? A. They are useful. Q. Are they not necessary? A. They are necessary to stop the Mouthes of Gain-sayers. Q. But are the Scriptures a necessary means unto Salvation? A. Jesus Christ is the only means of our Salvation, and there is no other Name given under Heaven by which men shall be saved. Q. But are men saved without Scriptures? A. Now the Scriptures are written, and what is written, is written for our Learning; therefore we are not without it, but Enoch walked with God, Noah obeyed, and Abraham be∣lieved, before Scripture was; and they that are come unto Christ, are come unto that which was before Scripture was. Q. How did you come to know any thing but by the Scripture? A. Although I had the Scripture, yet I never knew Christ, of whom the Scripture testifieth, until he was revealed in me. Q. Did not you come to your Knowledge at first, by hearing some Minister? A. I never profitted by any of them, but lived in Wicked∣ness, so long as I followed them. Q. But if ye own the Scriptures to be true, and spoken from the Spirit of God, why will you not own it to be the Word of God? A. Bring me any one Scripture, that saith, the Scripture is the Word of God, and I shall own it; but the Letter killeth, the Spirit giveth Life, and the Word of God is quick and powerful, shar∣per than a two edged Sword; then I took my Bible and laid it down on the Table before them, and said, See, this hath no Power in it, neither can it stir: Then the People laught at me again; then I said to them, Be silent for shame, for I speak soberly; and this Bible is not sharper than a two edged Sword: and if this Bible be the powerful Word of God, then the vilest Person in England may buy the powerful Word of God for Four Shillings.
Thus when the Priest had sought in these, and the like Questi∣ons to ensnare me, and found no better ground; then he turned to them called Justices, and said, Sirs, you see that though they deny Popery in the general, yet you see they hold it in the particular, as I have made it plain before you, in that he holdeth a Man may be free from Sin, and to be justified by Works wrought within; and if this Po∣pery be suffered to creep in, then you may conceive the danger that may follow in this whole Nation; therefore I shall leave it unto you; and you know that I came not here until you sent for me, therefore it is not of my procurement. So after he had betrayed me as much as he could into their Hands, like Judas, then he would have washed his Hands like Pilate. And after I was sent to Prison to the Goalers House, for re∣fusing to Swear that which afterwards they blotted out of my Mittimus, and after two dayes being at the Goalers House, where the mighty Power of God appeared, to the silence and amazement of all the beholders, as they were amazed at the Apostles, Acts 2. 7. For several times after I had prayed, the People were shaken, and the Word of God was spoken with boldness, Acts 4. 31. then I was sent to the main Goal, where the People were exceeding mad against me, as Saul once was against the Saints, Acts 26. 11. And the Rulers stretched forth their Hands to vex us, like Herod, Acts 12. 1. And the Town was moved, and the People ran together, Acts 21. 30. And the Multitude, with the Magistrates, Acts 16. 22. Being cut to the Heart, some gnashed on me with their Teeth, Acts 7. 54. And the Multitude of the Town was divided, and there was divers assaults made against us, both of the Heathens and the Rulers, who sought to vex us despightfully, as they did, Acts 14 4, 5. Some threw Stones in the Prison the wait of five pound, and threw Dirt and Water on my Lodging, and spit on me, and I hid not my Face from shame and spitting, Isa. 50. 6. And Pist at me se∣veral times, and once they Pist on my Food, and they made di∣vers Assaults and Insurrections against our Meetings, but Friends feared none of these things, Rev. 2. 10. but in patience endu∣red all their bitter Persecutions. At last they were ashamed, and so were the Rulers, who were far worse then the rude People; For though Friends met in the Street by the Prison daily, yet the Meeting was not broken by the rude People, but by the Magi∣strates,
who were at last more quiet, and then Friends met as peaceably in the Street, as if they had been in a private House; so they met thrice every Week, besides on the Market-dayes; after the Market was over, the People of the Country did come there in Peace, and receive the Word with gladness, and the Ignorant began to be convinced, and the Gain-sayers Mouthes stopped, and much People received the Truth in love, whereby the Meetings were increased, and the Work of the Lord began to prosper; thus we continued for four Weeks together day by day in Peace, and then there arose up a new Mayor, which knew not the righteous Seed, as there arose up a new King in Egypt, Exod. 1. 8. And he saw the People of God increase, was vexed at it, as the world was alwayes vexed at the increase of the righ∣teous Seed; so that Mayor Edmond Young, said, He would break our Meetings, or else his Bones should lie in the Dirt. The which he did upon the 14th day of the 8th Moneth, being the first day of the Week, on the which in the Morning Friends met in private, and not in the Street, and as two Friends of the Town were go∣ing to that Meeting, the Mayor laid Hands on them, and put them in Prison; and in the latter part of the day Friends met in the Street, where they used to do, where they were without any disturbance, until the Mayor came with Officers, and said, It was an unlawful Assembly; and said, If there were above eight Persons met together, it was an unlawful Assembly; And pre∣sently laid Hands on Friends, and pulled, and thrust, and kickt, and put many in the Prison and in the Stocks, and put me and two more in the Dungeon; and when he saw that Friends were not afraid of him, neither did any run away, then he said, He wanted another Prison for the Women (for he had imprisoned Men in four several places that time) when this was done, he com∣manded his Sargeant to make proclamation, and command in the Name of the Protector, That every one should depart thence on pain of Imprisonment; when he wanted more Prisons to put them in. Thus he broke our Meetings, who harmed not any, nor re∣sisted his Violence; and then he said, If we would meet in Houses or in the Fields, he would not molest us: Yet on the next First day he saw one of the Town going alone to a Meeting, that we had then appointed in a House, and him he put in Prison. And so I being that Day put in the Dungeon, where I now am
(as once before I was put in for Praying) then he endeavoured to keep all People from me, and for several Dayes and Nights we were denyed having Candles in this dark Dungeon; at last he sent us each man a Penny-worth of Bread, and a half Penny∣worth of Beer a day, the which the Goaler said, was the Towns allowance; but we still denyed it, and sent him word, That if we should not have Food for our Money, or from our Friends, then we should be without it. So at last, when we could have Bread from our Friends, and Water, then we did eat and drink, and praise the Lord, whose presence is with us. Thus he much indeavoured to bring us into slavery unto his corrupt will, which was according to the Words of Robert At∣kins, that sate Judge at the Sessions, who then said to me thus, You have been kept very high all this while; but I shall take a course e'er I go hence, that you shall be kept shorter. And the Mayor Edmond Young, caused a Trap-door to be made into the Dungeon, locked down, and all our Bedding and Bed-cloathes, that Friends had sent us, to be taken from us, and will not let our Friends have it again. Joshua Frensham (a Prisoner) having much pain with his Teeth, did something earnestly desire, that whilst he was a Prisoner he might have the use of a Pillow that was taken away, (which was his own) but it was denyed. On the se∣cond day after we were put in the Dungeon, a Friend brought some Straw for us to lie on, and the Goaler would not suffer it to be brought into us, because he would not give him Money to unlock the Doors. Once I sent to the Mayor to have Liberty for some man or Friend to fetch out our Dung from us, and he denyed it, and sent for a Constable to put that Friend in the Stocks that came to ask it: And before I came in the Dungeon, sometimes our Boxes and Writings were taken from us, and sometimes our Stools that we had to sit or write upon, and our Candles. Besides, eight Friends being Prisoners at the Goalers House, were much abused by him, the which I shall forbear to write; only thus he said unto them, If they would not pay four Pence a Night for each mans Lodging, and eight Pence a Meal for each mans Diet, then they should go all to the main Goal; Which they refused to satisfie his Will in; neither were they used to eat of his Diet, being all Towns men: But sometimes he would not suffer their Wives, nor any
other Friend to bring their Diet to them, nor yet to come into them; Then a man gained leave of him that dwelt next the Goa∣ler, and so went through his House, and brought Food to the Prisoners, which when the Goaler saw, he threatned that man which had let him through, and took the Beer from them, intend∣ing by such Actions to force them to his will, which they would not be subject to; therefore he brought them all to the main Goal, and then he said unto us, That if he might have his will, he would Hang us all: And he had said before, He might do what he would unto us, for we should have no benefit of the Law, neither durst any Lawyer plead for us. Then were them eight kept in the Goal, and we three in the Dungeon under them, five dayes to our own Dung; as I and some of us have been kept in this Prison and Dungeon, with our own Dung in the same Room from time to time, for this fourteen Weeks. And as for the Prison, it is not 12 Foot square; & but one Goal hole belonging to it four Inches wide, where we took in our Food and Straw to lie upon, and were forced to burn Candle every day (when we have it) by reason the Prison is so dark, and so close, and so many in so little room, and so little Air, with the stink of our own Dung, all which might have occasioned the Death of some e'er this time; and one they kept with me in the Dungeon until he had been sick, & after turned him once in the Night out; and some others have not been well, by reason of the exceeding closeness of the Prison, whereby sometimes the stink of the Prison hath been so strong forth in the Street, that People could not indure to stand by it; sometimes when the dayes were hot, the Breath of some Prisoners was almost stopt, and lay for seve∣ral dayes like men asleep; and when dayes are at the coldest, we have not room nor place either to make Fire, or to walk to keep our Bodies warm. Yet there is a large Prison over our Heads, where they do sometimes imprison many of our Friends; but that large Prison they will not let us be in, neither could we, (nor Friends for us) prevail to have Liberty to walk in that Prison sometimes by day, and to come down into the other Prison by Night. Therefore let all People (whose Hearts are tender towards the Lord) take notice how we are not only deprived of out∣ward Liberty (without the breach of any Law) but are also
kept in a most barbarous condition, worse than Thieves or Murderers, as the Goaler hath said, That if we had been in for Theft or Murder, he could have let us have more Liberty, than now he durst, because of the Mayor. One day two Country-men were passing by the Prison with their Teams, the which Men came and enquired, What we were imprisoned for? And the Goaler being by, inticed them into us, and then he lockt the Door again, and went his way; so the men were constrained (by reason of their Teams) to send several Messengers with intreating Words to the Goaler, to come again, and then they were forced to agree with him for to let them forth for Money, the which they presently paid. Another time one of the Town came in the Prison to see us, when the Goaler was there, and the Doors open, and the Goaler lockt the Door, and kept him in that Day from his la∣bour, and that Night; and his Wife nor her Friends could not prevail with the Mayor nor the Goaler to let him out without Money. Also, James Wall, a Prisoner, who had served seven Years an Apprenticeship in the Town, and a Free-man thereof, and hath born several Offices, being a Shop-keeper, ha∣ving for seven Years kept a standing in the Market place, until since he was Prisoner, that the Mayor Edmond Young forbad his Wife, neither would he let her stand that time where he was used to do, nor in any place of the Market; Then she went to him concerning it; and once he said, she should have a standing for two Pence; but after he began to speak suttilly to her, say∣ing, I hear that your Husband doth abuse you. She answered, My Husband did never abuse me; but as for that Judgment which he now holdeth, I could not own, but now seeing it is so much persecuted makes me own it, because the Way of God was always persecuted. And when the Mayor heard that, and saw he could have no occasion against her Husband by her Words, then he said, She should not have a standing for 5 l. Also two of James Wall's Chapmen came to him, with whom he had dealed much, and their Accounts were large, and some Money he owed them, who went to the Mayor and proffered what Bale he would desire for him, to come forth one day to perfect his Accounts. But they could not prevail with him; but the Mayor said to them,
If they would have a Warrant to seize on his Goods, they should. But the men said, They had no reason so to do (for the Mayor he seeks to ruinate others also.) On that day we were before the late Mayor, George Kemp; I said, I own Magistrates that are for the Punishing of Evil-doers, and the Praise of them that do well: He answered, You will find no such in England (and I am sure I find no such in Evesham.) On the 17th of the 9th Moneth, Margerat Newby and Eliza∣beth Quorte came to this Town in obedience to the Lord, who had a Meeting on the morrow (being the First-day) in private at Edward Pitway's, and after the Meeting ended, about the fourth Hour, in the latter part of the Day, they came to the Prison to visit us that were in it, and as they were returning, the Mayor laid violent Hands on them, and put them in the Prison above us, and then caused them to be put in the Stocks that are in that Prison, which Stocks are made worse then ordinarily, with places to put in both Hands, in which Stocks an Hours punishment is very bad; and after a Constable had put them in, the Mayor went up unto them, to see if they were punished bad enough, and caused them to be removed as far asunder as might be, that they might not one help or ease another, if they could; and so, left them with both their Legs therein, with two holes distance between their Legs, in a most barbarous & shameful manner, and beastly words he used to them; and so went thence & lockt the Pri∣son-door, that no Friends could come nigh them, it being a freezing night, in which manner they were kept the space of 15 hours at least; the like Punishment seldom heard of: I have thoughts that Paul's forty Stripes save one; was not so bad. And after they had been in that manner all that time, then the Mayor caused them to be taken out, and sent presently in the Cold out of the Town a back way, without any stay for any outward Comfort. And the same First-day at Night, a Friend that came to the Town the day be∣fore, being at the Prison hole, was put in the common Stocks by the Mayor's order, not shewing him any reason why they did; and after he had been in the Stocks all that freezing Night in the Street, then the Mayor sent him out of the Town by the Goaler; but when the Goaler had left him, he returned to the Town again along the Road-way, it being the Market day, and came to the Prison to us, and then went to the Mayor, to know what offence
he had to charge him with, that he had thus punished him for: But the Mayor having nothing to accuse, but was wroth, and sent him to the Stocks again, where both his Feet were put in; and then they sent for Robert Vens, who did go along with the Friend forth of the Town, that had been in the Stocks all Night; and when Robert Vens came before them called Justices, Samuel. Gar∣denar and Robert Maiten, the one of them said, What shall we do with this Fellow? The other answered, Put him in the Goal. But at last they sent him to the Stocks, and he knows no reason why they did it, but for going with the other Friend out of the Town; and when he had been in the Stocks five hours, then they sent for him to see what the Goaler had to charge him with, for any words that he might speak, when he went with the other Friend; so when they had punished him, they went to en∣quire what offence he had done, and finding none, they let him go. When this Persecution begun in Evosham, and the Corruption of the Magistrates did so plainly appear, some of the Inhabitants intended to send two men to the Protector to acquaint him, and they writ something to that effect to send by them, the which Writing was subscribed with about fifty Hands to it, that by it the Protector might know what corrupt men were in Authority in this Town; but I said unto them, That thy might put themselves to much trouble, and yet not speak with the Protector; therefore if they would not otherwise be satisfied, they might put some four Hands to it, and send it to Print; and then I should endeavour to have it sent to the Protector, that he might be left with∣out excuse: So they sent it to Print with twenty Hands to it, which was entit∣led, A Representation of the Government of Evesham, from many of the Inba∣bitants thereof, directed to the Protector, &c. And at the Sessions after, many of them were fined, and some were both fined, and have been ever since Imprisoned in the Protectors Name, for declaring to the Protector the corruption of those that are put in Authority under the Protector, who act contrary to the Protector's Laws, against those that have been faithful. And there is not any Friend at any time that can by any means since the Sessions, gain or have for Money a Copy of our Indictments. And let all People take notice, that all that is printed in this Book, is all but a short Declaration to what might be printed, of the Persecutions of Priests, Magistrates and People of this Town against the Saints. From the Dungeon in Evesham, by, him that is known to the World by the Name of Humphry Smith.
A WARNING TO THE Priests, Magistrates, Rulers A Inhabitants OF EXON That they may be Preserved from the Wrath at hand. With some of the Effects of the Priests Minstery in Devonshire, whose Fruits have exceeded many, and are now brought to light, that the simple may return from them (who profit not) unto Christ the Light, who reacheth all to profit, and is come to teach. YOU who are this day fasting for Strife and Debate, that you may smite with the Fist of Wickedness, and that you may exalt your selves in Pride, vain Glory and Op∣pression one over another, and persecute and imprison the Just, and be as Lords over Gods Heritage, exercising Authority one over another, seeking honor one of another, each man seeking his own Interest, and not the good one of another, pleasing your selves in lying Vanities, corrupting your selves in those things which the Righteous Law of God forbiddeth, sporting your selves in this the day of the Lord, which is stealing upon you all as a Thief in the night, so is he coming upon you unawares, who are this day mocking God and your own Souls, and are with, and in Cain's nature,
offering a Sacrifice to God, but the just Witness of God in the particular is murdered, and you with your Sacrifices are shut out from the Lord God of Sabboths, whose Rest you come not into, but are feeding upon the Serpent's Food, which is to know and not obey, and the young Serpents are nourished, and the old Serpent's Head is not broken, Iniquity lodgeth in the Heart, and Wickedness ruleth in the inward Parts. From the Image and Life of God you are all fallen, and are gone astray from your Maker, and are erred from the right way, and gone a Whoring after your own Inventions, and have committed Fornication with strange Flesh, the Thoughts of your Hearts are Evil, and on your Beds do you imagine Mischief one against another; and by Deceit and Defraud have you filled your Houses with the Treasures of Aegypt, and Darknese is in your Dwellings, even thick Darkness that may be felt, and from your Eyes are the things of God hid, and a Vail is over you, and the Seed is in Bondage, the partition Wall is yet standing, and you are found without among the Dogs, and the Sorcerers, and the wild Beasts of the Field, in the Nature of the Wolf, subtil, and devouring both the Lamb-like Spirit within, and the Lambs without; the Flock of God is scattered, and the Thorns choak the Seed; the fruitless Trees are not cut down, the Brambles cover the Ground, and Fruit to God is not brought forth, but wild Grapes and Leaves, and Airy Imaginations in the Subtilty above the Light, where the Serpent is twining to keep his hold, and this is the Reasoning in mans Will, which is not brought to the Cross, nei∣ther are the Corruptions of the Flesh crucified, but you go on in your Sins from day to day, and even hate to be reformed. Was Sodom and Gomorah guilty of any Sin that is not found this day among you? Are you not drinking down Iniquity as the Ox drinketh down Water? Nay, do you not even say in your Hearts, that you are delivered to commit all these Abominations? Wo, Wo unto you, the Lord God of the whole Earth hath a Contro∣versie you, his Judgments are as swift as lightning, he is coming and is come to try you, and to weigh you all in the just Ballance; and now all your Coverings are too narrow, all you who have made Lyes your Refuge, and turned the Grace of God into Wantonness, sporting your selves in this the mighty Day of the
Lord, and are found in Excess, Pride, Drunkenness and Glut∣tony, ye painted whited Walls, guilded Tombs, painted over with Saints words, but Enemies to the Saints Life, even for you am I made to take up a Lamentation for the Wo and Misery coming upon you, by reason of your Haughtiness, and the Stout∣ness of your words, through the hardness of your Hearts, which are not circumcised, nor purified by Faith, but in them Pervers∣ness, and the Love of this World hath gotten a room instead of God, and so the old Bottles are full of stinking stuff, and the Inn is filled with the Guests of this World, and there is not room for Christ, the Light, Life and Son of God, to be born up to take away the Sin of the World, though you profess him, and talk of him, yet you complain for lack of Power, whereas we bear Te∣stimony, That he is come, who is the Power of God, and unto him that saves from Sin is all Power committed, both in Heaven and Earth, in whom, and by whom alone this Sonship is received, and the Victory over the World, which knows not God, among whom you are seen, in the Light that comes from Christ, the Son of God, who made all men of one Blood to dwell upon the face of the Earth, and upholds all by the Word of his Power, in whom we live, move, and have our beeing, as the Poets have written, and as the Wise and Learned of the Earth have said, who came not to feel after & find him before whom the Hills tremble, and the tall Cedars bow, he who is coming to turn your Waters in∣to Gall of Wormwood, and your Coverings into burning Pitch, and his Jealousie will smoke like Fire against you, who are as Stubble ready dried, cut off from the stock and withered: Wo unto you Workers of Iniquity, is not your day at hand, that you must depart forever, and be no more seen? Hath not Hell enlarg∣ed her self for the double-minded Ones? Yea, now is the day wherein the Wrath of God shall be revealed from Heaven upon all Unrighteousness of men, who hold the Truth of God in Un∣righteousness. This shall come upon all you who have chosen your own way, and are departed from the living God. Is not this the Fast that the Lord hath chosen, to loose the Bands of Wickedness [Observe] Wickedness is a Band, which must be broken before man comes to offer up living Sacrifices well pleasing unto God, who requireth to let the Oppressed go Free,
and that you break every Yoke: Consider, is the oppressed Seed of God let go Free? the Seed to which the Promise belongs, or is not the Iniquity born upon the Shoulders of him that is the Light, whereby he is pressed down? And are you not laying heavy burdens upon the neck of the Poor? Is not the Poor Op∣pressed, and the Rich live in Oppression? Is not the Fatherless, the Widdow and the Stranger oppressed within your Gates? Have you not evil intreated the Servants and Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, whom he sent to Warn you? and some to be Signs and Wonders among you, as Isaiah, who walked naked and bare-footed, Isa. 20. 3. 1 Sam. 19. 24. that you may see your Nakedness, and repent of your Loftiness, and come down from your high Mountains, where you are making your Nests above the Stars of God in your Airy Imaginations from the first Wis∣dom of the first man, from the Earth, Sensual and Devilish, where the Prince of the Air rules in all the Sons of Disobedience, who are wise to do Evil, and subtil foxes in that Knowledge which puffeth up, and there you stand like strong Oaks, and fed Horses, fatted for the day of Slaughter, whose Sins are ripe unto Judg∣ment, whose measure of Wickedness is even at the full, & you your selves the Servants of Sin, fitted for the Wine-press of the Wrath of the Lord God Almighty, who is coming a swift witness against you, and from his presence you shall not fly. Therefore prepare to meet the Lord, for the day is at hand that your Iniquities shall be rewarded upon your own Heads, and you shall receive from the Lord the just Reward of all your Doings, and every mans Heart shall be made manifest in the sight of God, and by the Witness of God in every mans Conscience, shall God be ac∣knowledged to be Just, by which the Mouth of Proud Flesh shall be stopped, and the Conscience shall be awakened by the Witness of God, that did always testifie against Deceit, Sin and Hypo∣crisie; and when the endless Judgments of God are upon you, and his everlasting Torments have taken hold upon you, then shall my Witness in every mans Conscience witness for me, that in love to your Souls I was moved to write this for a Warning to you all, that to the Cross you might come, to the true Light of Christ, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World, that all men through him might believe, even in him that is the Light,
the Corner Stone refused by all you wise Builders, who build above the Light, which to you this day is a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offence, even Christ the Light, the true Teacher, that in secret condemns for Sin, who is the Heir, and is now come, whom all you Wicked Husband-men that have not brought forth Fruit unto God, are now slaying in your own particulars, and persecuting in us, his Members, that if possible you might murder the Heir, Christ the Light, and so the Inheritance be yours. But it is in vain for you to kick against the Pricks, the Light in your Consciences, which checks in secret for Sin, is and will be your Condemnation, whilst you fight against it, and hate it, and the measure of the Breath of Life will kindle a Fire in your Bowels, like a stream of Brimstone forever, which shall never be quenched, nor depart from you Wicked and Ungodly men, whose Sins have exceeded many, and whose ways are right in your own Eyes, and hate to be reformed, and despise, stone, per∣secute and imprison them whom the Lord hath sent to warn you, whose blind zeal is like Jerusalem's, from whose Eyes the things of God are hid, and your Madness like unto Saul's, who thought to do many things against the Name of Jesus Christ, the Light. And do not many of you fight against the Light, and so are found Fighters against God, who is now come to try you, and to search you, and according to your deeds shall you all receive? And now, who among you will hear this? Who among you will regard? Are you not covered with a deep sleep, that so the Destroyer may come upon you unawares? Who hath an Eye now to see, and a Heart to understand? Who will regard this, and return from the Evil of his ways? Who will lay it to heart? unto him is the day of Grace offered, let him return, and that with speed, and let the rest look for their Portion according to the words written. Let not this be slighted, for it was written for a Warning afore∣hand, unto you all, upon the 30th day of the 8th Moneth, 1656. by a Servant of Jesus Christ, a Prisoner at Exon, known by the Name of Humphry Smith.
Some of the Effects of the Priests Ministry in Devonshire. YOu that have been the Teachers and the Leaders of the People long, you, who say, the Priests Lips preserve Knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his Mouth; now consider, what have you taught the People, and what have they learned of you? Is it not to persecute the Innocent? and to hale out of your Sy∣nagogues? and to stone and to beat them whom the World knows not? whom the Lord hath sent as Lambs among Wolves into the Towns, Villages, Market-places and Synagogues to witness and declare in the Name of the Lord against all Unrigh∣teousness; and preaching Repentance unto all, even to them of the highest place of Worship, and to a Crooked and Perverse Generation, who have been long learning of you, that connot your selves cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. neither are they by you brought to the knowledge of the Truth, so as that they need not any man to teach them, but are still learning, and are not come to the knowledge of God, whom to know is Life Eternal, but are found this day in that, in which the knowledge of God is not, and in that nature which murdered Abel, and stoned the Prophets, and crucified Christ, and slew his Apostles; and yet you all pro-fess the Scriptures, but upon you the Scriptures are fulfilled, who are in these days haling, and causing to be haled out of your Sy∣nagogues, and persecuting from City to City the harmless Lambs of Jesus Christ, who saith unto his, These things shall they do unto you, because they know not the Father, nor me, John 16. 2, 3. Doth not your evil Savour come up into the Nostrils of the Lord? And is not your Nakedness seen by all the Children of the Light, who walk in the Light? Are not both you and your Hearers a Seed of Evil Doers? And are you not fierce Despisers of them that are good? And do you not daily cry out against those that are dead unto Sin, and alive unto Righteousness? And do you not even hate him that walks in the paths of Peace, and
the steps of Innocency? Is not there a noise amongst you against the Lambs of Christs? Are you not stirring up the Rulers against them, as your fore-Fathers did, Acts 4. 1, &c. and c. 5. 17. John 11. 47. Are you not seeking to your earthly Magistrates to defend your Profession with their carnal Sword, which must be by Persecuting and Imprisoning the Lambs of Christ, who break not your Magistrates Law, nor yet the Law of God; and if you have ought against us, you should come and declare it be∣fore our faces, or let us have liberty to speak when the Lord moves any of us to come to you; but fill ye up the measure of your Fa∣thers, the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, in whose steps ye are found, read Mat. 23. who denyed Christ the Light, and cal∣led him a Deceiver, and one that had a Devil, and the Carpenter's Son, and stirred up the Rulers and the rude People to Crucifie him, and they themselves gave their Voice against him, whom they had hired Judas to betray, and after his Resurrection they hired Souldiers for large Money to declare Lyes of his Disciples and him, who was just, and afterwards were Enemies to his In∣nocent Lambs, who had waited in Obedience to Christ the Light, and so received that Spirit of Truth whom the World cannot re∣ceive, by which they were endued with Power to go forth into the Towns, Villages and Synagogues, declaring against the false Worships even of Priests and People, though they had Latin, Greek and Hebrew, and Moses preached among them every Sabbath day, yet were they in the false Worship, and deniers of Christ the Light of the World, and his Ministers and Servants, who were foolish and contemptible in their Eyes, as we are this day in the Eyes of you, who are in the ways of your Fathers, consult∣ing with the Rulers against such as come in the Name of the Lord to declare against your Oppression and unjust Practices, and such are brought by you and your Hearers to suffer Impri∣sonment, and loss of Goods (if not Death it self) even by tn and those that you have been long teaching, and are of ght Church, as it is called, by whom the Church in God doth  not as is witnessed in Devon-Goal, wherein many of the Serva ever the living God have been kept Prisoners, who have not Truth, the Law of God nor Man; and this is done by thosne Light, taught no better by you Priests of Devonshire: Is aed by you;
to your Ministry to bring forth such Fruits in the generality of your Hearers? Did they ever imprison any for Conscience-sake, who were taught by the Ministry of Christ the Light, to deny Ungodliness? And are not your Hearers in Ungodliness, the which we bear Testimony against, and all Ungodliness? There∣fore we suffer this day by the Seed of Evil Doers, who have taken many of the Servants of God in the High-ways, as they were going to visit the Members of Christ in Prison, and took twenty Shillings from one of them, who was going to relieve the Mem∣bers of Christ in Prison, and sent him to Prison also. Another had ten Shillings taken from him; and others had their Writings and other things taken from them. Some others were put out of your Synagogues, brought before Magistrates, and sent to Prison, and one dyed in Prison; and this is done by you, and your Hearers, ye Priests of Devonshire! Is it not a shame to your Ministry to bring forth no better Fruits, in this your Gospel Profession? and the Fruits of your Gospel-Hearers, to lay wait, as he that setteth Snares, and set a Trap to catch men, (Jer. 5. 26. to the end) and send them to Prison for going to visit Prisoners, whose Relief from them was taken. Was ever the like heard of in the days of the Prophets or Apostles? Who but those that are as blind as you will follow you any longer? For now, as every simple man may see the Fruit of your Ministry, which hath plainly appeared in most Towns and Ports of Devonshire; at Tiverton, they that depart from Evil, are made a Prey of, and many Abuses they receive, and the Abusers not punished, but some that have been abused were also cast into Prison, and they who came to visit them, were also persecuted; and they that came in the Name of the Lord, were there persecuted, put out of the Synagogues, and imprisoned. At Tarington, the Servants of the Lord, that preached Repentance, and that came for the good of , were Evil intreated, and Snares laid for them, and ; and the Priest of Tarington said, That Paul was a  that it was his Duty to Swear: This hs affirmed more than . At Plymouth the Servants of the Lord several times  inhumane Persecutions, the like hath been seldom heard  by those that are called Christians. might be said, and other places named, with the
Fruits that your Ministry hath brought forth; but in this, you may be known by your Fruits to all that love the Light of Christ, who saith of the false Prophets, By their Fruits ye shall know them. And now is Christ the Light come to deliver his Flock from your Mouthes, and he will bring back the lost, and gather home the scattered that have been long devoured by you, the many Pastors, who have not brought home, to Christ the Light, the lost Sheep, but with Force and with Cruelty have your ruled over them, who have been scattered by you Shepherds that cannot understand, Isa. 56. 11. who feed the subtilty in your Hearers, and not the simplicity, neither have you ministred to the Spirit in Prison, nor yet received your Ministry from him that opens the Prison Door. And row your day is come, the Hireling must fly into the Holes, and yet shall you not be hid: And now your carnal Preaching, through your carnal Imaginations and Conceivings from the Letter which killeth, to a carnal People, for carnal Ends, in carnal idol Temples, high Places of beastly Worship: This you are now seeking to uphold with carnal Weapons, in the hands of carnal Men and Magistrates, who send the Lambs of Christ into Prisons; and all this will avail you no more than it did avail the chief Priests, your Fathers, who took counsel together, how to take Jesus Christ the Light by subtilty, and kill him, and gave their Voice against him: And are not you giving your Voices against Christ the Light, caing it Natural, as they call'd him the Carpenter's Son? But fill ye up the measure of your Fa∣thers, ye blind Guides of Devonshire, that upon you (at whose hand the Blood of Souls will be required) may come the Curses spoken of in Mal. 2. 1, 2. For now is Christ the Light made manifest, the second Priesthood, who is made a Minister, not after a carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life, even him that is the Light, and the true Shepherd that teacheth all to profit, the Everlasting High Priest, that leadeth up to God, who committed all Power unto him that is the Light of the World, which, whoso believeth in, and obeyeth, shall not abide in Darkness, as you and your Hearers do who are ever learning, but never come to the knowledge of the Truth, which makes Free: But such as follow him, who is the Light, the Way, the Truth, the Life, the Corner Stone refused by you;
for to you he is a stone of stumbling; even he that is the Rock of Ages, the Power of God, the Wisdom of God, the Son of God, the Light of the World, which whoso followeth, shall have the Light of Life, and in him receive Power to become the Sons of God, and so come by the light to the Teachings of the Father, and re∣ceive the Anointings, that they will not have need of your teach∣ings. For the Pastors are become Bruitish, and have not sought the Lord, therefore they shall not prosper, and all their Flock shall be scattered, Jer. 20. 21. And as Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests Murder in the way by consent; for they commit Lewdness, Hos. 6. 9. Written by a Servant of Jesus Christ, a Witness a∣gainst Deceivers, a Prisoner at Exon, called Humphry Smith. THE First & Second Priesthood Declared, according to the Scriptures; That both Priests, Professors and People may come to see with the Light of Christ, which Priesthood this belongs to. THe First Priesthood and its Ministry stands without, and consisteth of the outward things. The Second Priesthood and its Ministry stands with∣in, and consisteth of the inward Work; and Paul who was
made a Minister of the Spirit, which is within, he said, Work out you Salvation with fear and trembling, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Phil. 2. 12. The first Priesthood being made in the time of the Oath, under which Priesthood the Swearing is upheld, and the People continue in the Swearing and in the Strife. The second Priesthood is made with the Oath, the Confirma∣tion thereof is the End of all Strife, Debate and Dissention, and the End of the Lust, from whence the Wars, Fightings, and vain Janglings doth arise: And the Confirmation of this Oath, and the second Ministry, which is confirmed by this Oath, puts an end to all Oaths and Swearing, the Word of the Oath being come, and become Flesh, which Word was before the Oath, and the World, and since the Law, which Word is the Son, who saith, Swear not at all, Heb. 6. 15, 16. & Chap. 7. 20. Mat. 5. 34. James 5. 12. The first Priesthood and its Ministry under the first Covenant had a command to receive Tythes of the People; yet they were not to sue People at the Law, if they did not bring the Tythes, but were to receive the Tythes and Offerings; when they were brought, their command was to receive them: And these Tythes were given unto the Stranger, unto the Fatherless, and to the Widdow, that they might eat and be filled, as well as the Levite and the Priest, Deut. 26. 12, 13. Now that Priesthood must needs be of Antichrist, which is not agreeable to the first Priest∣hood, and it is also contrary to Christ, Luke 10. 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 6. 3. and so on 2 John 9. 1 John 2. 22. The second Priesthood and its Ministry is of the New Cove∣nant, where the Law is changed, by which the first is made; and this is not of the World, neither upheld nor maintained by the things of the World, neither is made by a Carnal Com∣mandment, but by the Power of an Endless Life, Heb. 7. 16. Mat. 10. 7, 8, 9. Gal. 1. 12. & 16. The first Priesthood was after the Flesh, where the Lusts were not crucified, whence the Wars and Fightings come, where the likenesses were found among such as were not come to the Sub∣stance; for Abraham came from the Wars, and gave the tenth of the Spoils unto him who was made like unto the Son of God, Heb. 7. 3. Chap. 8. 5. Gen. 14. 18.
The second Priesthood (who is of the Spirit, who comes of Abraham according to the Flesh) is the Power of God, and the Substance of the former Likenesses; which Substance being come, it puts an End to the Wars, and so an end to the Spoil∣ings, and also an end to all that which causeth the Spoils; and if so, then an end to that of which Tythes were first given; and so the Substance of the Likenesses being come, the Blessing is received in him, and the Multiplyings known, and the In∣creases of God witnessed, and the Spoils divided at home, the strong man being bound, and his Goods spoiled, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. 1 Thes. 3. 12. Col. 2. 17, 18, 19. The first Priesthood is of the first Covenant, which makes nothing perfect, and stands without, as in Tables of Stone, and divers Ordinances written by Moses, a Minister of that Law which condemns, and yet is glorious in its time, 2 Cor. 37. 8, 9. Heb. 7. 9. The second Priesthood is of the New Covenant, which is written in the Tables of the Heart, by a Mediator of a better Covenant, in which Covenant there is a coming to be presented Perfect in the Head, unto which, by the Ministry of the Word of Life, they come to be joyned, 2 Cor 3. 2, 3. Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 6. The first Priesthood stands in divers Washings and Carnal Ordinances, until the time of Reformation, until which time the outward Ordinances yet standeth, and the outside Worships yet are, which Worship being daily performed, yet the daily comers to these Ordinances are not made perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9. 10. The second Priesthood is Eternal, purging the Conscience from dead Works, whereby also the Spirit of Truth is received, and so the worship in Spirit and in Truth is known, which wor∣ship the Lord delighteth in; and such seek the Lord and find him, and he is merciful to their Iniquities, and their Sin he re∣members no more, but they are blotted out as a thick Cloud: And so being made free from Sin, and become the Servants of Righteousness, then Fruit and Service is brought forth and per∣formed unto God, well-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 9. 14. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Rom. 6. 22.
The first Priesthood stands in divers and carnal Offerings for Sin, and Confessions of Sin Morning and Evening, and yet the Sin not taken away, Heb. 7. 22. Ch. 10. 1. & 11. The second Priesthood stands in one offering for Sin, where∣by the Sin is taken away, Zach. 13. 1. 1 John 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5. Ron. 6. 2. & 7. & 18. Heb. 10. 17. Under the first Priesthood the Vail is over the Heart, and they that are there cannot see to him that is the end of the Law, who is made under the Law, to redeem them that are under the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15. Under the second Priesthood the Vail is rent, and the broken Heart is known, with whom God is; and so him that is entred within the Vail is seen, even him that is the end of the Law and the Prophets, Heb. 9. 24. Ch. 10. 20. The first Priesthood hath the Shewbread, which the carnal Eye may see, and the natural Man perceive; and so the Worship stands in outward shew, in some form and place where the Life is not, and such may worship they know not what, being not come to the Truth which makes free to worship in, Heb. 9. 1, 2. John 4. 22. The second Priesthood hath the Bread of Life which comes down from Heaven, and gives Life; the which Bread being not in outward shew, was not only hid from the Scribes and Pharisees, who had the Oracles of God outwardly, but also from them that pro∣fess Christ without them only; for there is a time wherein Christ is known after the Flesh, therefore saith Christ, He that is with you shall be in you, John 14. 17. Ch. 6. 35. & 60. The first Priesthood, though made by a Law of God, which Law stands outwardly, the Priests being Ministers of the Law and not come to Christ, but now the Priests are out of his Do∣ctrine, Mat. 23. and so are found themselves Transgressors of the same Law which they teach to others; therefore the Lord declares against such, saying, Wherefore ye Priests, this Command∣ment is for you; If you will not hearken, I will send a Curse upon you, and I will Curse your Blessing, and spread the Dung of your solemn Assemblies upon your Faces, Mal. 2. 1, 2, 3. Mich. 3. 10, 11. Jer. 10. 21. Hosea 6. 9. Isa. 56. 9, 10, 11, 12. R. 2. 21, 22, 23, 24.
The Ministry of the second Priesthood witnesseth the Righ∣teousness of the Law fulfilled within, and so comes to the free∣dom from the Law of Sin and Death, and so comes to receive a Blessing from God, not a Curse Rom. 7. 6. Chap. 8. 2, 3, 4. Heb. 6. 7. The first Priesthood, who offers daily for the Poeple and them∣selves, thought it be much, and consisteth in many Words and outward Ceremonies, yet this is not able to make him that doth in Perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, but the Guilt re∣maineth still upon the Conscience both of him and his followers, Heb. 9. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. & 14. The second Priesthood, who hath forever Perfected them that are Sanctified, he is of the heavenly Mansion, of the which there are many in the Fathers House, whose House are we, who are of the Body, which is the Church, which is raised up by the Mini∣stry of the second Priesthood, to sit together with Christ in the Heavenly places, where the Unclean cannot come; but the li∣ving Service and Prayers are offered up through the Eternal Spirit, Ephes. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. Chap. 6. 2. Heb. 3. 6. John 14. 2, 3. The first Priesthood and its Ministry consisted in reading of the Law that was written in Tables of Stone, and Writings which are without, and in preaching of Moses in the Synagogues every Sabbat-day, the Vail being over the Heart, and the end of the Law not seen, nor him known that's made under the Law, Acts 15. 21. 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15, &c. The second Priesthood and its Ministry consisteth in mini∣string Life to the Seed in Prison, and opening the Prison-doors, that the Seed of Abraham may spring out of the barren Womb, and feel the Power of the Son of God breaking down that which the Law had power over, and so to bring to him that is the end of the Law, and to behold with open Face the Glory of him that takes away the Sin, and brings in everlasting Righteousness, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Dan. 9. 24. 2 Cor. 3. 18. The first Priesthood had the Letter, but afterward resisted the Holy Ghost, yet profess Moses and the Prophets Writings, and make a Gain thereby, but resist the Holy Ghost and the Spirit of Prophesie, the Heart being Uncircumcised, Acts 7. 51, 52. Jude 11.
The second Priesthood and its Ministry is of the Spirit, with the power of the Holy Ghost, and the same. Spirit that guided Moses and the Prophets, and all the holy men of God, and so comes to that from whence that was given forth, which was preached in the Synagogues every Sabbath-day, Isa. 44. 3. Isa. 59. 21. 2 Pet. 11. 21. In the time of the first Priesthood the Cherubims cover the Mercy-seat, and the Lord communeth with him that is the Mi∣nister of the Law above the Mercy-seat, which Mercy-seat be∣ing both covered and under, and the People being both stiff∣necked and hard hearted: So the Power stands above ministring the Law, which is to judge and cut down that which causeth the hardness of the Heart, which is covered with the Vail through the transgression of the Law, under which the Mercy-seat is, and the Testimony lieth under it, Exod. 25. 31. Let him that readeth understand, Matth. 24. 15. Heb. 9. 5. In the time of the second Priesthood the Testimony and Wit∣ness of God is raised up, and the Mercy-seat opened, and the hardness of Heart broken, and so the Wall that's separated be∣tween him: and his Testimony comes to be broken down, and the Fountain of living Mercies opened, and the Soul refreshed with the hidden Manna; so the Seed of Abraham comes to be raised up through the Vail by the power of him who is the living Minister within the Vail, made under the Law, to redeem the Soul from under the Law; and so as this is read in the work of it, and so felt and understood, the Promise of the second Co∣venant, under the Ministry of the second Priesthood, is wit∣nessed, even as it is written, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 8. to the end. Chap. 9. 12. Isa. 57. 15. In the time of the first Priesthood there is much talking of the Ordinances, and many are pleading from the Letter for the Ordinances, which say, They are to last forever, (as Circumcision was) and also many are crying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord; and yet the Temple is made [by such] a den of Thieves, and a habitation of Dragons, and wild subtil devouring Beasts of the Field, who have stollen up another way (in the Serpents wisdom) than by Christ the Light and the
Door, and so resist the Holy Ghost, being yet in their Sins, and their Faith vain, and their Minds and their Consciences being defiled, and they not come to the Doctrine of Repentance, the Mountains being not leveled, and the burning Light not felt, nor the Wilderness not yet found, nor the way opened for the Seed, neither yet seen him that takes away the Sin of the World; and yet such are crying, The Ordinances, The Ordinances, and the Commands, which say, they are to last to the end of the World; and yet they themselves not come to the beginning of the World, nor to feel the power of the Word separating the Light from the Darkness, nor yet to feel the entrance into the true Circumci∣sion; and so the Vail remains over the Heart that they cannot see to the end of the Commands, Figures and Ordinances, which are a shadow of good things to come, but the End and Substance is Christ, the Light, Life, and Corner-stone, at which they stumble, Col. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 21. In the time of the second Priesthood the Kingdom is witnes∣sed, which is not in Words, but in Power, where the proud Boasters are shut out, and the Unclean enters not, nor the vain Janglers, who come with their carnal Weapons from the Let∣ter without, to fight against the Lamb, whose Commands are written in the Heart, where the Holy Ghost is by such resisted, who are not come to the second Ministry, where all things are compleat in him who is the Head, the Beginning and the End, in whom the Circumcision made without Hands is witnessed; so the Vail is taken off the Heart, and the end is seen, even he that takes away the Sin of the World; and so all Trespasses come to be forgiven unto them that are buried in the Baptism, and so dead unto Sin, whereby also the Hand-writing of Ordi∣nances was against us, comes to be blotted out and nailed down to the Cross, whereby the Principalities and Powers are spoiled by the Power of the Word that becomes Flesh, whereby those things that were in shew are triumphed over, and nailed down to the Cross, through which the Life comes to be raised, and so Christ Jesus the Son of God comes to be revealed and made ma∣nifest, being quickned in the Spirit; and so no more to know Christ after the Flesh, but in that which is raised up through the Cross, unto which the shews and shadows of things are nailed
down: So the Doctrines of Baptism and Repentance from dead works are left behind, and those things that are left behind are forgotten, and there is a pressing forwards to Perfection by the Ministry of the second Priesthood, wherein every man is to be presented Perfect in Christ Jesus, in whom there is a growing from Grace to Grace, and a changing from Glory to Glory by the same Spirit, having received of his fulness, Col. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Rom. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Heb. 6. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 22. 2 Cor. 3. 18. In the time of the first Priesthood, the outward Blood was to purifie, the transgression being without, and the law without; And so, here is the outward Washings, with the outward Wa∣ter, and the set dayes of Purification; and these things were to be done often, because of the continual Transgression of that Law which stood without, which came to be fulfilled; and did not Christ Jesus suffer without the Gate, Heb. 9. 23. Col. 2. 23. And the Law being without hath the shadow, and yet not the Image, therefore far short of Christ the Substance, Heb. 10. 1. In the time of the second Priesthood, the heavenly things themselves are purified with better sacrifices then these, Heb. 9. 23. which served to the purifying of the Patterns, and the heavenly things themselves, being purified with the living sacrifice; so the way into the Holyest of all is known, which is not manifest∣ed under the first Priesthood, Heb. 9. 8. And so there is an en∣trance made into the Believers Rest, Heb. 4. 3, & 10. Rev. 14. 13. where the seed of Abraham sits down in the Father's Kingdom, which consisteth of Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost, Rom. 14. 17. and so as there is a coming to feel the Power of the second Ministry, preaching to the spirit in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 24. and so to quicken them that were dead in sin, Ephes. 2. 1. by whose quickning Power the seed comes to be raised up, together with Christ the Head, who sits at the Fa∣thers right Hand in the heavenly places, Ephes. 1. 20. which are purified and prepared for the faithful, Ephes. 2. 5, 6. John 17. 21, 22, 23, 24. And as the heavenly things of the heavenly places are purified, and the entrance into the Rest ministred, so Christ comes to be seen exalted at the Fathers right Hand, in the heavenly places, above all Principalities and Powers (which are spoiled) Christ being the Head over all things, Ephes. 1. 21, 22.
And so there is a ruling over all that which stands in outward show, the which Christ made a show of openly, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2. 15. And if there be a triumphing over these things which are in show, before the entrance into the Holiest of all be made, how much more are the outward shows triumphed over, and the Principalities spoiled, when the way into the Ho∣liest of all is made manifest by the Power of him who is gone into the Heavens, and is on the right hand of God; Angels, Autho∣rities, and Powers being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22. In the time of the first Priesthood, the Rule and Covenant were without; and such as come on further, resist the Spirit within, yet profess the Scriptures without, but resist the Inspi∣ration which gave them forth, and yet are zealous for their Rule without, being yet blind, like Saul, even persecuting them in whom the Spirit of Truth bears rule, which Spirit they being not come unto (to open the Eye, and lead them into all Truth) are found out of thier Rule, which they so much talk of: Read and see James 1. 26. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Tit. 3. 9. Ephes. 4. 29, 30, 31, 32. and ch. 5. 11. 1 John 3. 4. and ch. 2. 4. John 12. 36. Mat. 5. 28, 29, 30, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. and Ch. 23. 26, 27. 1 Tim. 2. 9. 1 Thes. 5. 5, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 13. 11. In the time of the second Priesthood, a measure of the Spirit of Truth is own'd & received within, which whoso follows, walks not in Darkness, John 8. 12. the which leads into all Truth, and orders and rules the Creature in the fear of him who is the God of Order; whereby the strong holds are broken down, and every Thought comes to be subjected unto Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. who rules over all, and upholds all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. who hath given to every man a manifestation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 7. and a proportion of Faith, Rom. 12. 6. Christ being all, and in all, Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11. and as every man hath received Christ, Job 9. 9. so to walk in him Col. 2. 6. according to the same Rule already attained, Mat. 25. 21. and to mind the same things already re∣ceived that is the cause, Phil. 3. 16, 17 and mark them that walk so, and not go beyond the measure of what they have received, but be faithful in it, as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God, Tit. 2. 10. and such as walk according to that Rule, grace, mercy and peace be to them, and to all the Israel of God, 2 Cor. 10. 12, 13. Written by a Servant of Jesus Christ, the only High Priest, and Minister of life, for whose sake he suffers in outward Bonds at Dorchester, this 28th day of the 1st Moneth, 1657. who is despised, persecuted & imprisoned by the World; called, Humphry Smith.
AN ALARUM Sounding forth unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, ASA Warning before the Vials of the Everla∣sting Wrath be poured forth upon them. THe Lord of Hosts, whose Name is Holy, whose Way is Everlasting, whose Truth endureth forever, whose Power is Unlimited, whose Mercy endures forever, whose Judgments are just and true, and all his Ways are equal; whose Presence is Dreadful unto all the Double-minded, whose bright Appearance is as a fierce Whirlwind of Fire, and his Voice as the Terribleness of many Thunders; all the Bowels of the Earth are ript open by the Dread of his Powerful Voice; and all the created Earthly things pass away as if they had not been, be∣cause of the Presence of the Almighty, and the fierce Terror of the Lord of Glory, who is now arising as a Gyant unto the Bat∣tel, and as a mighty man of Valour unto the War, who a long time hath held his peace, and hid his face; But now, saith the Lord, will I arise, and roar like a Lyon, and utter my Voice like a man of War; yea, I will arise as a Lyon out of a Thicket, and a young Lyon out of the Forrest; and I will Thunder from Heaven, and Dark∣ness shall be upon the Earth; and with the Fire of my Jealousie shall the Wicked be consumed, & the Ʋngodly as the Smoke that vanisheth forever. Wherefore come all ye Brambles of the Earth, and gather your selves together, all ye Briars, Thorns and Thistles, and all ye strong Oaks and tall Cedars; yea, all ye fruitless Trees, that
long have cumbred the Ground, behold, the Day is at hand that you shall be consumed forever; and as the Stubble ready dry be∣fore an unquenchable Fire (that is kindled with the Fierceness of the Wind of the Nostrils of the most High) so shall all the Brambles of the Earth be. Wherefore assemble your selves to∣gether, O ye Heathen, and stand up to Judgment, O ye Princes and Rulers of the Earth, and prepare to meet the Lord, whose Trumpet is sounding an Alarum out of the holy Mountain, to gather the whole Host of the Heathen to Battel, and the People who know not God, to the Slaughter of the great King. Arise ye Idol-shepherds, awake, ye Blood-thirsty Rulers, stand up to∣gether, ye fatted Bulls: Let all the wild Horses stand to the Battel, saith the Lord of Hosts, that I may pour out my Indignation like Fire upon them, and Consume them as in a Moment forever, that I may give you Blood to drink, and fill you with Torment for evermore; for thus saith the Lord, Once more more will I arise and Confound mine Ene∣mies, and ease me of mine Adversaries; and I, even I, will fill the Heathen with Horror, and all mine Enemies with the Blackness of Darkness; a Fire will I kindle in the Bowels of the Scornful, and in the Proud shall the Flames burn forever; and all the Earth shall know, that I the Lord, in the midst of them, am Mighty in Power, and that none is able to deliver out of my hand. Therefore shall the Shep∣herds Howl forever, and the Priesthood of England be Con∣founded, and covered with a perpetual Shame; the Nations afar off shall hiss at them, and the Ages to come shall call them Accursed; for the day is at hand, that not a Tongue of all the Dogs of Aegypt shall be lifted up against the Seed, that long hath groaned under the Bondage of cruel Oppressors, who bite with their Teeth, and imagine Evil upon their Beds, and lay Snares for the Souls of the Innocent, and watch for Iniquity to devour the Simple. Therefore shall these things come upon you, an unbelieving Generation, whose Hearts are hardned, Ears stopped and Eyes closed and many of you sealed up unto the great Day of everla∣sting Destruction, which upon you the seed of Evil-doers is steal∣ing unawares: Neither shall you believe the things that are ha∣stening upon you, and declared unto you; for the Prophets and Seers are covered, a deep sleep is upon the bruitish Pastors, and
the Vail is upon the Hearts of all who are under the old Cove∣nant, and many of them are given up to the hardness of their Hearts, and their Consciences are seared, and such have yet a measure of Wickedness to fill up, and then upon them the Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction, shall the Flames of everlasting Burnings be poured forth forever from him that sitteth upon the Throne. Wherefore, Wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth forever, Wo to the Proud and Lofty Ones, Wo to all the Hard Hearted, A∣bominable and Unbelieving, the Devil is come down among you, the old Drogon is Head in you, the God of the World hath blinded your Minds, the subtilty of the Serpent hath de∣ceived you, and now Wo is your Portion, you are undone for∣ever; your King is the Angel of the bottomless Pit; Gog and Magog are your chief Captains; Cain is your Father; Nimrod the mighty Hunter, the builder of Babel, is your elder Brother; the great Whore is your Mother; Ishmael and you are of one House; Pharoah and Haman are your Companions; Judas, the betrayer of the Just, is near unto every one of you: and the Life of the Just crys for Vengeance upon your Head; the glittering Sword of the Most High is drawn to cut you down forever; the Ax to the very Root shall now come, and Root and Branch shall be cut off forever. Wherefore all ye Sorcerers, Witches and Sons of the Whore, with all Blasphemers, who say, you are Jews, and are not come to the true Circumcision, but Servants of Sin, and so the Syna∣gogue of Satan, and all you false Prophets who feed at Jezabel's Table, and not at the Table of the Lord, nor never drunk of the Blood of the New Covenant, to cleanse you from all Sin, but are daily drinking the Cup of Fornication: Now come all together, the Standard of the Lord is lifted up against you, and you shall have to drink forever the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of the everlasting Wrath of the Lord Almighty, and he will plague you with the Beast and the Whore together for evermore, and your Seed shall be cut off the Earth, and your Children from among the Living; your Memorial shall Rot for evermore, and your Name blotted out from under Heaven; and
all that hear of you shall Hiss at you, and an astonishment and a hissing shall you be unto all People. Where are Queen Maryes Judges and Bloody Persecutors, who sought to drive down all by their Devilish power, who were as high in Wickedness and cruel Oppression, as any of you, who are this day thirsting for Blood? Where are your Cardi∣nals, Jesuits, Friars, Monks, Abbots, Abbies and Nunneries? Where are your Altars and Crosses, &c? Even as there hath been an Overturning of these, so shall the Off-spring and Residue follow after; and then shall the Priests howl, and the Lamentation of the Shepherds be heard in all the Land, and the Great men, and the Rich men, and all the Mighty of the Earth shall lament bitterly; for their Tor∣ment shall come in one day, and there shall be none to deliver: Then shall your high places of Worship be left desolate, and the Temple of the Beast destroyed forever, and all the Idols burnt with Fire, and the Abominations of Molech confounded for∣ever, and the Whoredoms of the Whore punished with an everlasting Destruction, and all them that have committed For∣nication with the painted Harlot, shut up in the Bed of Tor∣ment, and in the Wine-press of the ierceness of the Wrath of the Almlghty for evermore. In that Day shall the Songs of your Temples be turned into howling forever, the place of your Worship laid desolate, and the Dung of your solemn Feasts spread upon your Faces; your Rottenness shall appear, and your Unsound parts be made ma∣nifest; the Skirts of the VVhore shall be discovered, and all your Nakedness, that long in secret have committed Fornication with her, shall now appear to your everlasting shame. And this shall come upon you as a Whirl-wind, and overtake you as a Thief in the Night; and when you cry Peace, then shall Destruction upon Destruction come suddainly, and you shall not escape: Torment shall take hold upon you, and Anguish shall seize upon your inward parts, a Fire shall be kindled in your Bowels forever, which shall burn, and none shall quench it. Oh, who shall stand in this Day! or who shall be able to endure the Terror of the Wrath of the Almighty! Surely all
the Ungodly shall be as the Grass that is cut down in the heat of Summer, and all the Unrighteous as Fuel fitted for the Fire. Oh! Whither then will the Sinners fly for Help, or the Wicked for a Refuge? VVhere shall the Lyar stand? or how shall the Proud endure? VVhat shall be the End of them that know not God? And where will they be hid that obey not the Gospel of his Son? Why! certainly into the Lake must they be turned, and with an utter Overthrow shall be condemned forever, as it is written, The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God. Therefore lament, O ye Inhabitants of the Earth, for the Lord is become your Enemy by reason of your Sins; he is rain∣ing Snares as thick as Hail-stones upon you; and the VVise men shall be taken in their own Craftiness, Judges led away Fools, Princes laid in the Dust, Diviners turned Mad, and a Curse will come upon all your goodly things: Y your Glory shall vanish as the Dust, and your Beauty shall be as the Dung upon the Earth: Your Riches shall eat you up as a Moth doth a Garment; your chiefest Delights will be your greatest Torment: For the Lord is making the Earth empty, and Wo to the Inhabitants thereof for evermore; no Deliverer in it shall be found, neither yet any to comfort you; therefore shall the Young man VVeep and VVail, & the Strong man Cry bitterly; In that day the Priests shall Howl, the Honourable Lament, and the Ancient go Mourning all the day long: For the Lord is changing Times and Seasons, and the Iniquity of the People is ascended up, and the remembrance of the VVicked is come before him, and once more will the Lord shake his Hand against the Wicked, as in the day of Sodom, and overturn the Oppressors, as in the day of Pharaoh, and shake the Heavens, the Earth, and the Sea; and this shall be known when the Lord passeth through the Earth with his grounded Staff, and Battels of Shakings. And in that Day shall your solemn Meetings be confounded, your high Places left desolate, and your goodly Temples de∣faced: Bats and Owls shall then build in your Steeple-houses, and they shall be for the Fowls of the Air to lodge in the Night, the unclean Beasts, and Spirits of Devils do, and shall resort thither; a Den for Dogs shall it be made: Your Bells shall come
down after your Organs, and your Temples shattered as the old Abbies; and a perpetual Shame shall come upon all them that have been, and are upholding the outward Temple made with Hands, wherein God dwelleth rot, and they themselves a Den of Thieves, and full of Rotteness: Therefore Astonish∣ment of Heart shall come within, and Destruction and Over∣turnings without, Fear on every hand, and Amazement shall come upon all Flesh; then shall the Vine-dressers be ashamed, and them that preach Peace to the Wicked shall no longer be hid. Wherefore all you that have been Parliament-Members, and all Judges, Mayors, Justices and Constables, and all other Offi∣cers and People whatsoever, that have been upholding the Wick∣ed and oppressing the Just, and have been hatching Mischief against, and acting all manner of Cruelty you could invent upon the Servants of the Most High God; behold, the Lord will kindle a Fire in your Bowels which shall burn in the Night-season, and with all your striving against it, and vain hopes, shall you not be able to quench it; and when you should go to your Graves in Peace, even then shall the Pangs of Hell lay hold upon you, and utter Darkness shall compass you in on every side: Oh! Fierce, Furious, and with unspeakable Violence will the Plagues of God come rolling in upon youWhen I was sick in Prison, for a long time so weak, as neither I, nor any Friend then with me, ever know any one, and recover strength in the Body again; at which time I gave up my Life, and took my leave of Friends, and lay down in the Fathers love not feeling sorrow or pain, Friends hardly then knowing whether I breathed or not; in which time I saw things un∣utterable: And though Heaven was opened, & two Angels by my sides to bear me away into everlasting Rest, yet was I left only for this end, For the work of the Lord amongst the Sons of men for a time; and so came into the Body again, having seen before the way that all the Wicked shall go out And this I eternally witness to e true; and now this Paper is written as a Warn∣ing from the Lord by one that came as from the Dead, and yet many of you will not believe like the unmerciful migh∣ty Waves of the Sea, Which none can stop; For verily and plainly I have seen the way that all the Wicked shall go, and the place that they shall abide forever, and none of their greatness in the world shall save them from it. And I have seen the place where the Innocent (whom you hate) and all that dye in the Lord shall sleep in the Infiniteness of fulness of
the Fountain of the Fathers unspeakable Mercy, and unlimited Love, where they shall rest in the fullness of God forever and ever; and the entrance thereinto is easier, and more to be desi∣red, than to fall into a sleep, (the sting of Death being taken away:) And this I know, and testifie what I have seen, and so warn all you (the Enemies of the Lamb's dear Members, and your own Souls) of the day that is coming upon you, and the Vials of Wrath that therein will be poured forth upon you, who when have felt Torment in your selves, have then let Wrath arise up in you, whereby you have been filled with Envy against a harmless People, upon whom then (to get ease of that Tor∣ment) you have acted that Cruelty, which afterwards the Light of Christ in your own Consciences hath condemned you for, and the same will condemn all you forever that Repent not. And these things will certainly come to pass, and then shall all the Heathen know, that the Lord is the same that ever he was, and that he hath heard the Cry of the Oppressed, and seen the Affliction of his People, and taken notice of all your secret Con∣trivances against them who are born of, and led by the Spirit, who are as the sound of the Wind unto you, that know not whence they come, nor whither they go, who now suffer by you with Christ, and shall reign with him forever and ever, when he who is their Life, shall appear to confound Zion's Enemies forever, and overturn the very Foundations of the Wicked, though never so great and high, and bring down the Mighty from their Ungodly Seats, and overturn the Inventions of the Wicked, and pour forth Everlasting Judgment upon the Beast, and all them that bear his Mark, or worship his Image: And when the Whore shall have Blood to drink, and the Mouthes of her Merchants stopt forever, and all them that love and make Lyes their Refuge, with all the Unclean and Unbelieving (who receive Honour one of another) and all the Blood-thirsty turned into the Lake, then shall Righ∣teousness spread over the Nations as the Morning-due, and Holi∣ness as the Light of the Sun in Summer, and Judgment run down as Water, and Peace spring up as a Fountain that overflows and is never dry. In that day shall the poor of the Flock be gathered, and the Out∣casts of Israel return; Deliverance shall come to the Captives,
and Joy to them that have Mourned; the Wilderness shall then rejoyce, and the Desart be glad for evermore; Springs shall a∣rise in the Desart, and a Fountain shall be opened in the Wilder∣ness; the Standerd of the Lord shall be lifted up on High, the scattered in the Desart, and the Meek of the Earth shall flow unto it: Nations shall turn unto the Lord of Hosts, and People be gathered to the Banner of the Most High; they shall feed toge∣ther as the Lambs in the Morning, and be satisfied as the Flock in Summer; and then shall Zion's Mourners be comforted and filled with Joy forever; then shall they shout aloud for Joy, with Ha∣lelujah for evermore, when the Smoke of the Torment of the Whore (her Lovers and her Brats) ascends up as the Smoke of Sodom forever and ever. Then shall Glory; Honour and Praise arise from them that were beheaded for the Testimony of Jesus, the Light of the World, and unto him that sitteth upon the Throne; and the captives shall come out of their Captivity, and the Prisoner out of the Pit; and every Bond-man shall be set at Liberty, and those that are at ease and Liberty in the Flesh, shall be Bound with Chains of Everlasting Darkness forever and ever, and they shall be torment∣ed day and night in the presence of the holy Angles, and in the presence of the Lamb (who is Light) even all them who will not that he should reign, who is the Lamb & the Light; and then shall they see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who wandered up and down, and were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth; these, with all their Seed then shall they see in the Kingdom and Dominion of God, and they themselves shut out; and so the Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus shall they know fulfilled. Wherefore Wo, Wo, Wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and all you the Enemies of the Lamb, by reason of the Judg∣ments that are yet to come; for your Proud Flesh, which is as the Flesh of Horses, shall be as Dung upon the Earth, and your Flesh is to be given unto the Fowls of the Air to feed upon; for the Day of the great Slaughter is at hand, and the Battel of the great King shall be set in order, and every Battel of the Warrier is with confused Noise, and Garments rolled in Blood; but this shall be with Burning and Fuel of Fire, and Blood shall all them
have to drink, who are found in Babel the great Whore, that long have made the great men of the Earth Rich, in whom the Blood of all the Saints is found, from Abel unto this day, wherein she and her Children are thirsting for the Blood of all them who believe in the Light. Written upon the seventh and eight dayes of the 2d Moneth, by him who suffers by some of Gogs Army in the House of Correction, and common-Goal of Hampshire, with the rest of the Lambs of Christ, who is the Captain of my Salvation, who hath armed me with the whole Armour of God, and clothed me with the Armour of Light, whereby he hath enabled me to stand in the day of Battel against all the Fiery Darts of the Devil, and the Oppressions of Pharoah's Host; and yet have nothing to Glory in, but in the Lord, having received all from him, who teacheth my Hands to War, and my Fingers to Fight, and that not with Carnal Wea∣pons, but with Spiritual, and deny all Carnal Fightings, Qurrel∣lings and Wars, that ariseth from the Lust, and learneth of him who maketh War in Righteousness, and joyns with him in the Battel against the false Prophet, the Whore and the Beast, and all those that have his Mark in the Hand, or in the Fore-head, who rise up against them that have their Father's Name written in their Fore∣heads, who is Light, in whom I have believed, and by whom do ex∣pect Deliverance in his due time (with all his suffering Seed) out of outward Bonds, in the which I bear my Testimony against all his E∣nemies, without Respect of Persons, or Flattering Titles to any, but in Love to the Souls of all, though never so Dreadful to that in all, which doth the Soul destroy; to the which I am never to be recon∣ciled, but stand a Witness against, until the Just under that arise and witness for me, whose Love is only to the Seed of God in all, by which I am known, read and understood, in the Light: and of the other, called, Humphery Smith.
A Sad and Mournful LAMENTATION For the People of these Nations, but especially for the Priests and Leaders of them; and the more because of that which is coming to pass. And let all People read it (and let it have entrance into their Hearts) in the fear of God; for it is of much Concern∣ment both for Priests, Rulers and all People, it being the deep Meditations of my Mind, and the true Openings with the Light, and Revelation of God in my Heart, sundry times when my Spirit hath had secret conference with the Lord, at such times as I have been absent from men, or in the Night season, in a true Mournful state of Pity towards the Souls of all Mankind, for the Eternal good whereof this is written. In Winchester-Prison, and House of Correction, being a colse Prisoner in a filthy Hole, the 16th day of the 11th Moneth, 1658. by me that have him to be my Life, who is a man of Sorrows; that of men am called, Humphry Smith. MAny Dayes and Nights, and Times, and Seasons, for many Weeks and Moneths, of late Years, have ma∣ny deep and serious Considerations been in me, and many Meditations in my Mind and Heart, in the true fear of the living God, and often times in quietness (waiting on the Lord God of Abraham) hath my Spirit had secret and private, yet plain Conference with the Lord, concerning the Teachers and Leaders of the People, even the Hireling Priests of England (and other Nations) and the Followers of them. And when I have weighed all in an equal Ballance, I have found that it hath been
in pure Love to the Souls all Mankind, and without Prejudice or Envy to them, their Bodies or Persons, as they are the Crea∣tures of God; and the eternal Witness of God, in his Covenant of Life, hath, and doth, and will justifie me herein forever. And when I have looked back upon the Teachers, and seen what a stir and a noise is made among them about God and Christ, and Faith in his Blood, and Redemption and Justification by him, and all proceeding from that nature in them, which is at Enmity with God: And when I have seen how many Thousand Thousands, and Hundreds of times ten Thousands following of them, and Contending, Fighting, Stoning, Whipping and Imprisoning for them, and are guided, or rather blinded by them: And when I have seen what care is taken for them, and to uphold them, by the great Rulers of the Nations, even Protector, Coun∣cil, Parliaments and Justices (besides many Thousands of bruitish People that are stoning and fighting for them) that they might be upheld and maintained, yea, even in Excess and Fulness, from the Peoples hard Labours: And when I have seen how many Hundred Thousand Pounds every year, they have received from the People: And when I seen, that notwithstanding all this, the People are still in Transgression, and so under the Wrath of God, and yet know not how to come out of their Sin, which se∣parateth from God, but that many Thousands dye in their Sins, and many more are pleading for Sin, and many end their dayes in a Bed of Torment, gasping, strugling, grovelling and raig∣ing in unquietness, under the horrible Terrors of the unutter∣able fierce Indignation of the Wrath of the Almighty, and so go down into the Pit forever, as many have done, not knowing a resting place in the peaceable stillness of God's Covenant of Life and Peace. Oh! when (I say) I have beheld, and deeply considered these things, and many more which might be named, and seri∣ously pondered them in my Heart, from a true sense of God's Pity to the precious Souls of all Mankind; and from a true Un∣derstanding of the Terrible Wos, VVrath, Horor and Perplerity of Spirit that then comes upon such who thus due in their Sins, not reconciled to God, even then hath my heart been broken within me, and mine Eyes as Fountains of Tears,
and a sad Lamentation night and day hath come upon me, and a true Mrning for the slain of the People, who thus are cut off from God, and separated from the Land of the Living. O Wo is me! because of these things my Soul hath been oppressed, and my Spirit grieved; and to the Lord alone hath a grievous Cry ascended up, and I have said, Oh that I could Mourn and Weep yet more in secret because of these things! And when I have looked upon the Priests and People, I have seen plainly and truly from the Lord God, That the Spirit of Error and Ignorance in them, hath been and is the very cause of all this Disorder, & Soul-Perishing state, that is in and upon the Sons of men, and their continuance therein; then hath my Spirit said within me, The Soul that sinneth it must dye, but the Lord will re∣quire their Blood at the hands of those that have caused them to Err: And the Lord hath said unto me concerning these Priests and Teachers, My hand is against them. And when I have looked farther back, and considered them who were made Ministers by a known Law of God, that they were declared against by the Spirit of Prophesie, and that they were such Shepherds that could not understand, being greedy, and could never have enough, Isa. 56. 10, 11. and that they were bruitish Pastors, Jer. 10. 21. and as Murderers, and Troops of Robbers; and that the Lord had cursed their Blessings, and made them base and contemptible in the Eys of the People, Mal. 2. Then said I, Ah! what state then are these men in, who are not made Ministers by a Law of God, neither yet sent forth by Christ, Mat. 10. but are out of his Doctrine, Mat. 23. and so Enemies unto him, being known by their Fruits, Mat. 7. 15, 16. and are made Ministers by the Will of men, and upheld by carnal corrupt Laws, and the Imprisoning of hundreds that are come out from them, that we may not partake in the Plagues with them, who are seen to be of Babel, Rev. 18. 4. in whom is found the Souls of men, and the Blood of all the Saints, from Abel unto this day; and they have been upheld by the devouring of Widdows Houses, the robbing of the Fatherless, the spoiling of the Goods of Hundreds, the Imprisoning of many until Death, the Rifling, and Robbing of whole Houses, as may be witnessed in the Coun∣ty of Kent (by a Paper entituled, A Horrible thing, and the Re∣cord
of Sufferings for Tythe and many other parts in the Nation: And when I have beheld these things, I have said in mine Heart, Those Ministers (or rather Deceivers) are far short, and much worse than them in the Prophets dayes, who were made Mini∣sters by a Law of God, though they became as Robbers and Murtherers. And then have I also lamented the hard hearted blindness of many Rulers, in these dayes, who have been worse in their per∣secuting of those, who from the Spirit of God do declare against these Ministers made by the Wills of men, than the Rulers in the dayes of the Prophets, who did not so Persecute them, that declared against those who were made Ministers by a Law of God: And surely, I have said, did not these Priests bewitch the Rulers that they cannot obey the Truth? Gal. 3. And so cause them to obey them, or be as it were Slaves or Pack-horses to them, even making their boast in Print, that they are still spurring on the Magistrate, as Richard Baxter, Priest of Kidderminster, hath written. But I say, were not the Magistrates blinded by them, and therefore uphold them by their corrupt Laws, even giving them Treble Damages, they would soon fall and come to nought; for they are already fallen under the Magistrates, and come creeping to them in the Serpents Wisdom, upon their Bellies, which is their God, for more Dust, or Earthly Trea∣sure, Money, Goods, and Earthly things: But the Bishops and the Priests in their dayes, were exalted above the Magistrates; and the Priests have yet that Spirit of Pride, from which they write, as if they rid upon the Magistrates, and spurred them like Horses; and this hath been so, but it may be otherwife: And I have seen how the Beast, the Whore and the false Prophet uphold one another, and ride one upon another, and the Priests spurring up the Magistrates (its their own words) and all making War with them that are sanctified, rising up against them that are anointed, who need none to teach, and compassing about them whom God hath loved, who are of the City where the Lamb is the Light, and need not the light of the Sun nor the Moon. And when I have thus pondered the state and condition both of Priests, Rulers and People, and compared them and their state with the Priests, Rulers and People in the dayes of the
Prophets, and seeing the condition of these to be much worse, and many things more that might be named, and that the latter end of many is like to be miserable; and that the Name of God is blasphemed by such, who say they are Christians, and are not, like them, Rev. 2. 9. and that they are in the Blasphemy, though Rich men, who do oppress the Poor in Spirit, and cause them to be drawn before the Judgement-Seats, James 2. 6, 7. even then hath the consideration of these things often times brought a deep Mourning upon me, and Sorrow hath filled my Heart. But when on the other hand, I have seen the Work of the Lord secretly going on in a hidden manner, opening the Eyes and Understand∣ing of many Rulers in the Nation; and that many who are, and have been in Authority amongst Men, and in the Army (have al∣ready, and) are believing in him who said, I am the Light, and is the Lord of Glory, though as a Lamb dumb, and a man of Sorrows, not pleading his own Cause, nor having whereon to lay his Head, but Sick and in Prison; and that many devout and honourable Women, (as in Acts 17. 12.) are also coming, and come to the Faith which purifies the Heart, and Respects no mans Person, without which Faith in the Heart walked by, its impossible to please God. And when the Eye of my Mind hath been fixed upon that Object, then hath my Soul magnified the Lord therein, and my Spirit hath rejoyced because of him that bringeth, and is bring∣ing Salvation; and because of Righteousness, Peace and true Judgment that the Lord is setting up over all, in the Hearts of many Rulers, and Devout and Honourable among the People, that in Righteousness, throught Humility, they may come to be renowned with Honour forever. These things on that hand (and much which is coming to pass for an Everlasting Good among the People, and is revealed in the Light and Fore-knowledge of God) hath given some ease to my Wounded and Troubled Spirit, and the Refreshings of my Father's Love hath bound me up in the Covenant of Life, with the tender Seed in those whom the Lord is drawing by his Love, through Humility, to the durable Honour and Riches which will never fade: Surely herein hath my Soul been made as a watred Garden, with the Influences of my Father's Love, so that living
Praises over all hath ascended up to him, whose Name is blessed for evermore, because he worketh, and none can let him. But when I have looked back again upon the Priests, and the many hundred Thousand Souls, that are kept in the Witchcraft (Gal. 3.) Rebellion, (Job 24. 13.) gain-saying, blindness and ignorance, and the daily murthering of the Souls of so many, then because of the Shepherds, who destroy the Flock, there hath been in me a Lamentation, and a Cry: Oh the Priests, the Priests! surely Vengeance is prepared of God for them, Wrath, Indignation, Cursing, (Mal. 2. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 14.) Bitterness, Tor∣ment, Perplexity, Astonishment of Heart, Endless Misery and Shame amongst men, from the wrathful Vengance of the wrath∣ful Terrors of God, will come upon them in a Day unaware, and their Houses shall be left unto them desolate; and they shall become a By-word among the People, as I have already writ∣ten, from the dreadful Indignation of the Lord God of Hosts, in a Book entituled, An Alarum, even so shall it come to pass upon them; behold, it is hastning the Lord God of Hosts hath spoken it, and his Word shall not fail, neitheir shall his Decree be changed. And when these things have come upon me, even as a Flood of mighty Waters, then have I said in the Grief of my Heart, alas for the Priests! The Priests, even the Leaders of the Peo∣ple, where will they hide themselves in this day of sierce Wrath, and siery Indignation from the Jealous God of Majesty that is near at hand? Oh! how will Shame cover their Faces? and how will their Countenances fall like Cain? and how will they Curse like Shimei, even their God (and their King) who is the God of the World (and their Belly is their God?) and how will they seek Repentance with Tears like Esau, who might have said, He was of Abraham? And how will they Repent too late like Judas, who had obtained part of the Ministry, Acts 1. 17. and yet denyed him that was the Light, and betrayed him who comes to make an end of Sin, and was a Devil, and hanged him∣self, and yet had obtained part of the Ministry. Alas for the Priests of England! Are not they worse then Judas? Did not he bring again and restore the Silver which he had taken? And can the Priests of England do so? Nay, they have wasted it up∣on
the Lust and Pride, even abundance; so that if they them∣selves, and all that they have left, with their Wives and Chil∣dren, should be sold at the utmost value (though I not desire it should be so) yet thereby could they not restore the tenth part, nor one part in a hundred, of the Silver which they have taken; nor bring again the Money, as Judas did, which they have gained. Therefore have I said, Surely a sad Day will come upon them, when they become a By-word, and a hissing to all People, and are turned out of their Parsonages, Glebe-Lands, Tythes, Treble Damages, and old Mass-Houses, as their Fathers the Bishops, and Deans, and Quiresters, and Singing-Men and Boys, were turned out of their Pomp and Pride, vain Glory, Covetousness, Exaction and Tyranny, and out of their Bishop∣ricks, Denaries, and the like: And when also that Gods Wit∣ness shall arise in them to confound them within, and the Light of Christ condemn them for their Deceit and Hypocrisie, Ty∣ranny, Pride, Idleness, fulness of Bread, Extortion, and all manner of Wickedness; Oh the Priests, the Priests have said, What a Day will this be unto them! Surely then, as I said, and say again, That the Shepherds shall Howl, and a bitter Lamenta∣tion of the Priests shall be heard in all the Land, yea, the noise of their bitter Cry soundeth already in my Heart; and behold, I have seen their Wo, which is near at hand, their Wives also shall be left as Widdows, and their Children as Fatherless, and from the pitiful Benovelence of the People must they be kept from Perishing in their Bodies; but alas for their Souls! who shall deliver them? And herein moreover is their State and Condition the more Miserable, because they will not regard this, neither would they at all be warned by them whom the Lord hath sent amongst them; and because they will not see when the hand of the Lord is lifted up, neither regard the Word of his Power, therefore for their Envy to the Lords People shall they be ashamed, Isa. 26. 11. that upon them it may be fulfilled, which is written, Behold, I work a Work in your days, ye Despisers, which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you, Acts 13. 41. Therefore have I considered, in the very depth of my secret Meditations, what shall be said or done in these things, when
the Priests have violated the Law, and made void that which is Perfect, and the Leaders of the People rebel against the Light, Job 24. 31. and harden their Hearts against Reproof, and will not be warned, that they might escape the Dreadful day at hand; therefore have I said, Ah! surely the Lord will root them up, Head and Tail, Branch and Root in one day: Ah! fruitless Trees, said I, have not you your selves yet brought forth the first Fruits of the Spirit, which is Love? And are not ye your selves yet come to that which fulfills the Law of God, to wit, Love? And are not all without it as sounding Brass, having the Tongues, and the like, making a Noise among the People, like sounding Brass, and pleasing their Fancies as tinkling Cimbals, 1 Cor. 13. And have you been all this while sowing to the Flesh? And are you the men who deny him that makes an end of Sin, and his Blood which cleanseth from all Sin, and the Faith which purisieth the Heart? And are you the men who deny the true Light of him, who said, I am the Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the World? Are you the men that deny the Son of God, and will ye not that he should reign, that is of the Seed of Abraham who wandered up and down? And is it you that are saying one to another, and to the Rulers of the Earth, concerning him that is the Light, This is the Heir, come let us Kill him? And would you not that he should Rule, who condemns Sin, and saveth his People from thir Sins, and maketh an end of Sin? Surely, have I said, even therefore will the Lord reward you, according to the Fruit of your own Ways; and as you have denyed him, so must you be condemned by him that is the Light, Job. 3. 19. And as you have been, and yet are (with Pilate, and others) of Babel, in the many Languages and Tongues, upon which the Whore sits; and as you have been, and yet are of the Nations, which are drunk with the Wine of the Fornication of the Whore, the great Whore, Mystery Babylon, that sits upon many Waters, and hath corrupted the Earth; and as you have been drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and made rich by the Robbing and Spoiling of the Houses and Goods of many (even as Troops of Robbers, Hos. 6. 9. Forty in one Troop lately at Dorchester, feeding their Belly, their God.) And as you have devoured Widdows Houses, and been drunk with the Wine of the Fornication of the Whore,
and the Blood of Saints; even so shall you have Blood to drink, and even so must you drink the Cup of Astonishment, and fierce Indignation of the Lord God Almighty, and he will plague you false Prophets, with the Whore together, and the Beast and you must be taken alive, and cast into the Lake of Fire which burn∣eth forever and ever. And when I have waited to see the end of these things, and pondered this in my Heart, in the Uprightness of Innocency and pure Simplicity of God; then hath it been said in me, Where then will the Memorial of this Priesthood of these Nations, who came up since the Apostles days, and were descended from the Bishops, that were commissionated by the Pope, and established by the See of Rome! And what a Howling, and a bitter Lamen∣tation will come upon many in that day, when Mystery Babylon, the Mother of all these painted Harlots, comes to be overturned forever? How then will the Great men, and the Rich men, and the Mighty Ones of the Earth, Mourn and Lament, because of the Desolation of the Whore (with whom they have all along committed Fornication) and to see these her Children (the painted Harlots, the Priests of England, who are covered with Saints words) even dashed to pieces with the Light, which is the Stone that is falling upon them, to grind them to Powder? Alas! alas! say they, how many were made Rich? And how many of our Children were like to be made Rich by being bred up under the Skirts of this Woman, who hath a Golden Cup in her Hand, holding it forth to all that will come to her? And how many young men began to love her? Pov. 7. Alas! say they, were not many of our Children looking at the Golden Cup, and and growing up under her Wing at Oxford and Cambridge, and in divers other Schools and Nurseries, where the Languages and Tongues are, even Multitudes, upon which the Whore sits, Rev. 18. 1, 15. who hath the Golden Cup, at which the Kings, and the Great Ones of the Earth have drunk abundantly! And must this Woman be laid Desolate? And must her Children be dash∣ed to pieces against the Stone? (the Light) therefore is the Cry great, and the Lamentation will be grievous, when the Ini∣quity is come to the full, the Sin ripe unto Judgment, the Beast fully fatted for the Day of Slaughter, and that come to pass,
which is haning suddenly, though few can receive these things (unexpected by many) revealed in me, and the more are they, and many other People hardened and blinded herein, because the Priests are so high, so great, and so strong, and upheld by the strength of such Laws, even exceeding and doubling in their Power and Authority, the Laws that were made for the upholding of their Predecessors, the Jesuites and Popish Priests, in the dayes of Queen Mary, whose Law was but three Moneths Imprisonment, and now it is six; and then the Law was but for the Tythes, and now it is three times as much, and so they are more higher exalted than ever, and our Task is doubled and trebled upon us; and besides, they cry out, We are Idle, and wander up and down. But let me Reason a little; Was it not suddenly after their Bon∣dage in Aegypt was doubled, that the Lord overturned the migh∣ty strength of the Oppressors forever? and was not the cry of the oppressed great, because the Task was doubled upon them, who were in Bondage before? And were we not before in Bondage, under Bishops, and Priests, and Kings, and Tythe, and is it now double and trebled? And is the little finger of the Priests be∣come heavier then the Bishops loyns? And will not God visit for these things? And doth not this shew that the day of Over∣turning is at hand? But say people, How can these things be, they seeming to be established more then ever? Yet I reason again with such; Who would before-hand have believed, that the Bishops, who were far greater then they, should have come tumbling down so soon, with perpetual Shame and Reproach; and their Common-Prayer-books taken away, with the Priests Idolatrous Surplices, and manv such things? And hath the Lord began with them the Head? And will he not go on to finish his Work, in Confounding, and utter Overturning the Tail and Dreggs of them which are yet left behind, and are like unto unnatural chil∣dren, denying their Parents, the Bishops and the Pope; and yet creep into their Mass-houses, and live upon the same Main∣tenance, which their Parents provided for them, and yet call the Pope, Antichrist, (and he is so) their great Father, who set up the Bishops, that established them in their Tythe, 'Parsonages and old Mass-houses; and so the Pope being an Antichrist, and
they come from the Bishops, set up by the Pope, then it follows, that they are the Dreggs of Antichrist; and if their own words, Writings, Way, Maintenance and Practices be but as it is, and doth appear, then herein I do them no wrong: And these things have I also thus considered, and leave to the consideration of such, who are not willing to remain in blindness, that seeing the Bishops are overturned, though they were above the Magi∣strates, the Priests may also soon be turned down by the Magi∣strates, seeing they are fallen under the Magistrates already; and they set them up, and put them in, and turn them out at their pleasure, and may soon turn them down when they are weary of being spurred by them. And as I have considered these things in the meditations of my Mind, so have I also considered the Words and Wayes of these Priests of England, Ireland, Scotland, and other Nations, and what ado and a stir they have kept, against those Priests that caused Christ to be crucified; and how he suffered by them: And when I have weighed and considered the Actions of them Priests that did so, and the Words and Actions of these Priests, against them Priests, and the Ways of one and the other, I have then found, that these, in many things, are worse then them, though they were very bad; and so both to be denyed, as I have considered according to Scripture: Thus; The Priests, the Readers of the Law, which discovers Sin, but makes nothing Perfect, and the Scribes and Pharisees had the Scriptures, and a large zealous Profession thereby, but when Christ the living Minister came, who was the thing, or the Sub∣stance of which the Scripture declared, from which they had the Profession; he being come, they knew him not; and therefore for a time the Scribes, Pharisees and Priests disputed, reasoned and contended with him, and sought to entangle him in his words, and did seek occasion against him, that they might de∣liver him to the Rulers, and he disputed among the Doctors; but when much People believed on him, they cryed out, The whole World is gone after him, John 12. 19. Mat. 22. 15. But when he, who is the Power of God, had raised Lazarus from the dead, and out of the Grave, then the chifest of the Priests and Phari∣sees held a Council against him; then they began to stir, and the
Beast began to rage; and they said, This man doth many Miracles, and if we let him alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans will come, and take away both our Place and Nation, John 11. 47, 48. And so saith the Priests now; If we let him alone, who is the Light, all men will believe on him, and we shall loose both our Place and Nation; for who will fight for us (say they) if all men come to believe in the Light? which lets men see that Wars and Fighting comes from the Lust, which Lust wars against the Soul, James 4. But one of their own Generation, even a chief Priest, told the rest, They knew nothing at all, John 11. 49. (the Priests who deny the Light know nothing at all) and so these chief Priests and Pharisees, who knew nothing at all, sought the Life of the Lamb, and to take him, verse 57. And the chief Priests also consulted to put Lazarus to Death also, John 12. 10. And so, the Priests now seek to kill that which Christ the Light, the Power of God, hath raised from Death, out of the Grave; for now the very thing it self is come to Life out of Death, and this Torments them exceedingly, even more then all the Words, Forms, Dis∣puting and Professions whatsoever that was before it. And it was at the Passover, the Worship and Feast of the Jews that the Priests sought to kill him that had raised the dead. And when Jezabel, whose blood the Dogs must lick, at whose Ta∣ble the false Prophets feed, when she intended to murther the Just, and take away the Life of the Innocent, and give his Pos∣session to another, she made a Feast, and that which feasteth the one thing, Murthers the other: And at the Jews Feast, the one or the other was to be releast; and at the time that they keep the Passover, who are the Jews outwardly, then he suffers who is the end of the Law and the Prophets; and so at the Feast of their Passover the chief Priests sought to kill him that was led as a Lamb dumb, and Satan entered in Judas, and after that, then Judas went out from Christ the Light; and when he went out it was Night, and then was the Son of man to be glorified; but Judas who went out from him that is the Light, went to the chief Priests and Captains; and they were glad when Judas was come among them, who was a Devil, and the chief Priests made a Covenant with him that was a Devil, and gave him Mo∣ney to betray him who is the Light; And he that took the Mo∣ney.
had obtained part of the Ministry, and he was a Devil; and now such Ministers that take both the Money, Body and Goods, are worse then Judas, whom the Priests say, was a Bishop, (or a chief Priest) because it is written, His Bishop-rick let another take, Acts 1. 20. And suddainly after the chief Priests, had made a Covenant with him that was a Devil, was the Jews Passo∣ver, at which time, he that comes to make an end of Sin was betrayed, and then Judas (who departed from him that is the Light, and was become a Devil) betrayed the Son of God, and had him led away to Ciaphas the High-Priest, and the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Council sought false witness to put him to death, Mat. 26. 59. And the chief Priest rent his Clothes, and accused him of Blasphemy, in whom there is no Sin, and they all said, He is worthy of Death, who said, God was his Father. And when the chief Priests had caused him to be brought before Pilate, and Vehemently accused him of many things, yet Pilate would have released him; and when the chief Pirests and Elders saw that, and that one should be released at the Feast, and that it might not be the man of Sorrows, that is not of the World, but the Murtherer and Thief, that had stole, therefore the Priests and Rulers then perswaded the Multitude, That they should ask Barrabas the Thief, the Murtherer, and destroy Jesus the Image of God, that comes to condemn for Sin, Mat. 27. 20. And so to this day, at the time of the Feast, the Thief, and that which Murthers is at Liberty, and that is destroyed which comes to save from Sin. But the Govenour said, Why, what Evil hath he done? And Pilate washed his Hands, and confessed him to be a Just Person; but the chief Priests and Scribes stood and vehemently accused him, Luke 23. 10. But Pilate said the third time, Why, what Evil bath he done; I have found no cause of Death in him: And yet the Priests even forced Pilate, to do that which was Unjust. And do not the Priests now even force the Magistrates, to persecute those that they find nothing in them worthy of Death or of Bonds? And so the Priests having provoked and instigated the People thereunto, they cryed, Away with him, (that is the Light) and Crucifie him, (that makes an End of Sin) and the chief Priests also gave their Voice with them against him; and so the Voices
of them, and of the chief Priests prevailed to have him slain, murthered and crucified, who is the Power of God, that had raised the Dead, in whom Pilate could find no fault, neither yet Herod; and when he was crucified, who is the Light, that condemns for Sin, then the chief Priests and Professors kept their Feast, and their Passover with the Shew-Bread, or Unleavened-Bread, which the carnal Eye might see, and the murthering Priests feed upon, and then they may talk of their Ordinances, having slain him that is given for a Witness, Isa. 55. 4. And so, such as slay the Witness within, are talking of the Ordinances without; and they cryed, Away with him, (that is the Bread of Life) and they Crucified him (at whose presence the Devils were tormented) and in the time of their Feast and Passover (who had the Oracles of God) the Witness of God lay slain; this may be read with∣in; and upon their Sabboth-Day, even the Day of their Wor∣ship (who worship in the High Places) that which came to save from sin, lay in the Grave, and they were reading that which discovered sin, but make nothing Perfect, and him in whom there is no sin, was in the Earth, in the time of their Worship, and he that was the Light in the Earth, was Perfect, but that which they read in the high Place made nothing Perfect; and the place of Holy Worship is to be laid desolate, and where Christ (the witness) is not risen, the Sin is not taken away, and there the Faith is vain. He that can receive it, let him. But after the Feast, he that is given for a witness arose again, and so before the Feast of the Passover of the Jews and Pro∣fessors, they murthered the Witness; and for a time, while the Witness lay slain, they kept the Passover with outward Bread, in an outward Temple, offering the outward Sacrifices, but af∣ter the Feast was over, and their outward Worship for a time ended; then he that is given for a Witness unto the People, arose again; and so that which leades to Feasting, murthers the witness of God, yet when the feasting is over, and the outward Profession and Worship ended for a time, then he that is the Witness ariseth, even the Light of Christ in the Conscince and condemns for sin, and then the Priests and Professors were, and are worse then before: And when some of the Watch came, and declared that he was risen, who is given for a Witness [Mark,
they that are upon the Watch, are the first that know the rising of the Witness] then the chief Priests, who had mocked him, Mark 15. 31. (the chief Priests were Mockers) assembled with the El∣ders, and took counsel again; for then they were more tormen∣ted than before, and that which they feared, came upon them; for they said, this would be worse than that before, therefore they said of him, This Deceiver said, After three dayes I will rise again; Therefore, said they, let a Watch be set, lest his Disciples steal him away, and say, He is risen, and so the last Error be worse than the first. And so the Priests called the Resurrection of Christ Error, and Christ the Light, a Deceiver; and these Priests now say, The Light deceiveth, or, is Natural, and not sufficient. But Christ the Witness being risen again, the chief Priests gave large Money to the Souldiers, to tell Lyes of him and his Disciples, and caused them to deny the rising of the Witness, as the Priests do now; for the Witness is in Man, 1 John 5. 10. And said the Priests, If this come to the Governour's Ear, we will perswade him, and secure you, Mark 27. 62, 63, 64. Chap. 28. 11, 12, 13. And so, the chief Priests gave some Money to have him betrayed and crucified; but they gave large Money to have the rising of him, who is the Witness, the Resurrection and the Lite denyed, after he was be∣trayed & crucified; and so them Priests gave their Money to have him betrayed, by him that is a Devil, and gave large Money to the Souldiers, to deny the Resurrection of him, and to tell Lyes, and the Devil is a Lyar from the beginning, and the Father of it. O horrible Abomination and Cruelty! that ever the Priests, the Leaders of the People should do such things as these, and to be found themselves the worst of Men, or rather as Beasts! as it is written, I said in my Heart concerning the state of the Sons of Men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they them∣selves are Beasts, Eccles. 3. 18. And these things may be a warning both to all Governours, Offi∣cers, Souldiers & People, that they may never more be deceived by, nor joyn to have a hand with the Subtil, Treacherous, Deceit∣ful Priests, (against the Innocent) who by their subtilty did and do overcome both Governours, Judges, Rulers, Souldiers and People, and so crucified the Lord of Glory, and make it their business ever since to keep People from believing in him, who
said, I am the Light, believe in the Light, John 8. 12. ch. 12. 35, 36, 46. But mark and consider; Were those Priests Wicked herein? And were they Murderers and Abominable? Then have I con∣sidered, how much worse, and how far more Abominable are these Priests of England, and other Nations thereabouts, who do seldom give People large Money to tell Lyes, after they have taught them so to do (unless it be when they hire them to tell Lyes and Swear too, in bearing false Witness for them, against the Innocent) but they commonly force People to give large Money to them for teaching them to tell Lyes, and to deny and murder the Witness in themselves, which Witness comes to be received by believing in the Light, John 12. 36. ch. 1. 11, 12. 1 John 5. 10. And seeing these Priests do now get large Money, or take it by Force, for telling the People many large Repititions in their Pulpits, one year after another, How Christ was caused to be crucified and murdered by the other Priests, who gave Money to have it done; and the People know that already. And when I have considered, how many Hundred Thousand Pounds a year these Priests do receive, and take by force, for telling the People, how Christ the Light suffered under the other Priests; and how he that condemns sin in the Flesh, and saves from Sin, was called a Deceiver by the other Priests, then have I said, surely these Priests are worse than the other; for they gave their Money, even large Money, but these take Money, and Money that is much more large, and take it by Force too, even Treble Damage, or three times Treble what they demand, and Rob whole Houses, and have got the Rulers to uphold them in it, (never such Robbers!) and take Tythe by force from such as hear them not: And the first Priests that I read of in Scripture, who would take the Tythe or Offerings by Force, were the Sons of Belial, and knew not God, 1 Sam. 2. 12, 16. and they said, If you will not give it us, we will take it by force. And so, they that took the Tythe or Offerings by force, were Sons of Belial: And such Sons of Belial now, who know not God, do not only take the Tythe and Offerings, but they take even Three times, or Sixteen times as much in some places, and sometimes the Per∣sons of men besides. And those Priests formerly did give their
Money; and Simon Magus would have given Money for the holy Ghost, but now these Priests force People to give them Money for their Meanings of the Letter: And when I have seriously considered these things, I have even stood as a man amazed, say∣ing, Who would, or how could I formerly have believed, that these Priests of England were so far worse than them Priests that made a Covenant with a Devil, and that caused Christ to suffer? Or who would have believed, that they were worse than Simon Magus, in compelling People to give them much Money for their Meanings from the Letter? whereas he would have given his Mo∣ney freely for the Spirit; but the Spirit they have not to sell, but if they had, what would they not do for the love of Money, which is so rooted in their Hearts? would they not do as Judas did, who sold him that was his Master? but I do not believe they would bring again the Money as Judas did, though he was a Devil. And who could have believed, that these Priests of England were so far worse than the Sons of Ely, who were Sons of Belial, and knew not God; for they would take but the Tythe and Of∣ferings by force, but these Priests take the Tythe and Offerings, and much more, and the Bodies of Men and Women also, and keep them in Prison until Death, for whom they do no Work, and who desire none of their Ministry? And if they herein be not worse than the Sons of Belial, let all sober-minded judge, and consider this thing with me, that the first Priests that caused their Servants to take the Offerings by force, knew not God; then say I, Alas! alas! for the Priests of England! are they so much worse than those that knew not God? How doth their Shame appear? And who could have believed, that these Priests were worse than Judas, that was a Devil, who brought the Mo∣ney again that he had received? But when do these Priests bring again the Money and Goods which they have received and taken away by force? (though Judas did not take his Money by force) And how hard are these words to be received by such who have not yet come to see and understand these things? And how un∣willing will the Priests themselves be, to believe the truth of this which I have thus weighed, and considered, and pondered in the Meditations of my Mind? What horrible things from the Pit
of Darkness are these, that the Priests should be worse than Judas! for after he had betrayed the Innocent, he confessed, He had sinned, and brought back the Money, but the Priests said, What is that to us? And are not these Priests worse than they; for these do not only cause the betraying of the Innocent, and say, What is that to us? but they take Money, and force People to give them large Money, for betraying that which is Innocent in them, by their Subtilty and Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; and when they have betrayed the Innocent Principle of God in People, by telling them, It will deceive them, yet they will not bring the Peoples Money back, as Judas did, nor so much as con∣fess they have sinned therein, but are Impudent: O hard hearted and unreasonable Men! (have I said) What shall be said unto them? Surely they are the worst of men, and it had been good for them they had never been born, or had a beeing upon the Earth. Did the Prophet Mourn over, or Cry aloud unto them that spent their Money and Labour for that which satisfieth not? Oh! what shall I then say or write, or how shall I cry loud enough or mourn enough yet more in secret, or sound a Trumpet to these dead sleepy Priests, who compell People to give them so much Money, or spoil their Goods, or imprison their Bodies till Death, for that which is so far from satisfying them, that their Souls are murthered thereby, and the innocent meek thing in them betrayed, and the Witness denyed? Oh! who can with∣hold from declaring this? And who can but write it in a Book, that they may see the State which they are in, and that People may know them by their Fruits, which did never so plainly ap∣pear as now? And when these things came upon me, in the deep Meditation of my Mind, and Conference in my Spirit, what a Condition was I often in! and how was my Soul overcome with Sorrow, my Spirit with Heaviness, and mine Eyes with Tears? When did the Prophets ever see such a Generation of Priests as these? And what manner of Lamentaion shall I take up because of these things? Surely I will cry aloud unto the Lord in secret, and my Soul shall pour forth Intercession to my Maker, and with Tears, as streams of Water, will I beg at the Throne of the Most High for the slain of the People that are killed all the day long; and
in this have I believed, that the Lord will hear my Cry, and pity the People that are destroyed for lack of Knowledge, that the Witness of God in them may arise, and that the Prisoner of Hope may come to Deliverance. And in this have I not been hasty as to utter their Shame (for I was my self a Preacher in the Pulpits) but in a Mournful state oft times many Moneths or Years, have I born this Burden; neither have I now uttered or written this out of Prejudice towards the Persons of any men, but in the Mournful state of my long burdened and grieved Spirit, from the true sence of the Sad, Shameful and Miserable state that is coming upon them, and the Eternal Wo and Misery that is like to follow after for evermore. The which I desire they may escape by speedy re∣turning from the Way that they are in, now it is so plainly made mani∣fest to be so exceeding Evil. H. S. IDOLATRY Declared Against. THe Great and Mighty God, who made the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and made all men of one Blood upon the face of the whole Earth, and breathed into man that which is of his own Life, that by it man might seek after him, and find him who is Infinite, Incomprehensible, Eternal and Glorious, even he dwelleth not in Temples made with Hands, Acts 17. 24. neither is he worshipped in one high place or ano∣ther by any of the Professing Jews, who deny his Son, of whom he gave Testimony, That in him he is well pleased: Neither is there any Worship or Service accepted with him, but that which cometh from them who are led and guided by the Spirit of Truth, and in it Worship the Father, who is a Spirit, and de∣lighteth not in those Oblations that are Vain, proceeding from
the vain Minds of such who take his Name in Vain, of whom he saith, In vain do they Worship me: And of all such, I say, their Faith is Vain, who are yet in their Sins, and found among the Gentiles, who sacrifice unto Devils, and not unto God, being Children of Wrath, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, whose Prayers the Lord abhors, whose vain Bablings cast an ill Savour in the Nostrils of the most High; and their coming together is not for the better, but for the worse, even to feed and nourish the young Serpents, and to encrease in that Knowledge which puffeth up, and encreaseth sorrow, the which knowledge the (Hireling) Priests Lips preserve, which the Devil once taught, saying, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil; and all they who encrease in this Knowledge, encrease in that in which the Knowledge of God doth not stand, neither can be received; and so the Wo from the Lord God will come unto all them that continue their seeking the Living among the Dead, crying for their place of holy Worship (which is to be laid Desolate) and living in Unrighteousness, and in all Ungodly Practices, without the fear of God, and talking of him with that Mouth which is full of Cursing and Bitterness, the Heart being not turned to God, nor the Mind unto the Light of his Son, who are themselves in the Jaws of Satan, and are some∣times made sensible of the Power of the Devil working in them, stirring them up to Wrath, and moving them up to Envy, Pride and Unrighteousness, and the Lusts of the Creatures, and the Vanity of the Mind, but feel not at all the Power of God to work in them the newness of Life, and his pure Image, who made man Holy and Upright; neither are they willing to receive that Power in them by which they might come to overcome their Sins, and be led up to him who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, whom all the World, (not knowing) is ignorant by Worshipping, and denying his Son (who maketh an end of sin) and Contemning the Just One, who is a man of Sorrows, and denying him who is led as a Lamb dumb, and slighting him who is the Light, and refusing him who is the living Minister, not made by a carnal Commandment, but by the Power of an endless Life, who teacheth all to profit (who learn of him) and none teacheth like him, who saith, Learn of Me; then not of
another, not of a Hireling, not of one that pleadeth for Sin, but of him that maketh an End of Sin, whom God the Fa∣ther hath given a Light to the Gentiles, a Covenant to the People, that all men through him might be saved, who hath spoiled Princi∣palities and Powers, and all Authorities; and now all Domi∣nions and Authorities are to be subject to Him, who said, The true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: And Truth is that which maketh Free; but the Worshipping the Un∣known God in a Synagogue, Idol Temple or Steeple-house, doth not make Free, neither makes an end of Sin, but all them that are there, are in their Sins, and have not received Power to Over∣come their Sins; but are following such Teachers, which Peter said, should come in the latter dayes, who cannot themselves cease from Sin; And these Teachers, Peter said (and so say I) that they are cursed Children, beguiling such unstable Souls, who are carried about with airy windy Doctrines, after the cunning Crastiness of men, who still lie in wait to deceive, against whom we bear Testimony, from the Spirit of Truth, which guideth us, not to handle the Word of God deceitfully, nor to make Merchandize of the People; neither come we with Flattering Titles, but in the Power of the Lord, and in the Demonstration of his Spirit of Truth, do we declare against all Unrighteousness of Men, whether Priests, Ru∣lers or People, without Respect of Persons; and we declare his Name in the World, who is the Light of the World, and publish him among the Sons of men, who is Gods Power, that saveth his People from their Sins, who is the true Prophet, whom all are to hear, that all might come to learn of him, and be guided by him in the Way of Everlasting Peace, that so such as are Strangers to the Covenant of Grace (being yet in their Sins, and are the Outcasts of Israel) might now come to be taught of the Lord, and hear the powerful Voice of his Son, and not fol∣low Strangers any longer, nor the dumb Idol Shepherds, who are become Bruitish, Jer. 10. 21. and cannot understand, Isa. 56. 11. that from them all, such who fear the Lord might be ga∣thered, Ezek. 34. and may come to know the one Lord, whose Name is one, and the one Truth, and the one Way, and the Worship of the one true God, and not follow them any longer, who are Strangers to the Life of God, nor such as cannot cease from Sin, who are all in the Curse, being not reconciled unto
him, who was made a Curse, and so they come not to receive that by which the Curse is taken away, and such are without God in the World; and of such the Lord hath said, You have we aried me with your Sacrifices; And so say I to you now, you have wea∣ried the Lord with your Words; and yet many are saying, Wherein have we we aried him? I say, in this have you wearied the Lord, in that you say, such as do Evil are Good in the sight of God, Mal. 2. 17. Therefore thus I declare unto you, who are yet in your Sins, meeting together in the Idol Temples, Your Service is not the Service of the true God, neither is your Worship that which the Lord accepteth, for he accepteth none but the Worship in Spirit and in Truth, not in one high Place or other, but your Worship is in some High-Place, Idol-Temple or Steeple-House, where all manner of Viperous Beasts are round, and unsanctified Persons meet together, who commit all Abominations, and live in all manner of Filthiness, and yet lean upon the Lord, and say; Is not the Lord among us? no Evil shall come unto us: Whereas they are an evil and an adulterous Generation, adulterated from the Spirit of Truth, in which the true Worship stands, and are ignorantly worshipping in a Temple made with Hands, in which God dwellcth not, neither is his Power there received to overcome the Sin; and so the People are wearying themselves for very Vanity, and tra∣velling to bring forth Death, and labouring for that which pro∣fits not; neither do they come to meet the Lord in the way of his Judgments, nor find the Path of Life, where the Unclean can never come; neither yet do they know the Bread of Life, nor drink his Blood, that cleanseth from all Sin, nor come to be translated in∣to the Kingdom of the Son of God, but remain in that Ground which was eursed by reason of man's Rebellion, Gen. 3. 17. Heb. 6. 8. which Ground being not removed with the mighty Power of God, the Blessing cannot be received, nor the Understanding opened to know and receive, that which the Natural Man per∣ceiveth not, the Eyes of their Minds being darkened, through the Ignorance that is in them, the Vail being over the Heart, when that is read every day of their Worship, which discovers Sin, but makes nothing Perfect; which Worshippers did and do, Cru∣cifie him that comes to take away the Sin.
But now he is come, who hath forever perfected those that are sanctified; and he that sanctisieth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one; But they that are not sanctified are not of the one, but are in the many Opinions, in the Lusts of Ignorance and Wayes of Unrighteousness, being not come to the one Faith, which puri∣fieth the Heart, nor to know the one Baptism, one Church, one Way, one Truth, one God, the Father of him who is the one Light, which lightneth every man that cometh into the Wrld; of the which Light, which is but one, there is given a measure to every one of you, which Light shineth in Darkness, though not by it comprehended; which Light will let you see that you your selves are out of God's Covenant in the World's Worship, not reconciled to God, up∣holding Idol Temples and Heathenish Customs, with Bells, and such things which the People of God never used, but did and do deny forever, and exhort you and all others to leave worship∣ping the Beast, or upholding that which is not the true Worship of the true God, practised by men of Sin in Steeple-Houses every First-Day. Wherefore all People every where, leave your Idolatry, which you have learned and received by Tradition from the former Papists and Heathen, who worship the Work of their own Hands, and bow down to their own Inventions, as you long have done, and for this many Hundred Years have been learning, and yet are not come to the Truth, neither to believe in it, but remain in Unbelief and Ignorance, and your long time of Ignorance God winked at, Acts 17. 30. But now Light is come, in which God is calling to you, and all men every where to Repent and forsake your Idolatrous Worship, which by you, a sinful Generation, is practised in a Steeple-house one day in seven and Catn's Nature remaining in the inward parts, from the which Idolatry, all that sear the Lord God of Abraham are now to come from the Uncleanness of that Worship which is upheld by the Heathen; for verily the Hand of the Lord God Almighty is stretched sorth against it and them. Wherefore, all People turn your Minds to the Lord God of Life, who dwelleth in his People (and not in Temples made with Hands) and hath given to every one of you a measure of the true Light of his Son, which Light, in you, will let you see your secret Sins, and will teach you and shew you plainly of the Fa∣ther,
if you love it, and come to be led by it, to do God's will so may you come to worship the Lord God of Life, in Spirit and in Truth, with the Children of the Light and of the Day, which hath dawned upon many, who need not any man teach them, but are all taught of the Lord, Glory and Honour, and Ever∣lasting Praises to his blessed Name forever and ever, Amen. Given forth as a Testimony against all Idolatry and Heathenish-Worship, from the true Love of God the Father, in pity to the Souls of them who have Eyes and see not, and Ears and hear not, that they may come forth of Darkness, to follow Christ Jesus the Light of the World, who is bringing the Blind by a Way that they know not, Isa. 42. 16. Therefore is this to go abroad among all People, and read in Steeple-Houses, Streets, Market-places, private Meetings and Families, that all may consider what they have been doing in the dark, Ezek. 8. 12. By a Servant of the Living God, a Sufferer for the Testimony of his Name in the Common Goal and House of Correction at Winchester. Humphery Smith. The 4th Moneth, 1658.
Man driven out of the Earth and Darkness, By the Light, Life, and Mighty Hand of GOD: Wherein plain and simple Truths are brought to light, that so the cause of Stumbling may be taken from before the Eyes of both Rulers and all sorts of Pro∣fessors in Herefordshire, &c. Also something related of the Wonderful Power of God, in the Work of Redemption and Restrora∣tion. With a plain Self-denyal by him that takes up the daily Cross. Behold, the Lord worketh wonderfully; every Morning he bringeth his Judgments to light; he hath brought me back from the Grave, and saved my Soul from Hell, and set my feet upon a Rock. THE Living Truth of the Lord God, which he hath re∣vealed in me, by the mighty Operation of his Word of Life, which living eternal Truth being my Life, and shall last for evermore, and be as a Standard of the Most High, lifted up to all the scattered weary Souls, that they may flow unto it, and have it to be unto them a place of Refuge and Defence to fly unto in the day of Distress, and by it come to be made Free, and in it Worship the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, and feel it in the inward parts, according as the Lord requireth, by which Truth man comes to be sanctified; for the Word that liveth and abideth forever is Truth, which comes to be ingrafted into them who believe in the Light, and in it wait for the Promise of the Father, even that Spirit of Truth which the World cannot receive; for they know it not, it being in Gods Wisdom hid
from the Wisdom of the World, who know not him that may be felt after and found, who is near unto every one of you, whose measure of Light in you, is it you are all to know, by it to come to know the eternal Power and Godhead, as they did who had not Scriptures, Rom. 1. 19. for the Light of Christ in you is that which is to give the Knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 4. 6. who hath assuredly revealed his Son in me, and led me in the straight Way to Life Eternal, and the enjoyment of the Truth, which is Immortal, the which being to me a Pearl of great Price, and more precious than a thousand Rivers of Oyl. And that none may be hindred from receiving of this, which I have most assuredly found to be more excellent than the Royalty of Diadems, or the Excellency of the most purest Gold, or the most Renownedst Glory, Beauty or Riches that the natural Eye can behold; and that all who breathe after divine Refreshings, and the Rest that never shall be shaken, and the attaining to the Covenant of Life and Peace, may come to be gathered into the One Fold of blessed Happiness, and rest upon the Rock of Ages, and never more be moved henceforth and forever. And that if possible, all Murmurings & Reasonings (concerning me, or what I was) may be taken out of the Minds of all People of all sorts, and that all Jealousies, Whisperings, and Heart∣burnings in the Wrathful Nature may be passified and cooled with the over-spreading Streams of God's free Love, which truely is shed and groweth in my Heart, and streameth forth as a Well-spring of Life toward the Seed that is yet oppressed in them, among whom sometime I walked in Darkness, & wallowed in Unrighteousness, and afterwards stood up as a tall Cedar in the height of Profession, preaching great and high things daily unto others, whereby then I was admired by many Hundreds, who thereby came not to receive Power to overcome their Sins, nei∣ther yet attain to that which the Souls of many of them thirsted after, whom since I have often mourned over in Pity, and in the Bowels of my Father's Love to the Soul in Bondage in them, from whom I have been long and far absent in Body. And that none of them by looking and wondering at me, or any thing that hath befallen me may stumble thereby at the Light or Truth it self, or be thereby kept from receiving the living
Truth, or from giving heed to that which all the Wise Master∣builders refuse; nor that they by looking at what I was before I received and lived in the Truth, and at that which justly came upon me for my former Rebellion against the Light, nor at the Judgments of God that came upon me within or without, be∣cause of my unwillingness to follow him who said, I am the Light, follow me; and said, He that will not leave Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Goods or Lands for my sake, is not worthy of me; and he that will not deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, is not worthy of me: And what a Cross it was for me to leave what I did, let that of God (in all that knew me) judge. But I say, that none of them who are Colonels, Captains, Justices, Pro∣fessors nor People, by looking out at any thing concerning me, may not be with-held from receiving the Truth, and so kept from that which is the way to the Father, and the Door to the Rest for evermore. Therefore hath it lay long (of late years) and often upon me, and that from the hand of the Lord, to lay something before your Eyes (O ye Rulers, Professors and People of Herefordshire, and thereabout) endeavouring thereby to remove any cause of stum∣bling, by reason of what I was, or of any false Reports raised upon me, whereby the whole Truth of God might be Evil spoken of. And this have I waited long to declare among you, either in Words, Writing or Print; thought thereby Shame might come upon my former Course of Life, when I lived in all manner of Sin and Iniquity [except it were actual Adultery, Fornication and Murder] and though also hereby Contempt may come upon all that great Profession I was in, when I preached, daily in the Synagogue, or upon all that I then spoke or preached, out of the Innocent Life of God; or if hereby at present suffer I Reproach (as it is like I may by many) yet the Reproach of Christ is greater Riches to me than the Treasure, Glory and Preferment of England.
And first, Concerning my Call out of the World, or my going out from my House, Country and outward Employment. THe Light of Christ, which condemns the Evil Deeds, comes from him who calleth his out of the World, and from their Employments, to follow him who putteth forth his Sheep, and thrultech forth Labourers into the Harvest; and Abraham, of whose Seed I now am, went out of his Country, and from his Fa∣thers House, Gen. 12. and him God blessed and encreased mighti∣ly, and the Lord also called, and thrust forth me, who at last was obedient to the Command of the God of Abraham; and ever since his Presence hath been with me, and his Blessings have I found, and the Encreasings of God have I received, Praises to the Lord God of Life for evermore, who hath called me by his Word of Power, through his Grace, which did teach me to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to obey his blessed Will, which was and is my Sanctification in Jesus Christ, who did also call Matthew from the receit of Custom to follow him, and Peter and John from their Employment of Fishing and made them fishers of men; and Paul also being called, left his Employment of Tent-making (after a time) and was Obedi∣ent to the heavenly Vision; and those then became a Wonder and a Gazing-stock to many, yet they continued on, Travelling through many Countries, as I since have done, preaching the Word of God with boldness. And one of these men, who were called from their outward Employment, said, Every man, wherein he is called, there abide; and whereunto they were called, they did abide, (and so do l) and when the Priests and Rulers would have stopt their Mouthes by their Commands, they said Whether it be lawful to hearken unto God or Man, judge ye: But these Ministers of Christ, did not say, he that is a Husbandman, there abide; for Noah was a Husbandman, yet a Preacher of Righteousness, and Elisha a Plow-man, and Amos a Herdsman; neither did they say, He that is a Fisherman, let him so abide; neither did Christ say, he that will be my Disciple must follow his outward Employment or Trade, but he said, He that will not hate Father and Mother,
Brethren and Sisters, Wife and Children, yea, and his own Life too, cannot be my Disciple, Luke 1. 20. and if not a Disciple, much less a Minister of his. But hereby, neither Christ, nor them Ministers of his, nei∣ther I did, or do intend to draw or perswade People to Idleness, or open a Door for any such Evil, (neither is there many who are called out of the World's Worships, and required to leave their Families and called to the Ministry) but that hereby it may plainly appear, that the Command and Call of Christ, to his Work and Ministry is to be obeyed, though it be to the for∣faking of House, Goods or Lands; for a Minister of his, said We have forsaken all (And have not I done so?) and unto them who had forsaken all, unto all such was promised a Hundred fold, Matth. 19. 17, 18, 19. And Heaven and Earth shall pass away, be∣fore one Jot or Tittle of his Word shall fail: And truly, I have found his Promise true, for a Hundred times Hundred sold have I already received, blessed be the Lord forever. But how contrary it was to my own Will to fulfill the Will of the Lord. in leaving my Employment and outward Business in the World, let all them judge with the Light, who knew my Conversation therein, and saw my Eagerness in the things of the World and Contrivances therein, beyond many men; my Heart being set in the Earthly things, being very fierce in La∣bouring therein, for the getting and encreasing of the Fruits of the Earth, as though I would have laid up Treasure for many Years, which might have been good in its place, if my Mind had been redeemed out of it, and my Heart from the Covetous∣ness thereof; but I say again, it was much contrary to my strong Will, to leave these things and the love of them, and much more that might be named, and be taken from it with a Hundred and Fifty Pound loss, and be exposed to Want, Hardships, Revi∣lings, Imprisonments, Whippings, Stonings, and all manner of cruel Torture, that the Soris of men might have Power to inflict upon my Body, and for me (that ruled over many, and was respected by many) to become a Servant unto all, and coun∣ted the Off-scouring of all, and be abused by any Boy, or the Vilest Person I meet; and it was much contrary to my Will, to refuse that Glory, Honour and Preferment of the VVorld
which was offered me by the Rulers thereof, when I was beloved of them, and Hundreds more; and when I preached among them in the Pulpits daily, and was then called of men Master, like the Hirelings of England, who being in the Curse cannot cease from Sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. yet I still refused their Unrighteous Gain, and denyed all their Gifts and Rewards; for the Lord, in his Mercy, kept me out of them Temptations, though sometimes some that were then near Friends unto me, would have perswa∣ded me to have taken something of what was offered, as to live upon, but I durst not, if I had wanted Food or Raiment; but answered one Justice, who was proposing me a free Gift toward Maintenance, which might have been worth a Hundred Pound a Year, or more, seeing I left my Employment, freely to preach daily, but I say, I answered, I shall rather go in Sheep-Skins and Goat-Skins, and eat Bread and drink Water; and that little ho∣nest, meek Principle in me, which then kept me from that (and such Temptations) in due time led me to be Ruler over much, which before I had not Power over; therefore I say unto all, it is good to be faithful to the little measure of God in the Conscience. For when I was but young and void of the knowledge of God, or his Way of Holiness, my Mind ran much in the Earth, with a covetous care, how to gain the Riches thereof; and even then did the Hand of the Lord follow me, and his Witness in me did so judge and condemn me Night and Day for my Evil, that at last I was scarce able to do any thing in the Earth, or go upon it; & then waiting to see what the reason was, after many Hours, I saw clearly, if I would leave the Wickedness of the world, and follow the Lord and trust him, I might have Peace, and if not, I was like to be cut off: And then I left some Sins, and re∣solved to live more Holy, and began to Pray and Read, and then I went to follow the Priests, not knowing that in me which I was to hear and follow, yet it secretly led me out of some Evil, and so into some Peace; and then my Heart was exalted in the Earth, though I encreased in a Profession. And when I was in the height of the World's Way and Wor∣ship, and expecting Riches to increase, even then in an unex∣pected time, did the dread of the Lord fall upon me, and his wonderful mighty Power wrought exceedingly in me, to break
me off from all my Wayes, and seperate me from all the Worship of the VVorld, and gave me to see the Abomina∣tions of all the Prayers of the Wicked, and the Invalidity of all the Worships of all Mankind, who are out of God's Covenant; and the Operations then upon me by the terrible Hand of the Lord, and the strivings that were in me, can never be declared, and then did the Lord command me to follow him in Obedi∣ence to his Will, to declare against all Unrighteousness of men, which I saw in the Light of Life to be in Priests, Rulers and People; and I then saw clearly, in the eternal Light and fore∣sight of God, the Hardships, Cruelties, Whippings, Imprison∣ments and Dungeon, and many such things, which since in part have been upon this Body fulfilled, as may be read in several of my Books, (read the True Rule) and at that time did the power∣ful Life of God so much break through me, with such unspeak∣able Love, that I was even willing to leave all & walk with God. But then contrary to Paul, I reasoned with Flesh and Blood, that I should be esteemed a Mad-man, and that People would not be∣lieve me; and that I was not fit, (and many such things:) Then the Word of the Lord was spoken in me, saying, Who is it that openeth the Mouth? Is it not I the Lord? Then was my Bowels even turned within me, with the constraining Power of Gods Eter∣nal Love, and I began to be willing; but when that was a little over, the Tempter being near,  reasoned concerning my Wife and Children, How they should be provided for? and present∣ly the Promise of the Lord was, That they should be cared for; and his Promise was to me, That he who converteth Souls to God, should shine as the Stars forever: And when I had received them VVords into me, I was overcome with the Refreshings of God, and at the present made willing to undergo all Tribulations, if in my whole Life I did Convert but one Soul to God, seeing and feel∣ing the Redemption of one Soul to be so precious, the which then grew so strong in me, that I was scarce able to retain from present actual Obedience to God therein; but when I looked at my outward things, and how first to settle that in order, then was I by Temptations made afraid, That it was a Delusion, or something of the Devil transformed as an Angel of Light; and then between both, I was in much Trouble and Distress, not know∣ing
what to do, having not then known any called Quakers, nor any such Operations in any man in those dayes; yet that could hardly prevail to make me believe it was a Temptation: But at last, reasoning about outward things, I then resolved not to leave them, but to mind the things of the World, and not obey that which called me out of the VVorld. And to write in short; at last I did strive and joyn with all the Powers of Darkness that I could, and used all means pos∣sible to drive the Power of God from me, and the Thoughts of him and his Works out of my Mind; but Wo was me after for it, and it had been just, if his Spirit had never strived more with me, but left me to be cut off forever, and to remain in the horrible Pit of Darkness; (And surely it was for the good of others that the Lord did spare me, some whereof may now with me rejoyce for evermore.) For when all was too little to overcome the mighty Power of God in me, then did the love of the World prevail, and even thirstings, for the love of it to come into my Heart, to drive out the Love of God; at last, I with it against God prevailed, though the living Power of God was so great, that the Devil, the Flesh and the World was scarceable to overcome it for a time; and so I have seen Children, Wife, Farms and Oxen to hinder from the Kingdom of God; but that which hindred most was the love of outward Goods: And so it was but just with God, to take that at the last out of the way; and if he had swept all away in his Anger, as from Job, he had done me no wrong. But when I had thus, in a cursed manner, overcome the striving of the sweet and lovely Spirit of Truth, yet was I not quiet, but much troubled, and in a sad Condition, which I was not able to hide from the World, who said, I was going Mad, seeing me so changed into Sadness, but of all this, and much more, I durst not then spake a word to any Creature. And now mark, what for my Rebellion did justly follow: My outward Goods, which I then loved more than Christ, be∣came as a Prey and a Spoil to unreasonable men, and most unjust∣ly on their parts, was I by them deprived of it; and the Lord al∣so dried up all my Springs within, that such a time after I knew, that I was left without hope, being in the horrible Pit of Dark∣ness,
from God, that I could neither pray nor believe, but con∣cluded, that I was accursed from God forever (and that which disobeyed was accursed) and being in a sad miserable Condition, resolved to write a VVarning to all People, that they might take Example by me, and never resist the Spirit as I had done; but before I could write (sinking down into the Condemnation, without Murmuring against God, knowing him to be just, if he cast me into the nethermost Hell forever) the Lord had Compas∣sion on me, and listed my Soul out of the Horrible Pit, and staid me with his hand for a time; yet afterwards his Afflictions fol∣lowed me in Judgments within, and much trouble in things with∣out, which my Heart was so upon, and yet for a long time I turned not unto the Lord that did smite, that his hand might make whole, though Checks I had by his Light in my Conscience, but strong was my VVill about it, until the fierce Judgment of the Lord did often break forth upon me with much Astonishment of Heart, and Horrible Indignation (not to be uttered) with Tears as streams of VVater from mine Eyes night and day, when it came upon me with Tremblings and Breakings, which broke the hardness of my Heart, and opened a way to something in me, which then I dearly loved; but going out again from that, I rea∣soned about my Outwards, and not waiting to receive Counsel from the Lord, I went unto a Rich Understanding man in out∣ward things, whom I loved, who may yet remember, that I made my Complaint unto That I was not able any longer to abide in the Way of the World; whose Counsel I then took, and my own Will together, and so sought to keep two Kingdoms some time longer, and therefore much Trouble followed me within, and VVasting, Loss, Shame and Destruction upon things without. But however, I durst do no less than follow the Lord, and be Obedient unto him, whatever Loss I suffered, or whatever Shame or Reproach I might undergo, though often times I was afraid that this Power of God in me would soon come to an end, or fail from me, and that then I might return to my outward Em∣ployment with great Shame and Loss, and that then, instead of doing Service for God, I might bring a Reproach upon his bles∣sed Name, and my self thereby be a Hissing-stock to all men, and they say, I began to build, and not able to finish; and this also kept
me back very much. But such was the Everlasting Love of the Lord, who is known in the Ways of his Judgments, that his Hand was heavy upon me, and his Judgments encreased in me, that there was no way for me to escape, but I must be Obedient, and bow under it, or be cut off forever by it, so that my Bowels were often pained in me, and it is like for many Weeks had little sleep or bodily rest, and sometimes knew not my Wife and Chil∣dren, that I felt and heard in the Bed by me, but thought they were People I should not be with: And therefore one time after it was day, I was rising and putting on my Clothes in a sober manner, and in Meekness said, Surely I should not be here; and my Wife then laying hand on me, easily perswaded me, but I said, I Know not who I am with; neither did I know her Voice at that time: And some time after, having endured much, I told she and my Family (with Heaviness and Tears) That I was not able to enduce it any longer; and that I had abode with them in the way of the World so long as possible I could; and that I must give up my Life to serve the Lord; desiring them (with Tears) to be Content, and in what I could, I should be careful for their good as ever I was: And this is true, and but little of what might be written. For another time formerly, the Light of Christ in me (which then I knew not) did so condemn me, and judge and trouble me in secret, that it brought Sickness upon me, and thereby being Weak, expecting I should dye, I was then much troubled, and it lay much upon my Conscience at that time, that I had not in the time of my Health gone to the Steeple-house, and in the fear of the Lord warned all People to Repent; and I was then much grieved because I thought I should dye, and not first in that thing discharge my Conscience. And so, though I might write much, by what is written may appear to the Meek and Sober-minded, that the Lord did not only call, but also thrust me forth of the World into his Harvest, and this was of God, and the operation of his powerful Word, which called me out of the World, and Hundreds since, by the Word of his Power through me have been gathered out of the Way of the World, and received the Earnest of the Rest Eternal, and many converted unto God, and Wo be unto them who open∣ly oppose me in this the Lords Work I now am in, which he hath
thus called me unto; and let none think that I did wilfully neg∣lect my outward Employment; neither let any one think, that I left my Family, as not regarding them, nor that I stay much out of that Country for any By-end; for the words are true, A Pro∣phet is not without Honour, save in his own Country, and in his own House; and those that did since seek to stop my Mouth, did not well. Concerning my publick Preaching, and something of what followed. THAT none may stumble thereat, and say, We called Quakers are such who change from one thing to another, and so what we hold not to be regarded: But I say, Those that have to changes, are not come into fear of God, psal. 55. 19. and the Fear of the Lord is to depart from Evil: And they depart from Evil are become a Prey; but such were cleansed and changed from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. and grew in Grace and Knowledge in the Lord Jesus Christ. And what I did or said then, was in a great Zeal and real Intent to do good, neither did I covet mens Silver for it, neither was it my end to make a Gain thereby, though much was freely offered me, more than I intend to make mention, though I recceived it not; so that therein I was not much found in Cove∣tousiness. But when Judgement came upon me, as before-men∣tioned, I gave up that Preaching, and said at the last Meeting I had then, which was at Stoke-bliss, That my Mouth was stopt at that present, but if ever the Lord should open my Mouth again, I should Preach indeed; and it is so, Praises to the Lord forever, who hath indeed opened my Mouth, (and since I was no longer Rebellious) and the living Truth of Jusus Christ do I declare, and bear Testimony to his Name where-ever I come, as his Spirit moveth me. And let none herby think, that I now glory in what was then my shame; for though I had a great Zeal then for God, it being not according to the Knowledge of the Crofs of Christ, which crucisies to the World, and all its vain Customs; the which Cross being then left behind, which is the Power of God, so the Love of the world, which is Enmity to God, remained in me, and the Root Iniquity not them removed out of my Heart, there∣fore
Fruits of Disobedience in secret were still brought forth, which the Would the World took little notice of, but I had one near me, who did let me see all that ever I did, and reproved me for vain Glo∣ry, and having the Praise of Men and the Love of the VVorld, and so my Preaching did not bring Souls home to God, though I informed their Minds of many things, which many ignorant People knew not before; and so though much Love was in many, yet this brought not forth Fruits of Obedience unto God, and so all came to little; for the People remained in their Sins, and re∣ceived not Power to come out of them; neither came they out of the Fashions and Customs of the World, nor to the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which purrisies the Heart, stands in the pure Conscience my self: And so their Faith and mine was vain, be∣ing then in our Sins. Therefore let none think, that I now justifie any Deceit, Hy-pocrisie or secret Evil, that then was in me, or practsed by me; for in the Presence of the Lord God I do openly declare against it all, and that Spirit that acted me therein (but I own that simple thing, which then encourged me to do good, out of an Honest Intent, and that kept me out of Covetousness, and from receiving of Gifts.) And I openly declare against all Cruel, Unjull and Ungcdly Action and Words and all that Filth which I wallowed in, before I was a zelous Professor, as it is known to may Ungodly Persons, how I was once as Wicked as many of them, whom I Warn all to Repent, otherwife they cannot escape the Dammantion of Hell. And I utterly deny, and declare against that Blindnese and Hypocrisie I was in, when I followed the chief Priests from one Idols Temple to another, who were chief in the Serpent's Wif∣dom, deceiving me and many more, and taught me that Know∣ledge which came from the Devil, who said, Te shall be a Gods, knowing, Gen. 3. 5. And in that Knowledge (in which every man is Bruitish, Jer. 10. 14.) from them Hirelings Iencreased in that which pusseth up, and encreased my orrow, as before was mentioned; for by that Serpent's subtilty, which I learned from them without me, I fought against and resisted that which
was holy in me: Therefore I declare in the Name of the Lord God, that all the Hireling Priests do more harm than good, and shall never bring People to receive the Power of God, but lead them into Subtilty, and further off from the Knowledge of that of God in them, Rom. 1. 19. And as true as the Lord God liveth, up∣on their Death-beds shall both Priests and People witness this to be true: And its also as true, that I write this without any Pre∣judice to any of their Persons, but in Love to all Peoples Souls do I warn all them Hireling Priests in Herefordshire, and else∣where, to leave deceiving the People; for absolutely the People are deceived by them, and forced to maintain them too, who may be warned of them, by what I have learned by Experience from them, having tried them and their ways to the utmost, and have much experience of them more than many Country People, whose Souls I truly love, and therefore this I write. And I declare against that which ruled in me in the time of Ig∣norance and Perverseness, and acted me in Cruelty or Oppression towards any Person; or to Wrong, Defraud or Insult over any one in Tyranny, either by Word or Action, or wherein I abus∣ed or smote with Envy (which is of the Devil) Either man or Beast, and that whereby I was led into any manner of Hypo∣crisie or Double-mindedness, or any manner of Evil whatsoever, which was Unjust in the sight of God, though not seen by Man; or any secret Evil that then lodged in the dark Corners of the stoney Heart then in me, whereby any thing did arise in me, or proceed from me, which was contrary to the Humble, Meek, Innocent, Upright Life of the Lamb of God, who is now come and hath taken away the Sin of the World, and is Pure, Humble, Meek and Lowly, whose Life and Power of Love constraineth me to declare openly against all that which was done or said by me in Envy, either openly or secretly against any Creature; for there is nothing done in secreet, that shall not be made manifest. And let all who knew me before (who are saying, I was an honest man, be warned of the like Evil, and leave it, considering, that if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear? for many did look upon me, to be either a Godly or an Honest man, yet am I made willing to let open Shame come
upon all that, which then was in me contrary to the Righteous∣ness of God; for he alone is to be exalted, and the Transgressor is to be ashamed, Psal. 25. 3. And every mouth shall be stopt, and every one stand guilty before God, and the Shame and Nakedness of all, both Priests, and Fathers, and People shall appear as much as mine, when Gods Witness in them arise, though they cover it for a time by deceitfull Flatteries, Promising Liberty, but are as deeply the Servants of Corruption as I was. And I do assirm in the presence of the Lord God, that there are a Generation of Professors, who follow Sermons, and have gathered themselves into outward Forms, who are grown up into a Profession and Knowledge in the Letter, who are further off the Life of God than the Publicans and Harlots, and are grown into Pride, Hypocrisie, secret Deceit, Arrogancy and Covetousness; and some of them for a time denied the Priests, and then for their own ends, got into their places, and so are more Abominable than they, and the Tree of Knowledge they feed upon; but the good savour of pure Obedience unto God, in all Self-denial, they have cast behind their backs, and are be∣come an ill Savour among all men: And the Lord God will vi∣sit them for these things; and in the Day of his sierce Wrath will all such want a Hiding-place; and when the day of Howl∣ing and Astonishment come upon them, as it hath passed upon me, then shall they know that the Sinners in Sion shall be afraid, and Horrible Fearfulness shall surprize the Hearts of the Hypo∣crites, and then shall they find, that God will not be mocked, though they deceive themselves with vain Hopes, which shall perish with all such Professors, if they Repent not, ard strip themselves bare from all their false Coverings, which in the day of the Lord (which they put afar off) will certainly be all too Narrow: For because of the greatness of my Profession, with∣out the Power that overcomes all Sin, therefore was the Wrath of God the more upon me, and I never came to receive Pardon for Sin nor Power over it, nor to receive the Life of the Son of God, until his Judgments had confounded all that Wisdom, which I had learned from and among the Priests and Professors. And this is absolutely true, and may be a Warning unto all them.
And all that is herein declared of the Strivings in me, and Judgments of God which came upon me, is very short of what it was, neither indeed, can it be ever declared, being then con∣founded both within and without, not having any man to be a Director unto me, nor then to guide me in Gods Wisdom, neither did any man bring me unto that Condition, nor lead me through it, but even the Lord alone, in whose Judgments I now rejoyce for evermore; but this especially, would I have all people that then knew me to consider, That at that time, (when I was in Di∣stress,) I knew not well what I should do or spke among men, neither what I should be, being become a Fool for Christs sake, and my Wis∣dom being confounded, and my Understanding brought to nothing; Read, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 9, vers. 27. And so, that is true which I have writ in that book in Answer to Edmund Skipp, wherein I said, That we were but in measure lea∣ving of the World, and entering into a little of that which is Eternal; at which time before-mentioned, I was brought to be silent from my publick Preaching, and waited on the Lord, with a few foolish contemptible Ones in the Eyes of the World, at which time having lost my Earthly Wisdom, and not received that measure of the pure Wisdom of God, (which since he hath given me) whereby to order all my Words and Actions, in Pru∣dency and Moderation, before the Eyes of all People, and others also might then with me therein fall short, whereby some to this day may stumble at the whole Truth of God, looking at what happened among us, in that time, when the Judgments of God was often on us (by which Judgments, his Sion is now Re∣deemed) and so they looking at that, and watch ever since for Evil, may be kept thereby from receiving the precious tryed Stone, which the wise Master-builders also refuse, though we now know, he is laid in Sion (redeemed with Judgment, for a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offence, even to both the houses of Israel; But let all take heed, of stumbling at the stumbling Stone, (the Light of Christ) for other causes of stumblings, especially by me, I have hereby endevoured to remove out of the way (and minds) of all that are willing to receive the Truth, or believe in the Light, John 12. 36. And as for Edmund Skipp, if ever he come again to that, which
convinced him of Evil, and made him in publick deny his peaching for Hire and Tythes, though after he strated aside, and stumbled in the Dark, not minding the Light of Life (which once he honestly desired after) in him, to which Light, if he return, and love the Witness of God in him, which hath ever since stood a Witness for me, and hath let him see his Barrenness, and without a true Eternal Rest, and if he to that be obedient, which is manifest of God in him, and by it be led into Meek∣ness and Plainness, without Prejudice, he may come to receive the living Truth of Jesus Christ, for which this day I suffer Bonds; for I did never yet look upon him to be so utterly Reprobate, as not possible to receive the Faith that purifies the Heart, and Re∣spects no mans Person; for truly my love hath been to the Seed oppressed in him, though that which hath exercised him in Rash∣ness (against the Truth of God) I do deny forever; and there is neither him, nor any Priest, Preacher, Professor or Profane, that can have any good ground or reason to envy me for declaring openly against all that in them which I declare against in my self, when it ruled in me, when I was as they yet are. I being by several long unjust Imprisonments detained from Liberty to declare in words those and other things, therefore for this very end have I written this in short, that God's Truth might stand clear, and not suffer in any thing done or said by me, before Gods pure Wisdom was born up in me; and that also the ground of all other things against the Truth (if occasioned by me) may be removed out of the Minds of all that are willing to receive the Truth, if they knew it; for I would not, if possible, that any thing whatsoever which concerned me, should so remain in the Mind of any one, as that thereby he should be hindred from receiving the living Truth, which I have found so precious, with∣out which none can be saved: And if by the appearing of the Shame of my former Nakedness, an inlet for the Truth may be made into the Minds and Hearts of any, therein will be my Joy, and the Eternal Comfort of all them, who by receiving, and Sanctification of the Truth, and faithfulness in the Light, do come to rest in the Kingdom of Joy and Eternal Peace forever and ever. Thus at present, in tender Love to the Souls of you Rulers and Professors in Herefordshire, to whom I say, believe in the Light,
and mind God's Witness in you, and be not Rigid, Bitter, nor Persecutors of the Children of Light, who (by them in the dark) are called Quakers, among whom I have chosen to suffer Re∣proaches for Christ's sake, and Whippings, long Imprisonments, and Dungeon, and now in the House of Correction, all which declares me to be, as you may read, 2 Cor. 6. 3, to 11. who am a Friend to the Souls of all Mankind, a Servant of Jesus Christ, not by the Will of men, to whom I am known by the Name Humphry Smith. Winchester, the 19th of 6th Moneth, 1658. THE Wandering-Star DISCOVERED, And his False Light Comprehended and made Manifest. Or something in Answer to a Book called, The Duakers Blazing-Star; Or, The Worlds-Wonder: Set forth by Edmund Skipp, who calls himself A Preacher of the Gospel at Bodenham in Herefordshire. But is sound and seen by the Light of Christ, and proved by his own Writings to be out of the Light of the Gospel, and to be him∣self wandered from the Truth, and is now amongst the rest of the Wandering Stars, mentioned in Jude, v. 13. With a Word to all Professors. BEing moved to write something in Answer to the Scan∣dals that have been cast upon the Truth by Edmund Skipp, in a Book called, The Worlds Wonder, or the Quakers
Blazing-Star; whereing he hath not only cast many Aspersions upon us, in these parts of the Nation, to wit, Here for dshire, but also on those, yea, all of the same People whom he never saw nor heard, whom the great and mighty Power of God hath raised by the pure Life of Christ in them, to witness and live in, which we (here a handful of Babes) are but in a little measure yet brought to witness; therefore not for our own Vindication, but for the simple Ones sake, who ever were carried away in all Ages with Scribes, Pharisees, false Prophets, false Apostles, through the sleight and craftiness of men, whereby they lay in wait to deceive, 2 Cor. 4. 2. Therefore take notice, that not many Wise men after the flesh, not many Learned, not many Mighty; for the Wisdom of this World passeth away, and the Lord is now taking the Wise in their own craftiness, and chusing the Foolish things of the World to confound the Wise, and the things that are not to bring to no∣thing things that are, That so no Flesh may glory in his sight, but that the Lord alone might be exalted, in this the great day of his Power, Isa. 2. 11. wherein he is risen out of his holy Habitation, Zach. 2. 13. to shake terribly the Earth, Isa. 2. 19, 21. and bring down the Haughtiness of man, and lay low the Haughty looks of man, Isa. 2. 11. who are going forth like men of War in their own Strength, against the Lord, and against the anointed, witness the last page of Edmund Skipps Book, Psal. 2. 2. Now that the Truth of Jesus Christ may the more appear, I shall in this following Discourse in brief, lay open some of the stromer and yet-lived-in Deceits of this open Enemy, and also some of his Lyes, which he hath written against the Truth of Christ, whom the World knows not; therefore they write, spake, hate, stone, whip, imprison, and falsly say all manner of Evil against us, wherein the Scriptures are fulfilled by them, Mat. 5. 11, 12. whose Judgment slumbereth not, and whose Damnation linger∣eth not. Now before I proceed further, I give thee a little notice what sort of people he thus hath opened his Mouth wide against, and it shall be made manifest, and that from his own writings which declare us to be the People of God, chosen out of the world, John 15. 19. and he to be the Persecutor, I shall give thee a few
short hints; but if thou wilt observe his Writings, thou wilt find that he himself hath declared, that our whole Life and pra∣ctice is proved by plain Scripture, and that our Lives and Pra∣ctices are the same with them that did write and speak forth the Scriptures: But in short, see his own words in page 40. Did you ever know People acted through a more Glorious show or ap∣pearance of Righteousness, then they are? (to wit us) their denying and throwing off the World, and all care and Pains for Christs sake? their forsaking Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26. though with so much Affliction, Opposition, Persecution and Disgrace from men: Is not this like the Cross of Christ, and the Sufferings of Christ and his Apostles? (yea even the same) Their traveling so many miles from place to place, and speaking so boldly unto great men, crying out against their Abominations, their writing so many Letters, & dealing so plainly with men: (Jer. 18. 18.) And there are hardly a People to be found, that cry out more against An∣tichrist, and all appearance of Sin and Unrighteousness than they do. And in page 41. The whole bulk of their actings hitherto, as far as I know, or have heard, do declare them to be carried forth as Ministers of Righteousness, page. 44. for I am perswaded, they dare not tell a Lye. Now see plainly, before thou proceed, the Darkness, Ignorance and Envy of this man, that can persecute in writings, and smite with the Tongue such a People as he himself in this very Dark∣ness cannot chuse but confess such things by and in; who that is not altogether blind, will not see the Blindness, Darkness and Ignorance of this mans confused Writings? See one more page 50. Now these People, as far as I am, and ever was able to discern them, are indued with a large measure, in those things the Apostle mentioned in Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. I mean, many of them that I know, that I did take, in my former Intimacy and Acquaintance with them, to have received much of the Power of Truth through Christs and to have much communion with God, and large experience of his Love: But as for others of them, they were never judged by me or the rest, to be any more than a willing People; and for such, this Scrip∣ture doth not touch them. Even by this, (although there might be much more mentioned) thou mayst see in measure, in the Light of Christ, what he is that doth Rail against such a People whose Words, Lives, Ways and Actions are agreeable to the Scrip∣ture, as he confesseth in his own Book.
The World loves his own, and the World delights in its own, the World speaketh to the World, and the World hears that which is spoken from the Earthly Heart, reacheth the deaf Ear, and no farther; that which is comprehended by the dark Mind, that is spoken forth by the deceitful Tongue, that feeds the De∣ceit that lodgeth in the Hearers; so one Darkness upholds another, and the same Deceit upholds its own in both Speaker & Hearer: So in both Writer and Reader, yea, all that write and speak that which proceeds not from the Life, but from the Death, being in the state of Death, is but Death speaking to Death, whereby Serpents are begotten, or the Seed of the Serpents is encreased. Now they that are of God, hear God's Word, and they that hear not his Word, are not of God; for the natural man per∣ceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are spiritu∣ally discerned by the spiritual man that judgeth all things, though no man can judge him who is a Child of the day, and dwelleth in the Light, and hath no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, out of which the Children of the Day are delivered, and can witness the Darkness past, and the true Light now shining in them: But all those who say, they have fellowship with Light, and walk in Darkness, are Lyars, and all Lyars are shut out of the Kingdom, and are estranged from God, who is altogether Pure, Holy and Righteous, Just, Perfect, Light, and those that dwell in him, are as he is, and they only have the Mind of Christ, the which all the World and earthly Hearts are ignorant of. Therefore I shall not put the worldly carnal Heart to judge of what may be written by me, although I am but yet leaving off the World, and entring into a little of that which is Eternal, which no Eye of Flesh can ever attain unto and live; neither can any but those that live in the same Life that speaks aright, or understands what is spoken from the life, by those that spake aright from the pure life: Therefore let not thy deceitful Heart deceive thee in judging herein; for the Old Heart is Deceitful, as I shall further make manifest, both unto the World, and unto the Children of the Light, not only from what I hear, but from his own written words, and my knowledge; and being witnessed by the Light and Truth, as it is manifested in me, whereby something may so plainly appear, that even the World it self may see the Deceit
that always hath been, and yet is in this man, who now desires all the World to take notice (p. 24.) of his Exposition of his Lyes, that he himself hath cast on us, who are not of the World, therefore the World knows us not; for we witness against it, that the Deeds thereof are Evil. After Edmund Skipp had thrown off his Tythes, and convin∣ced of much more, which he was waiting to throw off too, he then told me not long before he lest us, That he had not Faith to carry him through, neither could he believe; but he was con∣fident, That the Devil would steal all that he had from him again; the which is now too true. Wo, Wo, Wo, from the Eternal God to all the Inhabitants of the Earth, who dwell in the earthly Darkness, being seat∣ed in the Earth, drove out from the presence of the living God, and are Vagabonds and Fugitives in the Earth, whose center is in the earthly dark Mind: Wo to all those that put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light: Wo to all those that go down to Aegypt for help in Aegypt, the pure Seed is captiyated and kept in Bondage; in Sodom and Aegypt the Lord is daily crucified and put to open shame: Wo to all the Oaks of Bashan, and all the Beasts of the Field: Wo to them that build their Nests among the Stars; for Capernaum that is lifted up to Hea∣ven, and in its wisdom, in its own strength, shall be brought down to Hell; for the Lord God of Life and Power is risen out of his holy Habitation, to confound the Language of Babel, and dry up the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and famish all the gods of the Heathen, that know not God, whose presence is terrible to all the Children of Disobedience: Therefore Wo unto him that striveth with his Maker, who ariseth to scatter his Enemies, and to wound the Head of every one that goeth on still in his Wickedness. Oh! the Day of the Lord is at hand, wherein every man shall receive according to the Deeds done in his Body; then he that hath seemed to wait, and now begins to smite his fellow-Servants, saying, his Master delays his coming, and so eat and drink with the Drunken that are drunk indeed with the Wine of the Fornication of the Whore of Babylon, those are Drunkards indeed, that are drunk with VVine and overcome, but not with strong drink, such stagger at the Promises, and
stumble at the Corner-stone; but when that Stone shall fall upon them, it will grind them to Powder: Therefore be warned of the Lord, thou that despisest and wonderest (For all the Works of the Lord are Wonderful) lest thou perish; for the Lord is work∣ing a Work in these dayes that thou canst not believe, nor any that live in their own Wisdom, exalted above the pure Wisdom of Christ, who teacheth all his to deny all, yea, even all, both their Wisdom, Righteousness, Wit, and all carnal Comprehensions; for they are Followers of him, who lived not in his own Will; For, saith he, I came not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me; and saith, Not my Will, but thy Will be done: And he that is not yet made a Fool, and so denies his own Will and Wisdom, is yet exalted above the Cross, and the Son of Perdi∣tion is exalted above all that is called God, sitting in the Temple of God, even in the Holy Place, where Truth should alwayes be exalted. Christ should reign as King, and subdue all his E∣nemies under his Feet, and lead Captivity Captive, that a Gift may be received, which Gift is Eternal Life, and this Life is in the Son; by which Gift, all that are in the Son-like Obedience do witness, being made Heirs with him in the eternal Covenant, which is established upon better Promises then the first; there∣fore he taketh away the first, that he might establish the second, which is witnessed in the Son-like Obedience, by the which we are made the Righteousness of God through him, the which is a My∣stery to the dark World, whose Mouthes are now open to speak Evil of that they know not, calling the Great and Mighty Works of God, The Delusions of Satan, and the conditions now witnessed in the Sons and Daughters, that the Prophets and A∣postles both passed through, to speak of those things, they now call The Works of Antichrist. But he is an Antichrist that denyeth the Father and the Son: Now see who is an Antichrist; No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him: He that denies this Re∣velation, denies both Father and Son (that is an Antichrist.) Now to know the Father, is Eternal Life; and he that saith, He knoweth, and hath fellowship with the Father, and walketh in Dark∣ness, is a Lyar; and the Devil is the Father of Lyes: And he that liveth not in the Truth, which is Jesus Christ, he must needs
Lye, because he is out of the Truth, and therefore found an Enemy to the pure Truth, as it is in Jesus, who is the Truth and Life it self, by whom the World is, and shall be judged, when the Lord shall come in flaming Fire, rendering Venge∣ance on all that know him not: This Day is even at hand, yea, even now the Lord is coming a swift Witness against all un∣righteous Ones, who hold the Truth of God in Unrighteous∣ness, living in their ungodly Practices, sporting themselves now in the Day-time, spending their time upon their Lusts, living in their own Wills, speaking forth the Saints Words, but are Enemies to the Saints Conditions. Oh! consider, consider, the Lord is Just in all his Wayes, and he is come to judge the Earth with Righteousness, he will plead with all Flesh, before him all Faces shall gather Paleness; and in him, who is pure Light, are all the Secrets of all Hearts laid open; for nothing hideth from him, who is a God of consuming Fire, and of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity: Oh be ashamed and confounded, all ye In∣habitants of the Earth and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you, and rageth, because his time is but short. To thy first in page 6. where thou sayest, It must needs be the Spirit of Antichrist and Delusion, that doth mis-inform the Heart. I Answer; The Heart it self is deceitful, and out of the a∣bundance of thy Heart, thy mouth speaketh, page 8. or else thou wouldest not speak, as though a Deceitful Heart might be mis∣informed by a delusion; for Deceit and Delusion is but one, which lodgeth in the Hearts of all the Children of Disobedience, who are all in the Death, the Curse and the Fall, unless they come to witness Restoration, the Stoney Heart taken away, and a New Heart given, which is by the putting off the Old Man with his Lusts and Corruptions, and the New Man put on, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. But in the Light in thy own Conscience, see when ever thou couldest witness thy Redemption, and thy heart free from Delusi∣ons, as thou speakest, or from the power of Darkness, when thou by thy own Relation to me, went from one Parsonage to an∣other, and that not without thy Gown (as thou callest it) upon thy back, that thou hast looked upon as it was indeed Anti∣christian;
and then after at Bodinham, thou didst sue the poor Peo∣ple for Tythes, to my knowledge, witness one poor man thou didst sue for one Shilling, and wouldst have constrained the poor man to have paid Charges for that one Shilling, if I and some other had not spoke to thee, after thou hadst often refused the one shilling without Charge, though the Light let thee see. Tythes to be con∣trary to Christ, yet then lived contrary to the Light in thy own Conscience, as thou wast made to confess in my hearing, and hun∣dreds more, that thou hadst acted in it contrary to thy Conscience two years; and before that time thou didst confess unto me, and to others; How thou wast going to take counsel of men, how to sue for thy Tythes, and the Lord met with thee, yet the Devil had like to have taken thee off of the work of the Lord again, divers times, as thou confessedit, Then thou layest groaning under the burden of thy Tythes; yet thou resolvedst to keep them another year, yet I had thoughts to the contrary, and was made to tell thee at J. B's house in Hereford, on the sixth day, that thou wouldest e'er long roar a∣gainst thy Tythes like a Lyon; and on the next first day after it was so, and thou wast made to acknowledge the Lord in it, and sent thy Man with those few words to me; Brother Smith, the Lord hath done a strange Work in me this Morning, and I shall alter strangely this day therefore pray earnestly for me and make what haste thou canst to come unto me. Now this is that which thou now callest Delu∣sion; for this was the greatest Power that ever thou couldest wit∣ness; but thou wast made to see by the Light, the Emtiness of thy own words, both in Speaking and Prayer before, as thou callest it; witness that in Margarets Grave-Yard, where thou spokest words, the which were a burden to thy Life, & after acknowledg∣edst, That it was nothing but Flesh, though thou didst strive much in thy own strength: And at Len. thou toldest the whole Assembly, That thou hadst long spoke after the manner of men; but now they must ex∣pect no more such from thee; and that thy Praying was as dead as Ditch-Water; but now thou shouldst wait to Pray in the Spirit, and speak by the Spirit; and the like at Cliston: And then thou wast convinced, that thou must leave all, even Glebe-land too, and so live on thy own Land, and build on thy own Land, as thou callest
it; and thou then wast convinced of more Deceit in thy Heart; therefore thou wast not at all freed from Deceit, but always lived in the Antichristian state, where thou art yet, witness thy own hand in page 5 where thou confessest, Thou hast got a sinful Heart; which is a Heart in Sin, and full of Sin; and we know, that none but the Pure in Heart shall see God; but Sin is of the Devil, and is the Work of Darkness; and none that walk in Darkness have fel∣lowship with God, 1 John 1. 6. Here thou discoverest plainly, that the Old Heart is not yet taken away; therefore thou wast not at all, nor yet is free from Delusions: Therefore for shame leave off thy judging the Hearts of of others, as thou hast; read E. S. p. 6, 11, 19, 16. And as for the five Charges which thou mentionest, p 9. and saying, That if we had had more Accusations against thee, its like thou shouldst have had them; and in saying, The first Charge was Hypocrisie, in pag. 7. I answer, That that which was written by me in answer to thy Deceitful Lines first sent to us, I shall for the sake of the simple set down plainly, in the same order, as it was written by me, having a just Copy of it by me; and then let the tender spirited read thy Lyes in thy own Book. A true Copy of the Answer sent by me and the rest, to thy Letter and Accusacion. 1. You said, you would tell us truly, &c. Answer; There cannot be a true discovery of Truth brought forth in these that are yet in the fallen estate, as thou art. 2. That there is a Mystery of Iniquity in us, that we see not. Answ. The Mystery of Iniquity is not discovered, but by the pure Light and Life of God, as it is freely given forth from God, the which Light all the Children of Light live in; but thou livest in the dark ways of the World, and livest not in this pure Light to judge by. 3. That the time is come, that thou shouldst dis-burden thy self of the discovery of Truth. Answ. Thou hast laid aside too much Truth; that which con∣vinceth
of thy Evil is now a burden unto thee; but we disown all that disown the Truth. Mark, 4. That the Devil is an Angel of Light, and his Nature is to act in the Light. Doth the Scripture say, that the Devil's Nature is to act in the Light? Answ. Thou art imagining what the Devil is without thee, but thou knowest but little of his actings in thee, although thou art his Servant, and livest in his Light (as thou callest it) but the Light of Life thou art a stranger unto. 5. The Light, as it is acted in the Soul, giveth no Discovery of the Deceit, but rather covers it all. Answ. By virtue of the pure Light that proceeds from the Fa∣ther, we see thee live in that thou callest Light, which doth not discover unto thee the abominable Practices thou art in (to wit) Pride (thou dost usually call thy own Child Mr. Benjamin Skipp) (a Proud practice, seldom heard of) the love of the World, de∣ceiving the People, upholding the Worship of the Beast, painted over with the Saints words, an Enemy to the Saints Life, as doth now more fully appear. 6. Thou writest so largely of the Devil, as if thou wert acquainted with all his secrets, both what he is doing, and what he will do. Answ. The things of God thou art a stranger to; for they are hid from thine Eyes, and all such wise Ones of the Devil, the World and the Flesh, who are in the first Nature, as thou art. 7. Thou writest of what the Devil will bring us to. Answ. 1. It is neither thee, nor the Devil in thee that know what we are, much less what we shall be. 2. If thou, and the Accuser of the Brethren in thee, have ought against us at present, that we walk not up to the present discovery of the pure Light, as it is in measure brought forth in us, then I charge thee to speak. 3. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam that is at present in thy own Eye, before thou goest to cast the supposed Mote that thou thinkest may fall into our Eyes hereafter. In the close of this Answer, I writ a tender Letter in love to his Soul. Now let any that live in the Light compare these se∣veral Answers with that in pag. 7, 8, 9. In Answer to that which thou callest Railing and Reviling Lan∣guage,
in pag. 10. the Devil hath always brought up his Children with so much pretence of Manners, that they must not tell a Lyar he Lyes, nor a Thief he is a Robber; or if any tell the Proud of hsi Pride, or the Covetous of their Covetousness, then this is called Railing; read the Scriptures cited by him, this is fully cited, Tit. 1. 13. c. 3. 15, &c. See how thou condemnest the Practice of Christ, both in his Person and Members in pag. 11. To that which thou callest thy Experience, in pag. 11. I tell thee, thou hast had much Experience of Deceit, being always in it; but thou never hadst any experience of the powerful Work∣ings of God in us, only thou wast made by the Light to see thy Filthiness in some measure, and then presently thou wentst from the Counsel of the Lord, and acted and spoke in thy own Will, the which was Deceit indeed, running before the Light, the which I mourned over, and often complained to my Friends, who can witness the same. Pag. 12. The Scripture cited by thee, Mal. 3. They shall discern between the Righteous and the Wicked, between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not; the Promise being in measure fulfil∣led in us, we discern thee still to live in thy own Will and Wis∣dom: Therefore when thou haltedst between two Opinions long, at last one of our Friends was made sharply to reprove thee, the which thou couldest not own, and therefore left us that had under∣gone burdens upon our own Spirits for thee, in condescending unto thee in tender love, desiring thou mightst be made at last to witness the Work of the Lord in thee, unto which thou art still a Stranger, and now an Enemy unto. In thy pag. 13. thou mentionest a Scripture, as to us, 1 Tim. 6. 4, 5. They are there discovered by their Covetousness; for they suppose, that Gain is Godliness. And canst thou in the least accuse s of Covetousness? if thou canst, spare not to speak the Truth, but else let shame cover thy face for so many Lyes, and comparing us with those in this Text. Ask the Light in thy Conscience whether thou hast not looked after Gain, witness thy Tythes, thy looking after another Parsonage to that thou hadst, witness thy Physical Office, thy questioning what to do for more Main∣tenance, although thou hast told me, that thy Lands was 10 1. per Annum; 2 Tim. 3. 4. that is thy own Portion, witness thy many
Instruments of Musick in thy House. Page 16. thou writest of Faith, but thou knowest not that Faith that purifieth the Soul; he that hath this Hope, purifieth himself as he is pure; he that believeth is entred into his Rest, hath ceased from his own Works, as God did from his, the which Faith thou art a stranger unto; for thou hast writ thy own Lyes, and the Deceit of thy own Heart, and thy carnal Thoughts, the which thou callest the World (with whom thou art) to judge, witness pag. 9. line 11. & 7. 18. and thou thinkest in pag. 16, 51, 56, 57. Page 17. Thou sayest, that we esteem, The more our Hearts are brought off the dealings of God, and Prayer, and Spiritual Ex∣ercises, the more pure and Perfect: The which thou knowest to be a Lye; witness thy own Words, after the Meeting at Clifton, where thou sayest, Thou sawst such a Spirit of Prayer as thou never hadst seen before; To which those that were there can yet testifie; and we witness growth in Grace and Knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18. and walk from Grace to Grace, leaving the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 1. forgetting those things that are behind, we press forwards; For man in his own Wisdom can∣not find out the Lord, who is a Spirit, John 4. 24. and regard∣eth not the Wise in Heart, Job 37. 23, 24. Therefore if any man will be Wise, let him become a Fool, that so he may be found in the VVisdom that is from above, James 3. 17. Next, thou sayest, That we desire the Perishing of the former Wayes of God. This is another of thy Lyes; For all the Wayes of the Lord are Righteous, Psal. 145. 17. so in page 18. Satan acts thee to call that Scripture dangerous, Phil. 3. 7, 8. If thou callest Paul's Experience dangerous, its no wonder that thou callest ours so too: But we know, that all Scriptures are written for our Learning, the which we are searching. Next, thou wilt show the Thoughts (and but the Thoughts) of thy own Heart, which is thy old sinful Heart, wituess thy own Hand, page 5. Line 11, 12. Therefore from thy wicked Heart, thou being ignorant of the Spirit, dost in page 24. even Jeer at speaking by the Spirit, in opposition to all the Holy Men of God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. Therefore thou art an Enemy to Prayer in the Spirit, Ephes. 6. 18. the which we witness: Therefore, in the Light of Jesus Christ, thou art calling thy own Company
(to wit, the VVorld) to try thy Exposition of thy own Lyes, that thou hast cast upon us in page 23. and the last in thy Second Rule, page 23. there thou denyest the Sufferings of Christ, be∣ing ignorant of it in thy own Soul; but we know, that if we suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him: So we are made willing to fill up the measure of the Sufferings of Christ; and those that have thus suffered in the Flesh, have ceased from Sin, 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. Thy Second, where thou mentionest Quaking (thy Lyes there we deny, but Quaking and Trembling) we witness to be the Saints conditions fulfilled in us, who witness the same Power of God as they did, Jer. 5. 22. sa. 66. 2. Psal. 2. 12. In the Third, thou speakest thy own Lyes at random. In the Fourth, thou hast declared thy self to be an Enemy to the Sufferings of Christ, calling it A Delusion: Oh let Shame stop thy Mouth forever! thou Enemy of the Cross of Christ, and thy own Soul. For although Isaiah prophesied of what Christ in his own Person hath fulfilled, yet the Members of Christ are to take up his Cross and follow him; as it is written and and wit∣nessed, 2 Cor. 1. 5. For as the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also aboundeth by Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 13. 2. Cor. 4. 10. That which thou and the rest of the VVorld doth call our Bondage and Slavery, page 18. that was the Saints, and is our Joy and Liberty, by which the righteous Seed is brought forth in Obedience to the Living God. But it is no wonder that the World hate us, for they know us not; If we were of the World, the World would love his own, John 15. 18, 19. Matth. 5. 11, 12. In Answer to that in page 29. Jesus Christ is unto us the Bread of Life, John 6. 33, 35, 48. and he is unto us the Water of Life, John 4. 14. and 7. 37. In page 30. thy Lyes are made manifest unto all men that know us; For which of us doth deny to La∣bour with his Hands? And which of us is it that live in Idle∣ness? Nay, it is Satan, the Father of Lyes, that acts thee to say, that we should say, It is the Language of Antichrist that bids men take care for their Families. For we do take care for our Families with all diligence, in the sight of God; but our Conversation is without Covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. What is mentioned in the third Rule, page 31, 32, 33, 34, To
that I answer; The same Spirit that ruled in the Children of Disobedience then, even in the dayes of the Apostles, the same Spirit ruleth in thee and others. Now they stumble at both Pro∣phets, Christ and his Apostles; and now the same Generation are stumbling at Christ in his Memembers; so all they that stumble, stumble at the Light, and at the Corner-stone. As for the Professors, page 36. I tell thee and them, that all Professors that are Enemies to Possession, we do deny to be any Members of Christs Church, which is in God, 2 Thes. 1. Page 37. Is another Lye, yea, more then one, plainly in saying, That we rank our selves with the sinful men of the World, who are in∣deed under all the Powers of Antichrist, from the which thou wast never yet redeemed by Christ in thee; for thou art a stranger to his Life. See what thou raisest from thy Supposition, or thy [If] in pag 37. see what thou cast witness from those Scriptures fulfilled in thee; thou art a Thief and a Robber, stealing the Apostles words, stealing the word from thy Neighbour; thou confessest, That we walk like as the Apostles did in many things, as in Conversa∣tion, Words and Writings. In pag. 40 and 41. thou sayst, That the whole Bulk of our Actions hitherto, as far as thou hast either known or heard, do declare us to be carried forth as Ministers of Righteousness. Oh! let all take notice of this, the Devil speaks some Truth: but in the latter end of pag. 40. thou art thinking that Satans Kingdom is divided: Oh filthy Conclusion! Oh meer Babel! Canst thou open thy Mouth, and let thy Pen run against such a harmeless People, of whom thou thy self art made to confess such Excellent things? I shall now leave a little in following of thee in thy confused and deceitfull Lines, and shall turn to that Scripture, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. for such were false Apostles, deceitful Workers, &c. In pag. 41. elsewhere, thou raisest thy own Conceivings (as of other things) of the Scripture, and then amplisiest or illustratest upon thy own Imaginations, so givest private Interpretations of the Scriptures, for thy own private ends, whereas no Scripture is of any private Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. 20.
I shall lay down by plain Scripture, who those false Apostles are. 1. They are such as preach another Jesus, 2. Cor. 11. 4. Now Jesus is a Saviour; Thou shalt call his Name Jesus; for he shall save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1. 21. He maketh an End of Sin, Dan. 9. 24. Being dead with Christ, Rom. 6. 8. the Body of Sin is destroy∣ed, Vers. 6. He that is dead with Christ, is freed from Sin, Vers. 7. compared with 1 Pet. 4. 1. By the which we are made free from Sin, Rom. 6. 18, 22. and become the Servants of God: So that the Blood of this Jesus, who is the Son of the living God, cleanseth us from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. ch. 2. 12. because your Sins are for∣given for his Names-sake; which Name is Jesus, a Saviour from Sin; and we know, that he is manifested to take away our Sins; and he that abideth in him, sinneth not, 1 John 3. 5, 6. Rev. 1. 5. Now whosoever believeth, that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5. 1. Now Jesus is a Savior, Christ is God manifest in Flesh, and anointed the true Teacher, 1 John 2. 17. Now he that can witness Jesus Christ to save him from Sin, he is born of God, and can witness Christ in him, the hope of Glory, which is Emanuel, God with us, and those dwell in God, and God in them, 1 John 4. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Now Sin is the unfruitful Work of Darkness, God is Light, 1 John 1. 5. Now he that saith, he can witness Jesus, and is born of God, and yet lives in Dark∣ness, to wit, Sin, he is a Lyar. Now Jesus is one with the Fa∣ther, and dwelleth in the Father: Now he that dwelleth in the Father, hath this Hope or Faith that purisieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. and 5. 1. And he that abideth in him, sinneth not: This is Jesus, the Son of the living God, that sa∣veth his People from their Sins, whom Paul witnessed, revealed in him, Gal. 1. 16. by the which he preached Grace and Peace to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 3, 30. and 22. 16. Now there is no other Name given under Heaven, by which men shall be saved. Therefore all those that cannot witness this Jesus, this Son of God, they are false Apostles, that speak of a Jesus that they know not, like those that went to cast out Devils in the Name of Jesus, whom Paul preached, Acts 19. 13, 14, 15, 16. Those were not Vagabond-Jews only, but chief of the Priests that did so: Now
all that cannot witness this Christ, this Jesus revealed and brought forth in them, as the true Apostles did, that spoke from the Life of Christ in them, even all others are false Apostles, among whom thou art seen in the Light of Jesus Christ to be, and in the World, like a raging Sea, whose Waves cast up Mire and Dirt continual∣ly, unto whom there is no Peace, Isa. 57. 20, 21. a Wandering Star, never settled, Jude 13. but tossed up and down with every Wind of Doctrine, from such turn away. II. How you may know them. Pag. 36. 9. Abiding in the Light that comes from Christ; in that Light you will see Light, and so comprehend all the Children of Darkness; for he that followeth Christ, who is the Light of the World, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life to judge all the false Apostles, and all the Children of the Night, who live in the dark Mind, in Pride, Covetousness, Lying, making a Trade of the Scriptures, which were spoken forth from the Light, by those that witnessed it; but thou that takest up their Expressions, and livest not in the same Life, thou art the false Apostle that preachest another Gospel. Now besides the foregoing Scriptures, thou hast declared thy self to be a false Apostle, by thy own Writings. First, in writing thy [Thinkings and Conceivings] page 50. yet my former Thoughts, page 53. I am but in part convinced, page 16. Methinks, page 51. As I conceive, such were the false Apostles, 1 Tim. 1. 7. understanding not what they say, nor whereof they affirm, but speak and write the Imaginations of their own Hearts, as thou hast done in page 18. The thoughts of my own Heart, in the which are many Devices, Prov. 19. 21. Secondly, In being one of the world, and calling thy fellow-Creatures of the World to judge what thou sayest; and here thou hast manifested thy self to be a false Prophet, entered into the World, which the Saints of God never did; page 23. And let all the World assure themselves that, in page 45. Here thou dost write thy self (as thou art) calls thy own to witness, the World, one with the World, therefore we being gathered out of the World, are hated and written against by thee, John. 15. . I
shall forbear to write what I know of thy former, and yet con∣tinued Practices, this being sufficient to prove plainly, that thou art a false Apostle, whose many Lyes written against us, I need not to mention in particular, only some few in short, that the simple may not be deceived by thee, nor the Truth suffer altoge∣ther under thy Scandals. Page 48. Thou biddest the feeble Creatures of the World, To judge of Spiritual things, though the World by Wisdom knows not God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. page 46. thou sayest, That we do Lying Wonders, But hast thou in all those Lyes and Writings of thine proved that any of those which thou callest Wonders, are Lying Wonders? for it is not thy saying it is a Lying Wonder, that makes it to be so; for there were such as thee, that said, that Christ cast out Devils through Belzebub, but they were Lyars, and so art thou. Thou sayest, Our Works are Deceitful, page 49. But thou hast no ground for it, but the deceit of thy own heart, page 18. the which thou callest the World to bear thee witness, page 23. 50. Thou sayest, We disown the Power and Spirit of Truth (which is a Lye) but thou hast a form of Godliness, denying the power thereof, 2 Tim. 3. 5. Page 53. Thou sayest, Thou art in part convinced, that per ad∣venture the Lord would have his People walk in some way, whereby they might be brought into a perfect Unity in Heart. Oh! art thou not here ashamed! O let even the World (whom thou callest unto so often) read thy Ignorance! What! art thou but in part convinced what way leads to Unity? Oh! for shame, for shame, give over thy Profession, talk no longer of the Gospel, thou hast made thy self manifest to all men! Oh! hast thou been talking of the Gospel so long, and art yet Ignorant of the way that leads to Unity. Oh! let shame stop thy mouth, and cover thy face forever! but if thou wouldest shift from this, and say, Thou meanest an outward way or form. I tell thee, there is no way to have fellowship with the Father, 1 John 1. 3. but in the U∣nity of the Faith, and the Knowledge (not a Thinking) of the Son of God, who is the true living, and only way unto the Father, John 14. 6. where is perfect unity, even one Heart and one way, Jer. 32. 39. which is a way of holiness: The Wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein, Isa. 35. 8.
Also in page 53. thou sayest, That thou art very sensible, that thou hast lost thy Comforts, and therefore thou dost hope not to give over until thou hast found some way or means of having thy former. Enjoyments refreshed. Why! hast thou lost that thou never hadst? thou saidst but now, That thou wast but in part convinced of the way; And hadst thou the Comforter long ago, and lost him now? the Way and the Comforter is but one, the which is Jesus Christ, John 14. 6. 17. 26. chap. 17. 23. I know, that if Jesus Christ had been brought forth in thee, without which there is no true comfort, who is the substance of all Tythes, Types, Forms and Shadows, that thou couldst not unto this day have remained a Parish Priest, and so upheld an Antichristian Priesthood, halting between many Opinions, neither according to Aaron, Levi nor Christ, but living in thy own will, and so living above Christ, who lived not in his own Will; for saith he, Not my Will, but thine be done, John 6. 38. And now who will regard thy writings, when thou acknow∣ledgest, That the Comforter, which is the Spirit of Truth, is de∣parted from thee: Now it appears, thou art a Lyar indeed; now thou hast no Truth born up in thy Understanding; thy former Enjoyments (as thou callest it) which were indeed nothing but Comprehensions got up in the Wisdom of the Serpent. Oh! art thou not ashamed, that the World should now read thy Confusion, which thou didst soon make up in thy Writings? Art thou not ashamed in such a condition as this, when thou con∣fessest, thy former Enjoyments and Comforts are departed from thee, even now to writ against those that thou acknowledgest, to have large Experiences, and much of the Power of Truth through Christ, page 50? Oh! take heed, lest it had been better for thee, that a Millstone had been hanged about thy neck, and thou cast into the Sea! Oh! canst thou not look back on him, whom thou hast thus pierced, to wit, the Life of Christ in others? Now thou mayst read with Shame and Tears that which thy own hand hath written from own sinful Heart, look in page 5, 8, and 18. which was then in the apostatized condition, without the former Com∣forts (as thou calledst it) page 53. Now thou art found to be a false Apostle indeed. Oh! remember from whence thou art fallen
and do thy first Works; yea, Repente'er it be too late, Rev. 2. 5. Oh, though thou canst strive with man, there is no striving with thy Maker, who will come a swift Witness against all deceitful Workers, who livewithin the power of what they speak or write; much more against those that write filthy Abominable Lyes. Oh! if thou lovest either Christ or thy own Soul, return, return unto the Light of Christ in thy own Conscience, which will let thee see the Deceit of thy own sinful Heart out of the abundant Deceit thereof, thy Pen hath run so largely in Confusion. Now I charge thee in the presence of the living God, (in as much love to thy Soul as ever) that thou return to the Light of Christ in thy own Conscience, and mind that which cheks thee in secret. I tell thee (man) in love, there is something yet in thee, which will witness me to be true. See one more page 64. where for thy own defence, not for the defence of the Truth, thou sayst, Thou wast necessitated to fly unto the Practices and Truths of other men, to wit, Baptists; where it is plain, thou hadst not the spirit of Christ to fly unto and speak from, as the true Apostles had, wit∣ness one, Acts 6. 10. Therefore thou art both seen in the Light, proved by Scripture and thy own Writings, to be a false Apo∣stle, and a false Minister, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Much more might be said and proved, both from thy Writings and Actings, but I desire the good of thy soul, by this which is sufficient at present to prove thee to be one of the Wandering Star, Jude 13. A Word to all Professors in the World. BEing it was ordered of my Lord God, and Father of Lights, that something must go forth in Print, as from me who am the least of all Saints, I was even as freely engaged in my Spirit, out of tender Love to your Souls, to present a few Lines from that measure of the Spirit which is brought forth in me. Oh! My Friends, my Friends! the hour is not only coming, but now is witnessed in me, that the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, John 5. 25. and the Voice of the true Dove is heard in our Land, to wit, this Earth∣ly
Tabernacle that is made the Temple of the living God, who is now fulfilling his Promises in us, that walk not after Flesh, but after the Spirit, even in us is the Lord establishing his New and Everlasting Covenant, even the sure and certain Mercies of Da∣vid, which is by the Life of Jesus Christ in us fulfilled and witnes∣sed, whereby we have fellowship with the Father, and are in measure brought to live in him, and he in us, where we have Joy, Rest and eternal Peace, which passeth all Understanding, and all the Worlds Comprehension, where all the Children of the Light meet, and see face to face; for the Lord hath brought again Sion, who is become the Perfection of Beauty, out of which God now shineth, Psal. 50. 2. and is become our Glory, and we his, Isa. 46. 13. O Praises, Praises be unto him who hath redeemed us out of the Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, to serve the living God in Newness of Life, and not in Oldness of Letter, that so now we may offer up eternally living and eternal Sacrifice and Praise for evermore, who hath in measure redeemed us from the World, and out of all Darkness that is therein, and hath trans∣lated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, and made us Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, which is the Eternal Light of Life; for God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; and all those that live in him, are the Children of the Day, who walk in the Day, even the pure Light, in the which there is no occasion of stumbling, our Feet being guided in the Path of Peace, which is the true and living way, in which the way faring man, though a Fool shall not Err, Isa. 35. 8. which is the pure way of Holiness, leading up into the full Enjoyment of the Fa∣ther, who hath long waited to be gracious unto us; and now in the Day of his Love and Power hath gathered us in his Arms of Love, and brought us home unto himself, who were before the Out∣casts of Israel, wandering with you from Mountain to Hill, but did not find Rest unto our Souls; but now the great and mighty Power of the Lord hath raised up his own Seed in us, to cry Ha∣lelujah unto him; to whom alone be all Honour, Glory and Obe∣dience, and Eternal Praises forever, even forever and ever; for he that was lost is found, he that was dead is alive, and behold he liveth for evermore. Now my Friends, the whole World lieth in Wickedness, and
all the World by Wisdom knows not God; the natural man per∣ceiveth not the things of God, which are hid from the Wise and Prudent, even from the Readers of the Scripture, from Scribes, Pharisees, Priests, yea, the Princes of this World; for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, who is crucified daily by the same spirit that now ruleth in the Children of Disobedience, even in the Scribes, Priests and People, that live in the same Nature, where the learned Ones of the World are, and all those that walk in Darkness, to wit, Pride Covetousness, Love of the World, Hatred, Va∣rience, Strife, Sedition, Heresie, Backbiting, Heady, High∣minded, Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God, Scoffers, walking after their own Ungodly Lusts, Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own Shame, who account Gain Godli∣ness, whose Eyes are full of Adultery, Feet swift to shed Blood, Ears open to all deceit, whose Mouthes are full of Cursing and Bitterness, the Poyson of Asps is under their Lips, their Throats are an open Sepulcher, who imagin Mischief, their Hearts being altogether Deceitful and desperately Wicked: Such as these are the Fruits of the Flesh, in the which all the World lies; there∣fore I witness against the World, that the Works thereof are Evil. Now in the world there are Sects, Schismes, Judgments and Opini∣ons, there they are heaping up Teachers to themselves, having itching Ears, and according to the number of their Fansies, so are their wayes of Worship; according to the number of their Imaginations, so are their gods; for there are many gods, and many Lords, but the living God is not known by the World; for it by Wisdom knows not God: No man knoweth the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son revealeth him: Now he that hath the Son revealed in him, is born of God, and he that is born of God overcom∣eth the World, and sinneth not; He that sinneth, hath not seen him: But this is a hard saying, who can bear it? the World cannot; for the World hears its own; they that are of God, hear Gods Word; ye hear them not, therefore ye are not of God. Now Friends, all you that have looked after me, and other men, for teaching, now I can write unto you what I know, that it is the Lord alone, that teacheth his people to profit, none
teacheth like he, who is now my Teacher indeed, and will be yours if you are made willing and obedient to be taught, directed and guided by him, who is gathering his out of all Nations, Kin∣dreds, and Tongues, Ezek. 31. 11. which is by Jesus Christ, the one and only Priest, who is the Light of the Gentiles, and the light of the World, by which he hath enlightened every one that cometh into the World, John 1. 9. which light shineth into the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehendeth it not, verse 5. Now the World is set in the heart of man, eccles. 3. 11. Of the which World, Christ is the Light, and he that followeth him, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life, John 8. 12. This is that Grace of God that hath appeared unto all men, teaching them to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. This is the Light of Christ, who is the Word of God in the Heart; for his Word of the living God is not far off, but it is nigh thee, in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, that thou mayest do it, Deut. 30. 14. Now therefore, Friends, look not forth after them that say, Christ is here, or there; for they are all Deceivers: The Word is nigh, the Light is within thee, even in thy Dark Heart, although thy Dankness cannot comprehend it, because thou lovest Dark∣ness rather then the Light of Jesus Christ, which shineth in thy Consceince, and lets thee see the evil of thy Wayes, and calls thee to Repentance, and to forsake the Wicked, and live: This is the Talent that thou art hiding in the Earth; for the which thou must give an Account; therefore say I unto thee, mind that Teacher that teacheth to deny Ungodliness, and this is the Light to Jesus Christ in thy Conscience, the which Light proceedeth from Christ, and leadeth all that love it (John 8. 12.) up to Christ, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, the only Way, and no other way to the Father. Now all of you owning this VVord, and Teacher, and Light in your own Consciences, you will come to witness Jesus Christ in the Light of Life, and know him to be the way unto the Fa∣ther, which leads out of the Darkness of all the VVorld's Ways, VVorships, Forms, Fashions, Customs, VVords, VVayes and Actions, and come to be gathered in the Light unto Jesus Christ, who is the Light, and from the Light then to come to witness
the Scriptures to be true, yea, even fulfilled in you by the same Spirit as it was in them that did write and speak forth the Scrip∣tures, and so witness with them against the same things that were witnessed against then, by the Children of the Light, who had fellowship with the Father, by the which they saw that which in measure I witness, that there is but one Way, one Truth, one Light one Faith, one Baptism, one Spirit, one Head, one High Priest, who∣ever liveth to make intercession for us, one Church of the first-born, whose Names are written in Heaven, one God over all, who is Rich unto all that call upon him in Spirit and Truth, the which Wor∣shippers the Father seeketh to Worship him, who is a Spirit, and all his Worships are Spiritual; but God hears not Sinners; and he that regardeth Iniquity in his Heart, the Lord will not hear him; for there are none but the pure in heart that shall see God, whose Presence is Terrible to all the Workers of Iniquity, that continue in the unfruitful Works of Darkness. Now all of you, see that you keep unto the true Guide, which is Jesus Christ, and follow him, and see that you do not turn a∣gain to the Vomit, as the manner of some is, who begin in the Spirit and end in the Flesh: Oh! leave all for Christ, you can∣not serve two Masters; you cannot be of the World, and of God, you must witness a Separation: Therefore in Love to all your Souls, that have been Professors with me in publick, in these parts of the Nation, and all others, flatter not your selves in your Condi∣tions, promising your selves Liberty, whilst you are the Servants of Corruption; therefore forsake the Wicked, and live. Now my Friends, and all Persecutors, marvel not at my Change; for the Wicked have no Changes; therefore they fear not God, Psal. 55. 19. but I am made to witness the fear of the Lord to be the beginning of Wisdom, the which Wisdom is pure, which cometh down from above, James 3. 17. which none of the Princes of this World know, 1 Cor. 1. 21. therefore they call the Do∣ctrines of Christ Madness, Acts 26. 24. for the preaching of the Cross of Christ is to the Joros a Stumbling-block, to the Greeks Foolishness; for Christ is this day, as he was ever, a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offence to both the Houses of Israel, 2 Cor. 1. 13. therefore are they this day speaking Evil of that
they know not; for say they concerning these Sects call'd Quakers, We know that it is every where spoken against, Acts 28. 22. But in the Way that men call Heresie, do I Worship the God of my Father, Acts 24. 14. and am not ashamed to own the Power that shakes the Earth; for if I should be ashamed to own the Power of Christ before men, then he might justly be ashamed of me be∣fore my Father which is in Heaven; but I own and witness the same Power which made Moses exceedingly fear and quake. The which overpowered Daniel, that he had no strength left in him, Dan. 10. 8. Which Power made Habakkuk Tremble, his Lips Quivered, Rottenness entred into his Bones, Hab. 3. 16. the which Power struck down Paul, Acts 9. 3, 4, 5, 6. which caused the Goaler to come in Trembling, Acts 16. 26, 27, 28, 29. There∣fore I say unto all, serve the Lord with Fear and Trembling, Psal. 2. 11. and work out your Salvation with fear and Treambling, Phil. 2. 12. for now I know the Lord to be with them that Tremble at his Word: Therefore O foolish People, without Understand∣ing, which have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not! Fear ye not me? saith the Lord, Will ye not Tremble at my Presence? Jer. 5. 21, 22. Are you worse than Devils, that Fear and Tremble, Isa. 2. 19. And now the mighty Power of the living God hath shaken the Earth, and the Heavens, that now that which cannot be shaken may re∣main, Heb. 12. 27. Now all you that will enter in with the Bride-groom, wait to receive the same Power; for the Lord Jesus Christ is come, tendering himself unto his own, John 1. 11. and I witness, that as many as receive him, receive Power to become the Sons of God, John 1. 12. O be not Fools, and slow with Heart to believe all that the Prophets and Apostles saith; for the Lord is still a God with Power, he is the same yesterday and to day, and forever, whose everlasting Love is shed abroad in our Hearts, by which the Love of the World is cast out; For if any man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him, John 2. 15. But we are bought with a Price, and after glorifie God in Body, Soul and Spirit, which is the Lord's, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Being made Mini∣sters, nof of the Letter, which killeth; but of the Spirit, which gi∣veth Lie, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Giving no offence in any thing, that the Ministry of Christ be not blamed; but in all things approving our selves as the ministers of God, in much Patience, in Affliction,
in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Ta∣mults, in Labours, in Watchings, in Fastings; by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armour of Righteousness, on the Right hand and on the Left, by Honour, and by Dishonour, by Evil Report and Good Report; as Deceivers, and yet True; as unknown, and yet well known; as Dying, and behold we Live; as Chastened, and not Killed; as Sor∣rowful, and yet always Rejoycing; as Poor, and yet making many Rich; as having Nothing, yet Possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 Verses. Now the Light of the glorious Go∣spel in the Face of Jesus Christ hath shined into our Hearts, whereby the Grace that was to be brought in at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13. is now in us witnessed, even the Grace the Apostle exhorted to hope for, and the Prophets searched after, 2 Pet. 2. 20. the which Grace and Glory is now made manifest in the Sons and Daughters, whereby the everlast∣ing Gospel is sounded forth in the Ears of many Thousands in England, blessed are they that hear the joyful sound thereof: For verily, verily, as the four Hundred and Thirty years Bondage in Aegypt was at last accomplished, and as the Captivity in Babylon had an end, and the Lord brought again the Captivity of his People, even so now the many Years of Apostacy is over, and the Lord hath heard the Cry of his own Seed, and is come down to deliver Israel out of all Distresses, and to gather the Out-casts, Psalm 147. 2. And to bring home that which is driven away, and to bind up that which is broken, and to strengthen that which is sick; but he will destroy the Fat and the Strong, and will feed them with Judgment, Ezek. 34. 26. but his own shall be deliver∣ed from the many Shepherds, which have destroyed the Flock of Christ, and they shall feed no longer, Verse 20. yea, verily People, the mighty Power of the Lord is risen in England, to gather his from the Corners of the Earth, and they that have been long in the High-ways to De∣struction, being lind and Lame, shall now be compelled to come in to the Sup∣per of the Lamb, and eat of the hidden Manna: But many of the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out; For, for Judgment is Christ come into the World, that they that see not, may see; and they that soe; may now be made Blind, Joh 939. And the Sword of the Lord is drawn against the man of Sin, to cut it down Root and Branch, and to set up the Kingdom of Christ in Rightcousness and true Ho∣liness: And this Work of the Lord shall certainly go on, and Men, Devils, nor the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it.
The just Complaint of the Afflicted (against the Rulers, who oppress the Innocent) to be deli∣vered to the Judge of the Sessions at Win∣chester, the 8th Moneth, 1658. YOu that are set to rule over others should not let secret Envy, Ambition and Prejudice so rule over you, as not at all to hearken to the Counsel of the Meek, nor re∣ceive Instruction from the Simple, whom the Lord preserveth, but you should let Haughtiness and Arrogancy be done away; for God resisteth the Proud: And you should come to that which is meek, low, sober and humble, with it to know a ruling over that which hath captivated you under the power of Sin and Satan, who hath so blinded the Mind, that the Meek of the Earth are become your Enemies for telling you the truth; and the Day upon you is come, in which you cannot endure sound Doctrine: But this I tell you, That they who hate Reproof, are bruitish, and every man is bruitish in his Knowledge; yea, O ye men, your Pastors are become bruitish, and have not known the Lord; though this be a hard saying to you, who are your selves in that which is to be ruled with the Sword of God's dreadful Power, who will execute Judgment upon all; and with his own eternal Power is he working Deliverance for his Jewels, that are pre∣cious in his sight, who suffer long and cruel Bondage under your strong corrupted Wills; for which thing the Lord will visit, and bring Darkness upon you, even thick Darkness that may be felt, and will fill you with Trouble in the Night season, and overwhelm you with Obscurity in the day, when you would have Rest. Hearken ye Rulers, and consider my Words, and be ye warned of hatching Mischief in secret; for behold! a day of Trouble is coming upon you, a day of Darkness, and not Light; yea, the Lord God is coming near to Judgment, and withPlace this after pag. 92.
what measure ye have meated, it shall be measured to you again; for of a truth the Lord is for us, yea, even with us and in us, the mighty God of Jacob, in whose dreadful Power and righteous Judgments we rejoyce forever, whose Word of Power is our Life (at which the Heathen rage) whose Foolishness is our Wisdom, in which we stand, knowing him to be near who justifieth us, who will not alwayes suffer the Rod of the Wicked to rest upon the back of the Righteous, neither will his Spirit alwayes strive with you who rebel against the Light, Job 24. 13. But those who hate Instruction, and receive not the fear of the Lord, neither yet cease afflicting the Members of his Son, even such is the Lord of Life coming to vit; and he reacheth forth his hand, and taketh away the Breath of the Wicked, and putteth forth his Finger to the Life of the Princes of the Earth; and most assuredly there is neither Pope, King, Prince, Ruler, Judge, Justice, or any other Nation or People whatsoever, that shall be able to stand before the dreadful Power of the Lord of Hosts, neither shall they ever prosper who combine together, and rise up against him, his poor despised Flock, and the knowledge of his Ways, but he will rain Snares upon all his Adversaries, and pour Contempt upon Princes, and stain the Pride of all their Glory, and bring into Contempt all the Honourable of the Earth, and with a foolish Nation will he anger the Judges of the Earth, and with a People rejected, forsaken and trodden under foot, will the Lord bring down the strong Oaks of Bashan; and Zion that no man cared for, which hath been as a plowed Field, will the Lord restore into its former Beuty, and Jerusalem shall become a Praise over all the Earth, and the Mountain of the Lords House of Holiness shall certainly be established above all your high dark Mountains of Wicked∣ness; and there is no Weapon formed against the Seed, whom God hath blessed, that ever shall prosper; for we know in whom we have belived, and we fear not the inchantings of Balaam, neither are we discouraged because the mighty Rulers of the Earth would have the Israel of God defied; for we know the Enterprizes of the Wicked will come to nothing, and themselves shall fall into Destruction, who are privately and openly seeking the Destruction of those whom God hath said shall prosper.
Therefore in vain do the Wicked bend their Bows and smite with the Tongue, and imprison by their unjust and false Wri∣tings (called Mittimusses) for the Lord God seeth the Affliction of his People, and will reprove Kings for their sakes, and take the Wise in their own Craftiness, and lead Judges away Fools, and bring the Honour of the Princes of the Earth into Contempt for evermore, and a perpetual Shame shall cover the faces of all Zion's Enemies, and the Adversaries of Jerusalem, which is free, shall be as Chaff before the Wind, and none of the Arm of Flesh shall be able to preserve you from the Wrath of the Almighty, neither shall your Greatness in the World deliver you from the wrathful Presence of the Lamb, who is the Light that condemns for the Sin; neither shall any of your Unrighteous Laws, De∣crees and Ordinances, Warrants or unjust Orders and Snares, (which you make for the Innocent) hide, cover or deliver you from the Terror of the Pit in this day of Darkness that is nigh at hand, wherein yet more gross Darkness shall cover you, until your feet stumble at the dark Mountains, and you suddainly fall and never rise again, and a perpetual Shame cover your Names for evermore, who Repent not. Wherefore, Wo unto you Rulers of Hampshire; who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth which makes free? Who hath blinded your Minds, that you cannot see the Life of the suffering Seed, which preacheth the Innocency of the Lamb in Meekness and Long-suffering among you? What is it that hath hardened your hearts, that Truth cannot have entrance in you? How are you Bowels shut up, that you have not affection to Nature? How unreasonably have you caused the Members of Christ, sick and in Prison, to suffer? How will you give an Account for these things, when they must go to the left hand, who visit not the Members of Christ sick and in Prison? Oh, blind and miserable men! my Soul even mourns over you; that which should be your Life, is and will be your Con∣demnation; it lieth in Prison in you. Oh! who are more blind than you? And how long have you hardened your hearts against the day of Slaughter, and rebelled and strove with the Powers of Darkness, against the Light of Christ in you, who (amongst you) hath not whereon lay his head, neither can he be
received, though he come unto his own? How evilly have you entreated his Servants and Messengers? Where is your enter∣taining of Strangers? and when do you plead the Cause of the poor and needy? Is it not apparent that the poor in Spirit you are strangers to? And is it not seen, that the Bonds of Iniquity, which separate you from God, are not broken? Are not we, in this filthy streight Prisor, a true figure of the filthy streight place in you, that the righteous seed is long in Prison? And is not the cutting off of one of the chiefest Counsellors among you, an apparent token that your Councils are not of the Lord? And may not the suddain destruction of another of the chiefest of you be a warning to the rest? Are you more harden∣ed than they in the days of Corah? And are you more blind and worse than them whom God plagued, because they kept the Ark of the Testimony of the Lord in the place of the uncircum∣cised? And is not his Testimony a witness in us? And will ye not see when the hand of the Lord is lifted up? Surely were the oppressed let free within, you would soon let the oppressed go free without; and because it is not so, Wo be to you, a hard hearted and unbelieving Generation! who shall pity you in the day of Slaughter, or bemoan you when your Calamity cometh as a Whirl-wind? Even then shall you know, that the Lord is become your Enemy, who are Enemies to his Lambs. Oh! my heart is enlarged, and I am filled with the Indigna∣tion of the Lord, and overcome with the Power of his Might! Many Woes could I from the Lord declare, and much of his Judgment make known unto you; yea, many Lines might I write, and unfold the Mysteries of his Power, which from your Eyes are hid; and long hath my Soul mourned in secret for you, and because of the fierce Terrors of the Lord, which you cannot escape, mine Eyes have been filled with Tears, and my Heart with Sorrow, and that for you, O ye blind, scornful and rebel∣lious Men, that rule this County! The Lord God will bring Shame upon you, and your Names shall Rot, and be left for an evil Savour for the Generations to come: Better had it been for you, if the Womb had been your Grave, or that you had had a Milstone hanged about your Necks, and cast into the depth of the Sea, before you had writ an Line, or made one Order, or had a
hand against one of the Friends of Christ, who follow him that makes an end of sin, whom one day you shall see to be of the Seed whom God hath chosen, who being born of the Spirit, are now unto you as the Wind, of which you hear a sound, but know not whence they come, neither whither they go, whom you keep in your filthy Prison, to force them to bow to you, like Haman; but take heed how long you provoke the Lord therein, and consider what it is in you, which you would have us please, bow or submit unto, by speaking such words as may satisfie that Will in you which unjustly cast and keeps us in Prison. And now, behold, the Lord God hath tryed you, and you are found Enemies to his suffering Seed, and Fighters against God, and your Hypocrisie is made manifest, and the Infamy of your Unrighteousness is spread over the Nation, and Gods Witness in the hearts of Thousands will judge of your Actions to be Unjust and Unreasonable, and to the Children of Light your insides are discovered, and your end is seen, and your secret intents; neither can your Devices be hid, nor any shelter cover you; for the Light is come that makes all things manifest, and the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him. Be ye now therefore awakened and instructed, O ye Rulers of the Earth, and let your Minds be turned to the Light in you, and strive no longer with God, who is Light; for that which may be known of God is manifest in you. And did you not first strive and fight against his Witness in you, you would not fight with your carnal Weapons, and carnal Prisons against his Messengers and Servants, who fear before him, and fear not them that kill or imprison the Body till death, of whose Servants and Messengers you shall know that I am one in the day of your Calamity and Destruction, the which that you might escape, in Soberness and Meekness have I this many Moneths dealt with you, writing reasonable and plain things unto you, that you might in meekness come to hear the Cry of the Oppressed, both within and without; but if you hear not earthly things, but in that be unreasonable and unfaithful in the unrighteous Mamo, who shall commit unto you the greater Riches, or open unto you the Mysteries of the things of God? who with things that are
not, is bringing to nought things that are; and with the things that you despise, is he overturning the Counsels of the Mighty; and that which confounds the Wisdom of the VVise, and brings to nothing the Understanding of the Prudent, and overturns the Devices of the Wicked, even in that is my Life; and in that which terrifies, troubles, torments and condemns the World, do I rest in Peace with God for evermore, and remain. A Friend to the whole Creation, and to the Souls of all Mankind, who of men am numbred amongst Transgressors, in a filthy Prison, and place unfit for men, at Winchester, this 24th of the 8th Moneth, 1658. To the Enemies of Equity, Truth and Peace, I am only known by the Name Humphry Smith.
To them who have lately believed in the Light, and are waiting to receive the Life. THE Day of Gods Everlasting Love is come, and with his Mighty Power is he risen to gather all them in the Light of his Son, that long have sate in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, upon whom the Day is now Dawning, wherein the Outcasts of Israel shall be gathered, and the Cap∣tives that long have groaned may now come to know Deliver∣ance; for with plentious Redemption is the Lord visiting his People, and he is coming near unto his own, and seeking them that are afar off, and lifting up a Standard for the Standard for the Strangers to flow unto, and many shall return unto the Lord, and People shall be gathered to the God of their Salvation, and he will pour out his Spirit upon the Humble, and fill the Meek with the Riches of his Love; Multitudes of People shall come unto Sion, and the Poor of the Flock to the City of the great King; for Light is breaking forth as the Morning, and Righteousness as the Sun at Noon; therefore shall the Mourning Seed be comforted, and that which groaned in Captivity lift up the Head, that the Prisoner may spring forth of Bondage, and the longing Soul be satisfied, and Judgment come upon the Wicked, and Terror upon the Lofti∣ness of man, the Rebellious brought down to the Dust, and that which boweth not unto the Light, with it is condemned forever, that through the Condemnation the Seed may spring, which long in Death hath lain, and is now to be raised up by the Arm of God's Almighty Power, which now comes to be revealed unto them who believe the Voice of the true Spirit, which is in the midst, whom all are to hear, and obey his voice, who comes out from God, and leads them that believe in and obey him up unto God again, and he is the only Way unto the Father, by
whom the Redemption comes, who is arising in the Hearts of the Children of Light, whereby they come to know Light shine out of Darkness, giving them the Knowledge of God, which Knowledge they never learned from all the Teachers of the World, which Teachers are themselves in that Ground, in which the Knowledge of God cannot be received; and that which they have not re∣ceived themselves, they cannot teach others; therefore you have not received the Knowledge of God from them, after which Knowledge something in you hath long groaned, which is now to be satisfied from him in whom the Fullness of God doth dwell, who is the Light, of which you have received, in which you are to wait to receive the Promise of the Father, that your Souls may be refreshed in the Bosom of his Love, and feel God's Mercies showered down as the early Rain in the time of Drought, that your tender Desires may not wither, nor your breathing Spirits faint in the way, but may with chearfulness walk in the Light, and continue in faithfulness in your Measures, enduring the Cross unto your Wills, that by it the Carnal may be crucified, and that which is Earthly mortified, and all the fleshly Lusts sub∣dued, and the ground of Unbelief removed, that you, as Obe∣dient Children to the Light, may walk not (as do others) in the Lusts of Ignorance, and Wayes of Unrighteousness, where all the Ungodly lie, and are without his Fear, not knowing that in which the Power of God doth stand; and many of them are Murmurers and Complainers, who dwell in all Unrighteousness, from among whom Redemption you are to find, that a true Se∣paration you may come to know, that the Unclean you may touch no more, and that which defiles to be no more entangled with. For the Lord our God is pure, his living Truth is to be known in the inward parts, and that which makes Free received in the Heart; and pure is the Lord in his Ministration of Life, and free in the Discoveries of his Love; his unsearchable Riches are made known unto his Jewels, and his Secrets revealed unto them that abide in his Fear, whose Fear is a Fountain of Life, whose Love is streaming forth as a River of Oyl unto the broken heart∣ed; and in him the Fatherless find Mercy, and he giveth strength unto the Faint, he cherished the Babes as a Nurse, and feedeth the Young with Milk, he gathereth the Lambs with his Arms, and
nourisheth the tender Plant; he confoundeth the Proud in his Judgments, and removeth the Ground of the Wicked: Kings before him are as the Drop of a Bucket, and Ungodly Rulers as the Smoke before a mighty Wind: His Wonders are seen among the Living, and his Judgments made known upon the Wicked; they that come to him find Mercy, but his Enemies he turns into the Land of Darkness; the Ungodly are not able to come near his Presence, when he is Angry the Wicked stand afar off; but there's no Darkness in which they may be hid, nor shadow of Death, in which they can be covered; for his Hand will find out all the Rebellious, and he will reward them all according to the Pride of their Heart, then shall they be banished from the Lord, as the Chaff before the Wind, and none of their strength shall save them. But all you that wait for Sion's Redemption, and call that love his Appearance, who are willing to take up the Yoke, deny them∣selves and follow the Light; thus I say unto all such, The Lord God of Life is at hand, he is hastning his Mercies to the simple, and reaching forth his hand to the Helpless; your Re∣deemer is near, your Deliverer is at hand; for the Lord God hath not cast off his People, neither will he leave or forsake his Chosen Ones: With the Brightness of his Power is he appear∣ing to judge down that which kept his own in Bondage, and lay low that which did the Just oppress, that from under the Oppres∣sion it may now arise, that the Hungry may be fed, and the Na∣ked come to be clothed with the Everlasting Righteousness of God, who brings his Righteousness near unto the Humble, and clothes them with the Armour of Light, that so they may be able to stand where the Wicked cannot endure. Wherefore all you, my dear Lambs, in whom there is honest Desires begotten after the living Truth of my Father, who are in measure made willing to walk as Children of the Day, and to undergo the Reproaches and Revilings of Wicked and Ungodly men, and desire the Kingdom that is not of this World, from the honest Simplicity of your Hearts, that you may come to rest in the Kingdom of the Father forever. Unto you, I say, my Heart's Desire, and Prayer to God for you is, That you may be enabled, through the Power of him who is the Light, to under∣go
all your Tryals within and without, and that none of you may faint in your Way, nor be weary of well doing, but that you may come to shew forth the Works of Righteousness by a chaste Con∣versation, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, by whose Filthiness the Just is grieved. And my dear Lambs, grieve ye not the Spirit of the Lord, neither be you Envious against the Evil-Doers; let not Wrath arise in any one of you, but be Examples of Love and Meekness, one unto another; and all come to know what a true waiting upon the Lord is, in the Sincerity of the Heart, to receive that which the World never knew, even the Spirit of Truth, which comes from the God of Peace, in which the Blessing is received, and leads in the way of Righteousness, and will joyn your Hearts together, in the Everlasting Covenant of the Father, which he is establishing with all his faithful Ones, among whom you may now come to be gathered, and find an eternal Inheritance with them that are sanctified, who come to be made one with him that sanctifieth, who now cometh to purge away the filth, and cleanse that which hath not been cleansed, that Sinners may be convert∣ed unto him, and the Filthy redeemed from their filthiness, before the day come, wherein it shall be said, He that is Filthy, let him be Filthy still. Wherefore, let the Day of your Visitation be dearly prized, knowing that God, who is Light, will not alwayes strive with man; and its his Everlasting Love in that he hath visited you, and passed by the Wise and the Mighty, and made your Hearts sometimes soft and tender, by the powerful Drawings of his E∣verlasting Love, which by your Obedience and Belief in the Truth, comes to be more and more shed abroad in your Hearts, which Love will constrain Obedience to the Light, in which Light Gods Power is received, which Power maketh Sons, who cry, Father unto him that begeteth after his own Image, whose Image comes to be renewed in the Children of the Light, which Light is now come, and we are Witnesses of it, and testisie what we have seen, and declare unto you the Message that was from the beginning, and so preach not another Gospel unto you, but the same, which is the Power of God, which I neither receive of men, nor learn of men, but by Revelation, in which the Father
is known, which to the World is a Mystery, and sealed from all them who believe not in the Light, whose Deeds are Evil, but manifest through the Operation of the mighty Power of God, which worketh mightily in me, that I might reach forth unto you also, and that you might feel the Operation of the Fathers Love, that is manifest in my Bonds to you, who through many Tribulations, with the rest of the Lambs of Christ, are to wait for Deliverance from the Bondage of Corruption, in the which you have long continued; but now Christ Jesus, the Light of the World is come to redeem them, who through fear of Death were all their life time subject to Bondage; and the Bonds of Iniquity are now to be broken, and the Oppressed are now to be set at liberty, and the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God is, and is to be made manifest. Therefore, Friends, wait on the Lord, that you may come to reap the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, which in due time comes to be brought forth in all them that faint not: And take heed of seeming to be what you are not; for all Proud Boasters are for the Lake. Take not Counsel of the Serpent, neither rea∣son by the carnal Thoughts for the Morrow; be watchful in all Diligence, that you may know Gods Work wrought in you, be∣fore the Night comes, in which none can work: Therefore be not Idle, Sloathful nor Negligent; for the Lord, who is Love, will not alwayes wait upon such to be gracious; yet they that Honour him through Obedience, he will Honour; but they that despise him shall be lightly esteemed: Those that obey him, he honoureth in his Love, and the Disobedient he leaves in a Bed of Torment. You who are tender, humble & lowly in the bowels of my Father's Love, I salute you all; and Friends, take heed of your Wills, and learn of him who is the Light, and leads into Lowliness, and came not to do his own Will, and him hath God the Father sealed: And take heed of words, and be not hasty, any of you all, to utter words before the Lord, I charge you in his living Presence; and speak not rashly unto men, nor out of Gods fear one unto another; for that which bridles the Tongue is able to rule the whole Body, and keep it in Subjection to him, who is the God of Order.
The Blessings of the Lord God Almighty be with the Suffering Seed, and with you all, to which only I desire to be manifest, and to which my Love doth reach, and by it am felt and received, who am known to some only by the Name Winchester-Bridewell. Humphery Smith. The two striving within. THat Mind and Spirit which went out from and diso∣beyed the Life of God, professed the Name of God to cover itself with that, without the Life; the which Profession, through the secret subtilty, did more & more encrease, which led farther off from the sence of the feeling of the Life of God, and when it stirred to judge that which went out from it, then presently would that which out lead forth farther to seek after and comprehend in the Knowledge and Profession of his Name, treasuring up that in that which went out from his Life, therewith to cover that without the Life; and then for a time that was quiet, being got so far out from the sence of the feeling of the stirrings of the Life, which stirrings being got out from, ceased for a time to strive, being resisted with that which abode not in it, whereby it became vailed and covered with a thick Cloud by that which sinned against it, the which thereby came to be Exalted above it, even above all that is called God, and is of his Nature, increasing, getting strength, and covering it self in the Earthly Wisdom, through the Carnal Coverings and Profession of God, out of the Life and the Power, which by that was grieved, and under that oppressed, which under the Op∣pression sometimes would stir again, and in secret judge that which did oppress, and wound that which grieved it, even striking through it with the dreadful Darts of its Power, making the other sensible, that its Judgments was to pass over and cut down the
Head of that which was above it exalted, the which Judgment being loved & turned to, there is a coming again to the sence of the feel∣ing of the operation of the Power which judgeth, and stirreth against that which got up against the Power, professing his Name, who is the Power, but not bearing his Image, nor feeling his Nature, who being with the Power, judgeth and condemneth with the Light which cometh from the Power; yet being not kept to the Cross, and his Head always under the Sword of the Power, through the Law in the Judgment, his Head gets forth again, the twining Head of that which got the Profession, but abode not in the Power, which Head being not bruised in its first motion, the Body grows up, even the man of Sin, with Spiritual Wickedness in High-places, shewing it self like the Power, but exalted above the sence of the Power, and there stands in opposition against the Power; which being judged, condemned, confounded, scattered and overturned with the powerful breakings forth of that which by it suffered, so the true thing presents it self to be the Leader, which being received and obeyed, it driveth the mind in, where is stillness and quiet∣ness out of that which labours for Vanity, into that where the labour and striving ceaseth, and the Rest is received, and the Day come which God hath blessed for evermore, where the Lamb is the Light, and the small still Voice is heard, and the Power of the Word is received, the which some coming to see through the Openings in the Light, and yet not in it waiting through the Openings in the Light, and yet not in it waiting through the Judgment to be led into the thing it self; so that that which stood in the Power soon leadeth out the Mind into a false Joy, because of the sight to cover it self again therewith. And so, as that is still followed, which leadeth forth from the Power, in the sight conceiving and professing of the Light, be∣ing out of it, having not the Substance and the Power, is more and more departed from, in what Image or From soever it be, and the bare Form is continued in, the Power is denied; but as the Power is minded and waited for, standing out of dead Forms and Images; so the other, which abode not, but leadeth out of the Power of the Truth, cometh to be crost, judged and denied, and so not followed, but kept out of, in the Light to Watch and War against it by the Light out of it, to be lead into that, and it to
receive Immortallity abideth forever. And so as there is a con∣tinual watching with the Light, that may be seen, which abides not in it, but is got up above it, working in all Deceiveableness in the Mystery of Iniquity, to cover it self with a Profession of Truth, but still keeps out of it: And also that may be seen which suffers under all this, and lieth under it, so that it cannot be come to, nor come at, by that which is out of it, and stands above it, and it is vailed and covered, and the narrow entrance to it is hard to be found; and being found, is soon turned out of, and hard to be kept in, by reason of the many Twinings of the Deceiveableness of that which is, and is rightly named, the Mystery of Iniquity, which worketh in them that obey not the Light, which cometh from the Truth, in which the Power stand∣eth, out of which that goeth forth which hath not the Power, which is to be confounded with the Power, that the Power with∣out Hands may break in pieces that made with Hands, or the greatest, tallest, or most glorious Image that hath been conceived in the dark mind, and set up on high above the humble, suffering Seed, to be worshipped within in the Power of the Light, is re∣sisted with all his Wiles, though therein he bringeth Scripture to uphold his Kingdom and Dominion over the other, to have it bow down to him and worship him, who abode not in the Power, which by the Power is resisted and denied forever: And so that which denies the other, and is Humble and Low, it is that all are to wait to receive and joyn unto, from it Power to know, in it to stand against the other, which did it oppress, and by secret subtilty, being exalted, doth alwayes endeavour to sit in the Temple of God, shewing it self as God, being covered with a Profession of the Truth, which in the Truth doth not abide; yet to the Truth in words may confess and acknowledge that which saveth from Sin, to be the begotten of God, and may believe and tremble, and yet remain an Enemy to the same, tempting him by many Glo∣rious Presentations, to bow to that, and worship that which abid∣eth not in the Power, that so thereby, over the Power it may al∣ways rule, in the Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, wherein many are ensnared, others tempted, and some Overcome, whose latter end is worse than their beginning. Oh! who can declare the Depth of the Ground of this Mystery
of Iniquity, or utter forth the Innumerable Transformings and Changings of that which still seeketh by all subtilty to keep from the Obedience to the Life of the Power, by which man was made, and from which he was led by that which said, Ye shall be as Gods, which against God doth stand in that ground which by him is cursed. And how can the unsearchable Love of the Father be uttered with words! who so loved the World that he gave his Son to them that asked not for him, that by his Light might be seen the Deceiveableness of the many Workings of the Powers of Dark∣ness in the Mind that is darkened, which from the Darkness to the Light is to be turned, with the Light in the holy Fear to watch against every appearance of the changeable Powers of Darkness, which sometimes appeareth as an Angel of Light, a∣gainst whose Appearance all are to stand armed with the Power of him who is the Light, and to feel the Power of the Word, which is as a Fire, and yet to resist that which the Devil darteth in, which is also like unto Fire, that the tender Simplicity, after which my Soul breatheth, may not be betrayed by that which still seeketh to devour, and to keep from the Power of the Cross, and turn aside from the narrow Way of Life, and that in it all the innocent Friends of Christ may be kept to follow the Lea∣dings of that which from the God of Truth, and Love, and Peace to them hath come, by it to be led out of, and from all that which in the Truth did not abide. Therefore is this given forth, even from the Breathings of my Life, appealing to the pure Witness in you all, which the Changeableness of Iniquity doth always stand against, the which in Gods living Power let all that feel it, keep against the other, to stand and keep out of all Satan's Wiles, to be preserved to the end of all that which hath an End, that then when time shall be no more, you may rest and abide with and in him that is the Truth, whom the Devil hath nothing in, to receive the Blessings of the Father, and the tender Mercies of the most High, to refresh you and overcome you with the Power of his Love, that it to you all may be the Bond of Everlasting Peace, in which, with all the humble and faithful, I am bound up, and in it with them for ever∣more do rest, Humphry Smith. Winchester-Bridewell, 1685.
THE Love of God Declared AND SATAN'S VVILES DISCOVERED. THE Lord God of Life and Father of Infinite Love, Pre∣server of all the simple, Deliverer of all the innocent, whose Power reacheth unto the Heavens, and his Good∣ness to the Sons of men, who never forsook the Faithful, but was near unto them in the hour of Temptation, and knows how to make War for the Innocent to escape, and deliver the Oppressed in the day of Distress, whose Mercy endureth forever, whose Love can never be fully declared, whose Glory is beyond all Expression, whose Wayes are past finding out, whom my Soul honoureth forever, to whose Infinite Fullness and Incomprehen∣sible Power be Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, from the Power of my Life, to the Throne of his Love forever and ever. Even he who is the Fountain, from whence cometh the Breath of the Life of the Souls of all Mankind: He, I say, from the Throne of his Power, through the brightness of his Love, with his Eye of Fatherly Pity, hath look't down and taken notice of the Wants, the Groans and the Cryes of his captivated Seed, which hath been long oppressed with the strong and cruel Bonds of Iniquity, which separated man from God, and grieved the Spirit of the most High, who bowed the Heavens, and came down to visit the Captives and relieve the Oppressed, which is acceptable to many, and a time of everlasting Comfort; for by him the weary come to be refreshed, and the weak receive Ever∣lasting strength; for the Lord hath Compassion on the Needy,
and comes to clothe the Naked with the Righteousness of his Son for his Spirit reacheth unto that which is in Want, and his Com∣passion is extended to the Lowly in Heart, which long breathed after Life and Power to overcome the Evil, but knew not the way to obtain it; and therefore in the restless Wilderness, under the burden of Sin, did long Travail, as in a wearisom Land of Darkness, having little hope towards God, being often in much Distress, when no Eye pitied, even then had the Lord Mercy for his own Name sake, and he remembred his Covenant with Abra∣ham, his Friend, and had Compassion on the Seed of the barren Womb, which was as the Root of a Plant hid in a dry Land, whom the Lord came to visit in the Power of his Infinite Love, and said to the dead, Live forever, which Word of Power reached through the Earth, making way through it unto the Seed, that it through the Earth, making way through it unto the Seed, that it through the Earth might spring (by the Virtue of his Life) as a Lilly in the Spring, that so the Prisoner might grow up out of Captivity, and receive the early and the latter Rain, and the Dews of Heaven, that as a tender Plant it may grow, and become as a Tree, and be fruitful as a Vine, bearing much Fruit over the Earth. Oh! the Infinitness of the Fullness of the Fountain of the Father's un∣expressible Love unto the Prisoners of Hope, and the captivated Seed of Israel! Who can declare his Mercy to the Afflicted! or utter his Bowels of Compassion to the Spirits in Prison? What Tongue can declare the unsearchableness of his Way of Life, or make known the Infiniteness of that which passeth Knowledge? He hath been a Father to the Fatherless, he hath given Light and Life to them that sate in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death; he is found of them that sought him not, he spreadeth forth his Arms to gather them that asked not for him; he giveth Gifts to the Rebellious, and he is grieved with those that receive not the Tenders of his Love, and complaineth (from the grief of his Soul) when Israel will have none of him: He delighteth not in the Death of the Wicked, but waiteth long for their Return. If Israel backslide, yet afterwards return with true Repentance, forsaking the Evil, he sheweth Mercy, even to the Prodigal, and he heals the Backslidings, and loves them freely, that none may say, their Destruction is from him, nor that he appointed them thereunto, nor charge him with Injustice in the day of his Judg∣ments,
when the Just shall arise to the Resurrection of Life, and the Unjust to the Resurrection of Condemnation forever, that every Moath may be stopped, and every one stand Guilty before the Throne of his Judgment, and every Tongue confess to God, That he is Righteous in all his Wayes, and that all his Judgments are Just and True. And out of his Fatherly Pity, from the freeness of his Love hath he visited many of you, even with a Message of Life and Sal∣vation by the Word of his Power, making known that unto you, which hath been hid from Ages and Generations, and is yet hid from all Ishmaels Princes and Nimrods Builders, yea, even from all the Wise and Prudent of the Earth, even that is he re∣vealing to many of you, who are willing to become Fools and suffer the loss of all for his sake, who saves the Soul, and that not for any Works of Righteousness which you have done, but of his own free Love, through the Power of his Immortal Word is he begetting Sons and Daughters to himself, that he alone might be honoured, who worketh all their Works in them, that his Work∣manship all such might be created a new in Christ Jesus unto good Works in them, to walk in Newness of Life, bringing forth Fruits unto God, who with the Light of his Son, in whom he is well plea∣sed, hath convinced many of you of the Evil of your Ways, and the Blindness you were in, when you were Children of Wrath, even as others; and his Light of Life hath shined in you, to let you see the want of a Saviour, and feel the burden of your Sins, that the Word of Repentance you all might receive, and come to be led by him whom God the Father hath sealed for a Covenant of his Eternal Love, and sent for a Light, to be a Leader to the House of Joseph, and a Deliverer to the House of Israel, and to inherit the Gentiles, and possess the utmost parts of the Heathen, that the Brightness of his Power might shine over all the World, and the sound of his Voice be heard to the utmost parts of the Earth, that the Outcasts of the Earth might be brought to the one Fold, and the Seed of Abraham be gathered from the four Corners of the Earth, that Redemption might be known, from under the Shadow of Death; and that the blind, which have Eyes, and the deaf, which have Ears, might come forth to the Light of the Son, who looseth the Tongue of the Stammerer,
that it may speak plain, that those who Err in Judgment might learn the Doctrine of the Son of the Father's Love, who comes to lead the blind by a way they know not, and lead them in Paths that they have not known, and with Weeping and with Suppli∣cation doth he lead them that walk in the strait and narrow Path of Life, where those that abide in the Fear shall not stumble, but walk in the Uprightness of Innocency, through the Power of the Father's Love, continuing in the way of Holiness, where only the Ransomed of the Lord do walk, the which Way of Holiness the Lord God hath made known to many, which reached unto your Hearts, whereby it was at the present made soft and tender, and you received the Truth with love, rejoycing that you came to find the way to Eternal Peace, and many began to say one to another, This is the Way, let us to walk in it; and for a time many walked in Humility, and pure, dear and tender Love began to spring up in you one to another, and the Enemies of your Souls began to be subject to you, and the tenders of God's Love was over you, to do you good at your latter end; but behold, before you came to the Land of Rest, the Lord tryed you, by suffering the Enemy to present Hardship, Straits, and many Difficulties to come; on the other hand, to present the Glory of the World, and the Favour of great Men; and some, the Enemy draws forth their Minds from the Strait and narrow Way, into carnal Li∣berty and Ease in the Flesh, and so to contain an Easier way, whereby the simplicity in many is betrayed into the Power of the man of Sin, who worketh strongly to keep his hold in one Deceiveableness or another, to keep in Bondage the Life of the JUST, to keep his Head from being bruised by the Power of the Seed of the Promise, which under the Subtilty in many hath cryed for Vengeance upon the Head of that which Murders the Just; and when times of Tryal come by Judgment, and Famine and Want have come upon others, then have they started aside like a broken Bow, and caused th Offence of the Cross to cease, and then hath Unbelief come in, and the Enemy caused Question∣ings of the living Truth, and Consultations about the Way of Life, and such grew weary of their Tryal, like their Fore-fa∣thers in the Wilderness, even letting the Enemy draw back their Hearts to the Flesh Pots of Aegypt, which God by his mighty
Power had redeemed them from, and was leading them by the right Hand, and in the narrow Way that they should go: And others, the Enemy (who still seeketh to devour the begotten of God) hath drawn forth their Minds into a sottish careless Con∣dition, not regarding the stirrings of Gods Spirit with them, by the Light of his Son in their Hearts; and so not minding that his Spirit will not alwayes strive with them, and having seen before the straitness of the Way, the Enemy will work by all Subtilty to keep such from it, and from the Meetings and Society of them that in the strait Way abide, keeping them still from the Cross, which would be his Death, and the Life of that which would give Peace, and Victory over him and all his Wiles. And others coming to see that they are come so far, so that they need not Words, nor any man to teach them, then hath the Enemy invited them to sit down at ease; and so not minding the continual fear, at last they loath the Manna, and call it Dry, whereas the driness and barrenness comes by reason of their Unfaithfulness in not im∣proving what they had through their continual watchfulness un∣der the daily Cross. And the Enemy geteth forth the Mind of others to watch for Evil, or at least, to look at the Temptations, Backslidings, Backwardness and Failings of others, more than their own Conditions, (who see their own Evil therein) some whereof thereby at last draw back others, question the Truth it self; and by such things as these the Simplicity in many other tender Lambs is burdened & grieved, and the Life pressed down, by which they should grow and be fruitful unto God. And others being convinced with the pure Light of something that is Evil, which seemeth little to the carnal Eye, and so going out from the Obedience to the Light, and consult and reason, and take Counsel of the Serpent, who then contrives a way to shun the Cross there∣in, and so endeavour to dawb the thing over from a secret Deceit, working in the Power of Darkness, until the Light hath even ceased striving with that Person, and then he goes on with the thing, saying, He hath liberty therein. But let such mark and observe themselves; for no more unto them is committed, neither do they grow or come any further, but there stand as dry Plants, coming long to Meetings, having the Form, but not feeling the Power; for such who knowingly deny their Obedience in any
thing to the Light of Christ, he will deny them his Power in all things. And thus doth and will the Enemy of your Souls make havock of the Flock, if in the pure humble fear he be not alwayes watch∣ed against, and slain by the Power of the Cross in the Light; and many other Wiles and Ways doth the Enemy of your Souls watch to devour, ensnare and overcome you; the time would even fail one to declare it; the Lord God Almighty help you against it, that so in the Light you may see all these, and many more things, which you are all to Watch and War against, that Spiritual Wickedness in High-places may not overcome you, and that you may not turn aside with the Error of the Wicked, nor be overcome with the power of Temptations, but that you may be all diligent and watchful against every appearance of your Enemy, and be able to stand in the day of Tryal, that the Ene∣my of your Souls prevail not. Therefore, all Friends every where, keep upon your Watch, let the Light search your Hearts, and keep your Meetings toge∣ther in the silent fear and dread of the Lord, that his Power in you all may raise you all in the Dominion and Wisdom of God to stand and feel that which keeps your Hearts together in the unlimitted Love of God, and so his presence you will be fruitful unto his Blessing come to receive, whereby you will be fruitful unto him in every good Word and Work. The living Power of my Father preserve you all from the Power of the Enemy, and keep your Minds in that which cros∣seth your Wills, that the Lord God of Life may watch over you all for good for evermore. Written for the good of many, from the true Love of him, who is known to many of you by that which is nearer than the Name of Humphry Smith. Winchester-Bridewell, the 4th Mon. 1658.
TO THE Musitioners, Harpers, Minstrels, Singers, Dancers and the Persecutors; From one who loved Dancing and Musick as his Life, which be∣ing parted with, and the Light being come, which was before these things, in which they are all seen; And from it is declared THE Ground, Foundation, Beginning, and Father, and Children, and Compass, and End, and the Effects of all the Harpers, Musitioners, Singers and Dancers. Who may read what I have learned, who have tryed their wayes, and also searched into the things of God, and declare this according to Scripture, and have found the Joy which Man cannot take away JUBAL was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ, and so the Father of all such Musitioners, being himself of the Seed of Lemach, who slew a man; and so the Son of a Man-slayer was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ: And the Man Christ, the Light, is the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World. And Jubal was of the Generation of Cain, who first slew a Man, and then built a City; he slew his Brother, one that was near unto him; and the Light of the Lamb slain is near unto every one, even that which comes from the Man of Sorrows is in the Heart; Cain's Seed slayes the man of Sorrows; the Musitioners were of Cain's seed: And that which slayes the man of Sorrows, invents, sets up and delights in the Instruments of Musick; and the Father of all such was Jubal, the seed of Cain, who built a City, and so
was a Rich man, and his seed delighted in Musick, and so his seed, who are gone from the Lords leading are building Cities, Strong holds, high and large Houses, with painted Parlours, and then set up the Instruments of Musick, in the cieled Houses with∣out, and within themselves full of Rottenness, or as a Cage of unclean Spirits, whereby the just is murthered, and the House laid wast and desolate, as to the Life of God, which should be the Temple of the holy Ghost; and the Father of all these was Ju∣bal, the seed of Lemach a Man-slayer, who also had another son Tubalcain (the seed of Cain) an Instructer of every Artificer in Brass and Iron; and he that hath attained to never so much, if not come to that which fulfills the perfect Law, is as sound∣ing Brass, 1 Cor. 13. and there is many also of the Seed of this Instructer, whose Instructions bring people to be but as sound∣ing Brass: And this first Instructor and Jubal, were the Off∣spring of Cain, the Vagabond driven from God, against whom the Blood of the Righteous doth Cry, yet so rich in the Earth, that he built a City, being separated from God, (who confounds mans wisdom) then comes that which makes merry over the Witness, Gen. 4. And they who danced in the wilderness, and sung and made a great noise, and were in the Mirth and Vain Delights, were a stiff-necked People, and such as sate down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, like the same Generation now, who are stiff∣necked, and bow not to him, who is the Light, low in the Heart, to whom every knee shall bow, but eat and drink, and rise up to vain delights, having Musick at their Feasts, seeding themselves without fear, Jude 12. like Jezabel,. (at whose Table the false Prophets feed) who made a Feast, when she intended to murder the Righteous, to gain his Possession (read within) and that which Murders the Just; and such who forget God, delight in these things; for they that sung and danced in the Wilderness, forgot the mighty Power of the Lord which brought them out of Bondage, therefore they got into the carnal Liberty, like many others at this day, before they come to the true Rest; and these were in the false Worship, who Worship that which the car∣nal Eye might perceive, and these had lost the true Guide: And when they were in their singing and dancing, they knew not what
was become of him, who was the Minister of the Law, that disco∣vers sin; but though they who danced saw him not for a time, but began to dispise him, yet in a time unexpected he came upon them in the Fierceness of his Anger, who executed the judgments of the Lord upon those vain Dancers, with whom he was grieved, who was in the Church in the Wilderness, and is the holy One in the midst, who with a suddain slaughter destroyed these Dancers, whose voice of singing was not because of Mastry, neither was their Voice the voice of the Cry of the Oppressed; and these were Idolaters, whose Hearts were uncircumcised, and knew not the Wayes of God, who therefore condemned them with an utter Overthrow that they perished in the Wil∣derness, where they thus sinned, after they had seen the Deliver∣ances of the Lord, as many of the Rulers and People of Eng∣land have done, who have forgotten their Leader, to whom these are left for an Example, of whom there were about thirty Thousand slain for their Singing, Dancing and False Worship, Exod. 32. 1 Cor. 9. And Herod had Dancing before him, and she that danced, and he that was pleased with Dancing, caused his Head to be taken off that directed to him that is the Light, and preached the Lamb that takes away the Sin, and their carnal Nature, and so this murders that which is to prepare the Way of the Lord; and they took off his Head, and murthered him, who was a burning and a shining Light, and slew him that preached Re∣pentance; and so the Dancers and the Rulers of the Earth, who were pleased with Dancing and Musick, murther that in them, which calls to Repentance, and are ready to murder such as preach Repentance to them: And whilst there is a delighting in Dancing and Musick, that which calleth to Repentance is in Bondage; for John was in Prison when Herod was pleased with the Dan∣cing; and there is not a greater Prophet than he that preacheth Repentance; and he that proclaims the Way of the Lord was in Prison, and she that danced desired his Death, and he that caused him to be beheaded, was a King, a great one in the Earth, who was pleased with Dancing, and was a Swearer, out of Christs Doctrine; for he promised, with an Oath, What soever she would ask, who danced before him; then nothing would satisfie the
Dancer, but the Death of him who preached Repentance; and he was an Observer of Days, and kept the day of his Birth with Dancing: It was his Birth-day, the day of his Birth, in which he was brought forth, who was a Swearer (the Swearers delight in dancing) that caused his head to be taken off, who warned them that had the Oracles of God, To fly from the Wrath to come, and said, They were a Generation of Vipers, who had the Scriptures, and came also to his Baptism, and brought not forth fruits meet for Re∣pentance, (these are the Vipers) And so, that which is to lead unto Christ, doth suffer in Bondage, and is murthered, and the Head or first Appearance of it taken off upon that day which the Birth of that is brought forth, which is pleased with the Dancing (not like Job & Jeremiah) and delights in the Musick, and that which exerciseth the mind of the Creature in the dancing, desireth the Death and Murthering of that in Prison, which is to call to Repentance, above all other things; yea, there is nothing then so much desired as the Killing and Overcoming of that which is cast into Prison, by him that delights in the Musick, Matth. 14. And when them in Israel, who had Harps (the Musitioners) them who delighted in Musick were carried Captive into Babylon, the Land of Confusion, in which Land Nimrod the mighty One in the Earth went hunting before the Lord, and by the River of Babylon they sate down and wept, who were before the Musition∣ers with their Harps; these went into Captivity because of the Sin, and hanged their Harps upon the Willowes, and sate down Mourning by the Rivers of Babylon; and that which delighted in the Musick caused the Captivity, and leads into Bondage that which should come to Liberty, whereby Sorrow, Weeping and Mourning comes in the End; for the Songs of the Temple is to be turned into Howling, and their Delight in the Musick was turned into Weeping, and they led captive from Zion, who were come to the land of Promise, and there took Liberty in these fleshly Delights, Psalm 137. The Mind that hath Wis∣dom may read this. And it was the King of Babylon (who said, Is not this great Babylon that I have built by the Might of my Power, for the Honour of my Majesty?) that set up the golden Image to be
Worshipped at the hearing of all kind of Musick; and he also was a great man in the Earth, a great King, the King of Babylon, a mighty One in Confusion, who commanded the Magicians, the Astrologers, and Sorcerers, and Caldeans, and ruled over them, and all them that dwelt in the Earth; and he sent Greet∣ings of Peace to People, Nations and Languages that dwelt in all the Earth; but he that is the Light comes not to send Peace on the Earth; and the Angel cryed, Wo, Wo, Wo, to the Inha∣bitants of the Earth; but he that was King over Nations in the Earth had many Instruments of Musick, even all kinds of Musick, and he that delighted in the Musick set up the Golden Image, and by his command, they that heard the Musick were presently to fall down and Worship the great Golden Image, like the Children of Israel who set up the Golden Calf; and these were Idolaters, and in the false Worship; and that which delighted in all kinds of Musick, was in the Enmity to the Righteous Seed, and sought to murther them who denyed the Musick and false Worship, and therein such appear to be of Cain the Murtherer, and of Lemach, the Man-slayer: And these great Ones in the Earth, who had all kinds of Musick, were in Babylon; and these were the persecu∣tors, (and such persecute now) whose Rage was exceeding great against the Servants of the living God, who to him were faithful, though in Babylon, and regarded not their Musick, nei∣ther feared their great threatning Words, nor yet obey their strict Command, neither would they keep their Decrees, nor take much care to Answer them in that matter, nor bow before their Image, though made with Gold, nor Worship any other God, than he that dwells in his People, though they were in the Land of captivity, among them in the Land of Confusion, who at last were brought to confess unto, and fear and tremble be∣fore the living God (who is Light) that revealeth secrets in the Hearts But that which delights in the Musick, seeks to murder the just, and unto that which seeks to murther, and persecute all them who are yet great in the Earth, are joyned (being not out of the Earth redeemed) and the Rulers of the Earth take counsel together against the anointed, which need not man to teach, which seed is preserved and anointed amongst the flames of their
burning Enmity) for the Princes, the Governours, the Captains, the Judges, the Rulers, the Counsellors, the Sheriffs, and all the Rulers of the Provinces, who were of Babylon, that delighted in the Musick, stood before the Image, and were in the false Wor∣ship, and joyned together in the Persecution, (as such do now) a∣gainst the Seed of God, and to confirm the Decree made by the King of Babylon, which Decree was made with such fierce Tyranny, and height of Pride and Envy, that nothing less but presently to cast into the burning fiery Furnace, would satisfie that Nature, which ruled in these great Rulers in the Earth, that loved the Musick, whose fire of Enmity burned within them, and they caused their Decree to be Proclaimed with a loud Voice, That at the hearing of their Musick, all men should Worship their Image, or presently be cast into the Fire without, because of their Fire of Enmity within, the which Decree being not obeyed, nor their Image worshipped, nor their Enmity within, nor Furnace without regarded by the Servants of the living God, presently the King of Babylon was so full of Fury, as the Furnace was full of Fire, so that the form of his Visage was changed, and rose up in that Power of Enmity against the Righteous Seed, like Cain the Murtherer, who rose up against his Brother, whose Countenance also was changed, whereby it appears he and the rest were of Cains seed, and the Musitioners of their Father Jubal, the seed of Lamech, who slew a man; read Dan. 3. When the Harp and the Musick go, they must Worship the Image. And the Persecuting Rulers of England need not to put this far from them, being Rich and Mighty in the Earth, and Envi∣ous like Cain, and delighting in the Musick like the rest of his seed; for the great Whore, and Mother of Harlots, and A∣bominations of the Earth, Mystery Babylon, hath made all the Kings of the Earth Drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, and the Great Men, the Rich Men of the Earth, and all Nations have com∣mitted Fornication with her, who have corrupted the Earth, and all Nations wonders after the Beast; and in all Nations the Seed, and Children of Mystery Babylon, and of Cain and Lamech are sprung up, and even in this Nation and other adjacent Kingdoms, the Princes the Governours, and Captains, the Judges, the Treasurers,
the Counsellors, the Sheriffs, and the Rulers of the Provinces, de∣light in the Instruments of Musick, and are Envious against the Righteous Seed, who cannot bow to any Image, nor Worship, any Golden glorious Image or Likeness whatsoever; but the living God, who is able to deliver them, and is a Spirit dwel∣ling in his People, and in Spirit is Worshipped by them, who cannot bow unto, or worship any Image or Likeness without set up by the will of man. And therefore it is this day that the Governors, and Captains, the Judges, the Treasurs, the Counsellors, the Sheriffs, the Ju∣stices, and all the Rulers in the Earth, who are of Babels stock, and of their Fathers, Cain, Lamech and Jubal, are joyning together to persecute them that Worship God in Spirit, who commanded not to bow down or worship any Image or Likeness; and so their Like∣nesses are denyed, the Substance being come, and Christ reveal∣ed within, who is a man of Sorrows, who said, The World should rejoyce, John 16. 20. But their joy should be turned into sorrow; and his Light in the Conscience is it which judgeth those vain Delights in carnal Musick, which is to perish with the using. For when the Spirit was departed from Saul, he sought for one to play upon a Harp before him, and for a time he was satisfied with that, and when he heard the Musick, he would be well, but afterwards his delight in the Musick could not over∣come that Murthering Spirit in him, but at the very time that Saul heard the Musick he sought to slay him that was to be King; and such as Saul, who reject the Counsel of God, slayes him that is the Light, and would not that he should reign, who is a man of Sorrows; and he that loved the Musick, had an evil Spirit, or something that troubled him, and that which moved in him, while he heard the Musick, to murther that which was to Reign, (the Lords Anointed) the same thing led him to the Witch; And so first he left the Spirit of God, then sought ase by Musick, then sought Counsel from the Witch, & he was shortly after destroyed. They follow Witchcraft, who obey not the truth, which makes Free; and he that is the Light, is the Truth, and the Lamb slain, by that which takes delight in that, which is out of the Truth, invented by the Generation of Cain, a Fugitive in the Earth, of whom his deceived Mother said, I have gotten a
man from the Lord, whose seed loves that which keeps from the Lord, and leads into the Witchcraft (like Saul) not obeying the Lord, nor the Truth of his Son, who is the Light; and Saul being required made use of the Harp, to quiet him for a time, from whom the Spirit of the Lord was departed, and af∣terwards the seed of the Evil-Doers, even the chief of the Na∣tions, did chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent unto them∣selves Instruments of Musick (like David) putting far away the Evil day, lying upon Beds of Ivory, drinking wine in Bowls, but not grieved for the Affliction of the Righteous seed; and these were them that were at ease in Sion, who were to go into Capti∣vity with the first that go into Captivity, whom the Wo is to, as may be read, Amos 6. And Solomons Wives, his Men-Singers, Women-Singers and Instruments of Musick drew away his Heart from the Lord; and after he cryed against the Vanity of these things; for it leads out from the Spirit (and fear) of the God of order within, in∣to the confused things without, and such as follow that, are of Babel, the Mother of Harlots, who hath made all Nations drunk, in whom the time is come, that the Voice of Harpers and Musitioners shall be heard no more at all; for the Foundation and Skirts of that great Whore and her Craftsman are discovered with the Light, which judgeth these things. From a Prisoner of Christ, in whom my Life is hid, Humphery Smith.
DIVINE LOVE Spreading forth over all NATIONS, OR, The Glorious Day of Unity, Teace and Concord Tendred unto all the Meek of the Earth. Given forth from a tender Compassion to the Captivated Seed of the Noble Plant of Renown, which is hid in all Sober, Humble, Wise and Professed Religious Emperors, Kings, Princes and People in all Nations, kindreds and Tongues over all the whole World, and for all sorts of Poeple who know not the Power of Truth in the inward Parts, that they may come to have the hidden Treasure opened in them, and be gathered into the Glorious Life of Eternal Peace. HEarken and hear, ye Mighty Ones of the Earth that love Righteousness, and all you Prudent Ones that can re∣ceive Instruction, who have not yet hardened your Hearts, as many have done, against the day of Slaughter; even all ye who are willing to come to Meekness, and receive Under∣standing, that your Souls may live, who have an Ear ready to be opened to entertain Counsel, that the Wisdom of the Most High you may attain unto, and come to taste of the Virtue of the Sub∣stance of that which nourisheth all things living, that the un∣searchable Life of the unlimited Power you may attain unto, and come to that which was in the beginning, and partake of the Life, which over Death is to reign, that to the Immortal Beeing you may be led: Be ye now therefore awakened, and feel the operation of the Breath of Life in you; and let the Virtue of the Word of Life break through you, and the Power thereof
break through the Earth, that you may come to be overshadow∣ed with the Influences of divine Love, and filled with the sweet Content of the Riches of the Life Eternal, that nothing may stop the River of Healing Oyl, nor hinder the issuings forth of the pleasant Streams of Living Water, but that in it your Souls may be refreshed, and your Life grow up as a fruitful Vine, that under the Wing of the most High you may be shadowed, and rest in the shelter of a Rock. For the Almighty Power of the Infinite Beeing, is spreading forth it self, and the Eternal Excellency is giving forth it self un∣to the Sons of men, that they by Humility in it may come to rest forever, and come to the fulness of that which only gives sa∣tisfaction, without which there is no true Peace, by which Im∣mortallity may be enjoyed forever, and the Life which only through Death is found, and that Dominion, which through Pa∣tience and Long-suffering is obtained, which only belongs to Kings and Princes, and such whom the King of Kings delighteth to Honour, who hath eternal Crowns of unspeakable lory for all that come to him in the humble Simplicity and Innocency of Uprightness, with that Love which thinketh no Evil, which comes from that ife in which no Evil doth stand. For he that inhabiteth Eternity hath roared from the highest Heaven, and the Almighty, Wonderful and Terrible God over all, hath thundered with the might of his Power, to the reveal∣ing of the hidden things of Darkness, and discovering the Foun∣dation of all Worships practised by all Mankind upon the face of the whole Earth, and the ground of their Revolting from that which was, and is to be their Life, that by it they might have lived forever, who from the holy Life and Virtue of all things being departed in their Transgression and Rebelion a∣gainst the Light, whereby thick Darkness bath covered all man∣kind, and Bruitishness in knowledge hath happened unto many, and inordinate Aflections have had Dominion, and Sottishness hath blinded the Mind, and the things that are made in the Earth hath filled the carthly Heart, that in it the living Power that made all things cannot have entrance, without which living Power received in the Heart, there is not Eternal Peace, by the enjoyment (or possession) of all the things that are created in
or upon the Sea or Earth, neither is there any manner of Wor∣ship that obtains life to the soal, until therein man comes to be guided with that, by which the soul at first had its life, by which man was made, which is Light; for the Eternal Power, who is Light, is breaking forth of Darkness, and shining forth as the Brightness of the clear Morning, that all the dark Corners of the Earth may be enlightened with the beauty thereof; which Light in the lowly and the meek may be felt, who obeying it may know it shining more and more to the brightness of the Day of Glory, whereby all Nations may come to taste of the Virtue of the Life, and come to know the Covenant of Peace, which will heal all the Breaches, and restore the Unity of all Nations, that one peaceable Covenant over all Nations may spread as the Morning Cloud, and be all covered under that, which shadows over all the Upright in Heart, who love the Breath∣ings forth of the holy Life, and keep their Minds to the humble Seed, continuing in the pure Fear, thereby in them to have the Fountain opened, that they all may drink at the Spring that shall never be dry, whose Souls come to be as a watered Garden, and their inward parts as a Vessel of Oyl, their Hearts being enlar∣ged with the abundance of Peace, and because of Salvation, re∣joycing forever, that all Nations may be at quiet, and every one feed under his own Vine, and none destroy nor devour one ano∣ther henceforth forever more. For by the Mighty Wonderful Operation of the Power of the one Light, which shines in and over all, were all things made, and all Mankind upon the whole Earth, from the Life of which one Light, was breathed into man, that by which man might be kept in the Unity, and abide in the Oneness of Spirit, the which, though all Mankind are gone out from, by Sin and Evil, yet that which is but One in all, which was before man (and sin) doth still in man remain, even the Light, proceeding from the Life, which was the Life of man, without which he is dead unto God, which Light remaining in man a free gift from the God of Life, Power and Love, by it may all Mankind seek after the living God, and find him who is not far from every one, but is near unto all that seek him in the meek Lowliness in the Heart. And that all Emperors, Kings, Princes & Judges, and all Nations,
Languages, Kindreds, Tongues and People upon the face of the whole Earth, may come be restored into Unity, Peace and Concord, and be united together in one bond of Love and Peace, and never learn War any more; and that they may all come to the true Wor∣ship of the God of Life, Power and Light in & over all, and never to have hatred one against another, concerning professed Religi∣ous Worship, nor differ and strive about that, by which the Souls if all Mankind come to be saved, nor about the Way of attaining thereunto. And that all Nations and People may receive the Virtue of the Life it self, by which man may come to live forever in that noble state of Prudence, Innocency and Wisdom, in the durable Domini∣on of divine Honour, ruling in the excellency of the Omnipotent Power (of the most Infinite God of Life) over all that, which at first in divine Wisdom was subjected under man, who then bore the Image of the Immortal God of Power; and live in the Glorious state of Peace and Quietness, out of Wrath, Envy and Trouble; and that man may be brought into that Noble state of Uprightness, and come to be directed and guided with that, by which the may be renowned forever, and leave the Memorial of his Righteousness for a sweet favour unto many Generations to come. Therefore all ye Wise and Prudent, Ancient and Honourable, Devout, Zealous and Religious Ones, let all your Minds be turned from the Varieties of Conceptions in the vain Imaginations, and the vain Thoughts of the dark Mind, which leadeth forth into the carnal Conceivings of things, without the pure Substance of the one Immortal Life, which in man lies hid, from all that car∣nal Wisdom which naturally ruleth in man, who is fallen from the Dominion and Life of the God of Wisdom, whose delight is to dwell in his People, and reveal in them his secrets, and make known unto them (by that which searcheth the Heart) the un∣searchable Riches of the Mysteries of his Will, instructing them, as a tender Father, in the Perfect Way of Life, that unto them who feel his Power, an Eternal Inheritance he may give, and at last receive them in the Arms of his Love, with him to reign in the Light of endless Glory forever. Wherefore, let all Tongues be silent, and let every Evil Mo∣tion
be denyed, and the passage of every Vain Thought be stopt, and let Dread and Fear Possess him that hath done Evil, and let the inward parts be searched with the Light of Life, which is in the Heart of every one of you; and let your Minds be wholly turned from all the visible carnal fading Glory, to the Light of Truth in you, which being by you loved, will lead you into Meekness, and into true Humility, which leadeth to, and goeth before Eternal Honour, and bringeth to be Honourable in his Power, who ruleth in the Hearts of (Emperors and) Kings, who fear before him; and he only who searcheth the Heart, is to be sought after, above all things, and the operation of his mighty Power is to be felt in the inward parts, judging that which hath kept man from the knowledge of his Life, and condemning and overturning that which hath hindred man from the sense of the feeling thereof in him; the which being turned unto, and loved, followed and obeyed, will bring Judgment upon that in you all, which hath long kept you from the Dominion of pure divine Glo∣ry and Love, in the Slavery of sleshly worldly Glory, which hath more and more begotten you into that which lusteth after the Beauty which is to perish with them that dye in it. Now, therefore awake ye all to Righteousness, stand in awe and sin not, commune with your own Hearts, and be still, and in the cool of the day, and quietness of your Mind, listen ye then to the voice of the Word in your Hearts, and prize and tender that which moveth in you against that which is Evil, and come to be guided by that in you which is Light, which cometh from him who is the God of Love, whose love is already shed abroad in the Hearts of many, which constraineth them to wait in his Light to receive his Power and further Discoveries of his Will, who willeth that all men should be saved from Eternal Death and Damnation, and not dye under the horrible Terrors of his Fierce Wrath, nor perish in the Darkness of Unbelief, and Rebellion against that Power which made man at first Up∣right, and now from a fatherly pity doth call after all Mankind, that they may return from Evil, and come unto him, and be saved from Wrath to come, and find plenteous Redemption in the Life of his Power, and be gathered into the Comliness of his Love, and translated into the Kingdom of his Immortality,
and reign with him who sitteth upon the Throne of unspeakable Glory, ruling in and over all the Kingdoms of men. For behold, the Day-star of the Morning is risen, and his Glitterings are enlightning the Dark parts of the World, and un∣to all Nations is it arising, to declare in the Hearts of many, the springing forth of the day of Judgment upon the vail and night of Darkness, which hath long covered that from man, by which all Mankind might come to see the Fountain of endless Love, which now through Judgment, by the brightness of the Light is brought near unto all People whose Hearts are open to receive it, and the Light of the Morning-Star (which ariseth in the Hearts of the beloved chosen Seed) is bringing to Judgment the hidden things of Dishonesty, and in secret reproving the Double-mindedness of man, that Deceit, Defraud and Hypocrisie out of him may be cleansed, and the ground of all Vanity, Ty∣ranny and Lust discovered and removed, that Death upon Death with Judgment through the Light may come, that by the Light Life and Immortality may come forth and arise in the strength of immortal Power, breaking through that which separated man from Unity, Peace and Truth, that unto it all Nations may be∣come subject, and by the force of its Lowliness be drawn toge∣ther to the Hill of Holiness, and rest together in the heavenly Fe∣licity upon the Mount of Refuge forever. For the Son of Righteousness is risen with Healings in his Wings, and an overshadowing Power is with him; and they that come to the Fruit of his Love, are filled with Peace to their Souls, and so come to that which may be received in the Heart, and which is given to heal all Nations, and spring up in the midst of them as a Tree of Life, whose Fruit shall never fail World without End. And this glorious Light of Life, and Power of Love, is spring∣ing forth of Darkness in the Hearts of Thousands in the Nor∣thern parts of the World, and is shining forth in the brightness of Righteousness towards the utmost parts of the South, and un∣to all Kindreds upon the Face of the Earth, reaching from the East to the West, to declare and give the knowledge of Immor∣tal Power, which in the Hearts of the humble, harmless and single∣minded may be felt and received, if they rebel not against the
Light in the Conscience, nor remain in the strength of their own carnal Knowledge, but be willing to come out of all that which they must dye unto, or perish with, and leave all that which never brought them to the Enjoyment of everlasting Rest to their Souls. Now therefore all ye tall Cedars of the Earth, whose Heads are lifted up on high above others, and whose Minds are exalted above the Principle of Meekness in your selves, this are you all to know, even that Power of Eternal Life, which is to rule in and over you: And see that by greatness of your Honour and and Glory in this present World, your Hearts be not thereby lifted up in Pride, Ambition and Wrath, so as thereby to keep your selves from the attaining unto a Pearl of far more & greater Price, and of a more durable Substance; for great is the Riches, Honour and Dignity that is coming near unto you, if you let not your Hearts be hardened against it, in the strength and pervers∣ness of your own Wills, despising the Day of your Visitation of Love, and rejecting the Message of Life to your Souls, and con∣temning that by which you might come to live forever, and have Dominion over Death and Hell, and escape the Torment which all them fall into in the day of their Death, who dye out of the Covenant of Life and Peace; the which Covenant that you may attain unto, and come to live in forever; let Love & Mercy be received in you, and then brought forth by you, and let Hu∣mility and Fear be placed in your Hearts with it, in tenderness to rule over others; and let the Light in you (which lets you see the thing that is Evil) lead and guide you to speak and do the thing that is good, right and just; and let your Words be few, sound, sober and meek, and hate not them, who from good will to your Souls bring the Reproof of Life unto you, or publish the word of Repentance among you, or proclaim this message of Love and Peace within your Borders; let not such be harmed, for a day and time of Visitation is coming near upon you all, and happy may you be if you receive Instruction, and love the Light. By a lover of the Souls of all Mankind, a Servant of the God of Life, Prisoner at the City of Winchester, known by the Name of Humphry Smith.
TO ALL Parents of Children Upon the face of the VVhole Earth: That your Children you may the better train up in the right Way that they should go therein, some∣thing of the True Way it self is discovered, that Iniquity may not be received by Tradition from Parents to Children, and so from one Generation to another, but that your Children may come to Christ, and be Children of God, and so be a Comfort unto you: Therefore is this sent among you every where in love to your Children and you. FRom the Bowels of God's infinite Love, unto a tender Seed of him, not known nor brought forth in tender Babes, am I moved to you to write, That your Children you provoke not to Wrath, nor draw forth their Minds into Un∣righteousness; neither be ye Examples of Rashness, nor Fro∣wardness, neither teach ye them that, when they are little (to please your vain Minds) which you must chastise them afterwards to leave again; neither teach ye them to be Proud, by drawing forth their Minds to look at foolish Toyes, which you in the Transgression have put upon them, in any manner of dressing which is needless; for this know, that in so doing you bring them from being such, of whom the Kingdom of God doth con∣sist, to be Children of the Devil, who is the Father of Pride, which many harmeless Children would not come unto, were they not trained into it, by such as are in Pride already; neither teach ye them to strike in the least, nor provoke them to have any delight to see striking; for thereby afterwards they come to
strike one another, and hurt one another; and so you teach your own Children to be unnatural one to another, and you unnatural to them, in teaching them to strike one another, and then when they are a little grown up, to strike and beat them for striking one another, the which you taught them: Neither teach ye them to speak wicked Words, nor many Words; for in the Mul∣titude of Words, there wants not Sin: Neither teach ye them to call Names in the least, nor any such thing, as you will answer it for their Souls in the great and terrible Day of the Lord; for in these things is greater weight than many Thousands are aware of: And for want of taking heed of these things, in the true fear of God, Children have grown up in these and the like things, to be a great Grief unto their Parents, of whom they learned it; and some beat their Parents, being taught thereunto when they were little, and so trained up out of the fear of the Lord. And by this Wickedness, received by Tradition, and nursed up from one Generation to another, Nations are overspread with Sin and Ini∣quity, and Towns and Countries are filled with all Abominations, whereby the Lord of Heaven and Earth is grieved. Therefore of these things be ye all warned; for this do I know, that in many tender Babes and young Children, there is a meek, innocent, harmless Principle from God, who willeth not the Death of any; and they have a Light from Christ, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World, which Light is in them: And he said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, & forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of God, who come unto him that is meek and low in Heart; therefore you should suffer them to keep unto, & come unto that which is meek and low in the Heart; for that which may be known of God, is manifest in them: And Christ the Light had a love to little Children, and said, He that will enter the Kingdom of God, must become as a little Child: Therefore Wo be to you, if you teach and cause such to become the Chil∣dren of the Devil, by following your devised Fables, evil Ex∣amples and wrong Guidance in your own rebellious Wills: For behold, and look upon young Children, and see how innocent and lamb-like they look; and consider if every thing were as good as God made it; and how much more, if they were brought forth in the Covenant of God? And wherein have they delight,
in Pride or any Covetousness, or any manner of Cruelty? And is it not better for their Souls, if you let them keep in that state, and so to suffer them to come to Christ, who saveth from Sin, and his Power keepeth out of Sin, and his Light in the Conscience con∣demneth for Sin, where it is, and he cometh to destroy the Works of the Devil? Therefore you should consider, that you are far from Christ, if you teach such the works of the Devil, that never knew it, and teach Children to enter into Sin, which separateth them and you from God, and keep you forever from Salvation, unless you come through Judgment out of it again, which many come short of, and most attain not unto; for few there be that enter in at the strait Gate. And that you may the more consider my words, and come into Moderation and the Wisdom of God, in these and other things, to walk exemplary before your Children, and to be to them Pat∣terns of Gravity, Meekness and Sobriety; therefore shall I set before your Eyes some plain and simple Truths of my experience when I was a Child. First, as concerning Tenderness, my Heart was much affected therewith, and Tears was as my meat and drink night and day; and often was my Heart refreshed with love from God, when I came unto that which came from Christ, the Man of Sorrows, who said, Come unto me; and suffer little Children to come unto me; but many despised my Tears, and vilified my Mournful state, not knowing (as they said) what the matter was with me; and much provocation was used to get me out of that Condition, and as I grew up, to hurry me into the Earth, which brought much di∣sturbance upon my foolish despised state, that fear and terror then entred upon me, and ghastly Dreams in the Night, and sometimes strange Visions, in which I should cry out, and speak aloud, to the raising of all in the House, who with all the means they used could not get me out of it, which even astonished the Parents with fear, which things I well remember; and by the violent, fierce, wrathful Nature that ruled in others, was my quietness disturbed, which begat Wrath and Anger in me again towards them, which may be a Warning to you; yet something of God in me was not wholly overcome: And the first words, accor∣ding to Scripture, that pierced my Heart, and remained with
me, was, He hath filled the Hungry with good things, and the Rich hath he sent empty away. The which words remained as a thing printed and sealed in my Heart, from the pure love of God, and my Meditations of him and his Love was exceeding prevailent upon my little tender Heart, being a Child, and so much the greater was my Grief, when by the Earthly mindedness, and wrathful hasty Nature in Parents, and others, I was even forced out of it, and so provoked to Wrath, Grief and Discontent, and not suffered to come nor keep to Christ, who saith, I am the Light, which I felt meek and low in the Heart, therefore was my Trouble great many times, and wrath and hastiness began to have entrance in me, the which being sensible of, and finding a love towards God to be much more precious than any thing of the World, and having a Hope towards him, I do affirm, That when I was a little Child, I should and did often pray to God (believing there was a God, though I knew him not) even earnestly did I pray with Tears, and my Heart was opened with his Love, to whom also I should make my Complaint in secret sometimes upon my Knees, when I could get into such a place that none could see me, nor at all come to know it: And sometimes as I went along the way, when it come into my heart, then should I even as it were beg and cry with many Tears, and had boldness towards God, as towards a familiar Friend, though much in submission and fear, as one unworthy, because I had sinned against him: And for these things I had no Creature to be my Example, nor to learn it of, and not know∣ing nor hearing of any that did the like, I durst not let any know of it, nor wherefore I did so often weep, when they did see me; for I saw none but despised that condition, and were unsensible of my state. And so having not any that was sensible of that tender Princi∣ple of God in me, to cherish that, or be a help to me in it; but all, (as I grew up) to nurse up the evil earthly thing that was begot∣ten in me (as I said before) by that nature my Leaders were in; and as I grew in years, so that was apt to grow in me, my natural Father being more eager than most men, in labouring and caring for earthly things, that when I grew to the age of six or seven years, and upwards, there was seldem one day in six but he caused
me to cry bitterly, and through provocation continually thereun∣to, the Earth and Darkness got entrance in me more than before, and the tender Principle of God in me was vailed from me, and so became in after years as a Child of Wrath, disobedient to God, as I have written in a Book entituled, Man driven out into the Earth, wherein is declared the dreadful Indignation of God that after came upon me (because of that wicked Nature which I was led into) before I came into this peace with God, which now I do enjoy with him forever, whose Name my Soul doth magnifie for evermore. And this I do write to be an Ensample unto you, and a Warn∣ing, that you may not bring your Children into the like Alie∣nation, Torment and Condemnation as I was, and the more espe∣cially, because that few afterwards do return to God with all their Hearts, and enter in at the straight Gate. And this you may also consider, that this I write in plainness, and true love to you and your Children, for the good of Body and Soul that in the fear of the living God, you may train them up, so may you have comfort in them at the last, and they may grow up in the Wis∣dom of God, to rule over such outward Earthly things, as the Lord or you may commit into their hands; for this you may or should know, that such as truly fear God will do no Evil, nor waste the Creatures upon their Lust; and if you teach them to waste the Creatures of God in Pride, lust, vanity, and needless things when they are young, how can you expect, but they will abuse, spend and waste your Estate when they are grown up; and some have been bred up so high in Pride, that when they have wanted to maintain that, and other Wickedness, they have robb'd and stole to maintain it, and at last, with shame, come to untimely ends; and many things might be named which with the Light you may also see and know, that these things are of great concernment both for Body and Soul, and for your good and your Children. Therefore that it may go well with them and you, and that God may do them good at the latter end, let all your Children every where be trained up in the Way that they should go, which Way is Christ, and he saith, I am am the Light, and the Light in them will let them see, that they should not Lye, nor speak Wicked Words, nor do any Violence one to another; and so
you are to train up your Children in the Light; for the Light is the Way in which they may come to know God, and hear his Voice; for God speaks by him that is the Light: And God cal∣led Samuel, being yet a Child, and Ely bid the Child answer the Call of the Lord. And the Child, who answered the Call of the Lord, reproved old Ely the Priest; for that Priest's Sons were Sons of Belial, and knew not God; and them sons of his were the first Priests that ever took Tythes by force, and they and their Father came to an untimely Death, under the Judgments of God, which is also to follow upon all them Priests that take Tythes by force. And certainly, when I was a Child the Light of Christ in me did let me see the Abominations of the Priests practices, and did speak against their way of sprinkling Infants, and said, I should never stand as a God-father for any (nor never did) whereat a man Swore at me, and said, It was pity any one did it for me; but I said, I mattered not if they had never done it; for I was never the better, though I had never heard any one speak against the things, nor did not until many years after: And so, that which is now my Guide, is the same which was in the beginning before the Sin, and no other Foundation I never knew, neither can ano∣ther Foundation be laid in any, than that which is already laid, which is Christ within the hope of Glory; and he saith, I am the Light, come unto me; and suffer little Children to come unto me; for the Kingdom of God is of such, as come to him meek and low in Heart, who saveth from Sin: And certainly I never knew the Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace, until I became again as I was when I was a little Child: And how hard it is to come again into that simple innocent state, (when degenerated from it) let Gods Witness in the Couscience answer. Therefore is this written that you may not shut up the Kingdom of Heaven from your Children. Secondly, Take heed how you cause or suffer your Children to Babble many vain words with their Tongues, with a delight to hear them prattle when there is no need; for thereby afterward the Tongue becomes an unruly Member, set on fire of Hell, Jam. 3. 6. as I found and bore the fierce Indignation of the Lord for; and many little Children would not come to speak so many vain and evil words, which corrupt the good Manners, if they were not
much provoked thereunto; and seeing People delight to hear them speak the most crasty words, which are from the subtilty of the Serpent; and many send their Children abroad among other wild People or Persons, to have them learn sub∣tilty and crast, to speak their words from, and how to be har∣dy, or too hard for others by subtil Words and Lyes also, in buying and selling, and when they have learned it, say, They can live any where, and that they can shift for themselves, and live by their Wits and forecast, which indeed oft-times to deceive others; and yet there  such a plain, honest, simple Principle in some, that they can never be brought into such subtil words, nor into so many words as others, though they themselves have much endeavoured to attain it, but they have been more plain and simple, and the Lord preserveth the simple, Psal. 11. 6. and such sometimes could not defend their own cause, but were pleaded down when their cause was just, by others that had learned more of the Serpents subtilty, which the Vengeance of God will one day come upon, when the Lord avengeth the cause of the oppressed. And in this I have had also much experience; for when I was a Child I saw much into the vanity of needless words, and was very backward a long time in speaking, and in that, and some other things, much differing from other Children, and many thought I would have been a fool,  they call it  the foolishness of God, and therefore oft-times much means was u∣sed to cause me to speak, and many Provocations long together, and yet not at all scarce make me speak one word, for I saw then it was needless, and could not ask one how he did, when I saw he was well, nor answer that which was needless; and when I was a little grown up, and sent upon any small Errand, I should deliver my Message in very few words, that people thought I would be never like a man; and about ten years of Age my Father, in the flesh, would sometimes send me to Mar∣ket, and it was long before he, and all others, could make me ask any more then the price he did allow me to sell at; or if he did not set me a certain price, then I should resolve of a price in the mind, according as I saw the Market, and so I often sold with the cheapest, being loth to take too much, and therefore was often esteemed and called a Fool, and Dunce; but it had been easier for me, if I had never been drawn out of that state, when I
was taught of God, to do unto others, as I would be done unto, and was fearful to strike any one, but rather gave way to them that struck me, and so was by many of my equals abused, and it was hard for me to take away the life of any Creature, and pleaded much against it with my Father and Mother, when they com∣manded me to do it, though it was but to kill a young Dog or Cat, or the like, my Life in me was grieved to do it, and much was I forced to harden my Heart before I could do any such thing, though commanded by my Parents, which may be a warning to all Parents, that they be not the cause of the hardning of their Childrens hearts, and then say of them, they are hardy Lads, for that which har dens the heart seperates from God, who is Love, and from Christ, who comes to save the Life, and so the Sacrifice of God is not known, which is in the broken Heart, but the Lord is with the humble and the broken hearted: And you should all take heed of provoking your Children to many words; for all flesh should be silent before the Lord, and their words and yours should be few, seasoned with salt, that they might minister grace to the Hearers; for God sitteth in Heaven, unto whom an account must be given for every Idle word; and according to every word that a man shall speak, shall he be judged. Therefore let the fear and dread of the Lord God be before your Eyes, that you bring not your Children into the Condemnation, by speaking more then   , Of plain simple Truth in few Words, left the Lord God of Heaven and Earth requite it of you, in the day of his firce Wrath, when you will not be able to answer him one of a Thousand, and left you bring your tender simple Babes, to be Children of the Devil, and then it be not in your power to bring them back out of that state again, but they dye in their sins, upon whom the Wrath of God abideth. Therefore as you love and tender their good, both of Soul and Body, see that you keep, and in all things bring them to Gods Witness in them, and that will judg and reprove them for any Evil they have done, and will keep them more out of all Evil, then you by any other Reproof can do, and will answer your chastizing for any Evil to be just, when done in the true Modera∣tion, not exceeding the Offence committed, nor proceeding from the least motion of the wrathful nature in you [mark that.] Thirdly, take heed of provoking your Children to unquietness,
neither disturbe them of being quiet; for many are not content to see them sober and quiet, but are provoking them to Lightness and vain Pleasure, when they would be sober, like Lambs; for it is written, In quietness and rest shall ye be saved, Isa. 30. 13. And study to be quiet, I Thes. 4. 11. And commune with your own Hears, and be still, Psal. 4. 4. For when I was a Child, I did often sit and stand quiet long together, pondering many things in my Mind, and as I grew up all along that thing remained with me, that for an hour, or some hours, if I were not disturbed, I should sit quiet, either waiting on the Lord for Counsel, or searching which motion in me to be guided by; And when I have been riding along the way, when I have sound the right thing in me did not lead me, I have turned back and not rode that Jour∣ney: And my silent siting like a Fool, my Father hath often called studying, and hath often sharply reproved me for it; say∣ing, by way of Reproach, I would sure study to be some great Prea∣cher or another; and my Mother hath come to me, its like hun∣dreds of times, both when I was a Child, and a Man, and in her pity hath laid hards on me, and bid me should not sit studying so, for surely I would make my self a fool, not knowing what my condition was: And being so usually disturbed and grieved, sometimes on First-dayes, or when I could, I should get into some Wood, or place so private, that none should find me, and there wait in quietness three or four hours, and sometimes the Love of God would break through me, and his Word would make my heart soft, and I felt the same then which now is my Life; and now I know, that those that wait on the Lord renew their strength; and though it is written, The Lord was weary of the Peo∣ples Sacrifices, and with their Words, Mal. 2. 17. Yet it was ne∣ver written in Scripture, that the Lord was weary of those that waited upon him. Therefore you should suffer your Children to wait upon God (or at leastwise to be quiet) and that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, Rom. 1. 19. And the Lord hath not lest himself without a Witness in every Con∣science; and it is Christ that is given for a Witness, Isa. 55. 4. and his Light shineth in their hearts, who saith, Come to me, and learn of me; for he is the Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul, who teacheth all to Prosit, Isa. 48. 17. And is that true Prophet, which whoso hears not, the Soul is cut off; and certainly my Soul was cut
off from the Life, when I was forced from hearing his voice in me, that is a man of Sorrows, and as a Lamb dumb. Therefore take heed of provoking your Children to hear ken to a stranger, or another Teacher than he that is a living Mimster within the vail, and the vail is over the Heart, where I have found that Instructor that shall never be removed, but all Teachers without may be re∣moved, and Priests and men may dye, but this abides a Priest for∣ever, being made by the Power of an endless Life, Heb. 7. And so now all such as come to know something of God in them, they also come to sit in silence, and quietness, to receive Instructions from God, which is no new thing invented by the will of man, or learned one from another, but is the same with that which guided the Prophets, and was in my heart from God of a Child: and I do affirm in the presence of the Lord God, that I had never returned out of that degenerate state which I was hurried into, from the measure of the breath of Life in me, if I had not waited in, and been obedient unto the Light of Christ, which was in me so a Child: And you may all mind, that all along there hath been something in you, which in secret did reprove you for sin, and will let you see the sins of your Youth or Childhood, and that is the Light of Christ, the Son of God, who so loved the World, that he gave his Son a Light into the World; and the World is sct in the Heart, Eccles. 3. 11. that all men through him might believe, and be saved from Wrath to come; and that is it that is given for a Witness, and the Witness is alss in the Conscience of a Child, which will testifie against it, after it hath done Evil, and the Countenance will fall, like Cain; but before they have done Evil they are not ashamed, as Adam, being innocent; and if they be falsly accused of an Evil they have not done, they will have Boldness therein, and the Witness in them will justifie them; and the Witness is given, of God to be a Leader, Isa. 54. 4. and a Captain, Heb. 2. 10. and a Saviour, Mat. 1. 21. And the Lord in the midst is mighty to save, Hos. 11. 9. And this is freely given to every one, without Money, and without Price, so that there is neither Jew nor Greek, Barbarian nor Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ is all, and in all, and he is called a Witness, and the Light of the Gentiles; and he saith, I am the Light, be∣lieve in the Light; And God is Light, who is above all, and through all,
and in all, Ephes. 4. 6. And he hath placed a sufficient measure in eve∣ry one, Psal. 46. 5. Heb. 8. 10, 11. which was my Teacher when I knew no other, and before I knew what it was, and is my Teacher now, and is the same as ever it was, and doth not Change; and this is that which comes from God, and is not put in them by Man nor humane Learning, but men by their Eloqent Speeches and vain Deceit may lead them forth from that in them, and so break the Command of Christ, who said, Go not forth, Mat. 24. 25. And then when they are led forth after Lo here and Lo there, from the Rock, which Christ, the Light within, and from the sure Foundation, which God hath laid, and no man can lay another, though they despise this, and reject, and refuse this precious Corner-stone, which is the Light that shineth in the heart to give the knowledge of God, from the which being led by the subtility of mans fallen Wisdom, then are they liable to follow any devised Fables, and Imaginations, and Sects, and Opinons, and to be scattered upon every dry, barran and dark Mountain, as the Lord knoweth I was long, not knowing where to find Rest, having been hurried from, and led out from my true Guide, from and by the which at first I could pray with the Spirit, as in measure the Spirit that was within helped my Infir∣mity, with Sighs and Tears, which being led out from, and the tender Motions of it quenched, then after I grew up, was taught to say Prayers, and some Prayers that others learned out of Books, and this they laid upon me to say every night, but I found that was just as dry Heath, instead of a Honey-comb before. And so being led on in a Form, and to look after Things, and Teachers without, the Light within became darkned, and my understanding of the Son of God's Love shed abroad in my Heart, which sometimes being sensible of, I began very Young to look after Priests and Sermons, and thought to have sound the true Thing again there; but as true as the Lord God of Hea∣ven and Earth liveth, They did me more harm than all the rest, and led me farther from my Teacher, and from the sence of the feeling after God, Acts 17. 27. to sind him near me then ever, and withal begot in me abundance of the Serpents subtilty, and the more because I being sensible of a want in me, received their fair Speeches with much eagerness and earnest Desires, believing
them that that was the Way to Peace; so that I grew much into that knowledge which puffth up, and did indeed encrease my Sorrow, and so by them was I deceived, the Lord God knoweth I Lye not, but speak the Truth in Flainness, having not Envy towards any of their Persons; and this is the very Truth of my Heart, in the Presence of the living God, That it was more harder for me to leave and deny, and know Redemption out of that, which I learned from and among the Priests, then to leave the Fruits of all the Sin that ever I by Temptations did run into, and my Wit∣ness herein will abide in me forever. Therefore let the Lord God be the Teacher of your Children, who hath given them Life and Beeing, and a better Teacher you cannot provide for them, nor direct them unto, and that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; and let that lead them, and guide them in his fear; and you are to let them understand, that they should do and speak justly, according to that Witness of God in them, which will let them see when-ever they are tempted to speak a Lye, or say they have done such a things as you commanded them, and have not; and will let them see, they should be faithful and diligent unto you in all things, that are just in the sight of God; and other things you should not re∣quire of them, left you grieve them, but examples of Righte∣ousness should you be in all your Words and Actions unto them; and if you are not able to set them to School to learn to read, yet they have the Light from christ in them already, and that will shw them plainly of the Father; and he that is the Light is the good Old Way, in which the way faring men, though Fool, cannot Err. And if you set them to school never so long to read and write, and with their learning to search the Scriptures, which is good, yet they are to come to Christ the Light that they may have Life, and they are to learn of him, and follow him, and so to learn of Christ, as to know him to be in them the Hope of Glory, and the Way out of Sin, and unto the Father, his will in all things made manifest to obey, rather then man, that so it may go well with them, and that they may come to receive a Blessing from God, and be a Comfort to their Parents, who fear him, and at last in Gods Ever∣lasting Covenant lie down with Peace and Rest
ANd all you young Children, who are growing up into years of discretion, this you are to understand, that you have not made your selves, but were created by the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who ruleth over all Mankind, whose Presence is every where, and filleth Heaven and Earch, and Knoweth the secrets of all the Hearts of the Children of men, and sheweth unto man (both Old and Young) what is his Thoughts, from whom the least Evil cannot be hid, who is dreadful in Holyness, and just in his Judgments, and Righteous in all his Wayes, and his Presence is near unto every one, and from his All-seeing-Eye can no one hide his deeds, and before him should you fear for∣ever, and learn in his fear to walk, which will keep you out of Evil; and grieve ye not his Spirit, left he refuse to help you in your great Distress, neither provoke the Lord against you, by learning Wickedness among the Sons of men, who are all astray from the lowly Guidance of his Spirit, and so their works are Evil, and their words Unfavoury, and Evil Words they use, which doth corrupt the good Manners, the which of them you should not learn, but let your Yea ne Yea, and your Nay be Nay, and so learn of Christ, that his Power he may minister unto you and you by him come to be saved, that you may be Children of God, and taught of God, and drawn by his Spirit unto Christ his Son, who said, I am the Light, of whom the Scriptures bear Testi∣mony; And in him (the Scripture saith) is Life; and he is come, who is the Light, that you might have Life in your selves, and come to be Heirs of the Promise of God by Regeneration, through the working of the Power of God, which worketh in the Hearts of the Children of men, to sit them for himself, a Habita∣tion of Holiness, that he may be glorified in his People. And certainly you ought in the tenderness of your Years to have a true fear before that God of Life, which made you, who is an invisible Spirit, as may be read in the Holy Scriptures of Truth: And as you learn the fear of the Lord, who cometh to dwell in his people, he will by the Direction and Guidance of the Light of his Son in your Hearts, who is the Mediator, by whom the Law is handed forth, will he teach you your Duty to∣wards
your Neighbour, which is near unto you, and to Honour your Father and Mother and what Honour is, as also your Du∣ty and Obedience in the first place towards God, that his Love might be towards you, and that your dayes might be prolonged, as also saith the Law; for whoso groweth Wicked and Rebellious against the Light, the Lord suffereth not to live out half their dayes, Job 24. vers. 13. For Life comes from God, and he with∣draws it at his pleasure from them that obey him not; and when he taketh way their Breath they dye, and the Breath of God was the Life of the Soul of man; and Christ said, He was the Life, who is meek and lowly in Heart, who said, Suffer little Children to come unto me; and said he, I am the Way, and he com∣eth to condemn Sin, and calleth to Repentance, his Name is cal∣ed, The Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. and the Word is very nigh thee, even in thy Heart, Rom. 10. 8. And so that is the Way that you all which are Young, should go, and be trained up in, that when you are old, you might not depart from it, Prov. 22. 6. so may you have Peace with God, and his Blessing to be with you alwayes, and be a Comfort to your Parents, and all that truly fear the Lord. Written by a Member of Christ, whose love was to little Children, and so is mine, who am called. Humphery Smith.
THE True and Everlasting Rule From God discover'd. AND That which proveth all things Published from the Spirit of Truth. To the which Rule the Scriptures also bear Testimony that the Simple and Honest-hearted may see what Rule they are to walk by to come to perfect Peace and Rest with God for evermore. Also, A Testimony of the true Prophet, who was to come, and is come, and there is not another; his Work witnessed, and Truth declared from a feeling-sence and experience, according to Scripture. Wherein also is shewed, That the Prophets of God and Ministers of Christ did preach the Light; and so those who preach the Light now, do therein preach the same Doctrine as the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles did. With an Invitation from the Spirit of Christ. By a Servant of the Lord, and a Sufferer for his Truth in the House of Correction at Winchester in Hampshire, called Humphry Smith. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, Deut. 18. 15.
To the Flock of GOD, whom he hath gathered in Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Worce∣stershire, Wiltshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, Dorcetshire and Devonshire. TO you, my dearly beloved Lambs and Babes in Christ Jesus, chosen of God the Father before the Foundation of the Word; called to be Saints; sanctified with the living Truth in the inward parts; justified by him that is near; redeemed with the Blood of the new Covenant; glorified as a royal Diadem in the hand of the Father; preserved through believing and obedience, by the mighty Arm of unlimited Power; com∣passed about with Salvation; anointed with Oyl of Joy, and Gladness of Heart; who are beloved of my Soul, and the Joy of the whole Earth, who are chosen, and faithful and true; who through great Tribubation the Kingdom do come to receive; who have not loved your Lives unto the Death; who did once walk in the Shadow of Death; whose feet now come to be guided in the Way of Everlasting Peace, to whom the hand of the Father's infinite Love hath been reached forth, as unto tender Babes, who come to be born and nursed up by the Womb and the Paps that are free, which is the Mother of us all; who know the first-born, which is blessed for evermore; who are become the first Fruits unto God, and to the Lamb; who have received the Testimony of Jesus; who have washed your Robes in the Blood of the Lamb, and have received the fine Linnen, which is the Righteousness of God, and the Righteous∣ness of the Saints; whose Sins are done away forever; whose Naked∣ness is covered; who have put on the pure Robes, and are adorned as a Bride for her Husband; who are clothed with Righteousness, as with a Garment, and are all Glorious within, and are able to stand upon the Sea of Glass, mingled with Fire, and before the Throne, out of which proceeds Lightnings, and Thunders, and Voices; who have cast down all your Crowns at the fect of the Lamb, and come to wait on him forever and ever, who is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, who is worthy of all Glory, and Honour, and Praise, and Thanks, and Obedience, and Dominion from all his for evermore. The Salutation of me, the Prisoner of Jesus Christ, with my own hand, unto you, my dear Ones, unto whom at present my Bowels of Love from God the Father are poured forth, with whom I am in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, among whom I have passed through good Report and evil Report, yea, that which is not to be named, who am as one of the least, yet not the least in Love unto you, who are unto me as the Children of my own Bowels, bound up with me in the unspeakable Life of the Father, which from all the World is hid for evermore, where Life and Immortality dwelleth forever, and is daily felt by all you that abide faithful in the Obedience, and keep your Garments unspotted of the Flesh, abiding in the pure Fear and godly Humility, your Bread is continued, and your Waters are sure, and your Souls are made as a watered Gardn, and Peace and Life springs up in you, and you may delight your selves in Fatness, and find the replenishings from the Fountain of God's living Mercies, and grow up in the holy Life as Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified. The Church of the first born are you come to be, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, made lively Stones, elect and precious, growing up a holy Building unto God the Father, who will dwell in you his holy Temple forever and ever, who are founded upon the elect, precious and Corner-stone, the sure Foundation, the Rock of Ages, the Light of the World, whose light is your life, which is shining forth unto the Sons of men, that they may see your good Works, which are wrought in and by you, and hear your seasoned words, which ministers Grace unto the Hearers, and answers Gods Witness in all, and makes for your Ad∣vantage, who are as Plants of Renown, a Habitation of Holiness, Vessels of Honour, Clusters of Grapes, who receive nourishment from the Vine, whose Fruit never fadeth, whose Rivers are never dry, whose Rayment never waxeth old, whose Glory never fadeth, whose strength is renewed as the Morning, your Dread is upon the People, and your Terror upon the Heathen; your Enemies are all as stubble before you, and your God in the midst of you is a consuming Fire; Dreadful is his Presence in you, unto all his and your Enemies, the Workers of Iniquity, who shall fall before you as the Grass that is cut down, and wither as the Blossom that is cut off; Paleness shall cover the faces of all
your Enemies; before you shall all People be much pained; Sorrow shall take hold upon them in the Night-season; then shall the Arrows of the Lord reach into their Bowels; Astonishment of Heart shall be upon them, and they shall fly when none pursues; and be in Distress, and none shall deliver. Arise against them, O ye, my Lambs! in the strength of the Lord, who teacheth your hands to war, and your fing∣ers to fight; let the Beast be overturned forever, let the Whore have blood to drink; let her Merchant be spoiled forever, and all her Children dashed against the Stone, and broken to pieces as a Potters Vessel with the Power of the Light; let the Darts of your hands, who handle the Word of Life, strike through all the false Prophets, and reach unto the secrets of all their Hearts, to the renting open of their Chambers of Darkness, and the cutting down of the Enemies of the Most High; and fear not, let not your hands be slack, the Lord of Hosts goeth before you, the mighty God is in the midst of you, the shout of a King is among you, and your Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual, which will bring down their Holds, though never so strong. And you who suffer in outward Bonds, and there in your place, according to your measures, bear your Testimony against the covetous Hirelings, who are the Merchants that belong to the great Whore, who have long fed at Jezables Table and have long deceived the sim∣ple: Oh! faint not in your long-suffering, the Lord God is with you, as you continue in patience and long-suffering, and you shall be crowned with Immortality forever, if you endure to the end; for the Cry of your Affliction is ascended up on high, and the Lord hath heard the Sigh∣ing of the needy, and a three-fold Reward will you at last receive, who endure to the end; For the Lord God of Life, who seeth in secret, is sc∣cretly undermining the very Foundations of all Sions Enemies, and bringing Deliverance unto the Captives in a Way that hath not been known; that unto you, O ye afflicted Ones! may Deliverance come, not by might, nor by strength of man, but by the mighty Arm of Gods Power, which in due time will bring Deliverance unto all the dear Lambs of Christ, who this day stand faithful in the Innocent sufferings. And all you who are yet but young and tender, abide you all in Meek∣ness, Lowliness Diligence and Faithfulness, without murmuring at them that are growing up before you; and let no Root of Bitterness
spring up among any of you, I beseech you in the Bowels of the Lord Jesus Christ. And all you that are grown up into the Understanding of Holiness, walk you all in the Life of God, and let that guide you in God's Wis∣dom, as Examples to the Flock, among whom you are placed, not as Lords, to rule with any thing in the Will, but in Tenderness to serve the least Member, that it may be preserved, that all may grow up a holy Building unto God the Father, To whom be all Glory forever and ever. The Blessing of the Lord be upon you, and the Power of the Most High overshadow you, that you may spring forth as the Rose in Summer, and be fruitful as the Vine in its Season.
The true and ever lasting Rule discovered, &c. THe Lord God formed man of the Dust of the Ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and and man became a living Soul. So man was formed of that which was earthly, and into that which was earthly, that which was living was breathed; and that which is living comes from God, which is to keep and lead man unto God; but man going from that which is living, into that which is Earthly, is thereby led from God, and being led from that which is living, he is also pleading for another thing than that which is the Life, to be his Rule and Guide, and so comes not to be guided by that which is manifest of God in him, Gen. 2. 7. Rom. 1. 19. Now the Letter is not living, but the Breath of Life within is; the which living Breath man not knowing, goeth forth from it to be guided by the Letter which killeth, 2 Cor. 3. 6. But the holy men of God, who walked with God, and were obedient to his Will, and spake forth and writ Scriptures from that which was holy in them, and were Perfect in their Genera∣tion; they were such who came to be guided by that which was living in them, and from that men in dayes of old called upon the Name of the Lord, Gen. 6. 28. and they had not a Scripture without them to guide them thereunto. And Enoch walked with God, and so he walked with that which is living, and not with that which is earthly, neither had he a Scripture (without him) to be his Rule; and so he walking with him who is the Life, came to be translated that he should not see Death, Gen. 5. 24. Heb. 11. 5. And Noah, who was Perfect in his Generation, found Grace in the sight of the Lord. [Consider this] he found that by which man comes to be saved; for by Grace man is saved, which Grace to all men hath appeared; and so Noah found that which bringeth
Salvation, which is the Grace of God in the Heart, and thereby he came to do God's Will, and not by any thing that was earth∣ly, nor from a Scripture without, Gen. 6. 8, 9. Ephes. 2. 5, & 8. Col. 3. 15, 16. And Noah, who found that by which man is saved, him God blessed, and his Seed, and said, The fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every Beast of the field; and they were to multiply and bring forth abundautly from the living that was within the Earth; for by that comes the increase of God, and with them God established his Covenant, and so Gods Covenant came to be established with him who found that in the Heart by which man is saved, Gen. 9. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9. And the Lord, who is the one Spirit, was Abraham's Leader from his Kindred, and Father's House; and so Abraham heard that which was living, and obeyed that which was spiritual, who had not a Scripture to be his Rule; and unto him the Lord ap∣peared, and blessed, and in the time of the grievous Famines he and his seed was fed, Gen. 12. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10. And he that is led by the Spirit comes, thereby to receive feedings when the Famine comes upon them who are led by another thing; and Abraham, who followed the Lord, was called the Friend of God, and he (through believing) became the Father of many Nations; and he saw the day of Christ, the Light, and obeyed the Word, which liveth and abideth forever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. and being led by that which is living from his Father's House, and out of his Country, so by that which is living was he preserved, and him God loved, and to him afterward the Word of the Lord did come, saying, Fear not Abraham, I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Re∣ward: And Abraham answered the Lord, and the seed which God blessed came forth of his Loins, who are led by the Spirit, Gen. 15. 1. Heb. 11. 8, 9. And on the contrary, Nimrod, who began to be a mighty one in the Earth, he went hunting before the Lord, who is the one Spirit; and now there is that first which is earthly, and much earthly Wisdom, whereby man goeth hunting before the Spirit comes, the which should not be, but man should stand still (and not hunt) and see the Salvation of God, and so receive the Spi∣rit to lead (or go before) him, and not to run or hunt before the Spirit, but let it lead man, as its written, As many as are led
by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, Rom. 8. 14. but Nimrod hunted before God, who is a Spirit, and he was one of the seed of Ham, who was the Father of Canaan, whom Noah cursed. And the beginning of this mighty Hunter's Kingdom was Babel, where the Lord (whom he hunted before) followed after, and confounded the Language of all them that belonged to this mighty Hunter, who was a mighty one in the Earth; and out of this Land of Babel went forth them that built many Cities, and afterwards there was a People whose gods were according to the number of their Cities: And so, see what followeth when man is not led by the Spirit of God (as Noah was, and so pre∣served) but hunts mightily before him, being mighty in that which is Earthly; first he is mighty in the Earth, then a mighty Hunter, then builds a mighty Tower, whereby he that is earthly would climb up to Heaven [this a Figure] and then God con∣founded the Language; and after wards those that were in the many Languages professed God (who confounded the Language) before whom their Father Nimrod hunted; and they being found in that which God confounded, though they professed God, yet in Works denyed him, and crucified his Son, the Lord of Glory, and writ over his Head, of the many Languages, Latin, Greek and Hebrew; and this was written above him that was the Light; and so them now who are of the stock of Babel, are yet exalted above the Light, and count the Light a weak and low contemptible thing, not able to save it self, much less to save them that believe in it; and so therein manifest themselves to be of their Fathers, who crucified him that said, I am the Light, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, save thy self; and so de∣spised him who came to save them. And this is some of the effect of mans hurting mightily in the Earth (before they came to re∣ceive the Spirit) as Nimrod did, Gen. 9. 18, 25. ch 10. 8, 9, 10, 11. ch. 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. John 19. 19, 20. But Jacob followed, obeyed and believed the Lord, who is a Spirit, and the Presence of God was with him, and the Blessing of the Most High was upon him; and the Lord promised, To be with him (who was a Worm) in six Troubles, and in seven; and when he passed through the Fire and the Water; and God gave him a new Name, and afterwards promised, To give his Seed a Name
better than of Sons and Daughters; and Jacob was a plain man, and dwelt in Tents, and him God loved, and he prevailed with God, Isa. 41. 14. ch. 43. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Gen. 22. 28. Isa. 56. 5. And so Nimrod (with his Followers) who was mighty in the Earth, came to be confounded, and Jacob, who was (little in the Earth) as a Worm, and dwelt in Tents, he and his Seed came to be blessed. And Moses, the Servant of the Lord, whom God Almighty honoured in his everlasting Love, and made him a Deliverer unto, and a Judge and Ruler over the People, Acts 7. 35. he being in Aegypt, the Land of Darkness and Bondage, and all the Seed and Israel of God in cruel Oppression; and I do not read that he had any direction from Man or Scripture, or any thing else without him, to guide him at first to refuse to be called the Son of Pharoahs Daughter, and the glory of Aegypt, and to chuse to suffer Af∣fliction with the People of God: Neither do I read, that he saw the Angel or Glory of the Lord, until after he was, and had been Obedient unto that which God had given into him (for that which may be known of God, is manifest within, Rom. 1. 19.) for it is said in the Scriptures of Truth, That it was by Faith (Heb. 11. 24.) that he refused the evil, and chose the good; and Faith is that which is in the Heart, Acts 15. 9. As it is written, If thou believe in thy Heart, Rom. 10. 9. Acts 18. 37. And of that Faith in the Heart, God hath given to every man a Proportion, Rom. 12. 6. And as that (which is but little) in man is loved and obeyed, so man comes to know more of God, and hear his Word of Faith, which is in the Heart, Rom. 10. 8. And by hearing and Obedience of Faith man receiveth the Spirit, Gal. 3. 2. which is an undeniable Truth, which I might prove by a cloud of Witnesses from the Scriptures, which were given forth from the Inspiration of God, by his holy Servants: And so there being something of God in man, whereby man may (as Moses did) first refuse the Evil, and then chuse a suffering state, and so learn to do well, the Sin then comes to be done away, Isa. 16. 17, 18. and afterwards more of God's enless Love and powerful Presence is made manifest; and so being faithful in the little received from God in the Heart, man comes to rule over much, as Moses did, who first learned the Obedience of Faith in the Heart, though in Aegypt, and in the
time of great Persecution, where he was also despised of his Brethren, yet he obeyed the Word of Faith in the Heart, and so afterwards to him God appeared, and the Word of the Lord came unto him, and he talked with God afterwards face to face, as a man talketh with his Friend; and the many Wonders that the mighty Power of God wrought in and by him, are recorded at large in the holy Scriptures for a Testimony thereof, to last throughout many Generations. And by this Faith also after∣wards the Members of Christ did walk, 2 Cor. 5. 7. And Joshua, who succeeded Moses, was full of the Spirit of Wisdom; [consider that] he was first full of the Spirit, and so thereby he came to be a Leader and Ruler over others, and the Dread of the Lord fell, and his Judgments came upon them who rose up, or stood against him, and those whom he by the Power of the Spirit in him came to rule over; and great, many and mighty were the Victories that God gave unto this man, who was bold and couragious by reason of the fullness of the Spirit that was in him; and the People hearkned unto him, as they did unto Moses, and he left nothing undone of all that the Lord com∣manded Moses, Deut. 34. 9. Josh. 11. 15. But the Lords people in these dayes, who are led by the Spirit of God in them, are accounted both by Priests, Rulers and Peo∣ple, to be drunk or mad, as it was before, when the Son of God (who is the Light) was revealed in Paul, Gal. 1. 15, 16. he was accounted by the Ruler of the People to be mad, Acts 26. 24. And when the Disciples of Christ had waited, and afterwards received the Spirit of Truth within, from the which they spake, as with new Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance; at them then many were amazed, others mocked, supposing them to be drunk, Acts 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. And when Hunnah prayed in Heart, being grieved in Spirit, was esteemed to be drunk, even by Ely the Priest, yet she by her Prayers in her Heart, ob∣tained her desire of the Lord, who gave her a Son that knew the Lord, and ministered before him, being yet a Child; but the Sons of Ely the Priest, were Sons of Belial, and knew not God, (like the Priests of England) 1 Sam. 14. and 2. 18. And David, a man after Gods own Heart, was a deaf man, and heard not, and as a dumb man that openeth not his Mouth,
being dumb with Silence, and held his Peace even from good until his Heart was hot within him, and the Fire burned, then he spake with his Tongue, Psal. 38. 13, 14. Psal. 39. 1, 2, 3. & 9. and afterwards he said, Thy Word have I hid in my Heart, (which Word is as a Fire) that I might not sin against thee; and so that which keepeth from Sin is hid in the Heart; and that Word David said, was a Lamp to his Feet, and a Light unto his Paths; which Word he kept, and loved the Law of the Lord, which is written in the Heart, and so was made wiser than his Enemies, and had more understanding than the Ancients, and all his Teachers, Psal.. 119. 10, 11. vers. 42, 43, 50, 67, 81, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105. And all the Prophets of the Lord were led, guided and di∣rected by the Spirit of Christ which was in them, both in their Actions, which sometimes were as Foolishness and Madness in the Eyes of the Professing Jews, and also in their Words, which sometimes were as Thunder against the ungodly, though they were the Rulers of the People; and their Words were so Ter∣rible against them that professed Godliness, and lived in unrigh∣teousness, that Amaziah the high Priest said of one of the Pro∣phets, (who spake in the dread of the Lord) That the whole Land was not able to bear his Words, Amos 7. 10. And Amaziah the Priest of Bethuel, being not able to bear the Word of the Lord, therefore he falsly accused Amos of conspi∣ring against the King, Amos 7. And from the Spirit in them did the Prophets with boldness declare against the Wickedness of the Rulers of the People, saying to the poluted City, Thy Prin∣ces are Rebellious, and Companions of Thieves; they love Gifts and Rewards, and judge not the Fatherless, nor the cause of the Widdow; and suh as these are the Adversaries and Enemies of the Lord, upon whom he will be avenged, and all them that trouble his Servants, Isa. 1. 23, 24. 2 Thes. 1. 6. And it is just and right for the Friends of Christ to declare against the Enemies of the Lord, and those that decree unrighteous Decrees, and write grievousness which they have prescribed, and turn aside the Needy from Judgment, and take away the Right of the People, that they may Rob the Fatherless; against these is the Hand of the Lord stretched out, and they are to bow down under the Prisoners,
and fall under the slain, Isa. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. and saith the Prophet, Wo to the filthy and poluted City, her Princes are roaring Lyons, her Judges are evening Wolves, her Prophets are light and treacherous, her Priests have poluted the Sanctuary, Zeph. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. and ma∣ny more such expressions they used, which was not Railing, but sound Words in the fear and dread of the Lord; read Amos the first and second Chapters. And from the Spirit of Truth in them did they also declare, even against such as were the Teachers and Leaders of the Peo∣ple, and were made Ministers by a Law of God, which Law was then in force, and those Ministers departing out of the way, and corrupting the Covenant, (like the Priests of England) there∣fore the Lord made them (as he will these, who deny the Way, the Light) base and contemptible in the Eyes of all the People, because they also have been partial in the Law, Mal. 2. 8, 9. and against such did (and do) the Servants of the Lord declare, they being such Shepherds that cannot understand, but are blind, ignorant, dumb, greedy Dogs, (these are the worst of Dogs) Isa. 56. 10, 11. and by such is the horrible thing committed, Jer. 5. 30, 31. And the Pastors are become bruitish, Jer. 10. 21. Therefore hearken not unto them, Jer. 27. 13, 15, 16. verses; also read Jer. 23. and Ezek. 34. For as Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murther in the way by consent, Hos. 6. 9. And one of the chief of that number is John Hodder, Priest of the Parish called Haychurch, in the County of Dorset, and there was a People, the Heads thereof judged for Reward, and the Priests teached for Hire, and the Prophets divined for Mo∣ney, (is it not so in England?) Mich. 3. 11. and saith the Pro∣phet, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you, I will send a Curse upon you, and corrupt your Seed, and spread Dung upon your Faces, even the Dung of your solemn Feasts, [hearken ye Priests of Eng∣land] Mal. 2. 1, 2, 3. And this was and is sound Doctrine, which the itching Ears of the false Teachers of our dayes cannot endure to hear, being found themselves such cursed Children that cannot cease from Sin, that were to come in the latter dayes, 2 Pet. 2. 14. and those Words, and many more to the same ef∣fect, were they guided by the Spirit of Christ (the Light) in them to speak; and from that Spirit they declared against the
Rulers, Priests and People, who had the Law or Letter, and Moses Writings without them, yet were Enemies to the Spirit of Truth within. But the Prophets searched diligently to see what, and what manner of time the Spirit of Christ in them did signifie, 1 Pet. 1. 11. So that the Spirit of Christ was in the Prophets, which testisied unto them, and was their Rule and Guide. And when Christ came who is the end of the Prophets, and the Law, he also declared against the same generation, as the Prophets did (and we do) and he said, They were of their Father the Devil, who did his Works, notwithstanding they had the Scriptures and the Oracles of God, and were of the place of holy Worship, and were zealous and strict therein, even against them did Christ proclaim many Woes, Mat. 23. for the Word of God had no place in them, neither could they hear it, John 8. 37, 43. but in Christ the Light did all the fullness of God dwell, Col. 1. 19. & 2. 9. And so, he that had the fullness of God within him, was counted a Deceiver, a Blasphemer, denyed and crucified by them that had the Oracles of God without them, and read the Prophets every Sabbath-day (yet knew not their Voices, Acts 13. 27.) which prophesied of him, whom they knew not when he was come (who is the Light.) And now we do bear witness, that the Light is come, as did Isaiah 60. 1, 2, 3. though Darkness covers the Earth, and gross Darkness the People, yet in him that is the Light, doth the fulness of God abide; and no man cometh to the Father (or fulness of God) but the Son, who is Light. And now, those that have the Scripture (and call that their Rule) in the which they read of Christ the Light, yet the Light they deny, and so deny him of whom the Scriptures speak, and him unto whom all Power in Heaven & Earth is committed; and so long as they deny him, who is the Light, unto whom all Power is committed, they cannot receive Power from him to be∣come the Sons of God, but they who do receive and believe in him who is the Light, unto them he gives Power to become the Sons of God, John 1. 12. And now the zealous professing Jews, Scribes and Pharisees have the Scriptures, but they deny him that is the Light, and so they are blind; and all those must needs be blind who hate the
Light, and deny it; and so the Jews had the Oracles of God without them, and the Law without them, and Christ the Son of God without them, and among them, preaching to them, and yet they were deaf and blind, and of the Devil; for they did his Works. And moreover, the Disciples of Christ might read the Scrip∣tures without them, and they had him, in whom was the fullness of God, among them, with them, or without them, and yet in many things they understood not, John 12. 16. but were often asking Questions, as in Mat. 23. 10, 36. chap. 16. 22. ch. 17. 10, 13, 19. ch. 18. 1, 21. ch. 19. 10. ch. 24. 3. John 13. 7. and some time they knew not what Spirit they were of, Luke 9. 55. and though he had been a long time with them, yet it was hard for them to know him, John 14. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and though he had been so long time with them; [consider] (it was with them) (for [With] may be one thing, and [In] another) until he had finished the Work (without them) which the Father gave him to do, John 17. 4. [Consider] (the outward Work of Christ without, or among the Disciples, may be finished) and he was at the Passover with them, and at the Supper with them, and gave his Life for them; and they saw his Body broken, and his Blood shed without them; and yet not withstanding all this, afterwards he (that is, the Light) upbraided them of Unbelief and Hardness of Heart, Mark 16. 14. who for a long time had the fulness of God amongst, and with them, who being with them, said, He that is with you, shall be in you, John 14. 17. And so they were to wait to receive him [within] and that within was to abide for∣ever, but that without departed away; but that within was and is to lead into all Truth, and be with his to the end of the World; for that which is in man, is alwayes with him; but that which is with man, and not in him, may not alwayes be with him. And now the Light is in man, and so he that is with his to the end of the World, is the Light of the World, who is the Resurrection and the Life, who was dead, and is alive, and I say, he liveth for evermore, who hath finished his Work in the outward things, to wit, Circumcision, Baptism, the Supper, and Death on the Cross with∣out the gate, and is now revealed within, and worketh all our Works in us, and ever liveth to make Intercession for us, Isa. 26. 12.
Heb. 7. 25. in whose Hearts he is now crying, Abba Father, and he that hath the Son, hath also the Father, to whom be Eternal Dominion, Glory, Honour, and humble. Obedience for ever∣more. And so Christ Jesus being also guided by that of God, or rather the fulness of God in him, whereby he finished his Work, and de∣parted away from among them, and bid them wait for that which should abide with them forever; and said, These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the Comforter, whom the Eather will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, John 14. 16, 25, 26. and that which teacheth all things was to be revealed within, and until that was come and revealed in them, they did not know all things; so that that which teacheth all things, and sheweth plainly of the Father, and abideth for∣ever, is to be received within; and they in Obedience to his Command did wait, and their waiting was not in vain; for when the time was fully come, they did receive the Promise of the Father, which they had waited for, and so were filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. as Joshua was full of the Spirit; and in Christ was the fullness of God; and Stephen was a man full of the holy Ghost; and the Desires of such was, That others might be filled with all the Fullness of God, Ephes. 3. 19. (Its not filled with the Scriptures) And so they being filled with that which was holy, were by that led in the Way of Holiness, and with that which was holy in them, were they to build up one another, Jude 20. and then they spoke the Word of God with Boldness: and after the Son of God was revealed in Paul, three years after he went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal. 1. 16, 17, 18. and four∣teen years after he went up to Jerusalem by Revelation, Gal: 2. 1, 2. And so, he did not say, he went by the Scriptures, or any Command without him, but by Revelation, and a Revelation is within; and that all the Ministers and Disciples of Christ did come to be led and guided by his Spirit that was in them, might easily be proved by many undeniable Truths of plain Scripture, wereby it might more largely appear, that they were all led, guided and directed by the one Spirit in them, though the Gifts, Leadings and Operations of that one Spirit in them was various, as may be read, 1 Cor. 12.
And now, most People will grant this before written to be true, That all the People of God formerly were led by the Spirit that was in them; but that men should now in these dayes be led by the Spirit of Christ in them, is by many denyed; the which thing chiefly is that which I would a little search into, or rather open to thee, from that which hath searched me, Psal. 139. 23. and that according to the Scriptures of Truth, if that will be by thee regarded, that so it might appear unto all that are not will∣fully Rebellious against the Light of Christ in their own Consci∣ences, and also deniers of plain Scripture, by the which I am ready to prove, That the People of the Lord and Ministers of Christ were not only led by the Spirit of God themselves, but also in their Words and Writings did direct others thereunto, saying, Walk in the Spirit, be filled with the Spirit, and Worship God in the Spi∣rit, Gal 5. 16. Ephes. 5. 18. Phil. 3. 3. John 4. 24. But say the People, Though they did walk, and direct others to walk by the Spirit, yet are not we now to walk by the Scriptures? And is not the Scriptures now to be our Rule? And are we not to be led by that? To which I Answer: That God changeth not; And where doth the Scriptures say, That the Scripture is to be a Rule to walk or be led by? And the Ministers of Christ did not say, As every man hath received the Scriptures, so Walk; But As every man hath received Christ (and he is the Light) so walk, Col. 2. 6. Consider, there is first something to be received, and then there is to be a walking in the Power and Strength of that received; for a Babe is not able to walk by all the words that may be spoken unto him, until he receive power and strength within him; and the new born Babes are to receive the sincere Milk of the Word (and the Word is in the Heart) and then to grow up by that received, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and every man is to walk as he hath received of Christ the Light, which comes from the Word, which lighteth every man, John 1. 9. but every man doth not receive that into the good Understanding which he is lighted with, but rather strives against, and hates it; for every one that doth Evil hateth (not the Scriptures, but) the Light, John 3. 20. and so they hate that
in which the Power standeth; but as many as receive him who is the Light, to them (and none but them) he that is the Light gives Power; and he hath gifts for the Rebellious, but they hating the Light, and his own, whom he lighteth, receive not him that is the Light, and to them he committeth no more, and so they have not Power (yet they may have the Scriptures.) And so man walks by the strength that is in him, which strength comes from the Word by which all things were made; and man recei∣ving the ingrafted Word (which is not the Scriptures) it is able to save the Soul; for Christ, the Light, whose Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. is able to save to the utmost all them that come to God through the Light of the World, Christ Jesus; and in him neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision availeth any thing, but a New Creature; and as many as walk according to this Rule, (I do not say my Writings) peace be unto them, Gal. 6. 15, 16. And so, here was the Rule, which whoso walked by, the Peace belonged to; but many call the Scriptures their Rule, and have not Peace; but they to whom the Spirit is a Rule, from it to them Peace comes; and man being led by the Spirit in him, hath that to be his Rule from whence the Scripture was given forth. And now, that which man is to be directed, guided and led by, tryes, measures or searches things, that sometimes he calls Rule; and it is not said, the Scriptures searcheth all things, but the Scripture is to be searched into, John 5. 39. and its said, The Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God, 2 Cor. 2. 10. Prov. 20. 27. and that Spirit which searcheth all things, comes from him Who hath measured the Waters in the Hollow of his Hand, and meeted out Heaven with a Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a Measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Ballance, Isa. 40. 12. and draws a Line through the midst of his People, and layeth Judgment to the Line, and Righteous∣ness to the Plummet, and sweepeth away the Refuge of Lyes, Isa. 28. 17. and telleth the number of the Stars, and calleth them all by their Names, Psal. 147. 4. And they to whom this Spirit is a Rule, and are led by it, they are the Sons of God, Rom. 8. 14. and it is not said, as many as are led by the Scriptures, are the Sons of God; and man is to walk by the same Rule of that he hath attained, Phil. 3. 16. and mark
them that walk so; and it is said, If ye are led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law, Gal. 5. 18. but many have the Scriptures, and yet are under the Law, but the Spirit, which is the Word, Ephes. 6. 17. cometh (and hath power) to redeem from under the Law, which the Scriptures doth not; for through the Spirit the Deeds of the Flesh come to be mortified, Rom. 8. 13. And while Paul profited much in that Religion which he learned from the Pharisees, he was an Enemy to Christ the Light; but when Christ was reveal∣ed in him, and he obedient to the heavenly Vision, then was he led by the Spirit in him, to do God's Will; and he did not say, That the Mystery of Christ, which in other Ages was not made known, was then manifest to him by the Scriptures; but he said, That it was by Revelation made known unto him, and revealed to the holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, Ephes. 3. 4, 5. and he did not say, without Scriptures it was impossible to please God, but it is said, Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. and Faith is in the Heart, and purifies the Heart; and so without that in the Heart, (which purifies it) men cannot please God; and so man cannot please God without being guid∣ed by that (in the heart) which respects no mans Person, Jam. 2. And so, every one is to walk according to that which he himself in particular hath attained unto, and to mind the same thing ac∣cording to the measure of the Rule which God hath distributed, 2 Cor. 10. 13. and that Rule which God hath distributed, is the Rule, and no man ought to go beyond it, or boast of things without or beyond that measure, or of other mens labours, or things made ready to their hands, but to give all Glory to the Lord, 2 Cor. 10. 14, 15, 16, 17. And this was the Rule received from God, which his Ministers walked by, and exhorted others unto; and so I do not bid People walk by my Writings, but by their measures in them, received from God, and that is living, as God is, and of his own Nature, and enables man to do his Will, and so fulfills that which is written without, and was given forth from the measure of God within. What then? do I herein in the least make void, contemn, slight, villifie or deny the Scriptures? God forbid; nay, I had rather my Pen mightfall out of my Hand, or my Arm from my Shoulder, or my Tongue cleave to the roof of Mouth forever,
then I should go about to make void the Scriptures of Truth (and is a true Declaration, Luke 1. 1.) Which was given forth from that which is my Life, which is hid, not in the Scriptures, but with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. and the Word was God, and that which was God is God, John 1. 1. but if I should say, the Scripture is God, I should be a Blasphemer, like unto others: Do I herein deny the Scriptures? Nay, rather I establish the Scripture in its place, and make use of it as a Cloud of Witnesses by me, in directing all People unto that which the Scriptures testifie of, and was given forth from, John 5. 39. that by it in them they might be enabled to do God's Will, and witness the Scriptures fulfilled, as it is written, I will walk in them and dwell in them, 2 Cor. 6. 16. and he is the God of them in whom he dwells, and they are his People in whom he walks, from whose Inspiration the Scripture came, in which it is written, Prove all things, 1 Thes. 5. 21. and try the Spirits; and that which proveth all things, and tryes the Spirits, comes from the God of the Spirits of all flesh, and from the Word of his Power, by which all things were made; which Word in the Heart is as Fire, which proves, tryes and refineth things, and is1 John 4. 1. Numb 16 22. John 1 3. Col. 3. 16. Psal. 3. 3 Jer. 5. 14. Mal. 3 3. Heb. 4. 12. Psal. 139. 1, 23, 24 John 4. 1. Luke 10. 42. 1 Cor. 2. 12. ch. 1. 21. Rom 8. 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 3. 16. ch. 2. 10 John 15. 4, 5. Jude 6. 2 Thes. 1. 5 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. John 17. 17. Psal. 51. 6. John 1 14. ch. 8. 44. 2 Cor. 44. Ephes 2 2. John 8. 24. ch. 17. 7. 1 Tim 4. 5. Job. 8. 32 ch. 15. 5. 1 Joh. 3. 5. Dan 9. 24. 2 Cor 3. 5. ch. 4. 10. Rom. 4. 8, 10 Eph. 3 17. Col. 1. 27. Joh 16 25. ch. 15 5 quick and powerful, dividing asunder Soul and Spirit, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart; & man feeling that, and coming to be guided by that which searches the heart and tryes the reins, with that may he try all things, from the which one thing within, the false Spirits are gone forth into the World; and those Spirits of the world, and all the world by its wisdom, and that Spirit which is with∣out, knows not God, nor the measure of his spirit within: And so, those are the false spirits that are gone forth, which are to be tryed by that which is not gone forth, but abides within, and discerns the Heart; and those that are gone forth from being guided by that within (as the holy men were) they are like unto the Angels who kept no
their first eslate; for man at first was (and holy men were) guid∣ed by that within, which is the Word, which Word is Truth, and he that abode not in Truth (which is in the inward parts) was a Devil and a Murderer, who is called the God of the World, that blindeth the Minds, and worketh in all the Children of Dis∣obedience; and so the Devils Works are in his Children, and they are talking of the Works of God without them; but they that are led by the Word of Truth that sanctifieth, cleanseth and maketh free; by it they come to know the Works of the Devil destroyed, which was in them, 1 John 3. 8. And so, he that de∣stroyeth the Works of the Devil, and maketh an end of Sin, and bringeth in Everlasting Righteousness, is known in all them that are not Reprobates: And so, when sin is made an end of, Everlasting Righteousness is brought in; and so its within, and not without: And so he being received within, who brings that in which is Everlasting, to that man he is within the hope of Glory, and shews plainly of the Father, and saith, Without M E yo can do nothing [Its not said, Without Scripture ye can do nothing] and they that are without him who teacheth all things, are without God in the World; but he that hath the Son, hath the Father also; he that hath the Father and the Son abiding in him, need not to go out from that, to be taught or led by any other thing or Rule without him, as it is written of him that overcometh, That he shall no more go out; and upon him that goeth not out, the New Name comes to be written, and he comes to be a Pillar in the Temple of God, who goeth not out, Rev. 3. 12. And the Name which is better than of Sons and Daughters, even the Everlasting Name that shall never be cut off, is given to them within the House, and within the Walls, even to such who take hold of the Covenant, Isa. 56. 4, 5. And the San∣ctuary is set in the midst of them for evermore, Ezek. 37. 26, 27, 28. And in the midst of them will the Lord spread forth his hands, as one that swimmeth, Isa. 25. 11. And though Ephriam compassed the Lord about with Lyes, and the House of Israel with Deceit, yet saith the Lord unto Ephriam, I am God, and not man, the holy One in the midst of thee, Hos. 11. 9, 12. And so, Ephriam compassed him about with Lyes, who was in the midst, and he that was in the midst was holy, though compassed about with Lyes, and the Just Lord was in the midst of the filthy poluted and oppressed City, Zeph. 3.
1, to 5. Consider this, all you poluted Ones, who oppress the Just in the midst of you; for the Just Lord in the mst will arise as a Lyon out of a Thicket, and a young Lyon out of the Forrest; he shall roar like a Lyon, and utter his Voice like a man of War, Isa. 42. 13, 14, 15. And then shall his Enemies be scattered, Psal. 68. 1. And he will sweep away the Refuge of Lyes; therefore the Daughter of Zion, and the Daughter of Jerusalem, and Israel shall be glad; for unto them it is said, The Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shalt not see Evil any more: In that day shall it be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not; and to Zion, Let not thy hands be slack, the Lord thy God in the midst of thee, is mighty, he will save, Zeph. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. And he that is mighty to save, is known in the midst; and so he that justifieth is near, Isa. 50. 8. even he who hath said, I will dwell in the midst of the Children of Israel forever, and my holy Name shall the House of Israel no more defile, Ezek. 34. 7. For the Lord hath chosen Zion, he hath desired it for his Habitation; this is my Rest for∣ever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it: I will abundantly bles her Provision. I will satisfie her Poor with Bread: I will also clothe her Priests (not the Priests of England) with Salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy; there will I make the Horn of David to bud: I have ordained a Lamp for mine anointed; his Enemies will I clothe with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish, Psalm 132. 13 to 18. And every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. The true Prophet, who was to come, is come, and there is not another, his Work witnessed and Truth declared from a feeling sence and experience, accor∣ding to Scripture. THe true Prophet is come, of whom Moses the Servant of the Lord did write, who is raised up in the midst, and hath rent the Vail, and from under Death is risen in his unlimited Power, Dominion and Authority, even him that Death nor the
Grave cannot hold, who through Death hath conquered Death forever; and though Death had Power over him before the Way into the Holiest of all was made manifest, yet now Death hath no more dominion over him, but he is risen through Death who was made a Curse, and hath born away the Curse, and removed the cursed ground upon which fallen man stood, and hath born away the sin of the World, and was made sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God through, in and by him who hath opened the Understanding, whereby the unsear∣chable Riches of unspeakable love comes to be made manifest, even unto us who were going astray, and were Children of Wrath as well as others, and Aliens and Strangers to the Cove∣nant of Grace, and long were without God and in the World, tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, after the cunning Craftiness of men, whereby we were long deceived, even by such who still bewitcht the Minds of the simple; out of which Witchcraft, I can say, the Lord hath delivered, and obedience to the Truth (that makes Free) is yeilded, and Love, Mercy and Judgment is come and brought forth, and Victory is witnes∣sed; the Messenger of the everlasting Covenant is come, even he that we long waited for, and we do not look for another, but he that is the same yesterday, to day and forever, who was to come, and is come, and is to come (he that readeth, let him understand) who is without beginning of time, or end of dayes; who is made under the Law, and became as a Servant, being obedient to the Death, through which the Life is risen up into the understanding, and hath born away that which the Law had power over, and hath brought in that by which the Law is fulfilled; and so he that is the end of the Law for Righteousness, is felt and received, who taketh away the Sin, and reconcileth the World up unto the Father, where the sin is taken away by him, who though he was made sin, yet knew no sin, who appears now the second time without sin, to the saving of that which was lost, which is now brought again, and plenteous Redemption is known; for the de∣sire of all Nations is come, and the second Houses is filled with his Glory; the Wine-press is full, the Fats overflow; for the VVinter is past, and the Summer is come, and the Lillics appear in the Field where the Pearl was hid; the Fig-tree puts forth
her buds, and the Vine yeilds her encrease; the Olive doth blossom, and the Apple-Tree in the midst of the VVood doth flourish, and the good ground yeilds her encrease, and is fruit∣ful in its season to the good Husbandman; and there is seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; the Barns are filled with a∣bundance, and the Store-houses with plenty, and Treasure is laid up for many years in the heavenly places, which are purified with the lively sacrifices, so that the earthen Vessels are fitted to keep the heavenly Manna that shall dure throughout many generati∣ons; and so against the Famine comes upon the Earth (and all them that feed at Jezabels Table) Oyle is laid up in safety, and the finest of the Flower in a place where it is sure, where it will last and never fail until the Heathen are scorched with heat, and they that have forsaken the Lord are become as a parched Heath, and all the gods of the Heathen famished, and the Tongue of the Aegyptian Sea dryed up, and all the false Prophets overturned, who belong to Jezabel, whose Body the Dogs must tear, though she yet sits as a Qeen, in opposition to the true Prophet, Christ the Light; and until them who are drunk with the Wine of the Fornication of the Whore, and are the Merchants of Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of all the painted Harlots, be all condemned in one day with an utter overthrow, and the Seat of the Whore removed, and all them that commit Fornication with her made as the Valley of Hammon Gog, and as the Dung upon face of the Earth; and all the Brats of the VVhore dashed against the Stones; until then, I say, shall that in store remain, and a Hiding-place be found for the Prophet of the Lord, who is also hid near thee in thy own Land, though thou art seeking him afar off. Wherefore hear, O ye Kindreds of the Earth! for as the Dew spread upon the Mountains, so doth the Streams of my Beloved raise, overspreading the Earth with the comliness of his Love, and filling it with the Beauty of his Grace; the Banner of his Love is spreading forth as a Curtain; and under the shadow of his Wings is a certain Hiding-place both from the Storm and from the Heat; and though the Sea rage, and all Kindreds and
Tongues swell up in Wrath, Pride and Arrogancy; yet he come, known, witnessed and received, who commands both the VVirds and the Sea, who is the former of all things, by whom they all were made, and at his Command all are subdued; and the lightnings of his Light enlightens the VVorld, Psal. 97. 4. and the Glory of his Power is spreading over the Nations, and the excellency of his Beauty is reaching to his Lambs; and because of his Comliness the Virgins love him, and to him the Daughters of Jerusalem bring their Gifts, and before him the Princes of the People lay down their Crowns; and because of him the VVilderness doth rejoyce, and the Desolate is made glad; for the fruitful Land was become a barren VVilderness, and now the baren VVilderness is turned into a fruitful Field, and the plant sprung out of a dry Ground, and the Seed is born of the barren VVomb, and there is a VVay made in the VVilderness, and streams are given in the Desart, and the Ear of the deaf is opened, the Lame doth walk, and the Leaper is cleansed, and the stammering Tongues speak plainly; the Gospel is re∣ceived, and the everlasting Power is come, even the Immanuel, God with us, and in us; and we confess Christ come in the Flesh, and do not look for another, but do know that this is the great Prophet, who is come into the VVorld, that is set in the Heart, Ecclcs. 3. 11. which is in the midst, out of which Moses said, the Lord would raise up a Prophet, Deut. 18. 15. the which Prophet being come, which all are to hear, he saith, I am come a Light into the World, John 8. 12. ch. 12. 35, 36, 46. The VVorld being set in the Heart, there is the light of him who saith, I am the Light; and he that is the Light, is the true Prophet; and the true Prophet is in the midst, who is the Light, whose day Abraham saw, unto whom the Gospel was preached, which Gospel is Gods Power, whereby Abraham rejoyced because he came to see the Day of him who is the Light of the World, un∣to whom all the Prophets gave Testimony. Isaiah, who witnessed, the Son born, and the Child given, Isa. 9. 6. by whose stripes he came to be healed, he preached the Light, and said, The Light was come, and the Gentiles should come to his Light, and Kings to the Brightness of his rising; and he also prcached the Light to be everlasting, Isa. 60. 1, 2, 3, 19, 20. so
that Kings and Gentiles shall come unto him that is the Light, who is Gods Wisdom, that is from Everlasting, Prov. 8. 23. who is given for a Light to the Gentiles, and in him they trust. And Isaiah said, Come ye, let us walk in the Light of the Lord, Isa. 2. 5. And the Disciples called him Lord, who is the Light. And David's servants were careful that the Light of Israel might not be quenched by his going forth to War; [Mark] That which leads forth to War quenches the Light, 2 Sam. 21. 17. And Job did not deny but the Light was given to him that was in Mi∣sery, and to the man whose Way was hid, Job 3. 20, 23. And David preached him who is given for a Light unto the Gentiles, to be Salvation to the ends of the Earth; and said, The Lord is my Light, and my Salvation, Psal. 27. 1. And in thy Light we shall see Light, Psal. 36. 9. And Light is sown for the Righteous, Psal. 97. 11. And he that came of David said, Truly Light is sweet, Eccles. 11. 7. And when he came of whom the Prophets prophesied, who is the only Prophet and High-priest, and the end of the Pro∣phets and the Law, and that Priest hood which was made by a Law; he being come, preached himself to be the Light of the World, and said, While you have the Light, believe in the Light, John 8. ch. 12. And John who was a Minister of Christ, prea∣ched the Light, and said, it was the Life of man, John 1. and Light is come into the World, John 3. 16. And Peter preached the Light shining in a dark place. And the Ministers of Christ who were Eye-witnesses of his Glory, said, The Light shined in Darkness, and God commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, and some witnessed, that they were made partakers of the Inheri∣tance with the Saints in Light. And many more Proofs might be brought from the Scriptures of Truth, as a Cloud of Witnesses to prove, that we who preach, declare, and bear witness to the Light, do not therein preach a new Doctrine, nor another Gospel, but the same with all the holy men of God; and that which we have heard and seen, which was from the beginning, which Message is this, even the Light; which Light in the World, in the Heart, is the Corner∣stone, which is the sure Foundation, and other Foundation can no man lay, than he that is the Light that is already laid: And this is the true Prophet which all are to hear, and the Children of the
Light do hear, know, and obey his Voice, and stranger they will not hear, but him by whom God speaks; for God in times Past spoke unto our Fathers at sundry times, and in divers man∣ners, but in these last dayes he hath spoken unto us by his Son, who is the Light, whose Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. which Word was hid in Davids Heart, of whom Christ came, who is the Light, and the Word which was a Light unto Davids feet, and a Lanthorn to his steps; and so David cal∣led him Lord, who is the Light and the Word nigh, who is in the midst, and preacheth Peace to them that believe in, follow and obey him that is the Light; and the Light is the Condemnation of all them that hate it; and every one that doth Evil hates the Light; but the Light is the Condemnation of all whose Deeds are Evil; and every one that loves the Light, wherewith he is enlightned, brings his deeds to it, and by it the hidden things of Darkness are made manifest; and waiting in that which it doth make manifest to be Evil; so Christ the Light comes to de∣stroy the Works of the Devil, and make an end of Sin, and re∣conciles up unto God, who hath given him a Light of the Gentiles, and a Covenant to be salvation to the Ends of the Earth; and this is he that lighteth every man that comes into the World; which World God so loved, that he gave his Son a Light into it, that all men through him might believe, and be saved from Wrath to come; and so its the Will of him that sent him, who is the Light, that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth; which Truth brings Freedom to the Seed, whereby it comes to have Peace with God being redeemed from the Bondage of Corruption, and set at Liberty from under the shadow of Death wherein many long have walked, whose feet now comes to be guided into the Way of Everlasting Peace, where the Children of the Light do rest together. And this is he who hath wrought Redemption with his own Power, and redeemed out of the Captivity, and opened the Prison Door, and preached Peace to the Spirit that was in Pri∣son in the dayes of Noah, when the old World was destroyed, and brought the Flood upon the Ungodly, yet saved the Seed in the midst of the Storm and raging Waves; and by him, even he that is the Light, is Captivity led captive, and that which ru∣led
over, is brought to be a Servant under; and when the Word of the Lord came to the Rock it opened, and much of living Wa∣ter issued forth abundantly, whereby the Thirsty came to be satisfied, and clothing from him who is the Light doth daily come, and the Rayment that never waxeth old; he clothes with the Armour of Light, and is as a Sun and a Shield; from him the Spiritual Weapons come, and he teaches the Hands to War, and the Fingers to Fight; so that the strong Holds are broken down, and every Thought comes to be subjected, and when he leads through the sufferings like a Lamb, so is he followed; and when he arises up to speak with Authority, and not as the Scribes, then is he obeyed, who then utters his Voice like a man of War, and lifts up his Voice like a Trumpet, crying aloud unto all them that are Thirsty, and proclaming the Woes unto all them who wear the false Coverings; and by him are his Enemies confounded, and Judges led away fools, and Princes laid in the dust. And at him do the Kings of the Earth shut their Mouthes, and before him shall they all bow; for with the Sword of his Lips doth he slay the Wicked, and his slain are many, and shall be more; for no Flesh shall stand before him, who is now come to plead and make War in Righteousness, and now are his Enemies flying unto their strong Holds and fenced Cities, but his Salva∣tion is stronger than Walls or Bulwarks, and that all them that follow him (their Captain) know right well; and before him all the mighty of the Earth are as a tottering Wall, and as a bro∣ken Hedge; and he it is that rideth upon the Wings of the Wind, whose Power is unlimitted, whose Wayes are past finding out, who de∣scended into the Lower parts of the Earth, from whence the wicked ne∣ver knew him to arise. But I, with the rest, do witness, he is risen through the Earth, and his Feet stand upon it, and is become the first Fruits of them that slept, and is ascended up on High, and hath Dominion over all, and is crowned with Glory and Honour eternally in the Heavens, and hath given Gifts unto men, and from him the Gift of Eternal Life is come. And this is my Beloved, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem! and this is my Friend and Redeemer, O ye Sons of men! even he who hath redeemed my Soul from Hell, and brought me back
From the Power of the Grave; this is the Prophet of whom Mo∣ses did write should come, and is come, and there is not another than he that is raised up in the midst, which is Christ the Light of the World in the Heart; this is he that hath done wonderous works for, in and by me, and many more, who are thereby made living Witnesses unto his Name, whose Name is a strong Tower, and a Rock of Defence, he is a sure Dwelling-Place; he is the Rest of the Soul and the oy of the Living. And since he hath put the Sword of his Spirit into my hand, and his Word of Life into my Mouth, and Wicked thereby have been cut down like the Grass, and the Mighty have been trampled upon as the dust in the Streets; the tall Cedars have been as the Brambles, and the strong Oaks have been rooted up; the Pro∣phet became a Fool, the Pastors became Bruitish, and the Spiritu∣al Man was as Mad, but the Seed hath been refreshed; and the weak nursed up, the tender Plant preserved, and the Hungery fed And for his Names sake will I not keep silent until my Testi∣mony be finished, and until Jerusalem be made a Praise over all the Earth, and her Righteousness break forth as the Morning, and her Comliness as the Brightness of the Sun, and till I see the Destruction of her Enemies and her Adversaries over∣turned forever; for Powerful is our King, who is come to reign. Oh! who can with-hold the Pen from writing, and the Tongue from declaring? VVhen the Lyon hath roared, who will not hear? VVhen the Lord hath spoken, who can but pro∣phesie? How can I but declare his Wonderous Works, and pro∣claim his Name where-ever I come, and confess him before men, though I should suffer much more Prisoning, Dungeon, and VVhipping than I have done? surely his Name I will declare in the World, who is the Light, and give my Testimony of him that saves from Sin, whose Name is called Jesus, the Light of the World, which is the elect, precious, and Corner (but stum∣bling) stone, even to both the Houses of Israel; but it is he that is come to rule the Nations with his Iron Rod, and dash his Enemies in pices like a Potters Vessel, and judge the Earth in Righteous∣ness, and the people with his living Truth; and now the Sinner
shall not stand in Judgment, nor the Wicked in the Congrega∣tion of the Righteous; for he utters his Voice like Thunder a∣gainst the Wicked, and is dreadful against all the Double-mind∣ed; he condemns the Unjust with an utter overthrow, and pulls down the Unrighteous from their Seats; Oh! who of the Wicked can stand when he thunders from Heaven, and pierceth through the secret parts of the Heart! And though I do speak an Allegory, yet I do not speak contrary to the Scriptures, but according thereunto from the Spirit of Truth; and though I speak of the Operation of Christ in his Members, yet I do not deny the Works which were wrought by him in his own Person; and though I preach Christ within the Hope of Glory, yet I do not preach another; and though Paul tra∣velled in birth again, until Christ was formed in the Galathians, yet he did not desire another Christ should be formed in them: And though Paul said, God had revealed his Son in him, yet it was not another Son; and though I say the Son of God is come, and hath given me an understanding, yet it is not another Son, but the same that ever was, who worketh all our Works in us. And though I preach him The Make End of Sin, yet I do not preach another; but they who preach a Christ that doth not make an end of Sin, nor save them (who preach him) from their Sirs, do preach another Christ, seeing the true Christ maketh an end of Sin: And though I say, the Prophet is come, who is mighty in Word and Work, and raised up in the midst, or in the Heart, yet it is not another, but the same, whose Wonders appeared out∣wardly whilst he was in the form of a Servant upon the Earth. And though I preach him to the World, the Light of the World, yet it is not another, but the same who said, I am come a Light into the World; and I am the Light of the World, Joh. 8. 12. And so, he being come a Light into the World, he is to be preach∣ed as he is, [the Light] that all men through him might be∣live, and mens minds turned from Darkness to him who is the Light, (in the Darkness) and it is most right and proper to preach him the Light who is now come, and is the end of the Law to all them that believe in the Light, and the end of the Prophets, who preached him that is the Light under various Names or Terms, as King, Priest, Prophet, a Son, a Child, the Migh∣ty
God; and David called him Lord; and he is called a Saviour, a Redeemer, a Mediator, &c. who being come saith, I am the Light; and so its right and sound Doctrine to preach him as he is, The Light of the World, and lighteth every man that cometh into the World, which is the true Light; and we that preach this, do not preach another, but him who said, I am the Light. By me who refused the Glory, Treasure and Preferment of the World, and did chuse rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God; and though I profitted much in that Religion where the carnal Ordi∣nances are, yet that profiting came to be accounted as Dross & Dung, that he might be received who makes an end of Sin, who being now come, his Love constraineth me his Name to publish, who is the true Prophet, whose Name is called Jesus, who hath, and doth save from Sin, for whose Name sake I have been often brought before Rulers, haled and beat out of the Synagogues, numbred among Trans∣gressors, tryed at Assizes, as an Offendor, yet there denyed the Li∣berty of a Murderer, being six times imprisoned, twice stript na∣ked and whipt with Rods, and since put into Bridewell; once put in∣to and kept long in a Dungeon sor Praying; often abused in Prison; sometimes near Death; in Trials often, in Perils often, in Loss of Goods, in daily Reproaches, and in that which hath been greater then all these things; and yet have I been preserved unto this day by the Power of him who is the Light, and the only Son of God, to whom be Eternal Glory from his own Seed in his Servant, who is one of the least among many Brethren, being a Prisoner at Win∣chester for the Truth of Christ, by the will of men, unto whom I am known by the Name of Humphry Smith. An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ. COme unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, come unto me and find Rest; I, even I am he that comforteth Zi∣, I am he that preacheth Liberty to the Captives; Oh! come
unto me, stay not, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; I am he and there is none other; I came out from the Father into the World, that it might be reconciled up unto God thorow me: I am the good Shepherd that am now come to gather the Outcasts of Israel, and to bring home unto God the lost Sheep, that the di∣spersed of Judah may now return, and the seed of Abraham may be brought in to me, in whom the Redemption is, even plentious Redemption for all that will hear and turn in hither. Oh, all ye scattered of the Flock! my Voice is to you that have not found rest to your Souls, now hearken diligently to hear my Voice, and feel my Words of Life; for now the time is come that the Seed that hath long lain in the Death shall hear my voice, and they that hear shall live; and arise out of the Death, and I will give them Life: Oh! come unto me, my own, my beloved before the Foundation of the World; come, and stay not; I have long waited for you; my Locks are wet with the drops of the Night, and you have wearied me with waiting for you; long have I knocked at the Door of your Hearts, calling to Repen∣tance, and no man regarded; now the sloathful would not arise that I might come in and take up my abode with and in my own, and refresh them with Waters of Life; but now am I come, who am the Bridegroom and the Bishop of the Soul, with my alluring terms; Come, oh my Friends! hearken my Beloved, let me not be denyed; open the door of thy hard Heart, and let me not stand waiting any longer; behold, I have Honour for all them that follow me, and Crowns of Life for all that will receive me. Come unto me, my Lambs, I have pre∣pared my Supper, I have made in this Mountain a Feast of Wines of the Lees, of fat things, full of Marrow; all things are now ready; Come in unto me, I am the Bread of Life, I am the hid∣den Manna, I come to save mens lives: Come all ye that are wea∣ry with the burden of your Sins, I am the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; I come to take away the Sin of the World; I am the Root of Jesse, and the Off-spring of David; I am he that opens and none can shut, and shuts, and none can open; I have Power to forgive Sins on Earth. Come, cease from the Evil of your doings, learn of me to do Well, and then we will reason together, and though thy Sins have been as Scar∣let, they shall then be as white as Snow; for I come to finish Trans∣gression,
and make an end of Sin, and bring in the Everlasting Righteousness of God. Therefore hear, O ye scattered of the Flock, that are yet in the miery Clay, covered over with the thick Cloud of your Sins; Oh! remain not in the filth now, continue no longer with the Flesh-pots in the house of Bondage, for I am come to condemn Sin in the Flesh, and destroy the Works of the Devil, that you may find Redemption in me, and be washed from your filthiness and cleansed from your Sin. Wherefore hear, all ye that are far from Righteousness, behold, I have Gifts for the Rebellious, my hand is stretched forth; O ye simpels Ones! come unto me and learn pure Wisdom; and ye Fools, be of an Understanding Heart. Oh! why will ye dye, O house of Israel! have I any pleasure at all that the Wicked should dye? turn you, turn you now I do call, O ye hard heart∣ed! wherefore do you hide your selves from me, and dig deep to hide your Counsels from me? Why do you run alwayes a∣stray? Oh! what shall I do unto you that I have not done? and yet do you still go on in the Evil of your Wayes! When will you once return? O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? Oh! I have seen your Abomi∣nations, and am wearied with your Sins, and yet have you not re∣garded: Oh! now it is high time to consider thy Ways, and return from the Evil of thy Doings, lest thou be shut out for∣ever. And all ye, my dear Ones that have long waited for me, be∣hold, I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, saith Christ the Son of God; and I will open to you the hidden Treasures of my Father, and make known his Will to you; and I will re∣move off the burden, and circumcise your Hearts: Behold, I come, saith Christ, and I will open the Prison-door, and raise the Prisoner out of the Pit, and bring Deliverance to the Cap∣tive, and refresh the plant of my Fathers planting, and nourish the tender Grape which the subtilty hath hurt; and I will bind up the broken, and restore unto the Mourners the years of Joy and Comfort; and I will be unto you a sure Foundation, a pre∣sent Help in time of need; and I will bring back the scattered, and they shall not return, and fear the Lord God of thir Fa∣thers in my Mountain of Holiness, and they shall walk in the
Way of Peace, and in the Paths of Righteousness, where the Unclean shall not pass over, nor the wild Beasts of the Field shall not come, but the Ransomed of my Father, saith Christ the Son of God: Therefore hear, all ye, my Brethren, and consi∣der, all ye, my Friends, for I am come, who am the sure Foundation, and the Corner-stone, the Light, the true Light of the World, and the Life of Man, and the Everlasting Covenant of the Father, and the Power of God, and the Wisdom of the Father; by me Kings reign, and the Princes of Israel shall now rule in Equity; for behold, I am come, even he that you have long waited for, and there is not another; come, learn of me, I am meek, I am lowly, I am the Light, low in the heart, I am the living Minister, saith Christ, the Son of the Fathers love, and the Light of the World; I change not, but remain a Priest forever, a living Minister of Life within the vail, ministring Life unto the Spirit in Prison. The Sounding Voice Of the DREAD of Gods Mighty Power To all the Judges and Rulers of the Earth who rise up against the Lamb: And to Gog, Magog, and all their Armies; and to the whole Host of the Power of Darkness, and to all men who fight against God, who, or whatsoever they be (or whatsoever they be called.) BEhold, ye Rulers of the Earth, and listen and hear, all ye Earthly minded Men, let the Blindness of your Minds be opened, that your dark Hearts may be enlightned;
hear, I say, and stop not your Ears, whose Minds are in the Earth, whose Eyes are closed, whose Hearts are covered with a thick Vail by your own Iniquity, who see not the Wonders of the Lord wrought among the living, neither perceive the mighty Power of the God of the whole Earth, who are besotted through the sinfulness of your continual Transgressions, and are grove∣ling as Moles in the Earth, and laden with thick Clay, and co∣vered with the Vail that is spread over all Flesh, that you see not the glory of the God of Life, neither perceive ye the comliness of the holy One of Jacob, to whom the bright Morning Star is as a Cloud of Darkness, and the Way of the living God as a fierce Whirlwind of Fire, who see not him that dwelt in the Bush, neither hear his Voice, who hath made Darkness his Habitation, and his Pavilion round about him thick Clouds of the Skey. Hear, I say, and let my words have entrance in you, and let the sound of my Voice take place in your Hearts; let the opening of my Lips give Astonishment to the Wicked, and the enlarge∣ment of my Heart the Confounding of the Heathen; let the Dread of the Lord take hold upon the Hypocrites, and Astonish∣ment seaze upon the Double-minded; let the Prudent keep silent and hear; and let the Honourable be quiet and consider; let the Understanding give audience to my words; and let the Mouth of the Fool be stopt; let the Sinner stand still and be quiet; and let the Ungodly consider the words of Truth; rebel not against the Word of the Lord, neither harden your Hearts against the Dread of his Power; let the tall Cedar bow and bend, and that which is lifted up, be brought down, and stand ye all in Meekness. For behold, the Omnipotent Power is come, the Rock of Ages is revealed, the Everlasting strength is made manifest, the God of Abraham hath reacht forth his hand, and the Redeem∣er of Israel is come to dwell in the midst; the great Jehova hath uttered his Voice, and he whose Name is I Am, is at hand, he that moveth upon the Waters may be felt, and he that formeth the Seed in the Womb may be known; he that inhabiteth Eter∣nity is come to dwell in his People, and walk in the midst of the poor despised of his flock, having cleansed them by the washing of Water, and renewed them by the Spirit of Burning, and refi∣ned them with his Righteous Judgments, and cleansed them
with the Blood of his Son, that in his Zion (redeemed with Judgment) he may dwell for evenmore, and take up his rest in the midst of his People, having made the place of his feet Glo∣rious, and his residence as a Seat in the midst of a Fire, which burneth against all them that are in the Night, and giveth light to them that are in the Covenant, whose Glory is hid from the dark Mind, and his Counsel with-held from the Unbelieving in Heart; he standeth near unto the Wicked, who perceiveth him not, and taketh Notice of his secret Intents; he observeth the footsteps of the Kings of the Earth, and marketh the Decrees of the Unrighteous, and when they have filled up their measure, he putteth forth his Finger to their Life, and taketh away their Breath; he suddainly cuts off the Wicked, and regardeth not the Mightiness of Princes; he searcheth the Hearts of Kings, and ruleth over the Powers of men; his Infiniteness can never be declared; in his hand is the Breath of the Life of the Souls of all Mankind. Hear (I say) and consider my words, and ponder the Medi∣tations of my Mind; for behold, the Lord God of Life is come, Immanuel is revealed, the Root and Off-spring of David is grown up as a Plant of Renown; the Seed of the Shepherd sits upon the Throne, and before him shall all the Kings of the Earth lay down their Crowns; every Emperor shall bow and bend, and the Potentates of the Earth (before him) shall wither as a green Herb, their Glory shall perish as the untimely Birth of the Womb; their Honour shall vanish as the Smoke before the Wind; their Wisdom shall fade away, as a Blossom cut off, and their Understandings shall come to nothing; the Wisdom of the most high shall be exalted over all, and with his foolishness will he them all confound; yea, with a foolish Nation will he anger the Judges of the Earth, and with a despised People will he pro∣voke the Rulers of the World to jealousie; by the foolishness of his Flock will he confound his Enemies, and by his weakness in them, will he subdue the strength of the Mighty, and though all his Enemies strive in the Arrogancy of their Spirits, and in the fierceness of their strength, yet shall he be exalted, who is led as a Lamb dumb, and he shall reign whose right it is, in whose. Mouth there is found no Guile, who maketh an end of Sin, and
bringeth in Ever lasting Righteousness, and setteth up Judgment in the Heart, and cometh to rule in the Kingdoms of men, and overturneth the Host of his Enemies, by whom Judges are led away Fools, Diviners turned Mad; before whose Presence the Mightiness of the mightiest Rulers of the Earth is as Wax before the fire, and their Strength melteth away as the fat of Lambs. Wherefore hear and see, O ye Kindreds and Rulers of the Earth! the Lord our God is come, the might of his strength is revealed, and the Power of his Presence made known; he hath chosen his Army to himself, and their Names are written in his Life; he hath numbred up his Hosts together, and armed his chosen with his Everlasting Strength; the Captain of his Host goeth before them, and the Camp of the Lord is very great, they are Numberless as the Sand of the Sea, and Infinite as the Stars of Heaven: Even so is the Seed of Abraham, the Remnant of the Flock of Jacob, whom the Lord hath redeemed, who are chosen, and faithful, and true; yea, behold its even so, and that all the Nations of the Earth shall know; for the Lord of Hosts rideth on in Meekness, in the midst of his Host, and maketh War in Righteousness with the Enemies of the Lamb, who would not that he should reign, who makes an end of Sin, and he is clothing his Army with Zeal, as with a Garment, and covering them with the Armour of Light, and preserveth their Head in the day of Battel, and girds them up with strength, and guideth their feet upon the Rock, and preserveth their Life under the shadow of his Hand. When he speaketh the word, his Army goeth forth, and at his Command they march on their way: He lifteth up a Stan∣dard before them, and proclaimeth open War against the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth, who now hear that the Lamb is come to reign in Righteousness, and to stain the Pride of their Glory, and con∣found the height of their Wisdom, and lay their Honour in the Dust forever. Therefore, all Kindreds of the Earth, even Gog, Magog and all the Hosts of the Heathen are rising up in the bitterness of their Spirits, in the height of the Power of the Man of Sin, joyning all their Forces together, as in one band of Darkness, taking Counsel from Aegypt, making a Covenant with Death, and an Agreement with Hell, and gathering up the utmost Powers of Darkness to be as a Refuge unto them: And thus in the
strength of the King of the Children of Pride, they are rising up against the Lord; even the God of Life, and against his anointed Ones, who have indeed and in truth received the Anointings, and need not man to teach them, but are all taught of the Lord God Al∣mighty, who also teacheth their hands to war, and their fingers to fight: And he utters his voice as the sound of many Waters, before his Army, who follow him in the might of his Power, whose Pre∣sence is dreadful in the midst of his Host, and there is none that is able to stand before him; for he is a consuming Fire in the midst of his Camp, and burneth up his Enemies round about; and before him and his Army shall all faces gather paleness; Ever∣lasting Shame shall cover the Glory of all Flesh; before him all People shall be much pained, his Dread and Vengeance shall take hold on all his Adversaries: His redeemed shall march with him in the travail of their Souls, from strength to strength shall they continue on, and none shall be feeble among them; their Arrows shall reach into the Bowels of the Scornful, and their words of Life pierce the Hearts of the Hypocrites: They shall tread upon Kings, as upon Monter, and trample upon the Wicked as upon Ashes; they fear not the greatest Goliahs, nei∣ther yet the VVickedness of the Pride of Haman; Unrighteous Decrees cannot stop their Mouthes, nor the fear of a Furnace or a Dungeon with-hold them from their Way: All Flesh is as Grass before them, and at their Rebuke shall the Potsherds of the Earth be broken forever; before them there is no Nation shall stand; For One of them shall chase a Hundred, and before Five shall the strength and wisdom of a Thousand be confounded. And this the Lords Army shall never be confounded, and his Glory in them shall never be defaced, nor his Power with them shall never be overcome, nor his strength in them shall never be vanquished; therefore in vain do all the Potsherds of the Earth strive; for they that rise up against them, shall be as Flax before the Fire, and the Mightiest among the Sons of Men, shall he as the Grass that is cut down; for the Lord of Hosts is very Terrible; and in Meek∣ness is the Lamb riding on to Judgment; his Followers are en∣robed with the Light of the Morning, and adorned with the Beauty of the Sun: Their Eyes are enlightned with the Light of the most High, and they see through the dark parts of all their
Enemies, and discern the secret Plottings of all their Adversa∣ries: Their Wisdom comes in like a River, and their Under∣standing shall never be darkned: Their Strength is renewed as the Morning, and they are valiant to do Exploits: The Wisdom of the Wise before them shall be confounded forever, and the Understanding of the Prudent be esteemed as a thing of nought: They spy out the lurkings of their Enemies, and see through the coverings of the Deceitful: Of their strength they shall never be deprived, neither shall their Weapons be taken from them: Their Refuge shall never be shaken, nor the place of their Rest removed: The VVicked shall never enter upon their Dwel∣lings, nor all their Enemies invade the Land of their Rest; for the desire of all Nations to them is come; and him that they long waited for, have they now received: They tread upon the Cockatrice den, and meet the devouring Lyons. And in the Power of the Father's love there is no deadly thing that doth them hurt, nor any VVeapon formed against them that ever shall prosper. And this is Sion, the Redeemed of the Lord, the Glory of the God of Israel, the Seed of Jacob, whom the Lord hath chosen, and set up on high over all the Kindreds of the Earth, which stands against all the Enemies of the Lord, and is his new thresh∣ing Instrument, with which he will thresh the Heathen in his Anger, and bathe his Sword in the Blood of the slain; for behold, his Sword shall devour much Flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many: VVith Sion, the perfection of Beauty, will the Lord break in pieces, wound, confound and overturn forever, the Horse and his Rider, the Captain and his Troops, the Antient and Honourable, the Prophet that telleth Lyes, yea, all the Host of the Unrighteous, and the Strength of the Army of the man of Sin, and the Beauty of the VVhore that rides upon the Beast, and all them who set themselves in Battel against the Lord, and all them who lead into Captivity, and would captivate the Servants of the Lamb, shall go into Captivity forever. For behold, the Lord is with us, the Shout of a King is among us, the Lord, whose Name is holy, is come, he hath uttered his Voice from Heaven, and now the Nations of the Earth are angry, but the Lord will reign in Righteousness, and all his Enemies
shall be astonished at his Presence, and his Adversaries shall be amazed forever, their Hearts shall be turned as a Stone within them, and men shall be at their VVits end for fear, and for looking after those things which shall come upon the Earth, and all them whose Names are written in it, their VVisdom shall not preserve them, their Understandings shall not defend them, neither shall all their Subtilty cover them from the Light, their Nakedness shall appear to their Everlasting Shame, and the Prisoners of Hope shall rejoyce over them for evermore. For behold, I say, your day is come, wherein you shall bow down under the Prisoners, and fall under the slain, according to the words of the Spirit of Prophecy, Isa. 10. 4. and the slain over you shall rejoyce for evermore, having the high Praises of God in their Mouthes, and the Sword of the Spirit in their Hearts, with which they shall cut in pieces and pierce in sunder the Bow∣els of all flesh, and it shall be as Chaff before them, and the strength thereof as the passing away of the Morning-cloud, and in the strength of the most high, shall the Army of the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah go on and prosper, even as Kings, whose Armies are swift to the Battel, their faces are as an Adamant, and their Countenances firce and terrible, the found of their Voice is dreadful, and the noise of their Appearance Astonish the Heathen; the Earth before them is full of its Fruit, be∣hind them its a desolate Wilderness, they spare not the Antient nor the Honourable, neither have they respect to the Persons of men; they even smile at Destruction when its coming, and they are prepared for all your Oppressions. VVherefore now gather your selves together, O ye Potsherds of the Earth, and stand up, all you that thirst for blood; assem∣ble your selves together, all ye Persecutors, let your Counsels come up from Hell, and let the depth of the Powers of dark∣ness shew forth it self in the utmost of its strength, and with it combine ye all together, and stand up in the Power of your King, which is the Angel of the Bottomless Pit, who is head among (in) and over all you who thrist for the blood of the Innocent. Now come and draw near in the very height of your Father's VVrath, and behold, we meet you in the Infiniteness of our Fa∣thers Love, and stand you together in the depth of your secret
Subtilty, and behold we abide in the pure VVisdom of the most High: Stand ye up for the Glory and Honour of the World, and we abide faithful for the Glory of the Lord our Maker. And this I say plainly unto you, that your long Tyranny will never weary out the patience we have received, neither can you inflict more punishment than the Lord hath enabled us to bear; and as your Wrath is incrased, our Humility is increased much more; and as you are filled and moved with Envy, we are much more filled and overcome with the Power of the Fathers Life, and though you contrive ways to ensnare the Innocent, we take no thought aforehand to deliver our selves; for Self we have de∣nyed, and we have given up our Bodies and Souls a living Sacri∣fice unto God, to do or suffer his Will: And him that kills the Body we fear not, much less those that can but Whip or Impri∣son but for a few Moneths; for our Life you cannot reach, nei∣ther can you disturb their Rest whom the Lord hath crowned with Honour, who out of the World are redeemed and bought with the price of Blood most precious, but are become his, to follow him whither-ever he leads them, though it be through Tryals, great Tribulations, Bonds and long Imprisonments; these things cannot move them who are brought to rest in the De∣farts, and sleep in the Woods; yea, and there is none can make them afraid with all their Threats, unrighteous Laws, Bonds, Bridewels, long unjust Imprisonments, or Death it self. And this Honour hath the Saints, and herein do they rejoyce for evermore, in that they are counted worthy to suffer for his Names sake, who was made perfect through sufferings, and and thereby overcame all the Powers of Darkness, whereby Prin∣cipalities and Powers are spoiled forever; and through sufferings are we made more than Conquerers over all our Enemies, whose Day will have an end, whose Cruelty will cease, whose Tyranny will be rewarded upon their own Heads, and their Memorial will Rot forever; but the faithfulness of the Faithful shall never be taken from him, nor the innocency of the Harmless shall never be forgotten, neither shall they ever want strength to stand in the day of Battel, nor courage and boldness to endure, when the Enemies of the Lord arise in Opposition against the brightness of the rising of the Power of the Lamb of God, who is come to
take away the Sin of the World, even him who is the Light, and the Heir, against whom, with one consent, the Rulers of the Earth, the Hireling Priests, with all the Prophane and Unclean, and all them of all Opinions in the World, are joyning together in one Combination, as with one Mind conspiring in their En∣mity, to slay and murder the Heir that is come to make an end of Sin, Who saith, I am the Light. H. S. To all that want Peace with God To the Sheep every where not brought Home: To the Thirsty Breathing Soul, and to the Seed, though in Captivity, among and in the midst of all Professors. Greetings of Love, Mercy and Peace from God, the Father of the Living. VVHere the Bowels are not shut up, nor the Heart darkned, and where that doth not bear rule which stoppeth the Ear and closeth the Eye; and where Prejudice and Rebellion against the Light, with the Wisdom of the Flesh, through that knowledge which puffeth up, hath not
wholly eaten up, devoured, got over, and wholly overcome that tender Principle, which once moved in the Heart, towards that being of the living Substance. There may my words take entrance, and unto such, who feel that which breathes to God, and who are willing to be satis∣fied concerning the living Truth of his Son, and who would re∣ceive the Truth if they knew it, and do yet more desire after the Power of God, than all the Temporal things that are seen, and who are yet come no further than the reading of the Law, the Priests, the Tythes, nor that Religion that makes nothing perfect, and who are come no further than the outward Baptism, Shadow, or Figure, or such things, which are to be left behind, Hb. 6. or who are come no further than the Supper, or the Death, and so not yet saved by his Life, nor drunk of that which saveth, and is to cleanse from all that, which separa∣teth from God; after whom, and the incomes of his Love Im∣mortal, whosoever truly desireth, and is willing to receive the Power of his Life, and come in Covenant with the Lord; Such may lend me an Ear a little, and you are them who may receive some benefit hereby; for behold I write in plainness of the things of God, my heart being enlarged with abundance of his Peace, in which there is good will towards men, that you might come to draw near to the Witness; the Testimony whereof is within the vail, which vail is over the heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15 and is not done away, but as you come to be in him, who is given for a witness, Isa. 55. 4. by believing in the Light, John 12. 36. and so to have the witness in you, 1 John 5. 10. and you to be in it; and that you may come to participate of Gods Indwel∣lings, and feel the Oyl which will last forever; therefore I pro∣ceed thus: How can I but look back a little, with an Eye of Pity over those, who yet are where once I was, when the Darkness was over the Earth, and the Cloud of Error compassed me as well as others, surely I cannot now be so unmindful of them that are yet lost, as not to have compassion upon the Out-casts, of Israel, or to conceal from them these things of so great concernment, but rather as the Lord of my Life hath opened to me, will I reach forth my hand towards the weak, and utter my voice to
the Prisoner of Hope, and shew unto the meek in the Earth how the invisible God hath led his seed, and is leading his Rem∣nant through and out of the Variety of things, unto the one thing it self, from whence the various Things, Gifts, and Mini∣strations do come. Now that which is chiefly in my heart, to write for the Seeds sake, is, First, Something concerning the Ministration of Moses, (when he was upon Earth.) Secondly, Concerning the Ministrati∣on of Christ (whilst he was upon Earth) Thirdly. and chiefly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit. First, Concerning Moses's Ministration, (when he was upon Earth) which was to last till Shiloh came, or until the time of Reformation. AS concerning Moses Ministration, to wit, the Law, Condem∣nation or Death, with the Priests Offering, and worldly Sanctuary and an outward Tabernacle, and daily Offerings for Sin, and Store-houses for the Levites, Strangers, Fatherless and Widdows, having the Ark of the Testimony within the vail, and the Mercy seat covered, and the Golden-pot, and the People to seek the Law at the Priests Mouth, whereby their knowledge is preserved, and many profit much thereby, and come day by day, and year by year unto that which they esteem a place of holy Worship, and Ordinances of God. And notwithstand∣ing the Priests of Moses Law, were made by the Law of God, yet that Priesthood changeth, and the Law changeth, and the very glory of all this passeth away; for this did once seem glori∣ous unto me, and many more which only discovered sin, though it made nothing perfect, and with much delight was the reading of the Law and the Prophets hearkened unto, and the daily confession of sin, (but the vail is over the heart whilst Moses is Preached) and Sacrifices Morning and Evening with the long Prayers, which the comers thereunto, were not at all thereby made Perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, though it had a shaddow of good things to come, yet the glory thereof comes to be done away; then how much more will the very glory of the most glorious Appearance of that Ministry perish, and be done away, which cometh short of this, and hath not so much as the Image of this, which was as a shaddow. O weak and
beggarly things, that are found among those Priests now and their followers, who come short of Moses Ministry; for he direct∣ed them to Christ the substance, and so his Ministration comes to be done away, as Christ comes to be received; for Moses did not seek to uphold his Priests, or Law, or Tythes, or any thing else, when Christ should come, who is the end of the Law, but did write of him, and not withstanding his Ministry and Priests, he said, He that would not hearken unto him, should be cut off; and said, The Lord will raise up [Mark the words, raise up] The Lord shall raise up a Prophet, and when the Prophet was come, he said, I am the Light, and I am meek and low in Heart; and this is to be raised up which is meek; for to them that sate in darkness Light hath sprung up; and the Soul that hearkneth not to the Prophet, which springs up, shall be cut off, for Truth springeth up out of the Earth, and Christ is the Truth, and he said, I am the Light, which is the Horn of Salvation that God raiseth up, to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and is the Salvation of Israel; and so the soul is to hearken to that which God raiseth up, and that is it which condemneth sin (under it) who is like unto Moses, whose Ministry discovers sin; and so Moses directed unto Christ, (who puts away the sin) and Paul said of the glory of Moses Ministra∣tion, That it was no Glory in respect of the Glory of the Ministra∣tion of the Spirit; and the glorious Ministry of the Spirit was re∣ceived, after he who had a Body prepared, had suffered the Cru∣cifying of his body, and the Prophets searched diligently to see the glory that was to be after the sufferings of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. But the thing intended, That Moses when he was upon Earth, directed unto Christ, and gave commandment, That they should hearken unto him, (who said, I am the Light) and this is one Tittle of the Law, that the Light be hearkned unto, who is the end of the Law, and the substance, and he that offendeth herein is guil∣ty of all; and this is that in which all the large Ministrations of Moses is included, that Christ, the Light, the true Prophet be heark∣ned unto and obeyed, that by hearing and obeying his Voice, (or the Word in the Heart) they might come from under the Law and the Priests, and that which waxeth old, unto the Life and Obedience of him, who abides a Priest forever, even the Lord of that glory, which lasteth for evemore.
Secondly, Concerning Christ and his Ministration, (when he was upon Earth) and his work which he finished. ANd when he cometh, which Moses commandeth to hearken unto, even Christ, the true Prophet, the Light of the World, the living Minister, the end of the Law, who had a Body prepared to do the will of the Father, which was in him, the Man Christ Jesus; he saith, follow me, and he took up his Cross and passed through the Death and the Vail; and so being made Perfect through sufferings, attained that Glory, which he had with the Father before he had a Body, which Body was prepared to do the Fathers will, whose will was, That all men should be saved; therefore Christ tasted death for every man, and rose again for the Justification of those that believe in him, who said, I am the Light, and is sate down at the right hand of God, who is a Spirit eter∣nally in the Heavens, ascended up out of the sight of them, which gazed after that Body, which is gone out of their sight, even he, Christ, the Ministry, hid from Ages and Generations, now made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, being meek and low in the Heart, he saith, Learn of me: Then not the of Priests, nor any longer of Moses; for the Law is the School∣master to Christ, who being come, calleth one from the Custom, another from going to bury the Dead, another from questoning and reasoning, what this man, or another should do that he might not stand looking out at others, but himself to follow the Light, saying, follow thou me. And those that followed him when he was upon Earth saw his Miracles, and heard his Parables, and eat of the outward Bread, and were filled (though many now eat and are not filled) and they had his body among them, and they came to the Bap∣tism and the Supper, but Christ himself Baptized not; and when he was upon Earth, he said, I go to the Father, and I go to prepare a place for you; and he said, whither I go ye know; and he said be∣fore, follow me, and except a man deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, he cannot be my Disciple; and he said, My sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me, and he entred within the
Vail, (and the Vail is over the Heart) and was made Perfect through suffering, and is sate down in the Majesty on high, glori∣fied with God the Father, and the Father was in him, even the ful∣ness of God; and that which may be known of God, is manifest in thee; and he said, He had finished the work that the Father gave him to do, and so the Fathers will was accomplished and done, for which the body was prepared; he said, Now glorifie me Fa∣ther, with the same glory which I had with thee from the beginning; and he that spake in the body abideth forever, who said, A Bo∣dy hast thou prepared me, which Body being crucisied, he took up his Life again, and then those that did know him three dayes before, knew him not, and he ascended, and a Cloud received him out of the sight of certain men, who never found him unto this day, for he remaineth out of the sight of most that profess him, and as the lightning in the Clouds of Heaven doth he come again, and every eye shall see him, that condemneth sin; and the Kingdom of Heaven, is within you, and yet the blind cannot see, nor the deaf hear. And this was he that Moses commanded to hear, who said, he that is with you shall be in you, and he that was with or without, was to go away; and that which was to be received within, he said, should abide with them forever, and the Spirit of Truth, was to lead into all Truth; for though the body was prepared to do Gods will, yet they by it were not led into all Truth, but sometimes understood it not, though he speak Spirit and Life; and moreover, they went away, and some fled from the Truth, and Peter denyed him that was the Truth; and so such as have got a Profession of the Truth without them, and not the Spirit within to lead into all Truth, such fly in the day of Tryal from that Truth they profess, and some deny it rather than suf∣fer with, or for it; and herein, them called Baptists also, have not come short; and some of them have bowed to the Beast, and so it is with many who profess Christ and Truth without them, even as with those who understood not the Parables; nor could not cast out the unclean Spirits, so that Christ was and is grieved when he hath been so long with, and professed, and fol∣lowed without, and yet not come to that Faith which purifieth the Heart, whereby to cast out the Unclean within, as thou mayst read in thy self.
And therefore Christ, when he was upon Earth did often speak unto them of what was yet to come, and I do seldom read or take notice, that he did so often preach and repeat any one thing unto them, as that of the Spirit to come, saying, That it (Mark, the Spirit) would lead into all Truth; and seeing their Weakness and Unbelief, (Mark 16. 14.) he by the often repe∣tition thereof, did as it were the more chiefly engage their Hearts to wait for and seek after the incomes of that which should comfort them, and abide with them, when his Body was gone from them, whither they could not come; and to this one thing doth he direct them in various expressions, as of his going to the Father, and coming again, and saith he, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, John 12. 16. And many things Jesus did, which if they should be all written, the World might not contain the Books, John 21. 25. And many things he spake unto them, Acts 2. 40. and yet there was something to come to be waited for, and after to be received, which was more than all this; for said he, These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you; But the Comforter (Mark) the word [BUT] intimateth something greater, or more than what was spoken to them, whilst he was with them; for he saith, He that is with you shall be in you, John 14. 17. and said, But the Comforter, which is the holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my Name, he will teach you all things, (Mark what that is that teacheth all things) and bringeth all things to your Remembrance what soever I have said (and so that is within which bringeth the words of Spirit and Life to remembrance) John 14. 25, 26. And having spoken of other things, he saith again, But when the Comforter comes, even the Spirit of Truth, John 15. 26. And if I go not away, the Comforter will not come, but if I depart, I will send him unto you, John 16. 7. And I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now; howbeit, when he, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth, John 16. 12, 13. Here it may be seen, that they who followed Christ without, and not received the Spirit within, could not bear what he had to speak unto them; and also, it may be seen, that when the Spirit was come, it would be better with them. And much more might be mentioned, how Christ foretold,
what was to come, and be received, and revealed in that day, John 16. 23. when the Spirit should be poured forth according to the Prophets, all which plainly declare, and most evidently set forth, how Christ in his Ministry, when he was upon Earth, did most chiefly direct unto the Ministration of the Spirit of Truth, which was then yet to come; and that they might not run to teach others (as many do now) before they had received the Spirit of Truth in themselves, by and with that to be led into all Truth, but might receive the Power of Truth in themselves, from the Life thereof, to convert others into the same; therefore said he fur∣ther, after he was risen again, But tarry ye in the City of Jerusa∣lem, until you be enducd with Power from on high, Mark 24. 4. so that though they had seen his Body before, and had now seen him after his Resurrection, yet that and all the rest was not enough without the Power and the Spirit, which was to come, which they were to wait for: And so, now men should tarry, wait and stand still to see the Salvation of God, and until they receive the Spirit; for it is the Spirit, (not the Body) which search∣eth all things, and sheweth plainly of the Father. And by this before-written in short, I have a little endea∣voured to shew unto the meek and single-hearted, That Moses, when he was upon the Earth, directed unto Christ; As in these words, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, Deut. 18. 15. And Christ, when he was upon Earth, directed unto the Spirit, which was to come, in the like words, saying, These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the Comforter, which is the holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, John 14. 25, 26. And then, what if I did write after the manner of men, and say, If Moses were now upon the Earth, and Christ in his own Body upon the Earth; and Moses with all his Priests, Tythes and Offerings, and Religion, which discovers sin, but makes nothing perfect, which Paul profited much in; if he, I say, should com∣mand and exhort all People under his Ministry, to go to Christ, and hear him.
And if Christ were now upon Earth, and notwithstanding his outward Miracles, Circumcision, Baptism, Supper and Death, yet he should command and exhort all (that come through the Law or Ministration of Moses unto him) to look, and tarry, and wait for another Comforter, that they might receive the Spirit in them, and say unto them, that that should teach them all things, and lead them into all Truth. Then whether or no, People were to continue following Moses Priests, with their Tythes and long Prayers, and still be seeking the Law at their Mouth, or to come to Christ, to seek the Gospel? for Moses himself did not say, that they should seek the Gospel at the Priests Mouth: And then, when did the Priests ever preach the Gospel? And then, whether those obey not Moses, who leave the Priests and come to Christ (the Light?) And whether such, when they are come to Christ, should alwayes be looking and following after Water, Baptism and outward Supper, or tarry and wait to receive the Spirit within them? And then, which of these now, should all People that profess Christ, be led by in these dayes, either Moses, or the Person of Christ, or the Spirit of Truth? And, whether such as have re∣ceived, and are truly indeed led by his Spirit of Truth, and know that to be their Teacher, and follow it, and are ruled, go∣verned and guided by it, according to the command of Moses and Christ, do not hereby obey the command of Moses and of Christ, and fulfill their Doctrine? And whether any other People or Professors whatsoever, do obey the command of Moses and Christ, but only such? And whether this be not a thing of great Concernment to be known and learned by all that profess Chri∣stianity? But why then do People follow these Priests of England any longer, which are contrary to Moses, and also to Christ, who have no Store-houses, but suffer the Poor to want within and without, and the Widdow and Stranger ready to perish, and moreover devour, and can never have enough of the Spoil of other mens Goods? And why do others dispute about, and talk of the Body so much, which they know not? And is it not better to be silent,
and know the true God and Jesus Christ, who dwells in his Peo∣ple, and the Spirit of Truth, which he requires in the inward parts, and to feel after God, even the Life in themselves, because the Apostle said, They were saved by his Life, being before reconci∣led by his Death, Rom. 5. 10. And until the Life came, there were many things which they were not saved from, and the Death which reconcileth was passed through, and the Life was received again to save and justifie. And why then are People so much busied about that which was before the Reconciliation (and so therein much short of the Life) and for outward Bread, Wine and Water? Are not these things which are seen? And are not the things that are seen Temporal? But Christ the true Prophet being come, of whom Moses did write, who is the end of the Law, and so the end of that Mini∣stry, whereby that is done away for the weakness and unprofi∣tableness thereof, and Christ coming after John, of whom John bare witness, that he was before, and greater, and came after him; and Christ having finished that which he himself came to do; and likewise so largely and often exhorted, to wait for another Comforter, even the Spirit. Then what Ministration is it that now standeth and remaineth, which is according both to Moses, Christ, and the holy Scriptures? And what Ministration is to be expected or waited for, but the Ministration of the Spirit? And whether all they be not compassed about with a Cloud of Error, who are uphold∣ing that Ministry of the Law, (or a worse) which Christ is the end of, and the Apostles said was done away; and likewise such as are upholding and keeping up that which Christ said he had finished? And whether the upholding of such things now, be not quite opposite both to Moses, Christ and Scriptures? And being that Moses, nor indeed his true Ministers of the Law, are not upon Earth, neither that Body of Christ, (which by the Professors was murthered at Jerusalem) visibly to be seen upon Earth; Then what was it that those have to follow, who have not received the Spirit to be led by? and if they will say, They have the Writings of Moses and the Words of Christ: I say, if that be all, then they that forsook and denyed Christ had more
then them; for they had the Words from his own Mouth, which was Spirit and Life, and yet they understood not; (and then what do those understand, who have not so much as they had?) therefore after he had suffered and rose again, he opened their Understandings. And so, what is all their Religion worth, who are not come to the Spirit? And whether Moses Ministration being ended by Christ, and Christ also having finished his Work, are not all People in the first place now to wait for the Spirit, and to re∣ceive the Spirit by it, then to be led into all Truth; and so being first led into the Truth, then in the same Truth to worship God in the Spirit, who is a Spirit? And whether there be now any true Worship standing which God accepteth, but only this? And whether this alone be not agreeable to Moses, Christ and Scrip∣tures? And then, whether all other Worship now upheld, be not contrary to this true Worship of God, and contrary to Moses, Christ and Scriptures; and indeed chiefly opposite to the Spirit of God, whereby he is grieved? And if so, whether all such Worship, Way, Practice, Performances, Duties and Ordinances (so called) be not better left undone, than perform∣ed, until God's Spirit be received to guide therein? Thirdly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit, which abideth forever. Moses and his Ministry were visible, and Christ in the form of a Servant (and so like unto Moses) was visible, and so was his Miracles, and that which is visible to the Natural Eye, the Carnal Mind can come to profess, and contend about, but the blessed Eye, which God openeth with the Light, cometh to see, the one done away, and the other finished by Christ the Light and Life. And this Spirit is that which first moved, and yet moveth, and moved unto, and led through the visible Ministration; and this Spirit is invisible, as it is written, The Invisible only Wise God, whom no Eye of Flesh hath seen, or can see, and this moving in∣visible Spirit of God, which is without limit or end, is that which all People should be led unto, by all its outward visible
Appearances, Ministrations and Dispensations, and this Spirit was that which gave forth and ordained the Ministration of the the Law, which was glorious in its time, though to be done away; but how much more glorious is the Ministration of that Spirit of Life it self, from which the Ministration of the Law came, which Spirit abideth forever? And the second Adam is made a quick∣ning Spirit, and the Spirit, which is the Word, was with God, and was God, before the Body of Flesh was made, and that Spirit abideth forever, as it heard out of the Law, He shall abide for∣ever; and this is that which ever liveth to intercede. And this forever blessed invisible Spirit was before time, and is to be when time shall be no more, and is without limit, an Eter∣nal lively substance, giving Life from it self, and secretly cover∣ing it self from the carnal part of man, not seen nor understood, but by such as by its secret motions come to be led to see through that which shadows it forth, and by the Image, Form, Shadow or Figure, to discern the substance, which is the Life, where Immortality dwelleth; for in the most innermost and secrets of all, is the Life of all, being covered over with that in which it lies; through the which it breaking forth in any discovery of it self, is that whereby the Beholders might be drawn through the discovery to it self, which in the discovery broke forth; for the discovery was still too short of that from whence it came, and that which was discovered forth in any Shadow, Form or Image, was not to be idolized nor set up, for the very thing or substance of Life, from whence it proceeded; and herein hath been much mistake by such who came not by that which opened in the Visibles, to that from whence it came, in that to have their Understandings opened, and thereby to be made sensible of that which is Eternal, by it to be brought in, where its indwellings abide forever, whose breakings forth in the visible (which was to draw to that invisible) refreshed the Soul invisibly, in an un∣expected time; but being (after) sought for in the Visibles (and not in the Eternal) with-draws it self out of the Visibles, and out of the sight and reach of that which seeks it there, that there∣by that which is to live forever with it, may come through all that which it appeared in, unto the very thing and invisible Sub∣stance it self, which is the Life of all, and the true center of the
living Motion, which moveth of it self, and gave forth all things good, as they proceeded from it, by virtue of its gradual and various Motions; and this being come, openeth it self in them that find it, and live therein; and this maketh Darkness Light before the People whose dwelling is with God, and the crooked comes to be made straight by the thing it self, and dark Sayings of old come to be opened, and secret things revealed. But to write more plain, for the sake of the weak, of this glo∣rious indwelling Spirit, which in the fulness of time cometh forth in Flesh, laying hold of the Seed of Abraham, the most glorious appearance that ever was, being thus appeared was the express Image of God, who dwelleth in his People, whose Bodies are Flesh and earthly Tabernacles; but by the operation of the san∣ctifying cleansing Spirit, which the Father sendeth, are made fit Habitations of God, and so Co-heirs with Christ, and Members of his Body, Flesh and Bones, which Spirit quickneth to God; and being thus received and obeyed, is felt to live forever, though the shadowings forth of it be done away; and this is Eternal, and never endeth, but abideth with such forever, and the Mini∣stration of it is Life it self to the Soul, and more to be valued and desired than all that ever was seen before it. And as the Lord took off that Spirit which was upon Moses and put it upon his Brethren, the Elders of Israel, whereby they might rule and judge with him; so saith Christ, The Father shall take off mine, and give unto you, even of that Spirit of Love, Life, Power, Valour and Virtue, which was upon and in him (that was like unto Moses) is ministred into, and put upon such as are truly his Brethren and Friends, whereby him with they (thus gifted, sanctified and qualified) judge the World; for all Judg∣ment is committed to the Son; and of that which the Son hath (and is committed to him) doth the Father give unto his Members: And so, from Christ the Head, they come to receive Power over the World, and its Way, Worship and Fashions, and over Un∣clean Spirits. And that is an Unclean Spirit which will lead into any Sin, and it is an unclean Spirit in which sin standeth, and which pleadeth for the continuance and upholding of that which is unclean, and that is of the World, which the Saints judge. And as those Elders of Israel (who were of the Church in the
Wilderness) were not made fit to judge nor rule in outward mat∣ters by all the writings and words of the Law (though received by disposition of Angels) until the Lord himself took off that Spirit which was upon Moses and put upon them. So those that profess to be Elders in the Church now, or any other Person whatsoever, are much less made fit to rule or judge in spiritual matters, by all the reading and professing Moses wri∣tings and Christs words, and the rest of the holy Scriptures (though they were given by the Inspiration of God) until the Lord take off that Spirit, which was upon and in Christ (who is like unto Moses) and give unto, and pour it upon, and mini∣ster it unto them. And this is done in Gods way (which is se∣cret) and time (which is in his own hand) to those whom he accounteth worthy thus to Honour, and who truly wait for it, as a Wayfaring man for a Resting place, and as a Captive for Deliverance. And though Christ (after his Resurrection) said, All Power in Heaven and in Earth is given unto me, go ye therefore and Teach; yet they were to tarry until they had the Power in themselves; and when that was come, which they were to tarry and wait for, then with that they went and taught the Nations, from the sen∣sible feeling of that which taught them how to teach, and all things else, when the same Spirit and Power was upon them, which was before committed unto him; and so the coming forth of it from him into them, and filling them therewith, was to them in that work of the Ministry most effectual, like as the Virtue going forth of Christ healed the Woman; so the Power and Vir∣tue of the holy Spirit coming forth from Christ, being sent of the Father, and received by the Disciples (who with much desire waited for that) impowered them to do that which before they were commanded to do, after they were endued with Power (or had the Power in them) And so, what they were commanded to do, they were to wait to receive Power in themselves, from God to perform; and Christ did intend to give them Power to do that which he commanded: And as he commanded them to go and teach, he also required them to tarry (and so not to go) until they had received Power so to do; and so it was the Power of the holy Ghost in them which made them Ministers; and these were,
and such are truly Ordained Ministers: And after they had re∣ceived Power from on high, even the Spirit (or Life) of Truth, and were filled therewith, and so had it in them, then they went to do that which was commanded them; then they went to teach the Nations, and converted Thousands, and turned Sinners, and brought Souls to God, and then they were called Christians, and then were People brought to be of the true Church, which Christ buildeth upon, that which flesh and blood reveal∣eth not. And this is the entrance into the Church of God, 2 Thes. 1. 1. the receiving of the Spirit, and in this God is worshipped, and not else; for this hath excluded all other Worship, and those only are the true Worshippers, who come in thus by the Door, which is Christ, the Light and Spirit of Truth, sent into the Heart from God. And if all the prudent learned Divines (so called) in Europe, or all, or any of the wisest Orthodox men in any other Quarter of the whole World, can prove (by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament) any other true Worship of God (who is a Spirit) now extant among men, and to be performed (especi∣ally among them called Christians) with acceptance to God, but only that which the Spirit of Truth leadeth such unto, as receive it; then let them bring it forth that we may see it, and prove it by plain undeniable Truth of Scripture; or otherwise I shall look upon their Proofs, Words, Ways, Actions, Practices, Perfor∣mances, Duties and several Worships as things of no value. Or if there be any other entrance into the true Worship of God than this Spirit that God sendeth (or the Light which lead∣eth to it) or if there be any other Worship which God doth or will accept to be after this, spoken or prophesied of in the Scrip∣tures of Truth, whereby this shall ever be done away, or ended from being the true, only, and alone Worship of God, whilst men have a being upon Earth, then let the wisest of the Sons of men bring it forth, and produce there strong reasons therein, that we may plead together, and that the entrance into, and the true Worship it self, of the only true invisible God, may be declared over all the World, for the satisfaction of every tender Heart concerning this.
For this I am satisfied in, that Christ Jesus (who is the end of the Law, and who finished his work, when he was upon Earth) is made a quickning Spirit, and is the Way and Truth of Life, which bringeth into the Worship of God, and he is the begin∣ing and the end, and he leadeth to the beginning of Gods Wor∣ship, and he is the end and the Rest of all the faithful, in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen; and without him all is as no∣thing, and all that come before him are Thieves and Robbers, and he it is that abideth a Priest forever, and his Spirit of Truth is it which all People and Professors whatsoever, should first wait to receive, thereby to be led into that true Spiritual Wor∣ship which alone God accepteth, lest they and their Worship and Building fall together, in a day when there is none to deliver. And then thus I will Query; If Christ own dear Disciples, who had forsook all and followed him, (not Priest or Baptists) did not come to receive this Spirit, by hearing all the words which he he spoke unto them, but by waiting after the words were ended? Then whether those that have not forsaken all (nor so much as the Worlds fashions) do now come to receive the Spirit by Reading, Hearing or Professing the same words of Christ, now written, or any other part of Scriptures? Or, whether a Proud man hath received this Spirit, or a Lyar, or a Prophane person, or any Wise or Prudent man whatsoever, by any means or way of his? And whether any such ever did, have, can, or may by any industry, or other way or means attain to this Spirit which leadeth in the true Worship of God, but as it is freely given forth from God? And then, whether all people are not to be led by that Spirit (which God freely giveth) into the Worship of God; because Christ said, The Spirit should lead, which indeed doth lead into all Truth, and nothing else doth so? And they that have not received this from God to lead them, are not yet come to be led by that which the Sons and Children of God were and are led by. And the Ministration of the Spirit, which all are now to be taught by, is inwardly to be known, in the most nearest, secret, invisible manner, and is more out of the sight, Comprehension and reach of mans Wisdom, than any other Ministration, and
it is given forth from the clear Fountain it self, unto the Souls satisfaction of man, when he is come to the end of words; or ha∣ving heard much, or all the words that can be spoken of it, re∣maineth unsatisfied, in a restless longing desire to find, receive, feel and enjoy the thing it self, which the words declared of; and that which satisfieth the true thirsting Soul, comes clearly from God to the refreshing of the inward parts of man, and fil∣ling of the empty, barren, hungry Spirit, which cannot be sased without Gods indewllings; and thus the Disciples were led along, and at last, in a foolish way to the great Professors, they waited among them in Jerusalem, and the Lord had regard unto them, and sent his own Spirit unto them, and then they were filled with the Holy Ghost. And the secret invisible hand of God, whose Power was and is felt in my heart, having out of the sight of flesh and blood, in the hidden counsel of his secret Will, led me by the vertue of the operation and drawings thereof, through those things, which thereby I come to leave behind, and to receive, and feel that which now goeth before, and is my Leader in whose Cove∣nant of Life Eternal, my Soul is now satisfied; and so by good ex∣perience of the Lords leading, and from an experimental know∣ledge and sensible feeling, and present enjoyment of the incomes of the Spirit of Truth and Life, which filleth the inward parts with the holiness of it self, and giveth power to do the things required before of God, even from the right and good under∣standing thereof, is this written; That where it meets with the like condition in a weay Traveller, it may answer its own, and be helpful to the weak and feeble, that such may not give over pressing forwards, nor faint in their long Travail, though many Mountains on which they did nourish themselves for a time, will not yield them Bread now; yet that they may with me, and the rest of the Followers and Friends of Christ (past and present) alwayes continue following the Spirit as it leads, until the inward man be filled therewith; and so power and strength from God come to be known, and received in every particular. For thus it is with Christs Followers now, they are not satis∣fied until they are filled with that which they heard of, and their Souls thirsted after, and so it was with them then, and they
were filled with what they wanted before; and then, from that which they were filled with, they spoke forth; and so they did teach the Nations, and brought People under the Power of God, and baptized them into that, and dipt them into the Name of the Father, and brought them under that which saveth from Sin, and plunged them into the holy Spirit; and as they taught they did this, baptizing as they did teach, and plunging them (as their Do∣ctrine went forth) into that which washeth and purifieth the Conscience from the Filth and Guilt of Sin, of which the outward Baptism was a Figure of this which saveth; and so their Doctrine was from an inward Life, and proceeded from that which was invisible, & so reached to that which wanted Life in the Hearers, and so brought up the Power of God over them, and them under it, and into it; for the Word is [into] and they were to bring People Into the Name, (not Water) and they were to bring or baptize them Into the Name, as they did teach, Go ye and Teach, Bapti∣zing Into; Baptizing is in the Present Tense, when they did teach; And so here the Spiritual & Inward Baptism goes alog with the preaching of the Word of Life, which is inward, and brings man to an inward enjoyment of God, being baptized Into his Name, which is a strong Tower which preserveth from the Power of the Devil: And we all who are brought into this, and are come in here, are all by one Spirit baptized into one Body, and so worship God in the Spirit, having the Heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience, by the washing of Regeneration in the Ministra∣tion of the Gospel of Peace, whereby there is a drawing nigh to God, (being brought into his Name) and a free access to the Throne of that Grace, which saveth from, and out of all filthi∣ness of Flesh and Spirit. H. S.
THE VISION OF Humphry Smith, Which he saw concerning LONDON In the 5th Moneth, in the Year 1660. being not long after the King came in. The Prophet speaking of the pouring forth of the Spirit in the latter days, saith, That then the Young Men shall see Visions, Joel 2. 28. And the wise King said, Where there is no Vision the People Pe∣rish, Prov. 29. 18. And the true Minister of Christ said, I will come to Visions and Revelations of the Lord, 2 Cor. 12. 1. Concerning the great City of LONDON. I Beheld all her Waters, which belonged to her frozen up, and that exceeding hard, and the Vessels which went upon them, so that I and others passed over her Waters without the least danger, & over the greatest Vessels which had carried her Merchandize; for all was frozen with a mighty Freezing, where∣by all her goodly Merchandize were stopt, and her mighty swift
Waters were turned into a mighty think frozen Ice, which stood still, so that her pleasant Streams ran not. And as for the City her self, and her Suburbs, and all that be∣longed to her, a Fire was kindled therein, but she knew not how, even in her goodly places, and the kindling of it was in the Foun∣dations of her buildings, and there was none could quench it, nei∣ther was there any able, and the burning thereof was exceeding great, and it burned inward in a hidden manner, which cannot be expressed; and the Fire consumed Foundations which the City stood upon, and the tall buildings fell, and it consumed all the lofty things therein, and the fire searched out all the hidden places, and burned most in secret places, but the Consumation was ex∣ceeding great, where with it consumed. And as I passed through her streets, I beheld her state to be very miserable, and very few were those that were left in her, who were but here and there one, and they feared not the Fire, neither did the burnings hurt them, but they were (and walked) as mourn∣ful dejected People, and the fire burned every where, so that there was no escaping of it; And thus she became a Desolation, and as an Astonishment; for the burning was suffered of God for her chastizement, and could never be enched nor overcome; and in the midst of her Waters was the Vessel of her Merchandize frozen up, that none could move it, and there were none that could stop the burning; and the Fire consumed all things, both Stone and Timber, and it burned under all things, and under all Foun∣dations, and that which was lifted up above it fell down, and the Fire consumed it, and the burning continued; for though the Foundation was burnt up, and all the lofty part brought down (by the fire) yet there was much old stuff, and part of broken de∣solate Walls and Buildings in the midst, which the fire continued burning against; and that which was taken, as to make use of, which yet escaped the fire, became useless in mans hand, as a thing of nought. And the Vision hereof remained in me as a thing that was secretly shewed me of the Lord. And now let her Wise men find out the matter, and her Prudent men read, and her Divines (so called) interpret the Vision (and let her know, that her day is at hand) and let every one of them look to their own ways. And as for thee, O City of London, thy Sin hath been exceeding
grievous, and thy Iniquities beyond measure; Who can number thy daily Transgressions, or set before thee the multitude of thy Abominations? Oh! thy wayes have grieved the Lord, and thy works have oppressed the Just, and the Lord will surely plead with thee, whom thou hast long rebelled against, and walked in thy Pride, and nourished thy self in Voluptuousness, as a Beast for the slaughter, and in Arrogancy hath thy steps been found; Oh! thy Heart hath been defiled, and thy wayes are wayes of Grievousness, and thy paths are polluted before the Lord, and thou hast not done the thing that is just in his sight, but hast chosen thy own Wayes, and trusted in thy own Wisdom. Take heed now therefore, O City of London, for God will be too strong for thee, and thy strength shall fall before him, and thou must come to an Account for thy Deeds, and then where will be thy Refuge, or what shall be thy Shelter? Will thy Mul∣titude of men deliver thee from God, or the Greatness of thy strength prevail against the Almighty? If so, then mayest thou stand in thy Wayes, O City of London! but if not, thy Misery will be great; and who shall bemoan thee in that day, or pity thee in the time of thy Distress? Forasmuch as thou hast refused the counsel of the Lord, and rejected the voice of his Servants in the midst of thee, and hearkened not to his Word in thy own Bowels, but also slighted the many VVarnings of the Lord by his Servants, who were sent of him in love to thee, that thou mightest come to serve him, and not thy own Pleasure, proceeding on from Year to Year, like a monstrous Woman, who regardeth not the Voice nor Person of Husband nor Friend: Oh! what shall be said unto thee? Must thou needs be left for Desolation? And must thou be left as a Woman forsaken? Will thy Lovers help thee in the Day of Trouble? or thy delightsom Pleasures pre∣serve thy Heart from Judgment, or thy glorious Riches hide thee from the burning Torments? If thou lovest thy Wages of Va∣nity more than God, and thy Hearts lust more than thy Maker, and wilt not turn speedily from it to seek the Lord in thy Heart, then mayst thou post on (as thou art going) hastily to the Pit, and with much eagerness to the Gulf of Misery, where none can help thee: And then will thy Feasting be turned into Famine, thy Beauty into Dust, thy Glory into Shame, and thy Honour
into Contempt, as thou hast seen it come to pass upon others, whose Glory and Strength was as great as thine, by whom thou hast not taken warning by a thorow and speedy returning unto the Lord with all thy Heart. Therefore will God search thee and judge thee according to what is found in the midst of thee, and thou shalt be awakened in the day of God's anger, and be sensible of the Torment when it cometh: For though God hath also tryed thee, with giving thee thy Hearts desire, yet hast thou not been thereby humbled; and though the Lord hath visited thee in loving-kindness, yet hast thou walked loftily; nay, moreover thou hast taken occasion thereby to be the more exalted, and art going in the Steps of them that the Lord so lately (for such things) overturned be∣fore thee, that it cannot yet be forgotten; And dost thou or the Rules in thee think to establish your selves by acting such things, for which God overtured many mightier then you? Therefore, O City! think not to establish thy self by Blood, nor to be set∣led by way of Revenge; for though some men may have done some things unjust against some of you, (and others) so that God may justly by you scourge them sore for it; yet wherein you do it in the way of Revenge, or to Avenge your own cause, or to set up your selves in Self-ends, like them before you, therein God will also find out a Scourge for you. And this I have seen, that the Great men of the Earth stand in slippery places, and their great strength before the Lord is as Smoke before the Wind. My counsel is therefore, That thou fear the Lord, and turn from the Way thou art in; and let thy Judges know, that the Lord will judge them; and let thy Rulers understand, that the Lord will rule over their Strength and Wisdom; and let thy Teachers per∣ceive, that God is come to teach his own Children. And let the Kings Heart be upright before the Lord in this the day of his Tryal, and time of Visitation from God, (the shortness or length thereof being hid from him, over whom God ruleth as it pleaseth him) who is cutting his Work short in Righteousness: Therefore let all thy Inhabitants, O thou great City! from the highest to the lowest, take good heed unto their Wayes, and the Intents which are in them, for the Lord seeth the Secrets of all your Hearts. H. S.
ANd that thou mayst not altogether disesteem of this Vision concerning thee, and that thy Wise men may not esteem it as a thing of nought (which is published for thy good, and brought forth for thy Warning, and declared to set before thee thy state at hand, that thou mightest be warned before-hand, and come to find something in thy self, whereby thou mightst stand in the day of Tryal, and endure in the hour of Trouble, or other∣wise Gods Servants might seal up the Visions and Revelations of God in the Book of Secrets, and treasure them in the enlightned Chambers of the Heart, where God is revealing his Secrets to those that fear him) Therefore shall I write what hath been for∣merly shewed, most whereof being come to pass, and the rest hasteneth. In my former Vision, in the dayes of the former Rulers, I saw on a Hill many Trees together standing, which were both great and tall, but they were very old, and of a long standing, and many of their lofty Boughs were broken and battered, and many hanged downward, which pressed down the Trees, and they were old, withering and decaying, and had not grown a long time, and were but as a Wonder to the Beholders, though they had been of great account, and the chief Trees among (or over) the rest; and it was so, that I beheld them much even with ad∣miration, to see such Trees in such a state, which was more to this purpose than is here exprest; and I beheld until all these Trees were rooted up out of the Earth, and so overturned every one, and their dead Bodies lay in a confused manner, and were fallen one upon another, and the Ground upon which they stood was broken up, and then there was some room and liberty, and Light came in, and I walked and looked every way, both upon the Light, and the great Desolation of these great Ones. The Interpretation whereof may be read by such as can but see. And though this great overturning befell those great, tall and strong Trees, and that light came into that Ground, over which those fruitless Trees stood, yet I beheld round about, and near unto it much Briars, Brambles and Thorns in abundance, which covered the Earth; and it was such Rubbish, that it was never
like to be fit for any thing but to have a Fire kindled among it; and it was so thick and so strong that there was no passing in nor through it, but only where the narrow Way was, and there also those Briars would catch on every side; and he that passed through must stoop very low. And what those Briars and Thorns were, let those Brambles read, who covered the Earth with their Mul∣titudes, in Raging, Swearing, Cursing, Shouting, Roaring and Drinking the Health (as they call it) of their King at his coming. And near unto the place of the Destruction of those great Trees, was there a Child in great Desolation, in a close place, where it had been a long time, and was not like yet to be relea∣sed, but remained in want and misery, which mine Eye pitied, and in Irons, and my Heart was sadned for it, and the more be∣cause none came to visit it, nor succour it; for it was in a deso∣late place, and unseemly, and few had regard unto it, and yet there was some hopes it might be delivered. And this was a true resemblance of the state of the Seed of God in all the World. And in plainness concerning Oliver Cromwell, and his Son Ri∣chard, (late called) Protectors, the Vision from God was shewed to me, (before the downfall of either of them) thus: And I beheld a great and mighty Tree, much bigger than ever I saw before, and appearing without Sap or Virtue in it, or Leaf, Bough or Branch upon it, (much less Fruit) and the top of it was broad, (being all big) much like unto the top of Pauls Steeple in London; and close by this great old Tree, grew up another Tree, as out of his Root, and belonged to him, but not both in one Body, though very near together, and stood both upon one Foundation, and this was as a little stripling Tree, which also was without Leaves or Branches, or any thing to bear Fruit, so that I admired to see it so with the young Tree; for I looked for Branches or Leaves, but there were none. And whilst I was beholding of them, a Man being sent came in much haste, with an Ax in his hand, to cut down the great mighty old Tree, which seemed strange to me, that one man should adventure upon so great a work, to cut down such a Tree as that; for the lower part of the Tree was exceeding big, and almost as broad upon the Earth as half the height; so that I thought he had need of three or more to help him, and that one
man could scarce cut him down with one Ax, if he stood hewing all his Life time: But I much more admired to see the Confi∣dence of the man that came with speed with his Ax, who made no stop at all, because of the greatness of him, nor any thing else, but as soon as ever he could get to him smote with the edge of his Ax, and struck between the Ground and the Tree, so that I soon perceived he intended to separate between the Tree and the Ground on which he stood; and the man in the might of his strength struck but three Blows in all, but he separated the Tree from the Earth on which he stood, and immediately the Tree fell with a mighty overthrow, and the Foundation of the Tree was altogether rotten, and not one Root at all, but where the Root should be was Rottenness, and the Earth shook at his fall, and many Great men stood amazed, and fear seized on many, because of the great sudden fall thereof. And as this great Tree fell, I saw under the Foundation of the young tall Tree that stood near the other, and it was much like to fall presently after, and was almost down on the one hand, and then almost down on the other, and yet it recovered and stood up for a time, having no Root but Rottenness: And the great Tree fell from him on the one side, and the Earth parted from him on two sides more, so that only upon one side in four (or less) the Earth cleaved to him, and he being slender and tall without Root, was not like long thus to stand; neither did Richard. And I likewise beheld many more smaller Trees, and the man with his Ax in his Hand cut them all down at the Butt, somewhat above the Ground, and so left the Stumps in the Earth, and therefore it might be possible for them to grow up again: As some did come up again who were put down, but fell the second time through Disobedience. And after all this I beheld also many more Trees in abundance, yea, more numerous then the other, coming up out of the Earth, and covering the face thereof, and growing up apace, which were not yet ready to be cut down; and I saw the man with the Ax in his hand, standing still for a time (having cut all the other) until those should be ready to be cut down; and he waited till the time came, and was in a readiness with his Ax in his hand ready to strike, when those abundance of Trees should come up
to their growth, which hastened. And let those who are now come up read this, and let the whole City of London take heed (as I said before) and Repent with speed, and turn to the Lord, whose Servant I am, called. Humphry Smith. Postscript. WHen those People to whom God gave his Ordinances and his Statutes had long resisted and grieved his Spirit in them, who said, I am God, and not man, the holy One in the midst of thee, and had also refused plain Instructions; then the Lord sent them the Prophet Isaiah, who said, With stammering Tongues and other Eips will I speak unto this People; and for a Sign he was sent to walk Naked among them. And the Prophet Ezekiel was sent with that which they might esteem dark Visions and foolish Signs (which were many) and hard Sayings. And Jeremiah he lamented over them; and all the Lords Prophets proclaimed against their Priests and Leaders of them, who caused them to Err; and yet would they not be warned, nor their Priests leave preach∣ing Peace unto them, nor they leave following their Priests until they had crucified the Just, and denyed him that is the Light, who saveth his People from their Sins; and Jerusalem became a Heap, and a Desolation, and an Astonishment; and so both Priests and People went into Destruction and Captivity together. And thy Sins, O London! may be equalized with hers, and are as many, and as grievous; and that thou mayst a little the better under∣stand my Vision concerning thee, therefore have I written these latter things that concerned others, which if thou understand not, that which concerns thee is more Mysterious.
To the great Flock of the Im∣prisoned Servants of GOD Almighty. THe Lord is become our Portion, and the God of Jacob the Lot of our Inheritance, even the God of the whole Earth, whose Throne is in the Heavens, & his Dwelling in the Hearts of the Humble, before whom the least Lamb of his Fold is more delightsom than the beautifulst Flower of the Grass of the Field, and of more value than the Fowls of the Air, or many Sparrows, which are according to his Providence; the Mystery of whose Will lodgeth in the secret Chambers of his Wisdom, whose Wayes are unsearchable, and his goings in the deep; none can fathom the unsearchable Fountain of his Good∣ness, nor find out the utmost of the Intents of his Heart, but as Love springs up with healing Oyl, discovering a measure of the Motions of his Spirit, whereby something of his Mind is known, who inhabiteth Eternity, and is dreadful in Holiness, severe in his Judgments, clear in his Love, free in his Mercy, bountiful in his Goodness, large in his fatherly loving Kindness, wonderful in his Operation, pitiful to the Meek, gentle to the Upright in Heart, rewarding the greatest of his Adversaries according to the fruit of their own Ways, and altogether Righteous in all his Doings, from whom the Upright may certainly expect a plenti∣ful Reward, and all his Servants the Wages of Righteousness, and every one of the least of his Children a certain Inheritance with the sanctified in the Kingdom that fadeth not away. Even this is the Lord our Righteousness, whom the World knoweth not, who also appeared unto them, who were truly our Fathers in the dayes of old, who is the same both in Wisdom, Strength and Power as ever he was, and it is he that found us in the waste howling Wilderness, and tossed to and fro with the unset∣led
Waves, on which the Whore sate, that brought into Drunk∣enness, and with his holy Arm did he bring us out of the Miery Clay, and my Soul from under the deep Waters, and set our feet upon the certain Rock of Ages, that Men, Laws nor Decrees can never remove, and he hath been unto us a Shield, and will certainly be an exceeding great Reward, or a Reward that shall exceed and surmount all the contrary: What shall I say? what he will be unto the faithful can never be uttered, what he hath been in his Power, Wisdom and Love to us, we have seen, and what he is, let all my Brethren feel, and this we are most assured∣ly assured of, that he is become ours, yea, even our own, and we have a part in him that is true, our Covenant with him stands in the Power of his Life, which is endless, and he hath bought us with the price of that which puts away the Sin; and certainly I cannot but glorifie him even in the Body, Soul and Spirit, and no other Lover doth my Soul desire, nor a better Shepherd can Israel ever find, nor a more wise, stronger and tender Father can Children ever have, nay, he himself (as I have said) is become the Lord our Righteousness, and the portion of our Cup, in which Salvation standeth, of which we daily drink, and know it to be the Cup of blessing, and can truly say, our lot is fallen in a good ground. I can truly say, my Soul cleaveth unto the Lord, who bringeth Deliverance, and hitherto the Lord hath helped us, and hath done greater things than could have been by man expected; and what, now though there be a Sea to pass through, and Floods of ungodly men to get beyond, shall we therefore be discouraged, or shall we murmur because of the length of time, or be discon∣tented when the Lord brings his People into Tryals, for a two fold end or purpose, as in himself, that is to say, For the proving and humbling of his People, that he may do them good, or much more good than he hath done at their latter end; And for the drawing forth of the Cruelty and Tyranny of his Enemies to the utmost, which was in them before, or grounded in their Hearts, that their Sin being finished, he might destroy them forever, and overturn them, so that they never rise again? Or shall we be unsatisfied because the People of the Land of Darkness do shut us up out from amongst them, by rea∣son of the dread and trouble that is upon them? Or shall we not
be contented if the Lord should suffer us to be deprived of all things but himself, that we might have none other thing to have unity with, but only him alone? surely this would be his Love, and great would be the Unity between such and him! What if we went out as Jacob did, and left all behind us, even Goods, and Lands, and Fathers House, as did our Father Abraham? And what if there should be a Pursuer, like Saul and David, yet we know the Dominion belongs to the faithful Seed, though in ma∣ny Tribulations, even to us the seed of Abraham, according to the Promise, whose seed was led out of the place of Bondage, as it is this day? And what if we had none but him, even the Lord our God, to take care for our Bodies (who causeth the Rayment not to wax old, and the Widdows Oyl to encrease, and gave Bread from Heaven in the needful time,) yet should it go well with us; and though we had none other to trust unto, then he who delivered his People after the Decree was sealed for their Destruction in the days of Mordecai (who could not bow, though the King had commanded it) yet should we not be discouraged; and though we had none other to cry in secret unto, but him that preserved Daniel in praying to his God (though his Life thereby was in great Jeapordy, and the Decree of the King broken) yet might we have quietness and peace; yea, much better it is to enjoy the Lord, than life it self, and the lowliness of his Countenance, than earthly Treasure: Nay, truly let them take what they are for, and their Minds in, so we may but enjoy the Treasures of Life Immortal, and the Crown of Everlasting Peace, which fa∣deth not away. Dear Friends and Lambs of the Morning, and Flock of the Fold of God, in the suffering state, through which the Everlasting Life doth spring, when I am declaring of the unutterable Goodness and transcendent infinite Loving-kindness, of the Lord, I am sometimes rather willing to be swallowed up in that infiniteness of it self, than to be declaring of that which in it self can never be uttered (as it is) and when I enter into the Chambers of secrecy, where the hidden Wisdom is treasured up, I have been even ready to shut up all the outgoings, and to dwell in the inward Chambers of the secret Closets, where the unutterable Treasures are trea∣sured up abundantly forever, and even say in my Heart unto the
yet scattered Ones, Oh! that ye would come and see my Dwelling, and find out my Resting place, and abide in the beautiful Habitation, and rest in the munition of Rocks: Oh! that ye would come and drink of the everlasting Streams, and be satisfied with the Springs of Virtue, that your Bones might be full of Marrow, and the inside of your dwel∣lings beautiful, so shall the Lord delight in you forever; and though the World hate, yet he will love, and though Relations may deny, yet he will own, though Riches may take themselves Wings, yet he will never forsake; nay, though mortal Parents might cast off, yet then the Lord will not cast off, but receive; and though Wives or Husbands may break their Promise, and so be without natural affection, yet the Lord will never break his Covenant with his People, for that shall last for ever∣more; and though Children might for sake their Parents, the Lord will be more unto them than ten Sons. So that I say again, were I in one day bereaved of all, and seperated from my Fathers Children, which of all outward things are most dear unto me, yet enjoying the Lord, and his Presence being with me, in whose Covenant I am with all the flock of God, in the invisible Life, so should it be well with me, and so may it be well with all you, as ye are faithful to God in the suffering state, and so enjoy his Presence; thus al∣so with you for evermore may it go well. Shall I now therefore return to Exhortation and Admonition, with desires of tender Love towards you, that you all in patience may stand and look to the Lord, whom we have, and have none other in Heaven to hear our Cry, nor in Earth that truly com∣miserateth our Cause, nor hath Power like him to help. Dear Friends, he knoweth our Intents, and seeth how it is with us; he hath given to many of us an heart to say, Lord, if thou shouldst suf∣fer us to perish, we will not leave thee; and whatever become of us, we dare not deny thee before men; for thou hast called us, and we are thine, even thine own, whom thou hast chosen: Let your desires be forever thus unto the Lord, and wait upon him continually, and let your Eyes be more upon the Lord than upon those things which in this day of Tryal are suffered to come to pass by him, which he can also turn for his own Glory, and your Everlasting Comfort. And Friends, this know, that as your Minds are upon, and much caring how to preserve the temporal things, the weight of them will lie upon you, and stop the Springs of better Treasures,
but as your Minds are towards the Lord, a great case and satis∣faction will be come unto you. And Friends, Murmur not that this day is come, for it may be there was need of it, even amongst us, and it may be ye are more yet to be redeemed out of the earthly part and transitory things, and question not but this will be for good; and as for Tryals, since this cloud was up, I have even drunk deep with you of the inward sufferings, yea, more than is convenient to mention, but the Lord hath kept my feet up∣on the Rock, and with all the Upright I sing Praises to his Name. And now be tender one to another, you may read the Figure, God is bringing you near together, and Aegypt is thrusting you out, by reason of the Torment that is upon them, and a Land of Rest is before you, and from the presence of the Lord they can∣not Banish us, nay, nor what they would neither, for God is on our side, though they have yet something more to do; and when every mans Work is over, he shall certainly receive his Reward from God, either good or evil; and then, as the Apo∣stle saith of the Wicked, They shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Presence, 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. But Friends, it is safe for you all to dwell in your own Tents, and mind the Lord, and let your love be towards him above all things, and in all things that you do, wait to feel his Counsel and Guidance, and trust him forever, for great is the work of the Lord, yea, I have even looked for this day, that the Cry of the innocent may reach unto Heaven, and (as I have said) the sound thereof reach over Europe, that Kings may come to be crowned with Honour, and Judges decree Righteousness, and true Judgment may stream forth as Water, and Righteousness as a living stream, that Thousands, and Thousands of Thousands may slock to our Fold as Doves to the Windows, that the Nations of men may bow under the Scepter of Righteousness, and the Powers of Darkness shut up forever: Behold, O Friends! yea, stand still and see the fall of Babel, the Destruction of the Whore, and the Torment of the Beast; for though Hell hath enlarged her self, yet this we know, the Lord liveth, who scatters the Powers of Darkness: Oh! what more shall I say? who come to the
dwelling-place of its unutterable Power, may feel the unsearch∣able things of God. And Friends, let not the Enemy prevail through Unbelief, for there Israel fell in the days of old; and there is no greater danger than that of Unbelief: But consider, that you have some∣thing still to resist, and seldom ever more than now; and you have a spiritual Enemy to war with, which flyes not but as he is resisted; and in the time of your weakness and inward trouble is his time to prevail, if ever; and if thou canst stand then, full easie mayst thou walk, when Refreshings come, and with delight∣somness mayst thou persevere, when the Cloud is over; and this know, that a Storm lasteth but for a time, and Winter is but for a season, and the Night remains not always; nay, the four hun∣dred and thirty years had an end, and the Bounds of the Seas are set, and happy is he that always looketh unto him that ruleth over them; for though (when the Waves swelled) even the Disciples were ready to think he cared not if they perished, yet he intended better things for them; and when for the Life's sake they cryed unto him, he soon and easily abated the Rage both of Wind and Sea, and then the sweetness of a Calm is prized. Dear Friends, I need not open the Parable unto you, but even rather say, The Lord be with you, even every one of you beyond all that I can write, and the Lord strengthen you, and keep you stedfast in the Faith, and refresh your Souls, and minister more strength, virtue and comfort unto you all every where for evermore, Amen. This is chiefly intended for all the imprisoned Servants of God, and them yet at liberty, and to be read among them with a good Under∣standing, in that which gives it distinctly in the fear of God. Humphery Smith. Chalfont in Buckinghamshire, the 13th of the 11th Mon. 1660.
To Nw-Englands pretended CHRISTIANS, Who contrary to Christ have destroyed the Lives of men. Having seen something of yours, called by you an Appendix, where∣by you would justifie your selves in Whipping, Imprisoning, Ba∣nishing, Killing, and making Spoil of whole Families; I being weak of Body, and in Bed, the strength of the Lord arose in me, from the which was given forth that which followeth: THe Lord God will answer you with that which you shall never be able to resist, from the which you shall never be  to fly; neither shall your Coverings defend you, but God will visit in secret, and the Almighty will rain Snares upon you; and all your strong holds in one day (and that suddainly, in a moment) will the Lord God scatter and confound, with all your strong Reasons, and your Weapons which you have gathered together against the invisible God and his Ser∣vants, like your Fathers in the dayes of Old (Isa. 41. 21.) these with all your Weapons of War, against the Lamb and the suf∣fering seed, shall be broken in the midst of you, and Death will o∣vertake you, and Gods Righteous Judgments will enter within your dwellings, and a day of blackness from the Throne of God will come upon you, and his Anger with Bitterness will be pour∣ed forth upon you, as a mighty Storm, which which cometh on a suddain, and as a Whirlwind which none can stop, and as the mighty un∣merciful raging Waves of the Sea, which none is able to resist; even so shall the day of your Calamity come, which is hastning, as the lighting, whose breaking forth, all your fleshly Wisdom shall never be able to hinder.
Behold! I have heard a Voice of Terror from the Lord against your Unrighteous Proceedings, and the day of Gods Vengeance is in his heart; and who should stand to plead with him? Be∣hold! ye Thorns, the Lord our God is a consuming fire, and be∣fore him you cannot stand, for your Sins have reached up to Heaven, and your Iniquities are come before the most High, and your grievous blood-thirsty actions are spread over Nations, and Gods witness in thousands (who are not of us, but rather yet against us) do rise up in their hearts against you; and when you are awakned, you will be filled with Anguish, and a Cup of Astonish∣ment from the Righteous God of Truth, will be poured forth unto you; and as sure as you have thirsted after, and drunk deep of the Blood of Gods chosen, (though despised of men) so cer∣tain shall you have Blood to drink; and Trembling, Horror & A∣mazement will most absolutely come in that day, which approach∣eth as a Thief in the Night, and then shall your Bowels be rip∣ped open, and your inside Coverings broken, and then shall your Hearts be rent with Perplexity, and Amazement shall come over you as a Cloud of the Night, and the hand of the Almighty will find out your secret lurking places, and then shall ye know, that the Lord our God doth and will plead the Cause of his People, and avenge himself on his and their Enemies; and then shall ye know, that ye have risen up against the Lamb, who is some∣times silent from pleading his own cause, who though dumb as to answer the mighty Ones of the Earth, yet faithful in suffer∣ing, according to the will of him who ruleth over all; and then shall ye know, that though no answer at all were written unto your dark pretended Coverings, yet shall you then feel an answer near unto you, and the sound of Gods Terrible Voice shall be heard in the midst of you; and form the dreadful Noise of his War, shall you never be able to cover your selves with all your Writings, Printings nor Declarations, though never so strong from the prudency of the Earth, for God hath cast all that behind his back; and in the day at hand, shall you most absolutely come to know it so to be. For behold, my heart is indeed rent, and God hath opened in it the secret Counsel of his Will, and his Purpose concer∣ing you, whose Decree shall never be changed, which is sealed
against the evil doer: And  or Evil-doer, who have done worse then  selves a Reproach amongst me,  the Peo∣ple? O horrible and Wicked Crulty and Mercilss Tyranny which is found in the midst of you! Is this the fruit of your Professi∣on? And has the Spirit of Truth led you to do these things? Do not even the Nations stand and look at you? And do not the Upright in Heart mourn in secret because of your Sins? Ah! who could have believed that you would have done such things! And do you think now to stop the Mouthes of People by publish∣ing your strong Reasons? Nay, this is plain in my heart, that all whatsoever you Print, Publish or Declare, shall never give satisfaction to the meek just Principle of God, which remains in the Spirits of many Thousand Thousands in the Nations round about you: And if your called An Appendix, with the rest of your Writings, were never answered by us, and if we therein should lay our mouthes in the dust forever; yet this we know, that the holy One of Israel, the Righteous God of Truth will plead our cause, and execute Judgment in his fury, and avenge the Blood of his Saints, and help the man of low degree against him who is too strong for him; and to the Lord God of Righ∣teousness we commit our Cause, and the Innocency of our dear Brethren, and in Gods blessed will I rest, and am satisfied in respect of his love unto his Jewels, though but as Fools to the World, and in respect of his answering of you acording to the fruit of your own wayes. And behold! ye Children of men, I cannot but proceed to de∣clare unto you the Day which is near at hand, and warn you all to strip your selves from your coverings, and sit down, ye Peo∣ple, in Dust and Ashes, and confess your Iniquities in secret un∣to the Lord, before it be to late; for great is the Wo which is co∣ming upon you; and that which I have heard concerning you, is none other then a Voice of Terror: O the Trouble, Distress and Calamity that soundeth in my heart concerning you! and from the Lord God will it be poured forth, and exceeding deep shall you drink thereof; and this shall you know to be true, when the Whirlwind cometh from far, and the shadows of the Night
draw near, when no hiding place will be found for the Hypocrite, neither a refuge for the Evil doer. And then, as ye have not spared the despised of the World, so will the Lord cast upon you, and not spare. O the Bitterness and Unutterable Torments which will then come! but who a∣mongst you will believe these things, and who can entertain the Counsel of the Lord? And are not your hearts yet hardened against Reproof? And are not to be reproved for your Envy against Gods People? Nay moreover, are you not sometimes already reproved by him, who seeth in secret, and who search∣eth the Intents of the Heart, and maketh manifest unto man the Wicked Enterprises thereof, and overturneth the Counsels of the Wicked, but remembreth the Cause of the Needy, and pleadeth the Innocency of the Upright, in whose sight the Death of the Saints is precious, and who pleadeth their Cause in the day of Trouble, and will most certainly confound his Adversa∣ries, and scatter his Enemies as smoke is scattered with a migh∣ty Whirlwind; and in that day, where then will your place be found? And a seed there is which God will deliver from your hands, and preserve from the Blood-thirsty men, which shall grow up in the midst of you as a Lilly among Thorns, and Gods blessing shall be upon them, with whom my Life is: And as the latter gleaning in the time of Harvest, so shall the gathering of Gods Heritage be. And what you have done, will be for the advan∣tage of the suffering Seed, and for the Glory of God, and much for your disadvantage and eternal Shame, and endless Misery, if you repent not. And this you men of sin should know, that inas∣much as you have taken away the Life of Gods Creatures; and moreover, Unjustly by an Unrighteous Law destroyed the Lives of his Servants, therein may all men see, that you are contrary to Christ, and led by a Spirit opposite to him, who came not to de∣stroy mens Lives, but to save them. And what is here written need not hinder the moving of God in any of my Bretheren, his servants, in giving forth a more large Answer, according to the particulars written in your cal∣led Appendix, or to any other of your writings, the which you
may also expect; only this was in my heart, in which I have dis∣charged my Conscience; and so herein give forth my Mite a∣amongst the rest of my Brethren, by way of Declaration, and that from God. And by this it is my Souls desire, your hearts may be humbled, and truly rent, and broken for your own Iniquities, and that with speed, or otherwise Gods dreadful hand you cannot escape. And this is in faithfulness to God, and love to your souls, from a Friend thereof, called Humphry Smith. The 14th of the first Moneth, in the Year 1660. The Lamb & his Day PROCLAIMED. THe Kingdom of God is at hand, which comes not with Observation; Salvation is near unto all that will re∣ceive it; Redemption is coming in a time unexpected, and Deliverance in a way not known; as a Thief in the dark is the Heir come, whose Light out of Darkness is shining, and that which shineth out of Darkness, is it alone that giveth the know∣ledge of God, whom to know is Life eternal; and the bright∣ness of the Day of God is springing forth of Darkness, as the Morning-Sun after the Darkness of the Night; and glorious is this Day of the Revelation of God, to all them that have waited for his coming, who in the Life of his Power, through the Obedi∣ence in his Love, come to rejoyce in his Dominion, over all the Powers of Darkness forever, and sound forth the dreadful Day of his Power unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, from the which Christ the Saviour comes to take Peace, and to bring the
Sword of Gods Judgments into the Bowels of all the Earthly Minded, and in him that judgeth the secrets of all mens Hearts, do his Followers rejoyce, and proclaim him unto you all, that makes an end of Sin, who of the Father of Love and Mercy is tendered unto all that will receive him, that in him who condemns the Evil deeds, and sin in the flesh, Salvation might be attained unto, who now comes unto his own, of whom many receive him not; for he is come to judge the World, whom God so loved, that he gave his Son the Light of the World, that who∣soever believe in him (by whom the secrets of all hearts are, and shall be judged) may be saved from Wrath to come, and find a sure hiding place, when the wicked shall be cut off the Earth. And now, who will receive the Lamb, in whose Mouth there is no Guile? Who among the Sons of men will receive him that hath been slain from the Foundation of the World? Who will receive him that is the Gift of God, which is Perfect? Who will receive him that is a man of Sorrows, whose beauty is hid from the prudent of the Earth? Who will receive him, that the Priests cry out against and the Rulers say, Away with him from the Earth? Who will come unto the waters of Life and re∣turn unto the Fountain of living Mercies, that in his Belly the springs of Life may be felt? Who can endure to follow him to end of World, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and who receiveth not honour of men? Who can hear, receive and keep the hard sayings, and drink his Blood that cleanseth from all sin? Who is willing to receive him that is the Resurrection, and the Life, whose Presence troubled and terrified his own Disciples, so that their Hearts burned within them? VVho will lay down their Crowns at the foot of him that is the Light, and mourn over him that is slain, whom they have pierced, and through Patience, Long-suffering and Obedience, follow the one Shepherd in the Regeneration? even unto them is the VVord of Consolation sent. Therefore be ye awakned, O all ye Rulers and People! let not your Hearts be hardned against Gods VVitness in you, nei∣ther stop your Ears, nor close your Eyes; for of a Truth the Lord is at hand, and is come to try you, with his Loving-kindness, and with his Judgments! His flock despised of men, hath he sent
in the meekness of his love, to preach the innocent Life of his Son among you, in Meekness, Patience, Sufferings and Tribu∣lations, who being reviled, revileth not again, but in patience enduring long Imprisonment, yea, VVant and Sickness there, and Abuses, cruel Mockings, Stonings in the street daily, and Revilings by ungodly Persons, whose Cruelty is encreased and their Sins multiplied, encreasing to the day of Judgment, and Righteous Revelation of Gods wrath upon all Unrighteousness of men, who hold his Truth in that which is not his Righteous∣ness, which is now brought near unto all that fear, before him in Uprightness of Heart, that Truth in the inward parts they might come to know, and in it VVorship the God of the Spirits of all flesh. And all you People that are meek and tender, who have been taught by the Priests, and not by the Lord, whose Mercy to the humble abideth forever, the Lord God Almighty hath so loved you, that he hath provided a better Teacher for you, which shall not be removed, and a Priest that abideth forever, and a Bishop for your Souls; and behold, he is no less then a King, yea, he ruleth over Kings, and help is laid upon him who is mighty, and he is able to save, and he is so willing to do it, that he hath laid down his Life for that end, and he standeth at the Door and knocks, and he that knocks is called the Word, and the Word is as a hammer, and the Word is in the Heart, where Christ is to be received, and where this knocks for entrance, and it knocks against sin, and in him is no sin, and he cometh to save you from sin, and to lead you the way to the Father; and without Money doth he ever teach, nay, he giveth abundantly unto all that are taught by him, and that more then mortal Riches, and you may have him to be with you alwayes forever, and he can resolve all your Doubts, and satisfie every one, and replenish the weary, and nourish the faint, and in him are all Gods Treasures, of the which by him you may come to partake forever, and he himself is as a Treasure in thy field, but hid from thee, which I have found in the Earthen Vessel, and declare it unto thee, that thy Fallow∣ground may be ript up to find the Pearl; for this is near unto thee, and the motion of it is against thy sin, the beauty where∣of thou canst never see, until to it thou comest to hearken. H. S.
FOR THE honour of the king, AND And the great Advancing thereof (amongst men) over all Nations in the World. In the ensuing Proposals, tending thereunto, stated in Six PARTICULARS. Concerning the KING'S Honour: 1. By His Subjects Unity one with another. 2. By His Subjects Submission to all his Laws. 3. By His Subjects Faithfulness unto him. 4. By His Subjects Uprightness in Craffick with other Nations. 5. By His Subjects Departing from that which dishonoureth both God and the King. 6. By His Subjects Being the peculiar People of God, and they having his Spirit to counsel him. I. Concerning the honour of the king, by the Unity of his Subjects one with another. WEre all (or the Major part) of the King's Subjects so in Unity one with another, that every man sought each others good, as much as his own, and so fulfilled the Law of God therein, by each mans loving his Neigh∣bour as himself, and doing unto all (and at all times) as they would be done unto; having the Bond of Peace upon their Hearts, by the power of his Spirit, who commanded the Christians, not
only to love one another, but also their Enemies; whereby they are so far from Defraud or coveting other mens Goods, or wronging any man in Person or Estate, that Covetousness is not named a∣mong them, neither could be by any justly charged upon them; but rather the things they possess are acknowledged to be the Lord's, and themselves to be but Stewards thereof, and therefore durst not be unfaithful towards God or man, in the Unrighteous Mammon, lest the Lord should refuse to commit unto them the greater Riches. And were they brought to have a certain know∣ledge one of another herein, that they durst with boldness con∣fide one inanothers Constancy in those things, without the least fear of being any way wronged, or oppressed, or injured by each other; with what abundance of satisfaction would such live upon the Earth? and how desirable and amiable would this be for Christians, and Brethren, to live thus in Unity? And were they brought not to turn away their faces from their own flesh, nor to slight the Cry of the Poor, but with an Eye of Pity still to be commiserating the Needy, and much caring how to have Oppression removed, that so with the more chearfulness the Necessities of their poor Brethren might the easier be relieved, and such continual Care to be taken herein, until all Oppressions were brought to an end, and all the Poor kept from want (their being sufficient within the King's Domi∣nions to do it) that what is spent in Vanity might be forborn, and what is wasted in Oppression might be withheld, and other wayes found out (as something hath been prescribed by Thomas Lawrence of Marleborough) until there were not one poor Member of all the Body of the King's Dominions to be found, that had need to ask for Food or Rayment, by reason of the Brotherly Care, Love and Unity in the aforesaid Subjects. And all Jealousies and Heart-burnings one against another, and fear one of another, as to be hurt in Person or Estate, or destroyed one of another, to be as clearly removed out of all minds, as if such things had never been; all being contented with the things (and places) that they have, and no man seek another's Goods, or House, or House, or Land, or Place, or Worldly Honour from him, nor any strive to be greater than another therein; but if any strive, then so to strive, as to excel in
Virtue, and in his service of love to his Brethren, and People of his Nation, until Love, Unity and lasting Peace and Con∣cord spread over all, and all the contrary removed: which would be much for the Honour of the KING, not onely all the dayes of his Life, but would reach unto the Ages to come. II. Concerning the King's Honour, by his Subjects sub∣mission (actively or passivly) unto all his Laws. VVEre the King's Subjects (or the major part thereof) brought to be as ready to observe and keep all his Laws, Edicts and Commands, which are according unto, and grounded upon good Reason, the holy Scriptures, and according to Gods Witness in their Consciences, as he is to require it; and as freely willing to walk according to all such his good and wholsom Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, as he is to impose such upon them. And moreover, that they could not be constrained to break them by any Forreign Prince or Evil Member at home, but at all times, and in all cases, standing so faithful that the King be never dis∣honoured by their transgression of his just and righteous Laws, and that for Conscience sake, out of love, and not for fear. And moreover, did the King make such Laws and Orders, or suffer such to remain in force, which his Subjects aforesaid did certainly know were contrary to good Reason, and not according to the Scriptures or Law of God, but quite contrary also to Gods Wit∣ness in their own Consciences; and that such Laws also were well known to them to be destructive to the King's Subjects, and much hurtful to their Estates, and danger of ruinating their Fa∣milies; or if it should reach to Death or Banishment, yet they not to rebel against the King, nor raise Arms to defend them∣selves, though they are truly satisfied that such Laws are unrea∣sonable, yet for Conscience sake not to oppose, but submit unto every Ordinance of Man, whether unto the King, or such as are set in Authority under him. And so, though they cannot actively obey those Laws which are contrary to Gods Righteous Law written in their Hearts, yet passively to fulfill those Laws also, by a passive suffering the Penalties which those Laws require of such as actively keep them not: And so, therein again are those Laws fulfilled
also by them, that so it might be said of him, That his Subjects are alwayes ready to fulfill or submit unto all his Laws and Or∣ders, either by active or passive obedience, whether they be rea∣sonable or unreasonable. And a People being brought thus to sub∣mit to the King in all things, would be very much for his Hon∣our in Truth and Righteousness, III. Concerning the King's Honour by the Faithfulness of his Subjects unto him. VVEre all the King's Subjects brought unto such Faithful∣ness unto him, that he himself could with good Con∣fidence trust them, or himself with them; and, without any doubting, believe and know, that they would not harm him in the least, nor in the least contrive the shortning of his dayes; but all desiring his long life, to govern in Righteousness: And were they all of such a Principle, and unalterable therein, as not to de∣stroy any man's Life, though their Enemies, much less a Friend, a Neighbour, or a Christian; that the King might be well perswa∣ded of them, that they would never harm him, nor plot, nor conspire against him, nor ever offer or intend Violence towards him, though he had none to guard him; so that if he please, he might even with boldness and confidence at any time trust him∣self with them, or amongst them, without the least danger or fear in himself, knowing all his Subjects to be as careful of his Life, as his Life-Guard; so that if he please he might not need alwayes to keep one Company of his Subjects to guard him, for fear of any other of his Subjects; but rather for fear of such as are not his Subjects. And were all his Subjects brought in such Faithfulness, and the King well and truly satisfied therein, would it not ease him and his Council of much Care, and sometimes Fear too? and to be so well satisfied in himself concerning his Subjects Faithfulness to him herein, that he could take their Word for it, without Oath, Bond or Surety; Or, if he had no Word or Promise at all from them, yet could believe and trust them, that they would never plot or rise against him, nor do him harm, but remain as firm, steadfast, and true to him, as any other Princes
Subjects in the whole World, by any of their Oaths, Bonds, or other Engagements whatsoever, if not more constant and stead∣fast: which, were all the King's Subjects brought unto, would be such an Honour unto the King therein, as would hard∣ly be found belonging unto any Prince in the whole World again. IV. Concerning the Honour that the King might have by the Uprightness of his Subjects in their Traffick with other Nations. VVEre all the King's Subjects (or most part of them) brought into Truth, Plainness, and Righteousness, so that their Yea was Yea, and their Nay, Nay; that so all Mer∣chants and Factors could take their Words, and trust to their Words to be of more value than the Oaths of most Princes Sub∣jects in the World; and that in what Nation or Kingdom soever they come, in the World, as soon as it was heard they were such a Princes Subjects, that then both the King of those Dominions, with Princes, Judges, Merchants, Factors and People, might all conclude, they were true men of their Words; and that any, man might deal with them, and none be afraid to traffique with them, because they abhor Deceit, Defraud and Lying, and all man∣ner of Cozening or Dishonesty: And would not this also promote trading, and so enrich the Kingdom, and be some means to relieve the Poor? And is not the enriching of the Kingdom for the King's Honour? And what Man or Nation is it, but would desire to deal with Just Men? And would not the Fame of such a Prince, and such his Subjects as deal justly and truely where-ever they come, soon sound over all the World? And would it not be for his Honour, that had such a People as did neither seek nor ask but a Just Price where-ever they come amongst all Nations in the World? And if such Honour before mentioned be esteemed, what part of it is beyond this, which might cause a King's Name to be renowned over the whole World, having such up∣right, true, just, honest-hearted men in all things, to his Subjects, as not any other Eemperour or Prince could produce the like?
V. Concerning the King's Honour, by his Subjects depart∣ing from that which disbonoureth (both God and) the King and themselves. VVEre all the King's Subjects brought to leave and utterly to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomp and Vani∣ties of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the flesh, and the carnal desires of the same; and so to leave and utterly forsake all manner of Evil in word and deed, and to bear no Malice nor Hatred in their Hearts; to keep their Tongues from Lying and Evil∣speaking, seeing it is the evil words that Corrupt the good manners; and so not to speak proudly, nor contemptuously, no, not of the meanest Member in the Nation; but to abhor and leave Arro∣gancy, with all manner of Voluptuosness, knowing, that God re∣sisteth the Proud; and so not one such prophane person as Lord Esau to be found amongst them; nor one Swearer, nor Lyar, nor Thief, nor Murderer amongst them; neither yet a Drun∣kard, nor a Glutton, nor a Whoremonger, nor a Covetous Per∣son (which is Idolatry) to be found amongst them; nor any that spend their dayes in Vanity, nor that abuse or waste the good Creatures of God in any of the King's Dominions, whereby any of his Subjects may come to want, to his dishonour. And were they all brought to forsake the very Appearance of Evil, and so never to transgress any of his good Laws, to his dishonour: herein also would this be for the Honour of the King. And thus might his Fame ring over all the World, and be of great Renown among all the Upright-hearted in all Nations; for what is a King without his Subjects? And when is a King more honoured by his Subjects, than when his Subjects them∣selves are most honourable, and act most noble and honourably? And what is more honourable and more noble in the outward practice among the sons of men, whereby a King might be ho∣noured, than the things aforesaid? Nay, do not the Princi∣ples, Qualities and Practices aforesaid make men more noble
and honourable than the Titles ofFor Esau was called Lord, & Edom had ma∣ny Dukes, and Ishmael had twelve Princes. Lord Esau, or Dukes of Edom, or Princes of Ishmael, seeing Abraham was a Wanderer, and Jacob a Pilgrim, and Israel dwelt in Tents; who obtained a good Report through Faith, and whom God hath re∣nowned with an everlasting Honour. VI. Concerning the Honour of the King, and also his great Benefit, by his Subjects being the Peculiar Chosen People of God, and their having the Spirit of the Lord to counsel Him. VVEre many of the King's Subjects the true Servants and Children of the invisible God of Heaven and Earth, by true mortification, sanctification and regeneration, and truly led, moved and guided by the Spirit of God, and many of them so grown into the Power and Wisdom of God really, and abso∣lutely so having the Spirit of the Lord poured sorth upon them in these latter dayes, according to the promise of God, which must be and is already fulfilled, so that at a needful time one of them having (as it was said of Daniel, ch. 5. v. 11.) the Spirit, Light, Understanding and Wisdom being found in him, could shew unto the King such a thing or things, or secret Determination of God, which all others (the King's Wise-men) whomsoever could not; and to discover the lurking of the King's Enemies unto him, and their secret purposes against him, though they were far remote; as Elisha discovered unto the King of Israel that which the King of Syria in his Bed-chamber contrived against him, whereby the King of Israel escaped his Plots, not once or twice, 2 King 6. 10. And that they could and did at any time, and of∣ten times (as moved of the Lord) declare and shew unto the King, the Counsel of God concering himself and his Kingdom, and what would come to pass concerning both; and how he might avoid the Evil, and chuse the Good, like as Samuel and other Prophets, who had the Spirit, were wont to do unto the Kings of Israel in the dayes of old, that so his Throne might be established in Righteousness; which would be more than an or∣dinary
Honour for the King; and God might bless and prosper him for their sakes, as he did Pharaoh for the sake of that one faithful man Joseph, after the King had released him out of Bonds. But by this time many might say unto me, as a Lord said unto the Prophet, when he spake of things much unlike to come to pass, How can these things be, though God should make Windows in Heaven? To which I answer, That though I do not affirm, that all those things shall come to pass concerning him; yet I say, that many are already, and many more may come to the slate asoresaid; And it would be his Happiness, and more for his Honour than men can yet receive, to be chief Magistrate among or over such a People, and to have most of his Subjects so qualified, and great would be his Peace thereby. And thus further I say, That the God of Heaven and Earth hath promised, That a People shall be all Righteous, and that Iniquity shall cease, and the Nations shall learn War no more, but every one shall rest under his own Vine, and, and none shall make them afraid; and they shall be in League with the Stones of the Field; and the Beasts of the Field shall be at peace with them. And the Lord God hath brought many into the entrance of these things, that with Christ in the Prophet they can give their Backs to the Smiter, and their Cheeks to him that plucketh off the Hair. And if it were well if that all the King's Subjects were come to the things afore∣said, and to live in that upright state; then it is not ill that some are come unto that state already: And if the little that is begun towards this work were cherished, might it not grow and en∣crease towards that state hinted at in the former brief Particulars, touching the Honour of the King, though there is an Honour which exceeds all this? And certainly the Word of the Lord will stand forever, though Men and their Powers, and Heaven and Earth may pass away: And assuredly the God of Righteousness hath begun his Work in this Nation, and in the hearts of many of his little Ones; And a Little One (he hath said) shall become a Thousand, and a small One, a strong Nation; and the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdom of our God, and of his Christ. And what if a Nation
be born at once, and Sion bring forth before her Travel, and the Lord answer before his People call, and hear while they are yet speaking, and multiply the seed of Abraham as the Stars of Hea∣ven, and encrease the innocent flock of his Fold as the innumer∣able Plants upon the face of the Earth, that Sin and Iniquity may have an end, and Righteousness reign for evermore. And if it be farther enquired, How the King might have his Sub∣jects truly principled and qualified as afore said; or, have such Subjects generally thus for his great Honour? I Answer further (to the everlasting Praise of God) That there are many (which may well be called some of his truest Subjects in his Dominions) that are already truly principled and qualified, as aforesaid; and more are entering and growing up into the same Faithfulness, Love, Unity and Peace with all men, and God will encrease them; and it might be much for the Honour of (God and) the King to encourage them therein; and much for the dishonour of God, and dishonour and great disadvantage of the King divers ways, if he seek, or should be perswaded to seek the hindrance of these things, or of his Subjects, who are thus al∣ready qualified, or the encrease of their Number therein, or their encreasing in the honest, noble, honourable upright things aforesaid; which things might make for the Honour of the King, and will certainly be for the Glory of God. And this is written by one that desireth the Peace of all the Nation, and Unity amongst all men, and that many more may come into the Righ∣teous things aforesaid, which would be for the Glory of God, the Honour of the chief Magistrate, the great Benefit of the Nations, and much Comfort to themselves: And that desireth the encrease of love, truth and virtue, which brings into the true honourable No∣bility, for the which this is written, that men may come into the true Noble and Honourable Estate in the sight of God and all just Men, among whom I am a true Friend to them all in love, called Humphry Smith. The 10th of the 4th Moneth, 1661.
To the Lambs of Christ. MY dear Brethren, who are Children of my Father, whom he hath visited with the Power of his Eternal Love, and gathered into his covenant of Light, where Life and Immortality abideth forever, who come to feel the Life of the risings of the Son of Gods Power with his Immortal strength, you all in his Power to keep, as living Branches of the Root to himself, single and pure, in the uprightness of Innoceny, in this the day of his infinite love, wherein the Glory of the Most High is revealed to the humble Seed, which receives the Gospel of Peace and the Ministration of Life, to those who in the Death did lie, and by Captivity was long in Bondage kept, which now from the Lord God of Life Refreshings comes to receive, and Oyl of everlasting Joy to the mourning Plant, whereby the ever∣lasting Covenant of the Father is known, in which I am with you forever, you standing in obedience to the Power of the Word, which operates in the Heart, by which all things were made, in which they are all enjoyed, as you all in his Wisdom stand by it to be guided in the dominion of the Word, with it over all to find Life, and guidance with that which is Immortal, in the strength whereof to stand as Pillars of Life for the living Truth of God against all his Enemies, with boldness and cheerfulness through the Power of his Son, whose Life you are to feel exercising you therein, to which you are to yield Obedience with all humble Submission to the Fathers will, abiding low in his fear, and there is both Safety and Strength, that the Fountain of the Fathers love may be opened in you as a Well-spring of Life, to overcome you with the Power of himself, that thereby you may be refresh∣ed one in another, and be opened one to another in the bowels of the Fathers love, that it may overshadow you as a Tree in Sum∣mer, and be to you as the refuge of a Rock, in it to be hid from all the high and raging Waves, Winds and Storms, and from all secret Discontent or Swellings in the mind, which are apt to hurt
that which is little and tender, which is to be brought forth (in∣to Liberty, Peace and Life) with the pangs of Sorrow; and as with the anguish of a travailing Woman, so is the Seed brought forth which lives forever, which is fed with the Milk and pre∣served from the Storm and the Heat, and fed with Food conve∣nient, and clothed with Humility forever; the little Child is you to lead in the peaceable Path of the Fathers love, that you all as Lambs may follow him, whose Power saveth from Sin, in him trust, compassed about with the Walls of Salvation, and feeling the everlasting strength you all to preserve in the Power of his Might, his Blessing to receive unto the Seed, that you in it and by it may be fruitful unto God forever. For dear Friends, the Father is well-pleased in him who is meek and lowly in the Heart, and in obedience unto him through the leadings of his Spirit of Power in which the Father's Love is manifest, which leadeth in the low Ground, where the safe way of everlasting Peace is known, where all things are quiet and still, where the small still Voice is heard, whereby the Dead come to live in the powerfull Life of the Fathers Love, which compasseth about the Seed as a Wall of everlasting Strength, which is made perfect in Weakness, and to the Weak is only to be known, that the Weak then may say, I am strong, feeling Strength ministered forth from that which is begotten of the Father, which never was comprehended by the Earthly Wisdom, which is all scattered as the Smoke before the Wind, when he ariseth, who hath long been as a Servant, and is now to be served, that he may be Lord o∣ver all, who is as a Man of Sorrows, and leadeth through the Suf∣fering state, that by the Obedience of Faith, through the Power of the Cross, which crucifies and brings to the Death that which is to dye, that the Vail may be rent, the way into the Holiest of all made manifest, and that received into the new Ground which abideth forever, even that which now Comforteth the weary Soul, and Satisfieth the longing Spirit, and Replenisheth the dry and barren Land with the Rivers of the Valley, and the Springs of the Desart, that the Meek in the Earth may Rejoyce forever, and through the Earth may grow as a Lilly in Summer: For plainly, its the Poor that receive the Gospel, and the Meek of the Earth that shall inherit Sub∣stance, and its the Lowly that will abide forever, and the Seed
of the Shepherd that shall be set on the Throne, and he that is low shall never fall, neither shall his Footsteps at all be moved; he leads the Creature in the Fathers fear, and guideth the Tongue in Wisdom; and its him alone that all are to wait for, to receive and continue in, even him that is acquainted with grief, who never openeth his Mouth in Perverness, but speaks Life in Wisdom through the Power of the Father's love, which overpowereth the Soul as an overflowing River of Oyl, which makes all well, and heals the grieved Spirit, which none ever comes to find but such as alone walk with him, who humbled him∣self to the Death of the Cross, and became as a Servant, though he was Lord over all; in him there is Safety, for he is the Rock and the sure hiding Place, even out of the sight of the World, and from the Tempters power; for the Devil hath nothing in him, who is meek and low, in whose Mouth there is found no Guils: And this is he that hath been long set at nought, whose Tenders of Love con∣strains Obedience to himself, because of the Beauty that is in him, which from them is hid, over whom the Vail is, through which they cannot see the Comliness of his Love. Oh, all ye Lovers and Followers of Truth and Righteousness! come ye all and sink down in your Minds unto him, whose love springeth forth of the low Ground as a Well-spring of Life issuing forth abundantly, as through a Rock that is hid under the Earth, thence cometh Life to the Humble, and there may you drink with me of the Cup of Blessings; for from the Root of Jesse, and the Foundation, the Branch which is low, doth spring forth the Life to the satisfying of every Branch: and tru∣ly in him there is Life indeed, and with him there is no want; Who can desire another than he? or who can complain that dwells in him, where the Unclean doth never come, where all things are at Peace, and Rest is enjoyed forever? Oh let none turn aside from him, nor climb up above the measure of his humble Life, nor reach beyond the Power of his Breathings forth, nei∣ther grieve ye him through the unkindness of your forward Wills, but love him as the Life of your Souls, and prise him above all that can be spoken, and tender his Love as the Apple of thine Eye, that he to thee may be forever the Prince of Eternal Peace, and the Power of thy Strength, and the Blessing of thy Life,
that thou never mayst want Food nor Rayment, nor want a shelter in the hour of Temptation, nor look for another to help in the time of need. And so, my dear Lambs, in him keep for ever∣more, for its he that comes out from God, and keepeth them in per∣fect Peace, who in his lowly Spirit abide, from thence to feel the Fathers Love arise, with it to love and tender one another. So to that which is of my Fathers Life in you all, I desire to be known, and in it with you to have Fellowship forever, which is more than  to be declared by a multitude of Words, or written in many or long Epistles; the bowels of my Fathers love, from the measure of his own Life in me, is to his Image, and that which is begotten of him in you all: So the Life of the Power of the Lamb of God be with you all, and the Blessing of the God of Love and Peace preserve you in all Humility of mind, that the begotten of the Father through the Power of his Love may increase and grow up unto him, who is the Life of my Soul, who is blessed for evermore, Amen. H. S. Winchester-Bridewell. To such in whose Hearts the Spirit of the Lord is beginning to move his Truth to declare. YOu whom the mighty God of Power hath found in a De∣sart Wilderness, polluted in your Blood, without help or strength of your own, whose Nakedness did once ppear, and you in it stood guilty before the Bar of Gods Justice, receiving the Condemnation due from him, who then said unto you, Live; and since in the measure of that Word upon the Lord have waited, to receive that which was promised of him who is the Father of the faithful: This I say unto you, the thing is great that you are come unto and entering upon, to speak in the Name
of the mighty God, and to publish the Message of the most High, to declare the Word of the Lord among the Heathen, and mi∣nister Life to the Spirits in Prison, to stand Witnesses for God to the People, and to be as Guides and Examples to the Tribes of Israel: Oh! how can you but be overcome with the dread of the Lord, and filled with the Power of his Love! How can your Hearts be restrained from breaking, and your Bowels from an un∣expressible yearning after the advancing of the living Truth of God, which he hath so freely made you partakers of? May you not fall down to the Dust before the presence of the Lord, and become as the smallest thing in respect of him? Who can but fear before him, and be astonished at the Power of his Might, and bow before him, who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, that he over all may be honoured, who is blessed for evermore. And as through Humility you come to receive that which maketh Honourable, even that which is Holy, like pure Oyl to comfort and nourish you, in that keep, treasuring it up for your selves until you receive Power from on High, or feel the higher Power that stands over all, opening the Mouth of that which is to speak, giving you Power and Wisdom, your Life forth to mi∣nister to the reaching of that in all which can receive the Gospel, and to the chaining down of all the Powers of the Prince of Darkness that would arise up against it. And such as feel something stirring to speak Words, and a great War and trouble within, being neither quiet one way nor the other, and by reason of fearfulness, Words begin to go forth as from under a load and trouble, and then feel the Earth lie upon the Seed, let such take heed of speaking too much with a strangled and strained Voice, but sink down again, and wait to feel that rent and broken, which is as a hard thing between thee and that which should rise up to speak, that thou mayest feel it opened in thee as a place of broad Rivers, giving thee room, or as the opening of a Rock, and the powerful issuing forth of a mighty stream of living Water, pure and clear, not mixt with Earth and Dirt, and when thou hast felt this, take heed of spend∣ing all upon others; and another time take heed of that which would imitate such a Power again. And also, let such who
speak in Meetings, take heed of speaking above the Vail, with a forward Zeal, leaving the Light behind him▪ lest he do more hurt behind him, than he doth good before him; and when the Vail is rent, and a few Words spoken, and the measure being declared, the Vail comes on again upon a sudden; and then some there be that change the Voice, and continue in a form of strange words an hour after like a Priest: Now the measure in such is owned, the which they keeping to, might increase, but going beyond it, the o∣ther will increase, and that decrease; but stopping with the Light when it stops, and so become a Fool, the Light would arise again, Life speak; and its that alone which doth Service for God: and other long Declarations of Words do but thicken the Vail over them that have felt Life, though Death in others, (who have not found Life) will feed upon the many words. And such as are moved to bear their Testimony against the false Prophets, or the Wickedness of men, in it be faithful, keeping in the fear and dread of the Lord, that in his strength you may stand as a Wall of Brass against the Ungodly, and spare not to thresh the Heathen so long as you feel the Hammer of the Lord up over them (and then take heed of Disputations after) and go not out of that which is your strength, lest you fall before your Enemies, and dishonour the Lord. But let every one take heed of running too soon, for some such there are, who run to Priests and others, in the light airy Spirit, and pride of Heart, who are vain Boasters, out of the Truth, whose service the Lord abhors; and likewise, some such speak in Meetings, whose Mouthes should be stopped. Thus, Friends, from the dear love of my Life to you all, and the living Truth of God, for which I suffer in Bonds, have writ these things in plain and few words, to be considered of by you whom it concerns; and the Lord God of Life make it a blessing unto you. Winchester-Bridewell. H. S.
Sound things Asserted, I. In the King's own Words. II. From late Experience. III. From Scripture-Truth. IV. According to Reason and Equity. And certain things opened (or propounded) by way of Enquiry thereupon. Offered in meekness and good will unto the con∣sideration of the King's Lords, Counsellors, and other his chief Officers under him, in all places of Justice & Trust, both Civil, Military and Ecclesiastical. Being intended for the good of the KING and them∣selves, and all Persons under him, and for the preserving of Peace amongst men. The first Assertion. I. FOrasmuch as you are set in Authority under the KING, and so are to observe, and to be Ministers of his Laws, for the punishment of Evil, and not to go beyond his Will and Proclamations; and so to do that which is just and rea∣sonable toward all his Subjects, thereby to preserve them in Peace towards him, and one with another. II. In that the King hath freely engaged himself by Promise in his Declaration from Breda, That no man shall be disquieted nor called in question for differences of Opinions in matters of Religion, &c. And in that he hath since he came to England doubled the Confirmation thereof, in repeating the self-same words twice
over in his Declaration Of Ecclesiastical Affairs, bearing date the 25th. of the 8th Moneth, called October, 1660. page 5, and 18. And since all this, he having again renewed the same in a late Speech of his to the Parliament, bearing date the 8th day of the 5th Moneth, called July 1661. saying, It is to put My Self in mind, as well as You, that I so often (I think as of∣ten as I come to you) mention unto you my Declaration from Breda. And he further saith, My Lords and Gentlemen, let it be in no mans Power to charge either Me or You, with breach of Our Word or Promise, which can never be a good Ingredient to our future Security, Page 5, 6. III. In that he hath confirmed the same to us in particular, in a late Proclamation, entituled, The Enlargement of Prisoners called Quakers, bearing date the 11th of the 3d Moneth, called May, 1661. wherein he writeth us his Subjects called Quakers, whereby Friends were generaly released out of Prison, and that without Fees. IV. In that the King hath promised the same by word of Mouth, and granted, that we should have our Liberty of Conscience, and that we should not suffer therein, engaging Himself there∣unto, in the Word of a King, and in that he hath manifest∣ed the same towards us several times. The first Queries upon the first Assertions. THese things (above written) being rightly considered and truly understood, this then would I learn from you or en∣quire of you whom the King hath set in chief places of Autho∣rity under him, and let just witness of God in all your hearts answer hereunto. Query 1. Whether all or as many of you, whom the King hath placed in Authority to do his his will, and act according to his Proclamations, and minister Justice (not Cruelty) according to his Laws, for the punishment of Evil, and instead thereof (as towards us) act otherwise, and that also in his Name; do you not therein dishonour the King? Q. 2. Whether this which the King hath promised, declar'd, and so often stood to confirm (as aforesaid) both in general, and to∣wards
us in particular, (to wit) Liberty of Consceince, be rea∣sonable or unreasonable? If you hold it unreasonable, do you not dishonour the King, and his Council both? The King, in that he did so, and his Council in that they advised Him no better all that time? But if the thing be Reasonable, you sit in place by the King to see it done, it being part of your service to him; Then whether you do not more dishonour the King therein, (and neglect your Duty and deny Reason) when you act quite contrary, and that in his Name, and so make use of his Name to dishonour his Person. Q. 3. Whether all such that are set in Authority under him, who do not see to the Performance of this, which the King hath so much, and so often engaged himself in, but do cause his Word and Promise, in that thing to be broken, do not therein much dishonour the King. Q. 4. Whether all them that counsel the King not to keep his Promise in this thing, or subtilly perswade him unto such things, whereby at last his Word and Promise herein must needs be bro∣ken, do not therein endeavour to lead him in that unsound path of Oliver, and them Rulers who broke Word and Promise with God and men, and so cause the King to lose part of the love of many of his Subjects by breaking his word like them? Q. 5. Whether this which the King hath so freely Offered, so fully Engaged, so firmly Promised, so often Renewed, so far Confirmed and so largely Published (it being a thing of so much concernment, for preserving peace in his Kingdoms) is not al∣wayes to be performed, and by the King, and all other Mini∣sters of Justice, and all Officers whatsoever at all times to be granted, and in all places, and in all Courts, unto all Persons tru∣ly concerned therein? And whether they all ought not to have a special care, that his Subjects be not deprived of the benefit of this thing, which from the King to them is made so strong as a∣foresaid? If the Kings words were true (as indeed they were) which he lately spoke in the House, as aforesaid, That the breach of his Word or Promise, can never be a good ingredient to his future Security: Q. 6. Then whether ever it can be for his good or security, to cause His Word and Promise to be broken? And whether
those be good Subjects to him therein, who seek to have it done? And what good security can ever come to Him thereby? and whether many do not endeavour very much to have his Promise broken, and sometimes already do it also, though he hath (as it was said) it can never be for good; yet do not many endeavour it, especially to have his Word and Promise broken, which was to us, for the Liberty of Conscience; and whether all those do seek his good and future security therein or not; let his Words stand either against or for them in that matter. And as the King hath said, That the breach of his Word of Promise can ne∣ver be a good Ingredient to his future security? Q. 7. Then whether the breach of this so often an engaged Promise, of so high a concernment (for Liberty) may not cause the People much to question in themselves, or in their minds, whether he may not be drawn aside from the performance of the rest of his Promises, pertaining to other matters, and so cause them to be afraid lest he will forget his other Promises also; and so prove unfaithful to his Word, like them before, seeing the People have long and often been deceived with fair Speeches and Pretences, by many Rulers, one after another this long time, who did not perform what they promised to them? The Second Assertion. SEeing by late experience, the late Wars did first begin, and strife hath still continued, and much dissatisfaction doth yet remain about, and chiefly concerning, Liberty, or not Liberty of Conscience, and being the Peace or Strife in these the Kings Do∣minions doth very much depend thereupon, and the Kings wel∣fare, (and his Subjects too) depend much upon the peace and quietness of the People; and seeing that for One that was real∣ly for Liberty of Consceince, when the War or difference first be∣gan, there is Twenty now, and one of those Twenty, or one in the Twenty, are stronger in their Zeal, or in their minds for it, then Twenty of them were then, and yet the Lord suffered them to prevail, until they proved false to God, and not true one to another, and became breakers of their Promises, which they had often made and renewed.
Seeing by late experience, that the other Army, and the o∣ther Powers, never so much began to be divided among them∣selves, nor were never overcome, nor quite overturned until they themselves, who had promised Liberty of Conscience, began as it were, to make War one with another, with men amongst them, about matters pertaining to their Consciences, and so turned men out from among them, and out of the Army, only for wearing their Hats, or because in Conscience to God they could no longer put them off, when it was but only to please the Wills of men of corrupt minds, and until honest sober men were sent for out of their honest Employments, before Rulers, and into Courts, only to ensnare them about their Hats, or else about some Oath, (then against Popery) knowing afore-hand, they durst not break Christ's Command, who saith, Swear not at all. The Second Queries upon the second Assertios. Qu. 1. WHether it be not good and safe to prevent all farther Strife among the People to grant them all just Liber∣ty of Conscience, in matters of Religion, especially seeing it is so much already promised? And whether it be not good to be kept, lest there should be also difference about it now, and that also among your selves, and so to have Peace kept which is often in so much danger of being broken? Q. 2. Whether it be not good and safe, to take heed of ensna∣ring, or seeking occasion against men, about matters pertaining to their Consciences towards God, especially the most innocent and uprightest of them? And whether it be safe in the sight of God, for these Rulers, now to act as vigorously against such In∣nocent People as they before did, and were overturned? And whether it be not dangerous for these now to Ensnare, Persecute and Imprison the Innocent for and in the self same things, as them Rulers did about the Hat, not Swearing, and not coming to the Steeple-House, and the like?
The Third Assertions, with the Quries to them annixed. 1. SEeing there was a People who had not a King, to whom the Lord gave a King, and seeing he gave them a King in his anger, Hos. 13. 11. (and (after) took him away in his wrath or greater anger.) Q. 1. Whether then these people of our days, being without a King, did purchase themselves a King, with Gold, Silver or mortal Strength, or did the Lord give the King unto them? And whether the King did come to them (to rule over them) in his own Power, strength, wisdom and force of Armed men▪ or did the Lord give or bring him to the People, (and that be∣yond, and above, and much more easier than he, or the wisest Polliticians he had, could perceive, expect or believe?) 2. Query upon the same. And whether or no the Lord was pleased or displeased with these People before the King came, or rather was given to them of the Lord? And whether the Lord was angry or pleased with the Governours and Government as it then stood, and with the Army, and the Ministry, as they and it then stood? And whe∣ther most, if not almost all, or wholly all the Rulers were not then Breakers of their Promises and Engagements, which they had often made unto the People, and one with another, and might not God be justly Angry with (Promise and) Covenant∣breakers? 3. Query upon the same. And whether the total Overturning the whole Government, (as it then stood) and the Destruction of the Governours, (with Shame, Scorn, Ignominy, Reproach and Loss of Honour, Digni∣ty, Fame and Renown, together with Riches, Goods, fair Buildings, Lands, Liberties and Life it self) were not and will not remain a sure Testimony of Gods anger against them, in which Anger he gave the People a King, thus to execute his just Judgments, in his anger? And whether those things be Signs of Anger, or not? 4. Query upon the same. And whether God was angry or pleased with the Souldiery,
and Army as they then stood, seeing that before they could have their pay, they were fain to swear for that manner of Govern∣ment which they had so long, and so often protested and fought against? And may not the sense of Gods anger therein re∣main to this day upon many of their Consciences? 5. Query upon the same. And whether the Lord was then angry, or not angry with the Priests and Leaders of the People, and with the Ministry as it then stood, especially with the pretended and esteemed, most re∣finedt of them, whom some in scorn call Quakers, much warn∣ed before hand, and much declared against, seeing they are allo∣verturned, as from what they then stood in and were (or at least seemed to be) And seeing that many of them are turned from Hundreds a year, whereby some are in distress, some in great care how to live, some faint to travel from one Country to an∣other, some being ashamed to shew their faces among People, some faint to turn Hypocrites, in denying their own Principles, some lose their dearest Friends, some faint to bow and creep (like ) unto such that before they had in little esteem (or ) some turn against that which themselves were in, and  gainst themselves, like the wind that turns every way;  and preach down, and contradict that which before the themselves were, and so write and preach down themselves, and contradict themselves and one another? And many more things I might Query concerning them, and as to their stand∣ing then, and their state now, and leave them, or any for them, who do now either own them or disown them, as to their former standing, (when the King was given) to answer for them, or in their be half, whether such things as these (and much more) (which I say is justly come upon them, seeing they rejected warn∣ing) be Testimony and Signs of Gods anger, or not? 6. Query upon the same. And whether those Rulers who now, under the King, and in the Name of the King, have Imposed the things aforesaid (and much more) upon the Priests, Rulers, Souldiers and People, and have executed those just Judgments of God upon those Pro∣mise-breakers, and People that had not a King, and took away
the Liberties of many, and that which was moreover even the Lives of some, did do those things in love and pity unto them (as they then stood) or else in anger against them? And if God was not then angry with the people, how came those things to pass? And if he was angry, was not their Promise-breaking a great cause of his Anger? And if the People now break Promise again, is it not just, if the Lord be in his Wrath with them a∣gain? And if the King (though he hath given him to be King) should likewise break his Word and Promises, may not the Lord just∣ly be sorely displeased therewith, as he was angry with the same things before, and spared not the cheifest of them that did it? 7. Query upon the same. And if the People generally be as Wicked now they have a King, as they were before (or worse) how then shall the ensu∣ing Wrath of God be stopt, or hindred now, any more than his anger was then? And is not Gods Power as great now as it was then? And doth not he hate Wickedness and Promise-break∣ing as much now, as he did then? Or if the King, whom the Lord hath given, and these Rulers, Souldiers, Priests and People, now under him, shall break Promises, as the other did, and be as cruel, and as hard hearted, and as great Oppressors, as the other Rulers, and as full of Envy as the Souldiers, Priests and People were in the time of the other Government, when they had not a King; whether then the Lord will respect Persons▪ or the Persons of the Mighty in judgment? And unto all these things here stated in brief, let the just witness of God in all Con∣sciences answer, yea or nay. 2. Seeing that Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upheld by Mercy, Prov. 20 28. And so seeing a King may be given in Anger to the People, and in Wrath may be taken from them, yet Truth may preserve the King, and Mercy may uphold his Throne (which thing is worth the Kings obser∣ving, and all that truly love him.) Qu. 1. Whether now is it best for the King to keep to the truth of his Word and Promise, or not, seeing Truth preserveth the King? And if Truth be a Preservation to the King, whether Untruth and denying of the Truth be not destructive? And now who are the Kings best Friends, they that would have him keep
to the Truth, and live in the Truth, or them that would lead him from it, to do quite contrary to Christ, (that said, I am th Truth) who said, That Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away, Luke 21. 33? And is not his Throne established forever? and should not a Christian King take him for an Ensample? And is it not good for the King to keep the Truth, and not to sell it? Prov. 23. 23. seeing Truth preserveth the King, and to know and receive and abide in, and be led by the Spirit of Truth, which the World cannot receive, John 14. 17. And to know that Truth which God desireth in the inward parts, where Wisdom is to be known, Psal. 51. 6. And is not the Word the Truth? John 17. 17. And is not Christs Name called, the Word of God? Rev. 19. 13. And did not Moses say, The Word was in the Heart? And is not the Word there as a Hammer, and like Fire? Jer. 23. 29. And doth not that Word sometimes pierce and divide in the Heart? and is it not there quick and powerful? Heb. 4. 12. And is not Christ the Power of God? 1 Cor. 1. 24. And did not he say, I am the Light, John 8. 12. and I am come a Light into the World? John 12. 46. And did not he that was sent of God, bear wit∣ness of the Light, and say, That it was the true Light (or indeed the Light and Truth) which lighteth every man that cometh into the World, that all men through him might believe, who was in the World? John 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And did not he himself say, Believe in the Light? John 12. 35. And is not this he which is the Truth, whom God hath given for a Light unto the Gentiles? Isa. 49. 6. And is not this he whom the Princes of this World hath not known? 1 Cor. 2. 8. who was from everlasting, when there was no Deeps, nor Fountains of Water, neither yet Mountains nor Hills, Prov. 8. 24. And is not this he that is given for a Leader and Com∣mander to the People, Isa. 45. 4. who will break the Yoke of the Oppressor, Isa. 9. 4. even him that is the Light, whom they that walked in Darkness have not seen, Isa. 9. 2. who endeth the Strife with burning, being born unto such as know and preach the Light; Shall not his Name be called the wonderful Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, the in∣crease of whose Government and Peace shall have no end, who shall sit upon the Throne, and establish Judgment and Justice henceforth, even forever, Isa. 9. 6, 7. Is not this he at whose Name every Knee
shall bow, unto whom the gathering of the People shall be? And are not the Kings to be brought unto his dwelling? Isa. 60. 11. And shall not the Kings of the Earth bring their Glory and Ho∣nour unto his beautiful Habitation, Rev. 21. 24. and shall he not have a habitation in the Hearts of the Children of men, in whom God doth come to dwell? And may not this Truth (and Power of God) preserve the King? Qu. 2. Again, if the Kings Throne be upheld by Mercy, (and not by Cruelty nor Persecution) whether then it be not good for the King to shew Mercy? And how sadly, even as it were without Mercy or Pity to Old or Young, Widdows or Fa∣therless, did several Thousands lately suffer by Imprisonment, and divers wayes, only concerning things which to them were matters of Conscience? And should the King be perswaded moreover to break his Promise, and restrain Liberty of Con∣science, and so thereby ruinate many Families, impoverish many that now live well, honest and comfortable, and cause Children to starve in the Streets, and Old People to perish with Hardships and Abuses, and many more to lose their Lives in Prisons, as some have done already, (who can lay down their Lives for Christs sake) and that not for any Evil in the least done or intended by the said Sufferers, but only truly and purely in matters of Con∣science to God, and whether this would not be unmerciful? The third Query upon the same. ANd is it not said in some of that part of the Book of Common-Prayer, which is (in it) appointed to be read once a Year, or upon that day called Ashwednesday, Cursed are the unmerciful; and should any man be first perswaded to be unmerciful, and so brought liable to the Curse, and then they themselves to curse him (once a Year) who cause him to be unmerciful, and it may be much endeavour to make he himself say, Amen, to the Curse against himself, and so curse one another? And is it not dan∣gerous for any man to come under the Curse, and to be unmer∣ciful, lest God shut up his Mercy from him? Therefore whe∣ther Mercy and Pity doth not become the King, that therewith his Throne might be upheld? And whether all the wise men he
hath, with all his Bishops and his armed men, with all strength and Wisdom else whatsoever be able to uphold his Throne without Gods Mercy; and if he would alwayes receive Mercy from God to have his Throne alwayes upheld thereby? Whether it be not meet, if not needful, for him alwayes to shew mercy, and to let all people, but especially Gods Servants, have Mercy from him, or at least so much right, as the Lord himself hath given them, which is, to Worship him in Spirit, and serve him in that which purgeth the Conscience from dead works, that they may serve the li∣ving God, Heb. 9. 14. And seeing the King hath promised, as aforesaid, that such shall not be disquieted therein, and whe∣ther these lines are not written for his good, and in love unto the King? 3. And seeing the same that said, I am the Truth, (who was in the beginning with God, Prov. 8. 30.) said likewise, By me Princes de∣cree Justice, Prov. 8. 15. Qu. 3. Then whether he be not the Power of God, who said so? And if so that he be the Power of God, and that thereby Prin∣ces decree Justice (or that which is just) then what Power is that by which Princes decree Injustice? And whether it be not Injustice for the King (to be perswaded) to break his Word and Promise; and which Power are those men in that would have him do so, seeing Christ is the Power of God, by whom Justice is decreed? And is it not just for the King to be as good as his word, and may not all such as would have him break his pro∣mise, remember, That Lying Lips become not a Prince, Prov. 17. 7. Moreover according to reason. Whether many of them that do so much endeavour to have the King act contrary to his word, or make void his promise, by restraining sober honest Persons from the Liberty of their Con∣sciences in spiritual matters, and duties of prayer to the God of Heaven, and waiting upon the Lord in his true service, and fear of his holy Name; whether such as these would be contented themselves to be restrained from the Wicked Liberty of their fleshly Lusts (though that was never so openly promised them) and so to be kept from all Whoredom, Drunkenness and Swearing, and such other works of Darkness, wherewith they serve the De∣vil? And can such be willing that all Boyes, and all sorts of Peo∣ple,
as often as they see a Whoremonger, or a Drunkard, then all cry out presently A Whoremonger, A Whoremonger, or, A Drunkard, A Drunkard, as they are, that such should cry after us, A Quaker, A Quaker? And whether such be willing to suner as much for their prophane Swearing as they would us (and as we have done) for not Swearing at all? And whether such can be content to suf∣fer as great Punishment for going to an Ale-House (needlesly) on the First-Dayes (or any day) as they would have us suffer for not going to the Steeple-house the First-dayes? (which to us is needless) And whether they would have such Laws made against them, for such things, and such their practices, as they would have made against us, for our practices, in Liberty of Conscience, as pertaining to the service and Worship of God? And if Li∣berty had been so much promised them, in this their Wicked∣ness, as hath been to us in the matter of Conscience; would they have had that promise broken? And whether they would be ha∣led out of their Ale-houses, Tipling-houses and Whore-houses, as oft as they meet there, or could be found there by any Officer, Souldiers, Boyes or People, as they would have other sober per∣sons haled out of their own Houses and peaceable, private and Pub∣lick-Meeting-houses, wherein they meet to serve God? And would they receive every such time the like usage or abuses by any Boyes or Persons that should find them there, or take them in such things, and that would stone them for their Whoredom and Drunkenness at the present? or would they receive the like Punishment after∣wards, when they were brought before a Magistrate in Impri∣sonment, or otherwise? If not, then whether all such men as these (who would have the King break his Word) be not absolutely of the Devil? And would they not limit the Spirit of God, and his Worship and Servants, and tolerate the Spirit of the Devil, and have liberty for his service and his Children therein? And then, whether it be good or safe at all for the King to hearken un∣to the Counsel of such men, or in the least to incline thereunto in this matter? And whether the Lord God will ever bless their Counsels herein (which lead to Destruction?) And whether the King be in the least to receive or consent to the Counsel of such men herein, or their Petitions in that matter, and so be∣come a Breaker of his Word and Promise? This will I leave to
Gods witness in themselves, and in the King, Council, Parliament, and all other Magistrates, and other inferiour Officers and Peo∣ple whatsoever to answer, yea or nay. And further, I might enquire in like manner, concerning the matter and manner or form and place of Worship, whether they would be deprived of theirs, as they would have us of ours, and be haled out as they have haled us, and suffer so much therein as they have caused us, and have Laws made against them for it, as they have made against us, and have another manner of Wor∣ship, and Place, and Teachers imposed upon them, than what they are perswaded of to be Right? And how do such come to be more certain that their way of Worship is right in things they have no Scripture, nor example therein for, than we do come to be certain that our way is right, which we have Scrip∣ture and example therein for? And how came they to know that their worship is better in a temple made with hands, in which God dwelleth not, and the Apostle declared against, Acts 7. 44. than ours is in the Spirit (of which God is, John 4. 24.) and in the Truth, which is his Son, in whom the fulness of God doth dwell, Col. 2. 9. and in the Light, where God doth dwell; for Christ said, I am the Light John 8. 12. And he that hath Immortallity dwelleth in the Light, 1 Tim. 6. 16? And whether such as are compelled to a Worship, which they are perswaded is not right, and that God doth not accept, are they not therein made Hypo∣crites? And if they would compel us from such a Worship that we are perswaded is right, and also compel us to such a Worship, that we are perswaded is not right, whether they themselves would be done so by? And if not, how do they love their Neighbour as them∣selves, and do unto all men as they would be done unto, according to the command of Christ? Mat. 7. 12. And wherein are such like unto a Christian Spirit, which the true Christians were in, and them that by the Holy Ghost were made Overseers of the stock of God, who said, that it seemed good unto them, and to the Holy Ghost, to lay no greater burthen upon the Gentiles, thn to obstain from Meats offered to Idols, and Blood, and things strangled, and Fornication, which were necessary things, Acts 15. 28. These things in brief at present, are offered in plainness, and love unto the consideration of all Rulers, and People, by one that truly desireth Peace amongst men, being an Innocent suf∣ferer
for the cause of God, in the place of my late long and sad Sufferings, in a close unsavoury Prison at Winchester, the 28th of the 9th Month, 1661. being known amongst men by the name Humphry Smith. If a Ruler hearken to Lyes, all his Servants are Wicked, Prov. 29. 12. Bewise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, Psal. 2. 10. Judge righteously, and plead the cause of the Poor and Needy, Prov. 31. 9. The King that faithfully judgeth the Poor, his Throne shall be established forever, Prov. 26. 14. Thou shalt not wrest Judgment, thou shalt not respect Persons, neither take a Gife; for a Gift doth blind the Eyes of the Wise, and per∣vert the Words of the Righteous; That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest Live, and Inherit the Land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, Deut. 16. 19, 20. The People that are gone out of the way, it were them that knew not the way of peace, Rom. 3. 12. vers. 17. But Christ, who is our Way, and unto us the Prince of Peace, hath taught us to give the Back to the Smiter, and to turn the other Check. Forty Four Queries propounded to all the Clergy-Men of the Liturgy, by one whom they trained up in the best things set forth in the Book of Common-Prayer. Eleaven Reasons why these Queries are proposed. BEcause your manner and way of Worship, and pra∣cticeFirst, in many things, hath been these twenty years, by many Zealous persons, very much questioned; who ought to be satisfied, or stopt by sound Arguments and Do∣ctrine,
and words of Scripture-Truth; or else a true Reconci∣liation in the hearts and minds of both, cannot easily be 2dly, Because it is most agreeable to the Law of God, and most according to the Commands of Christ, and doth most suit with the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, and is professed, even by you in the Book of Common-Prayer, To love thy Neigh∣bour as thy self, and not hurt the Body of any man by word or deed; to Love Enemies, to do good unto all, and to convince Gain-sayers with sound Doctrine, and words that cannot be condemned; Rather then to inflict great Punishments upon mens Bodies, and Forfeitures of outward Goods, because of a Principle in the inward Mind, which is not removed thereby. 3dly, Because that Heresie is first occasioned by the Devil, whereby the mind is mistaken or mis-lead, and then prompt on in the same by a spiritual Motion, which worketh in the spiritu∣al Wickedness, which is of another Nature and Being than the visible body (simply considered) in which it acts, or than the out∣ward Goods. And therefore the Power of God, and the Spiritual Weapons, and the continual exercise thereof, is to stop, overcome and re∣move that, which the taking away of carnal Goods, and casting into carnal Prisons (neither yet a carnal Commandment it self) can do. 4thly, Because it is no less than the Duty of a true Minister, to render an account of the hope that is in him, unto him that asketh. 5thly, Because twenty years ago there was no such a necessity of enquiring into those things, as now there is; forasmuch as then your way was going down, and now coming up again; and that then there were not so many unsatisfied so much about such things, as now there are. 6thly, Because divers things and Opinions in the minds of ma∣ny, hath within these Twenty Years, been more largely contend∣ed about, and opened, both in open Conserrence, Disputes, Writing, Print and Practice, than in some Ages before, whereby in Twenty Years time, you might be learned therein, and so know the better how (now) to return the morereadier An∣swer thereunto.
7thly, Because now you are (as it were) upheld under both Arms (with Law on the one side, and Armed men on the other) that so you need not to be afraid, but may with more boldness an∣swer to such things, than in the late years, when the Powers of men ruled so much over you, that you durst not so openly contend for your Faith, or answer such things, nor manifest and practise your Principles, as We do ours now in Bonds under you. And again, as in respect of my own particular, and so in the behalf of others truly with me concerned in the same. First, Because that I was taught, educated and trained up in the very same things, which you practise and profess, and which yet among you your selves stand in force. 2dly, Because I now suffer Bonds this day, as an Heretick, or as a Seducer (as the Mius saith) who hath to this very day, with the help of God's special Grace, more and more en∣deavoured, and come to lead my Life, and regulate my Words, Wayes and Duty towards God and Man, according to the best, most weighty and chiefest things set forth in the Common-Prayer, according as I was by some of your own (called) Episcopal-Di∣vins trained up, and without which they would not receive me into Communion with them; at which time I was by one of them encouraged (as by others at other times  press on further commending me for what I was then already come unto. 3dly, Because that ever since that time, unto this day, I have been pressing forward, and was never cast out from among them for so doing (nor any thing else) as by any way of Excommuni∣ation, or any known Order or Rule used or owned by them; neither yet hath any one of them come to admonish me (from pressing forward) since that, to this day; neither can they well justifie rejecting of me until after the second Admonition, if they could prove I was an Heretick, Tit. 3. 10. 4thly And Lastly, Because they did not tell me, nether did I ever learn out of the Common-Prayer, nor read in the holy Scrip∣tures, That a  might persvere too much, or too far in the way of Ho∣liness; or walk too much with God, or to be too much mortified, or leave sin too much, or be too holy, or too circumspect, or too just, or too
upright, or too faithful to God and man, and walk and speak too much according to the Scriptures; or be too innocent, or too harmless, or be too much conformable to the Image of Christ, or be too much like unto Him, or too much cleansed by his Blood from all Sin whilst in this World, or walk too much in God's Commandments all the days of Mans Life. The Queries propounded to you are these, viz. VVHether the late Resormers and Composers of  the Rites and Ceremonies in the Book of Common-Prayer, were not themselves for Liberty of Conscience? If not, how are their own words trueSeeing in that (before the Common pray∣er) which sheweth why some Ceremo∣nies are aboli∣shed, and some retained, they say, These things were taken away, which were most abus'd, & did burden the Conscience.? If they were, Whether those that profess the Common-Prayer, and are against Liberty of Conscience, are not contrary to them, like those who profess Scripture, and are contrary to that Spirit by which they were given. II. Whether those who profess the Common-Prayer, and prescribe things to those whom they own not as their own People, but persecute them as Hereticks, and do think it not convenient, neither will allow every People who are not their own, or one with them in Worship, to use such things as they shall think best, to the setting forth of Gods Honour and Glory, and to the reducing the People to a most perfect and holy Living, &c. be not contrary to them that reformed the Book of Common-Prayer? Seeing they said, We condemn no other Nation, nor prescribe any thing but to our own People only; for we think it convenient that every Country [And if so, then consequently every People] should use such Ceremonies as they think best, to the setting forth of Gods Honour and Glory, and to the reducing the People to a most perfect and godly Living, without Error or Superstition? III. Whether those that now profess the Ceremonies, and will not have other things put away, than they who reformedSee the latter end of that a∣bovesaid. it, be not therein contrary unto them, and to their Order, who said, They should put away other things, which from time to time they perceived to be most abused? And whether they did
not order, that not only Abuses, and the things themselves that were abused, should be put away; and not only the things which they had put away, because they were abused, but like∣wise other things, which from time to time they perceived to be most abused? And so, whether these now that would have no oher things put away but what they did, be not worse than them, and contrary to their order, mentioned in the Margent? IV. Whether that Confession and Repentance, in that be∣ginning,Seeing they say (not the Scripture) At what time so∣ever a Sinner do repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, God will put out all his wickedness. And seeing they say, They should not dis∣semble nor cloak their sin. And seeing they confess, they have offen∣ded against Gods holy law, and there is no health in them, but are miser∣able Offendors; And seeing, that following is said to be the Absoluti∣on and Remis∣sion of Sins. with the words of Almighty and most merciful Father, &c. together with the Absolution and Remission of Sins follow∣ing, be a true Confession, Repentance and Remission from the bottom of the heart? Or is it false and feigned? If false, is it no tloaked of more sin, and dissembling with God, and deceiving their own Souls? If true, how then are such (after Confession and Remission) Miserable Sinners before they depart▪ as in the Letany? And if the Confession, Repentance and Absolution be right and true, and from the bottom of the Heart, and such thus pardoned, and so made clean, run after∣wards, and that again and again into the very same Sins, whether they be not like the Dog and the Sow, that turn to the wallowing in the Mire, and the Vomit again? V. Whether after true Confession and Repentance, such may thenceforth live a godly, righteous and sober Life, and that pure and holy, according to the latter end of the Con∣fession, and of the Absolution? VI. Whether all such as have erred and strayed from the ways of God, were (before they did so err) made Members of Christ, and Inheritors of God? And whether any were made such Members, &c. but such as have tasted of the good Word of God, and the Power of the World to come? And whether such as have so tasted thereof, and after err and stray from the ways of God, can be renewed again by Repentance? If not, is not their Repentance false, or not effectual, like Esau's? If true, how then is the Scripture true, seeing it speaks as a∣fore-mentioned, of not being renewed by Repentance? VII. Whether such as were made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and are now erred and strayed from the ways of God, so that they are Miserable Offendors, and that against God's holy Law (as themselves confess) can then, in that state, and in that very hour, sing unto the Lord, and heartily rejoyce, and come be∣fore GOD'S Presence with Thanksgiving? And whether such Miserable Offendors are the People of God's Pasture, and the Sheep of his hands? VIII. Whether all such, as in the beginning of the Letany do themselves acknowledge four times over, That they are Miserable Sinners, can call God their Father, by saying, Our Father which art in Heaven? Or, can such Miserable Sinners make others the Children of God, by sprinkling a little Wa∣ter upon their faces? And whether God hath such fourfold miserable Children? Or, are those that are truly the Chil∣dren of God, at the same time in such a fourfold miserable state? Or, are such miserable men truly the Ministers of Christ? IX. Whether God's people may be delivered by him fromSee Letany 6, 7, & 8. Particu∣lars. all these things following, that is to say, from all Evil and Mischief, from Sin, from the Crafts and Assaults of the Devil, from God's Wrath, and from Everlasting Damnation; from all Blind∣ness of Heart, from Pride, Vain-glory and Hypocrisie; from En∣vy, Hatred and Malice, and all Ʋncharitableness; from Fornica∣tion, and all other deadly Sin; from all the Deceits of the World, the Flesh and the Devil? And whether such as are delivered from all these things, be not delivered from all Sin? And then are not such free without sin? If not, then what Sin is it they are guilty of, who are truly delivered from all these? And whether such as pray to be delivered from all these, and do not believe, that they shall be so delivered, do not therein sin a∣gainst God, and so instead of being delivered out of sin (by their praying) add sin unto sin, being it is written, What∣soever is not of faith, is sin? X. Whether shall I own that man, as Christ did, and be∣lieveSee Letany the 14th Particular. him, who said, We know that God heareth not Sinners? or else miserable Offendors, who in their Prayer say, We Sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord; and so believe that the Lord doth hear them, though their continual fruits (and the Scrip∣ture) testifie otherwise?
XI. What, and where is the way of Truth, which all suchSee Letany the 26th Particular. as have erred, and are deceived, are to be brought into, see∣ing when one sin was committed, the creature was deceived, and if deceived and in sin, then unclean, and no Ʋnclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of God? And whether Christ, who is the Way and the Truth, be not in the Kingdom of God? And whether all such as are not only yet unsaved from their sin, but are miserable Offendors, and that against God's Righteous Law, and yet in the same Nature, Way, Words, Worship and Practice, as were their fore-Fathers, whom they confess were in Iniquity; have not all these erred, and are yet de∣ceived, seeing Christ saved his from sin? And whether such do yet rightly know the Way of Truth themselves, which they should be brought into, in which there is no sin? XII. Whether all men are capable of the Mercy of God? And whether Christ hath not lighted every man that cometh into the world? And whether God doth shew to all men that be in Error, the light of his Truth, to the intent they may re∣turn into the way of Righteousness, according to the Collect, appointed for the third Sunday after Easter? And whether the Word be not the Truth, John 17. 17. And is not the World in the heart? And hath not God shewed that to all men, though they be in Error? XIII. Whether men may (with the help of God's Grace) cast away the works of Darkness, and put on the Armour of Light now in the time of this Life? And whether the works of darkness be not Sin, the works of the Devil? And whether the Armour of Light be not the Power of God? And whe∣ther the Power of God, be not sufficient to defend from the Enemy and his Power, and able to defend from the Devil and his works? XIV. Whether those that in this life have put on the Ar∣mour of Light, are not to let it shine before men, that God may be glorified? And whether it be not for God's glory, when his people are by the Light defended from all the works of darkness? And whether those that now deny the Light, and would hinder the children of Light, from letting their Light shine before men (which saveth them from sin) be not
them selves against the Common-Prayer and the late Reformati∣on of it, against GOD, CHRIST and Scriptures, seeing that God is Light, and Christ said, I am the Light; and the Scriptures testifie of him that is the Light, who commanded his, to let their Light shine? And then is he a man, or below the principle of a man, who hideth his Light under a Bushel? XV. Whether any men in their Youth, Infancy or fullSee pub∣lick Bap∣tism about the midst, and Cate∣chism a it∣tle after the begin∣ning. Age, may forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all Covetous Desires of the same, and car∣nal Desires of the Flesh, so as not to follow, nor be led by them, and afterwards keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the dayes of their lives? If they may, why should they not profess the same, and not be counted boasters by such as taught them so? And why may they not live in the same, without being persecuted for it, by such as bound them to it? If they cannot, why is it that they are forced to promise and vow so to do? XVI. Again, whether they that minister this Promise and Vow unto others, have in all things performed the same, viz. Whether they themselves, who impose this upon others, do forsake the Devil and all his Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all Covetous Desires of the same, and the Carnal Desires of the Flesh, so that they themselves do not follow, neither are led thereby, but do keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same every day of their own Lives? If they do, how is it that their Fruits appear otherwise, not only in vain Pomp and covetous Desires (like Balaam) but also in Covetous Practices, worse than Balaam? If they do not, then whether therein they are not just like the Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites of Old, who laid heavy Burdens upon the People, but themselves would not move them with one of their Fingers? XVII. Again, if any men in Youth, Infancy or full Age, do attain so far in their own particulars, to forsake all tho things aforesaid, (which indeed includes all Sin) whether they can safely, and with a good Conscience, Promise and Vow for another, that he shall do the like, seeing also it is but an Infant? And whether all Infants in England be elect∣ed,
and are of the faithful Seed? and whether any but Gods Elect can perform the Promises and Vows aforesaid? If not, why should the People be forced to make such Vows which cannot be kept, and be constrained and taught to tell Lyes in the presence of God, by saying, We forsake them all; if they nor the Child do not so? If they do, let God's Witness in their Consciences answer, which will shew the truth of the matter. XVIII. Again, whether it is good or evil for People To for∣sake the Devil & all his Works, the vain Pomp & Glory of the World, with all covetous desires of the same, and carnal desires of the Flsh, so as not to follow, nor be led by them, and then to keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the dayes of his Life? If Evil, why are they bound and taught so to do? If Good, why are many this day Persecuted and Imprison∣ed only for so doing? XIX. Whether the old Man in People or Children may beSee further in publick Baptism. so buried, that the new Man may be raised up in them? If not, why have the Priests prayed so many Years to∣gether? If it may be so, why may not such then profess the new Man raised up in them, without being called Hereticks for so professing? XX. Again, if the new Man be to be raised up in People when they are in Infancy; then whether it be not to be raised up any other time, or some other time of their Life, if it be not raised up in their Infancy? And then whether they be not true Labourers who labour to raise this up in People? And whether they be not effectual Preachers who do thereby raise it up in People? And whether this new Man be not Christ? And if he be not raised up, whether the Preaching be not vain, the Faith vain, and the People continue in their Sins, that being not raised up in them, which is to save from Sin? And whether this new Man is not in People and Chil∣dren before it be raised up? And is not the new Man the second Adam? And is not that the Seed, which if we had been left without, we had been as Sodom? And is not the Seed
sown in all sorts of Ground? And is not the Seed Christ, which is still in the World, though not known by the World, and who lighteth every man that cometh into the World? And is not this the Truth (Christ) which God desireth in the inward parts? Psal. 51. 6. And is not this the Truth which is promised to spring out of the Earth? Psal. 85. 11. And was not the first man made of the Earth? and are not all People descended from him, and so of the Earth? And whether it be not unreasonable that many Hundreds should be Persecuted chiefly for professing this, and that by such who taught them so to profess, and for witnessing, speaking and writing of the new man raised up in them, and for living up∣rightly according thereunto? XXI. Whether Children or People (who have the new man raised up in them) may have all carnal Affections dye in them, and come to know all things belonging to the Spirit (not only) to live (but also) to grow in them? If not, why are they deceived with those fair Speeches? If they may, then who are most agreeable thereunto, and the best Chri∣stians, they that only talk of, and profess these things effected inwardly, and yet deny that any live in it; or them that are come unto, and do truly know, and live in the possession of these things within them? XXII. Whether the New Man be not the second Adam, the quickning Spirit? And if it be, whether as many as are truly led thereby (it being within them) be not the Sons or Children of God? And whether there be any other that be the Children and Sons of God, but only such as have this New Man raised up in them, and are truly led thereby?See fur∣ther in pu∣blick Bap∣tism. XXIII. Whether all the Children these late hundred Years that were baptized, were regenerated when a little Water was sprinkled upon their faces, though it were done by such a Priest who himself was Unregenerate, and either a Proud, Covetous or Drunken Man? If they were, or the most part of them, how then did they come afterwards to be Unregenerate, seeing that after their Infant-Baptism most are looked upon to be, and by their Fruits do indeed appear in an Unregenerate estate? And whether in any Age it can be
proved by Scripture, that there were so many, either Young or Old, first regenerated, and then unregenerated again? If they were not, how then are the Priests words true, when he saith (after he hath sprinkled them) Seeing now, dearly beloved Brethren, that these Children be regenerate? XXIV. Whether all or any of those Infants these manySee privae Baptism. hundred late years, whom the Priests say, were born in Ori∣ginal Sin, and in the Wrath of God, did come to Regeneration in their Infant-Baptism, and were then receiv'd into the number of the Children of God, and Heirs of Everlasting Life? Was all this done for them, and did they truly come from the one state into the other, by having a little Water poured on their faces, and by the speaking of these words, viz. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen? It being done by a man, who himself at another time will confess with his own Mouth, That he is (with the rest) a miserable Sinner? And how can an old miserable Sinner make a young Child thus happy? XXV. Whether all Children (so sprinkled) or the mostSe Ca▪  part of them, were made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven? If not, whether it be not pity that so many thousand Children should be taught and trained up to speak that which is untrue, whilst they are so young, in saying they were made so, when they were not, and likewise to be deceived thereby all the dayes of their lives? If they were made so, how shall a reasonable man be perswaded from any good reason of Scripture-proof, that they are afterwards dismembred from Christ, separated from God, and dis-inherited out of the Kingdom of Heaven? And when did Christ lose his Members, or God his regenerate Children, or his Kingdom the Inheritors thereof? XXVI. How can such make others the Members of Christ, who are not so themselves? And whether Christ hath any miserable Members? And if miserable Sinners pretend to take upon them to make others the Members of Christ, and receive Wages for it, and yet do it not, whether such are not plain Deceivers? XXVII. Whether the Priests, that say, they are miserable Siers and miserable Offendors, be really so, or not? if not,
are not they miserable Lyars in so saying? If they be, whe∣ther they that are miserable Sinners, and miserable Offendors, can make others so free from all sin and misery, as the Mem∣bers of Christ, in whom is No Sin, who were as miserable as themselves, if they were born in Original Sin, and in the Wrath of God? XXVIII. Whether Children were not first taught their duty towards God, before their duty towards their Neighbour? And whether all such are not still in the first place to obey God, and secondly, to love their Neighbour as themselves? And so, whether Obedience to God is not still to be preferred be∣fore obedience to man, though his Neighbour? If not, why were they so taught? If it be, why then do the Teachers now seek to cause them to obey man in Swearing, and many other things, rather than Christ, who said, Swear not at all? Mat. 5. James 5. XXIX. Whether Children are not taught (among other things) to hurt no body by word or deed, to bear no Malice in the heart, to rule the Hands, the Tongue, the Body and the Desire, in not coveting any man's Goods? If this be right so to do, why do not the Priests themselves do it, and instruct all Magistrates and People in the like, and suffer them that do so, and encourage them also to continue in the same? If this be not right, why did the Priests teach it us when we were young? and whether be the Priests covetous, yea or nay? XXX. Whether Children were not taught, that they could do little of themselves, nor walk in the Commandments of God, nor serve him without his special Grace; and after in another place, that the Geace was inward and Spiritual? If so, whether God's special Grace, which is inward, is not much more than the Letter, which is outward? If it be not, why were those words written in the outward Letter? XXXI. Again, if none can walk in the Commands of God, nor serve him without his special Grace, which is in∣ward; then what manner of walking or service is theirs, who of late have denyed the Grace which is inward, and them that are led by it; which Grace the Bishop in the Confirma∣tion,
prayeth to the Lord to defend Children with? And if nothing can be done of ones self without this Grace, and that this Grace doth defend, and the Apostle saith, bringeth Salvation, and by Grace ye are saved; and the Catechism saith, this Grace is inward and spiritual; and also, why are so ma∣ny persecuted this day for receiving this Grace, and power by it, which is inward, who walk in the Commands of God, and serving him? XXXII. Whether Children were not taught, that thisSee Bi∣shopping. inward and spiritual Grace was a death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness? If so, then whether shall People esteem those Common-Prayer-men to be rightest, who directed to the in∣ward and spiritual Grace, to bring unto a death unto sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness, or these men, who direct unto the Letter without, or a Steeple-house, or any thing else that is outward and visible; seeing the others directed to that which is inward and spiritual, which the Apostle said saved them? and whether the same doth not save now? or whether the Grace of God hath not the same sufficiency in it self as it had in the dayes of the Apostles, or in the dayes of the late Re∣formers of the Common-Prayer? And whether those which have received this inward Grace, may not thereby increase in the same, and in the Spirit more and more (according to that in the laying on of hands?) XXXIII. If you will grant the Apostles words to be true,See Ma∣imony. that the man was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the Transgression, 1 Tim. 2. 14. then whether this be not dark work, or works of darkness, to cause the man to worship the woman, seeing they were both deceived, and in the Transgression, and so instead of worshipping God, make him worship the deceived Transgressor? XXXIV. If you will grant that man was not deceived, but the Woman (who was first in the Transgression) Then wherefore is it that Man being first deceived by the Woman, must now also worship the Woman? And whether this be God's Ordinance, or not? And did not God ordain, that Man should rule over the Woman? Gen. 3. 16. And why
then did man ordain, that man should worship the woman? And when did God ever ordain that man should worship that which he had set him to rule over? If you will grant, that when Peter did only contradict Christ in words, Christ e∣steemed him as a Devil, saying, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16. 22, 23. Then whether all the women you marry, do not more contradict Christ, both in Words and Actions, than Peter then did, and so in as bad or a worse state than Peter then was? And if so, then whether that man which is caused to worship such a woman, or a woman in such a state, do not therein worship one that was deceived by the Devil? XXXVI. But whether doth the man worship the woman, yea or nay? If he doth, is it not evil to worship the Crea∣ture, or any thing else but God alone? If he doth not, why must he speak that Lye, and so thereby serve the Devil, and o be constrained to worship the Devil one way, or serve him another? XXXVII. Whether the man be not Head of the woman? and then, whether that which is head and above, must wor∣ship that which is under? And whether such a joyning to∣gether as this, for the one to worship the other, be of God? and whether God's People, in time of Law or Gospel, were ever joyned together in such a Covenant? and whether it be not contrary to all Scripture and good understanding? And whether it be not time to have this put away, as is mentioned in the beginning? XXXVIII. Whether it be not a piece of gross ApostacySee visita∣tion of the ick. and Popery, for proud, covetous Priests, who are in divers Sins, generally to pretend power to absolve the Sick from Sin, with these Words, I absolve thee from all thy Sins? And whe∣ther most of the same Priests will not themselves acknowledge, that they are miserable Sinners and Offenders? And can such forgive the Sins of others, and cannot leave Sin themselves? Or can they pull the Mote out of anothers Eye, before they have cast the Beam out of their own? XXXIX. Whether the Priest (though he by his own con∣fession a miserable Sinner) doth absolve the Sick from his Sin, that so he is then free from it? Or doth he not? If he doth,
whether he doth not more for another, than God hath done for him? And then whence had he that Power so to do? and whether any true Members of Christ can believe it? If not, whether therein the Priest be not a most miserable blind Lea∣der of the Blind, and a foul Deceiver of Mankind, both at their coming into the World, by a pretended Regeneration, and at their going out of the World by as false an Absolution? And whether ever there were any greater Deceivers than these? XL. Whether the People that dye in their Sins, and the Priests that live in their Sins, be not therein truly BrethrenSee Buri∣al of the dead. together in Iniquity, seeing the Priest saith at the burying of the dead, For asmuch as it hath pleased God to take our dear Brother here deceased? XLI. Whether the Priest doth give God thanks for the safe deliverance of no other Women but such as are GodsSee Chur∣ching of Women Servants? Or whether they are not to give God thanks for almost all Women after Child-birth? And whether all Wo∣men that they are to give thanks for, and do give thanks for, be the Servants of God, seeing they say, Almighty God, which hath delivered this Woman thy Servant? Or whether most of the women they give thanks for, be not Servants of Sin, and led about with divers Lusts? And whether it be not one thing to be a Servant of Sin, and another thing to be a Servant of God? XLII. Whether the new Man, which is within ChildrenSee Com∣mination. and People, and to be raised up in them, be not Christ? and whether Christ be not the Light? And whether he that is the new Man, and the Light, be not the Way? and whether all they be not blind that know it not? And if Christ the Light and the Way be to be known within the hope of Glory, and that the Priests have caused Children and People, who were so blind they did not know it, to go out from that which is the new Man, and the Light, and the Way within, and also teach them to go after, and walk in something without? Whe∣ther such Priests have not these many Years cursed themselves or read the Curse against themselves, and causing the People to say Amen to it, in saying, Cursed is he that maketh the Blind to go out of his Way?
XLIII. Whether the Priests themselves have not put their Trust in Man, and taken one Man and Protector afteru aother for their Defence? And whether some of them have not been un∣merciful, in taking more than Ten times the value (in Goods) of what themselves demanded from men? And whether some have not been Fornicators, and some Covetous Persons, and some Slanderers and Drunkards, and many Extortioners? If not, let Gods Witness and their own Fruits testifie. If they are such, then whether they have not a long time read the Curse against themselves, and that from Year to Year in these late Ages, as long as they durst do it, saying, Cursed are the Ʋnmerciful, the ornicators and Adulterers, and the Covetous Persons, the Worship∣pers of Images, Slanderers, Drunkards and Extortioners? XLIV. Whether the Priests, that did in our Infancy sprinkle us, who are now in derision by them called Quakers, did then by that Water and their Words, make us, or so many of us as they did so sprinkle, the Children of God, the Members of Christ, and the Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven? If not, whether did not they grosly deceive us, as also by after teaching, and perswading us we are already regenerated, and born again in our Baptism, by which means hindering us, what in them lay, for ever looking after it, and causing us to say we were that we were not, and so made innocent Children speak Lyes, we not knowing it to be Lyes? If they did make us so, then what have they since done, in Reviling and smiting with the Tongue and Pen, and writing against us, the Members of Christ, and per∣secuting us the Children of God, and that so many Years toge∣ther; and in causing us, the Inheritors of the Kingdom of Hea∣ven, to be Imprisoned Year after Year, to the depriving many of us of our Healths, and some of our Lives, and many of their Livelihoods, by spoiling of their Goods? And by this time some other thing then what the former Composers of the Common-Prayer did put away, which did burden mens Consciences, are herein by way of Query made manifest to be abused, yea, even the Prayers abused; and several of these things the Minds of People will never be quiet concern∣ing, as to own them again, unless some better satisfaction in plain and sound Words be given them, either by answer hereunto, or otherwise in the like nature, in Love, and not by Severity; for Love and sound
Words may win the Hearts of those, which Severity, Bonds and Cruelty cannot force them unto, till they are better satisfied con∣cerning it. Written by one that hath learned (as he was taught) To for sake the Devil and all his Works, the Vanities of the wicked World, to hold the true Christian-Faith, and to keep God's holy Will and Com∣mandments, and walk in the same all the dayes of his Life. H. S. An Epistle to all the Meetings in Dorsetshire. ONce more am I moved to visit you with an Epistle of plain words, from the free and powerful operation of divine Love, unto the seed which in many lieth oppressed, by reason of that which through disobedience doth hinder the growth thereof, so that many come not into the Life of Truth, which in the power of God was declared unto you, whose hearts at that time were much broken, and true desires in many raised; but af∣terwards not standing in the Cross to your wills, in Obedience to the Light, to receive the Judgment due to that ground, from whence Transgression ariseth, whereby the Enmity might be ain, the love of the World rooted out, and that ruled over with the perfect Law of God, which was not subject to it, that the Law of the Spirit of Life, your minds might be alwayes exer∣cised in, thereby to be made free from the Law of sin and death; that sin might not reign in your mortal Bodies, but that through the power of the Cross of him, who is the Light, the sinful Lusts of the flesh might be mortified, and you led by the Light through the Law, by it to have the Transgression thereof to you in every Particular discovered, that every one might deny and stand out of that, which leads into the Transgression thereof, seeing with the Light, that not one jot nor tittle thereof shallpass, till all
be fulfiled; and the Righteousness thereof is to be fulfilled in you, by your humble and faithful following of him (that worketh in us) who cannot transgress the Law, who being made as a Ser∣vant under the Law, to him you are all to come and see the Law stand in force, over every one that doth transgress, which Law is addedbecause of sin, and that which saveth the Soul doth not make it void, nor mittigate the power thereof against any one that sins wilfully, after the knowledge of the Truth received, but upon such the Wrath of God abideth, which is ministred forth through the Law, with Tribulation, Anguish and Wo upon every Soul that doth Evil; so Trouble, Torment and Vexation of Spirit cometh upon such, who turn aside from the simplicity of the Gospel, and let the spirit of the world reign over them, not being faithful in the little, which from God they had received, by the powerful ministry of his living Truth that the smallest of all seeds in them might spring, with obedience, through the whole body of the Earth, under which it lieth, and by it in many is oppressed; and such in whom it is so, are in many Doubts and Reasonings, from that ground out of which Unbelief doth arise. And then the Mind being from the Light, a hardness comes in, and the Rebellious take entrance; and so that which is worse than before gets strength, which being joyned unto, leads in a secret deformity, farther from the Witness then ever; so that then the good Savour comes to be lost, and the Understanding darkned, not knowing the true motion, and often a carcless Spirit gets head, and such are from the true Love and suffering Seed in themselves, and so not joyned in the Covenant of Love and Peace, with them that abide therein, the which they sceing, a discontent ariseth therein in the mind; so did Cain, he murmur∣ed at the other, but the Fault was in himself, for Sin lay at the Door; and it is Sin to transgress against that which is Perfect; and the Light is the perfect gift of God, and his Gifts are Per∣fect, and in the Light there is no Evil, and the Light is to lead out of that which is Imperfect, & they that err from the Light are in the strife and fleshly will: And the other Eye seeks for evil, and then that kindles a Fire in the Bowels, and eats as a Worm, and
so drowns that from whence true Love should arise, as deep as the depth of the Sea, and nothing but raging Waves over it, sometimes ready to vent forth its own shame, and dis∣cover the nakedness of it self and others, which begets its Image in the minds of them that regard it, so as to come under it, or let it have entrance in them: And where these things are, there is little increase within or without, but Truth suffers, and the World takes advantage, and the Weak stumble, for whom Christ dyed, and the Lambs hurt, and their dear Life grieved. And so these things are far from answering the dear and tender Call and Visitation of the Lord; and then, if not faithful in lit∣tle, when can such come to rule, or how can they receive the blessing of God, being joyned to that which he hath cursed? What shall I say to such? or with what Words shall I find en∣trance in them? Surely if I had not a Word to write, I would mourn in secret for them! Oh fruitless Trees, dry Branches, foolish Virgins, unprofitable Servants, take heed lest the Lord spue you out of his Mouth! What should the Lord do for you, that he hath not done! My Bowels within me are troubled for you, and I even mourn under the burthen of your Iniquities. How is it that you delight in other Lovers? and what is it in you that keeps you from the power of Truth? How long shall the Lord streth forth his Hand to them that rebel against the Light? And how often have you grieved the Spirit of the Lord? And why is it that he is provoked to Jealousie every day? Will not the Lord visit for these things? And can the Wicked go un∣panished? Turn ye now therefore, O ye Rebellious! and let the Double-minded fear and tremble before the God of Power; for no Peace have I to preach for the Wicked, nor Pearls for the Swine, in which the Unclean is entred: Let your Hearts now therefore be opened, and let Judgment come upon that which is above the Seed, and sink down into the House of Mourning, that the Prisoner may hear my Voice. And now you that are honest, tender, faithful, willing and obedient, dear is my Love unto you, the Lord God eternal preserve you dear Babes, and give you up your Lives, and praise his endless rich love, who hath called you to come out of the World. My dear Friends, let my Fathers love arise in you, even
the same which I now feel towards you; and let me come near unto you in the power of my Fathers love, that you may feel my Life, and partake with me of the hidden Treasure, that your Hearts may be open to me again, from the feeling of the Power of the covenant of Life, that in him I may salute you, who is at the Fathers Right Hand: For unto you, O ye Children of the Light! is my Heart enlarged, and toward you doth the Power of my Life arise from the streams of unlimitted Love, which from all the World is hid, and reserved in the Bosom of the Father, for the meek and tender Lambs, for whom the Milk is prepared, and to whom the Bread is to be given, and the sure Waters that never shall fail. Let the Light arise in you, my dear Ones, that with it your Hearts may be opened one to another, that you may know that the Lord is a God of Power, and near at hand unto the Humble, that in his Love you may be kept, and by his Power be defended, and so from strength to strength in his fear to walk, and to come at last to be a People saved from Death, and redeemed from the Cor∣ruptions of the Flesh. And walk in the Life of Righteousness, to preach forth the Innocency of the Lamb in uprightness, through a suffering state, and therein to glorifie him, whom in Spirit and Truth you are to serve forever more, so your Life may be renowned with him forever, and your Souls replenished in the bountifulness of his Love, whereby Fruits in you may abound to the glory of his Grace, and you become rich in every good Word and Work. And all you that are weak, who meet with many Hardships, and Tryals, and Temptations within and without, be ye not therefore discouraged nor moved, but still mind that the Lord is able to deliver, and still on him in much Patience wait, that in the due time you may come to reap. And truly Friends, in faith∣fulness you will come to know the Lord to minister strength to the weak, and give power to the faint, that the small thing in you may become great, and the barren become fruitful; for in him, who is the Light, the plentious Redemption is, and he it is that succours and saves in the time of need, and helps and delivers in the time of distress; and he will not leave the Humble Comfortless, nor forsake the Meek of the Earth; neither can the Lord forget
his Covenant of Peace with the Seed of Jacob, though it be but as a Worm in the Earth. And you who suffer Bonds, Imprisonments or loss of Goods for his sake, who hath called you out of the World, dear is my love unto you, and precious is the faithful suffering Seed in you to me, who also with you suffer, both within, and in outward Bonds, seeing the Crown of rejoycing that through a suffering state is manifest to the Seed, which through suffering comes to live for∣ever; and the Life is that which will uphold, in the measure whereof manifest in you: The power of the Lord preserve you, that you may feel Truth kept clear in you, and preserved blame∣less by you, that the Prisoner of hope in you may Reign over its Adversaries, and you feel the Power of the Lord strengthning the spoiled against the strong, that under it the other may bow, that to the humble Life of the Lamb slain, all Nations may be∣come subject. And all consider, that he that is the Wonderful Counsellor, who saith, I am the Light; In it therefore wait, the counsel of the Lord to receive: And all take heed of going out from that, to set up a form of barren Words without, neither build ye the things which began to be destroyed, but all take heed of vain Talkers, high Boasters, and such, who by a multitude of Words, darken that in you which is to give the knowledge of him, whose Kingdom consisteth not of Words; for many see things afar off, and speak too soon and too much, and out of the true fear, whose Words feed that above the Seed in many, who live thereby; and it burthens the Seed in some tender Lambs, so that it which should live in them is kept in Death. And so such Talkers, with their many Words, do scatter the Flock, and cause Strife, be∣ing separated from the suffering Seed within, and so cannot suf∣fer one with another, and things are out of God's Wisdom, and out of Unity and true Brotherly Love; and then the Mouthes of the Heathen are opened against you all, and the precious Truth of God suffers: Therefore its better all such were silent, and that in the true fear you come to wait on the Lord, that the power of his Life might be opened in every particular; and then if that speak a Word or two, it will hurt none, but be received by all that fear the Lord, and that my Soul loveth; but
this I know and feel, that many Words are spoken, which mur∣der the Life in the Meek. Therefore where these things are, let it be searched into with the Light in every particular, that the true thing in all may arise, and act, and lead, and guide in Meekness and true Fear, that the Power of God in you all you may come unto. And let all your Meetings be kept as in the dreadful Awe and Presence of God; and meet together often, that the Seed through Death may come, to which my Love is dear, in which Love, which comes from God, his Arm of Power preserve you all, which is both my Desire and Prayers to God, whom in the measure of his living Truth, I serve in my Spirit, and for which now I suffer Bonds, who to some of you may be felt in that which is more near unto many of you, than the Name Humphry Smith. To the despised, rejected and persecuted Lambs of Christ in the County of Dorset. YOu whom the Lord God of Life hath visited with his Ever∣lasting Loving-kindness, in a day of Salvation, and in an acceptable year hath the Lord ought after you, who from him were going astray in the frowardness of your Wills, and haugh∣tiness of your vain Minds, whereby your Souls were kept in Death, out of which the Lord is now come to redeem, and ga∣ther you, his long lost sheep, in his everlasting Arms of unlimited Love, home unto the rest eternal, where Peace and Plenty is within the Walls that are Salvation, and the Gate of everlasting Peace; within which the redeemed of the Lord do dwell, and their rest is gloriously glorified with the presence of the most High, who comes to rule in the Kingdoms of men; and set his Righteousness and Judgment in the Earth, whereby the meek of the Earth shall rejoyce, and the Mourning seed shall be comfor∣ted,
because of him that executeth true Judgment upon the head of the Wicked, which ruled over the growing seed, which cryeth unto the Lord in the hour of distress, and mourned for him who is the bright Morning Star, whose lightnings begin now to en∣lighten the Earth, and shine out of Darkness, to give the know∣ledge of God in the sensible feeling part of the heart, which comes to be made soft and tender thereby, so that its wrought into Gods love, which melts the Hills and shakes the Mountains, and divides asunder, that an open way, fair & clear may be made for the long∣ing breathing seed to spring out of Bondage, and feel Gods Mercy showered down as the latter Rain upon a dry and thirsty Land, wherey the Lillies grow, and the Vine yields her Increase, and the Olive flowrishes, and Clothing from the God of Righ∣teousness comes to cover the mourning naked Birth, who hath no strength nor help but from the Lord God of Mercy, who is the Father of the Fatherless, and the Helper of the Helpless, who also hears the Cry of the Needy, and knows the mind of the Spirit, and hath pity on all Sion's Mourners, and Compassion of all the faint, and he is helping the Prisoner out of the Pit, whereby the Captive comes to be set at liberty, and the opening of the Prison Door is felt by the Lambs and Children of the Day, who unto the day of Salvation are come, wherein God, even our God is shining out of Zion, the redeemed of the Lord, the perfection of Beauty unto all the World; and all Nations who have been high shall now be brought down into the Valley, & there will Christ, the Lord of Hosts, plead in the cool of the day with all Flesh, and fallen man; and the day is come that the Hea∣then shall be weakned, and the strength of the Mighty shall fail; and he that handleth the Bow, and the Shield, and the Spear, shall not deliver himself, but the mighty man shall fall in the Streets, and the strong man shall utterly faint, and Wisdom shall perish from the Wise, and Understanding from the Prudent; and Judges shall be led away Fools, and the Honourable shall be laid in the Dust, and no Weapon formed against the Righteous Seed shall prosper; for of a truth the Lord is with us, and in vain do all the Potsherds of the Earth strive against the Lamb, and his meek Spirit in his Members; for though they Fine one, and Whip another, and Imprison many, yet the day is come, that they
shall fall down under the Prisoners, and bow down under the Slain; for the Lord our God is risen over them all, and he even laughs them to scorn, and will have them in derision: Therefore by ye still and quiet, O ye flock of the most high, and let the Boun∣tifulness of God's everlasting Love break the Earthly Pitchers, and feel Gods unlimitted Power fighting for you, who are now to be quiet for a little season, and you shall see the destruction of the wicked, and the overturning of the seats of the ungodly, who are all but as Chaffbefore the wind, & as stubble ready dryed be∣fore the fire of God's Jealousie, which will shortly smoke against his Enemies, who shall vanish like smoke when our God ariseth to confound Babel, and overturn the foundation of the Wicked; for great Babel is come in remembrance before our God, who is now giving her Blood to drink, and the day is at hand, that Vengeance shall be poured forth upon the head of the Wicked, and Flames of everlasting Burning upon the Whore, the Beast and the false Prophet, and all they that commit Fornication with strange flesh, and they shall now be taken and cast alive, sensible of Gods Wrath, into the Lake that burneth forever and ever; yea, the day is at hand, and the Ungodly shall not escape. Therefore, ye Sons and Daughters of the most High, lift up your Heads, behold, your Redemption draweth nigh, therefore rejoyce in the Lord forever; and again, I say, Rejoyce, for your Redeemer cometh, riding upon the Wings of the Wind, a Fire devoureth before him, and behind him a flame burneth; behold, his Reward is with him, and his Work before him, and long his Enemies shall not stand, but the overflowing Scourge shall pass over them all, and their Covenant with Hell shall be broken, and their Agreement with Death shall be dissanulled, and their Shame and Nakedness shall appear to the view of all Nations, and their Whoredoms shall be made manifest in the sight of all People, and the Nations afar off shall hiss at them, and they shall become a By-word and a Hissing to them afar off. Wherefore, be ye still and quiet, O ye Children of the Light! commune with your own Hearts, and be still in your own Closets, and fret not your selves because of the Ungodly, for his day is short, and e'er long his place shall not be found, and in the mean time your Patience comes to be exercised; and by the Tyranny
of the Wicked, and the Oppression of the Merciless, your Faith is tryed, and blessed forever are they who love not their Lives nor Goods more than Christ the Light, but follow him unto the end, who is despised of men, contemned of the Wise, and consulted against by the Rulers of the Earth, who are now lifting up their beastly Power unto Heaven, and are laying Snares and setting Traps to catch the Innocent, and are openly blaspheming the God of the Seed of Abraham, whom they call Quakers, who confess we are Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth. And all you who stand fast in the Faith, that respects no man's Person, and you that in patience endure the spoling of your Goods, the Imprisoning or Whipping of your Persons; and all you, in whom there is honest desires begotten after the living Truth of the God of Life, even to you all my Bowels of Love do reach, and of your sufferings I do partake, and my Prayer and Hearts desire to God, for you Night and Day with Tears, is, That you may be preserved unto the end; and this I write from a true sence and feeling of you, your Sufferings and Conditions, who are tryed divers wayes both within and without; but faint not, my dear Lambs, the Lord God will never break Covenant, nei∣ther can he leave or forsake the faithful; Therefore only trust in the Lord and be still; for the Lord of Hosts is fighting for you, yea, it is so, and all your Enemies shall be but as the dust of the Earth, and as the mire in the streets; so shall the Lamb in Meekness Trample upon them all. And my dear Friends, now the Everlasting Love of God unto you hath appeared, with the same Love come to love one another, and be watchful one over another; and in the Light meet often together, and be not soon shaken in mind, and so turn from the true Guide, as some have done, and that which is out of the Light, with it judge in wisdom and meekness, that you may answer that of God in all, who contrary to the Light do act, but of rash Judgment see that you all beware, but rather in love wait to re∣store and build up one another; and none of you depart out of Gods fear, but be low, single-hearted, plain and honest, with∣out any By-covering or Double-mindedness, but as Doves and Lambs in the godly simplicity all walk, not as Strangers unto, or High-mindedess one over another, but in Love to serve;
and let your Minds be kept on the Eternal Invisible things, and let Faith, Love, Meekness and Vertue abound in you, so shall the work of God prosper in and by you. Truly Friends, the Love of the Lord is towards you, and he will make you a blessing and a praise over the Earth; and if you stand in his Counsel, your Enemies shall be confounded and overturned: Believe it, it must be so. And you, the Jewels of the Lord shall be Crowned with Eter∣nal Dominion, and the Lord of Glory will be your God, and Peace, Righteousness and Plenty shall you enjoy forever: Wherefore faint not, O ye seed of Abraham, who are Strangers and Pil∣grims on the Earth, but let the meek be encouraged, and the tender nursed up, in the everlasting Arms of Gods endless Love, and let none turn back because of the Enemy that standeth up before, but all joyn battel with the Lamb; and Gog and Magog, and all Nations that rise up, and gather themselves together a∣gainst you, the beloved of the Lord, they are all but as the ri∣sing up of Smoke, and as Chaff before the Wind, so must they e'er long be driven away: Have you not seen the Overturning and the Confounding of them that were against God and good∣ness, who raged much against you, as these do now? And will not the Lord once more overturn? Yea, it shall be so; for the Blood-thirsty Priests and persecuting Officers must follow after; for though Pharoah, and all his Host were overturned, yet the Moabites, nor the Canaanites would not take warning: But re∣joyce not thou, when thine Enemy falleth, nor because the De∣vils are made subject, but feel thy Name written amongst the Living. And now to the Lord God of Life I commit you all, and to the Guidance of the measure of his Spirit of Holiness; and the Blessing of the most high be upon you every one that is faith∣ful, now and for evermore; and the presence of Lord be in all your Meetings. Humphry Smith.
DEar Brethren, Friends and Babes in Christ, who are begot∣ten again by the Word of Power, and born of the Im∣mortal Seed, whom God hath raised up in the Day of his Love, and gathered into his Covenant of Life, with whom my Heart is joyned in the Life of Righteousness, where the sweet savour of divine Love is felt, as healing Oyl, blessed forever and ever be the Fountain from whence it comes, whereby the heart is made glad unto God, and the weary Soul refreshed; Beauty and Ex∣cellency remaineth in the Life forever, and durable Righteous∣ness inhabiteth therein: Let the humble rejoyce because of its Beauty, and let the meek be glad for evermore; let the Earth be quiet and still, and let the Inhabitants therein feel the Visita∣tion of Life, where God's day of brightness dawneth in the Hearts of his chosen, where Peace abideth forever, and the Light most gloriously doth shine, which expels the Darkness far away, and scatters the Clouds of the Night; Love then springs up from God, and Life and Virtue doth nourish his tender Plant, unexpressibly is it received therein, and the Father's Mercy more sweet than the finest Honey, with this may all Gods Plants be nourished, and your breathing desires answered, and longing Souls satisfied; then may you all lie down together, receiving God's blessing of Life, and grow up in the Power thereof, as the holy Building of God, to shew forth the Praise of his Glo∣rious Name, by walking in the Virtuous Life, that the Father and Begettor of your true Desires for evermore may be honour∣ed, and you a delightsom savour of Life unto him, to be joyned in his Covenant Immortal, where God, who is Love, dwelleth in the Light, which no Eye of flesh can behold, nor the fleshly Birth come near, nor the polluted enter within his Dwellings, nor the Transgressor of the Law come with his burden into this City of Rest, where the Lamb is the Light, and the blessed Sab∣both is kept, who feel the liberty of the Seed Immortal, may see, and read, and understand, even the unutterable things of God, whose Power, Love, Mercy, Compassion and Peace may many of you feel sometimes in your own hearts, which is to draw you to himself, that you might love him again forever,
above all things that are created by him, that in his Power, which was before it, you may come over it all, to him again, and in the same Power, with him, over it to reign, and the Creatures to rule in his Wisdom, that your Souls may be kept clean to God, and you sanctified to himself, a sit Habitation for him forever. The Lord God Almighty help, keep and preserve all Friends, that all may stand in the day of Tryal, and finish your Testimony with Peace. H. S. Broomeyard in Herefordshire, the 4th of the 3d Moneth, 1660. One Hundred and Forty four Lines of secret inward Melody and Praise to the Lord. MY heart shall sing of thee, Who dost my Soul defend, Whose Life hath saved me, Who didst my Wayes amend: Whose strength hath me upheld, Whose Love is with me still, Whose Grace doth virtue yield; Who hast taught me thy will. O! blessed be thy Name, Who hast my Life redeem'd, That I may sound the same, With them thou hast esteem'd. O! let me now rejoyce, And praise the Lord my strength, Who long hath been my choice, And drawn my dayes in length. O! that I could declare Ʋnto the sons of men His Gifts and Rules rare, Which he hath yet for them. O! that my heart could dite The goodness of his Love, Or that my pen could write, His Mercies yet above. O! that I might express, With Heart, with Tongue or Pen, His sweet delight somness, Reserv'd for upright men. O! that I could unfold, Or in meekness declare, His strength, which maketh bold, And keepeth from the Snare.
Behold, his Throne is Love, His Seat is Mercy pure, Descending from above, Is he both day and hour. Behold, his Glory shines Ʋnto his Jewels rare, He visits them betimes, When they in Darkness are. Behold, his Heart is bent Towards his little Ones, His Love their hearts doth rent, And in his Virtue comes. Behold, he draweth near To all the Poor and Weak, And he to them is dear, Who will them not forsake. Behold, he doth arise, In Might, Virtue and Power, To bring in his lost prize, Into his refuge Tower. The weak he doth defend, The poor he'l still uphold; Forth' needy he'l contend, And give them more than Gold. His Lambs he still doth lead, His little Ones he'l teach: The Hungry have his Bread, The Thirsty he'l refresh. He makes the Feeble strong, He makes the Barren bare, He leads the Blind along Into the Light most clear. He cometh as a Dew In heat of Summer time, Ʋpon his Plants below, That forth their Fruit may shine. He feedeth every Babe, He seeketh every Lost; His Love doth never fade, For his he spares no Cost. His Vrtue and his Strength, His Wisdom and his Power He gives to his at length, And they of him are sure. He never doth forsake His dear and little Flock, Who of that Bread partake That's hidden in the Rock. The Heavens and the Earth He with himself Doth fill; He dwelleth in our Hearts, And doth reveal his Will. He maketh known his Way, That all his Flock shall go, And them in light Aray For to withstand the Foe. He helps in time of need, He leaves not in distress, He doth effect the Deed, To Man he gives redress. He casteth down to Hell, His Power is so great, He doth the Living kill, And none can him defeat. He raiseth from the Grave, And makes the Dead alive; From him there's none can save, Nor in his absence thrive. He's alwayes near at hand From trouble to deliver. He's joyn'd with his in Band To live with them forever. No God is like to him, No Honour like to his, No man is said to win, Whose Soul is lost from bliss.
Oh praise him all ye Saints, Who feel his vertue near; Ʋnto him still give thanks, Who is our Father dear. Let wicked men lament, Let all Ʋngodly howl: Too late shall some repent, When down his Judgments rowle. When Babel's turn'd int' Lake, When the Beast is thither thrown, When Drunkards reel and shake, When Wrath is poured down. When Vengeance much wth might Is pour'd on the Whore, And all secret Deceit Destroy'd forever more. Then Sion shall be glad, Then God shall honoured be, Then Praises shall be had, Then Worship shall be free. Then Comfort shall abound In all true mourning Lambs, And Gospel free shall sound Throughout all Nation Lands. The time hereof's at hand, The Captives shall be free Gods Seed in every Land, By him shall gathered be. Let Friends rejoyce in fear, Let fear in love abound, Let Thousands more draw near, For we the Pearl have found. Let all in Patience dwell, And in the Lord still trust, That we in Love excell, In which with you I rest. As I walking alone in my close Prison at Winchester, upon the 24th of the 5th Moneth, 1662. in much Quietness, Meekness and inward Refreshings, by the rising vertue of Gods refreshing Love, these Lines began to run gently through me, with Melody in my Heart to the Lord; and when I was free in my self to write, it departed not from me, but came so easie and so fast, as I could well write, whereby in a very little part of the said day this was begun and finished with my own Hand: Yet would I not have it looked upon to be a great thing, nor a pattern or ex∣ample for others to run into the like. For since I came into the Life and Obedience of Truth, I durst not write any thing thus in Verse until this day and time; nei∣ther was there the least thought in me thus to write, until the very instant. For writing in Meeter is apt to beget a lightness in some Readers, and make way for too much, or a wrong Li∣berty in others, to do the like, but not in the true fear, which is the continual Refuge of Humphry Smith.
Hidden things made manifest by the Light, In a plain Distinction between Condemnation & Temptation. Wherein is shewed How the Righteous Law of God is ministred upon the Transgressor, and how it is to be by all received, as a Schoolmaster to come to Christ, by him to have the sin done away forever. Also, of Temptation, what it is, and how it may be known & discerned from Condemnation. With a Direction to them who profess the knowledge of Truth, and live not in the power of God. Concerning the Ministration of Condemnation. THe World being set in man's Heart, and Sin being in the World before the Promise was made, which Pro∣mise was before the Law, by which the Sin is discover∣ed; which Sin was in the World before the Promise, yet the Promise was before the Law; and yet until the Law comes, Death reigns over that to which the Promise is, and Sin separateth man from God, the which is not clearly seen until the Command∣ment (which is Light) is come, the Ministration whereof is Con∣demnation unto Man, being found in the Transgression; the which Ministration of Condemnation is to pass over all, having sinned; and when this cometh, it finds man in the Death, and by it is sin revived, whereby man comes to see a Body of Sin,
which stands between him and God, so that he is afraid of the dreadful Power of God, ministred forth through the Law, to slay him that hath transgressed, the which some coming to see, or in the least measure to feel, call it a Temptation, because it maketh him sensible, that Condemnation belongeth to him, and that all his Profession and building upon the Promise, in that which the Promise was not unto; and seeing, that if he lie down to re∣ceive this Ministration, that then all his Profession and Know∣ledge, Zeal, Wisdom and Prayers (which did arise out of that ground which was cursed by reason of the sin that was in the World before either the Promise, the Profession, or the Law) will be all ript up from him, as filthy Rags, and that his shame and nakedness must appear, as its written, Every mouth shall be stopped, and every one shall stand guilty before God, and no Darkness, no shadow of Death shall hide the workers of Iniquity from the mighty hand of God, who brings to judgment the hidden things of Darkness, and rips open the secrets of the Heart, so that the most secret Sin that ever were committed are clearly made manifest, and justly charged upon the head of the Transgressor, who stands in Enmity to God, who will wound the head of the Transgressor, and plead in Righteousness with him, in whom the sin is found, though not made manifest until the time that the Law is come, by which it is discovered. And this Ministration of Condemnation is not a Temptation, though many call it so, who being blind, put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; for that which sheweth man his sin, doth not tempt man to sin, but rather brings man in fear that he may not sin; for because of sin was the Law added; and the Law was given after much of the Love, Preservation, Power, Deli∣verances, and the Wonders of the Lord had been seen, and it was given in the Wilderness, where sometime there was want of Bread and Water, where was Serpents, Scorpions and many Tryals, where the figure of him who was to heal the wounded, and take away the sting of death, and save the Life of man, was lifted up on high without them; the which figure or outward bo∣dily Appearance, was prepared by Moses: And Christ had a body prepared him, both which the carnal Eye might see, and the carnal Mind contend about (even as the Devil about the bo∣dy of Moses) but the Substance of the Figure, Christ the Light,
Gods power, being not received within, in the heart, and so fin (the transgression of the Law) remains within, and the figure or that which the natural Eye did or may see, was and is looked upon without; and that without doth not take away the sin with∣in; and these knew not the Ways of God, who sinned, and at last loathed the Manna (calling it light bread) in the Wilderness, even there was the Law Ministred; they whose eyes are open may read and understand And where the Law was given forth, there was a Mount, or a high place of the Earth, which then trembled by reason of the dreadful Power of the Lord of Hosts; and beneath or under the Mount was the Seed and Israel of God, which was to keep the Law and Life [Read within and understand] and yet by reason of that which was hard upon the heart, there was a crying out with Dread, and Horror, and Fear, That the Lord might speak no more, lest they dye; and so that which is hard upon the heart, in the which by the Law (which is Light) sin is found, that is it which is afraid to receive the Law, and come near the Darkness, and Thunders, and Tempests; and so, though many do talk of the Law (being a School-master to Christ) yet they are much afraid to receive the Ministration of Condemnation, as their Fa∣thers were, who might have boasted, that they were the People of God, his only chosen flock, and that the Land of rest was pro∣mised to them, and that they had fed upon the Passover (and yet they perished before they came to that which was promised, who are left for an Example) and they might have boasted and talked much of the goodness of God, and of his wonders, and of his presence being with them, and of their own experiences therein, and that therefore they were not to come under the Ministration of Condemnation, and fear, and horror, and trem∣bling, and astonishment, and that they need not now to be a∣fraid of God, who had shewed them so much love and mercy: And many such things might they have pleaded, as most profes∣sing People do now, who can talk of promises and deliverances, and of Christ, and his Merites and Righteousness, and Justifica∣tion, and Redemption (finished without them) and especially of Ordinances, and their own experiences of the Power of God, but are yet in their sins, having not received the thing promised,
neither come to him who is the end of the Law, and maketh an end of sin, whom many satisfie their vain Minds with talk∣ing of him with the same Tongue that useth deceit; and pro∣fessing him who is the end of the Law, but the Law they despise, holding the Truth of God in the unrighteous Ground, which by the mighty power of God, through the Ministration of the Law, is to be shaken and removed, as it is written, Sinai also was moved, and all Israel trembled, and Moses did fear and quake; and once more will the Lord shake not only the Earth, but the Hea∣vens also, and then shall the Foundation of the Hypocrites be overturned forever. For though the Name of God and Christ be professed, yet if Moses's Law be despised, such dye without Mercy; for the Law is to remove the Iniquity, which doth with-hold the Mercy and the good things from man; and in the end of the Law is that received by which the Law is fulfilled, which is according to the Law and the Prophets; but there is none can come to that in the end of the Law, who refuse to come to the beginning of the Law, and despise the Ministration of Condemnation, and make a mock at Trembling, or at least, not knowing what it is, exceed∣ingly to fear and quake, being not in the least sensible, what that is which must be shaken and removed, before the thing pro∣mised be obtained; for a Promise may be made long before the thing promised be given or obtained; for a Promise was made unto Abraham and his seed, and yet it is written of him, and ma∣ny more, that they dyed, having not obtained the Promises; and he that made the promise was before the sin, who ministred forth the Law to discover the sin; through the Ministration whereof, and by Obedience thereunto, that cometh to be received which taketh away the sin, in which all the Promises are received. And so, all that come to receive the thing promised, they re∣ceive that which is the end of the Law, and was before the sin, in which there is no sin, by which sin is finished, and him received in whose Mouth there is sound no Guile; who bringeth his to be as he is in this present World, being made the Righteousness of God through him, having the Righteousness of the Law ful∣filled in them, by him who is the end of the Law, dwelling in them, in whom also his Power worketh mightily, which is more
than to talk of the Law being fulfilled without them; for many such are neither come to that which fulfills the Law, neither yet to the Law it self; and such are hating, reviling, backbiting, opposing, and many ways persecuting those who witness the Law fulfilled in them, even as Saul, who was bred up at the feet of Gamall, and knew that of the Law which was written with∣out, and walked blameless according to the Righteousness there∣of, and yet knew not that which gave forth the Law, but per∣secuted him by whom the Law should be fulfilled, whose dread∣ful Power smote him down, and a blindness came upon that great Professor, who had profited much in that Religion, above many of his equals: And to that Power which struck him blind did he then bow, and became obedient, and afterwards said, When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed: And so that was struck blind, and is to be blinded, which professed the Law before it came, and encreased in that knowledge, without the Life, and Knew not that by which the Law should be fulfil∣led. Therefore that which sees, must be blind; and that which is blind, is to see. And this Revelation and heavenly Vision he did not then call a Temptation, nor a Delusion; neither did he despise that which struck him blind, and let him see a Body of sin, and came to cut him down because of the sin, but cryed out of his Wretchedness, and accounted all as Dross and Dung; and unto this he was obedient, and this he loved, and did not say of it, That it was not able to save him from Sin, the which be∣fore did prick for sin, though against that which prickt he had strived (which was in him) and it was said unto him, It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. And so, that which striveth and kicketh against that which pricketh at the Heart, is that by which the Heart is hardened; for the Word is hid in the heart, which Word is sharp as a sword; which Word being preached, some were pricked to the heart (others cut to the heart) so that many cryed out, Men and Bre∣thren what shall we do to be saved? And so the Word being nigh, n which God is striving with man, even piercing the hearts of many, that some in secret have been ready to cry out and say, What shall I do to be saved? And yet being not truly sensible what it is in them which did prick and pierce through the heart,
and let them see themselves out of Gods Covenant; therefore have they strove against it, and called this a Temptation, which was the Powerful Operation of God by the Light of his Son in the heart, calling to Repentance, the which they have called a Temptation of the Devil (esteeming it so to be) which is most horrible Blas∣phemy and resisting of the Spirit, and refusing to turn to him that smiteth: And this is the blindness of them who know not God, who by the Light of his Son doth knock at the Door of the heart, to minister forth the Law, to judge and condemn, and break the hardness, that in the broken heart this Word of Life might be received, and his Power made known, to the Confound∣ing of that which kept that in Bondage (under the Transgressi∣on) which was given into man before the Transgression was, out of which Transgression there is no coming, but by and through the Ministration of Condemnation, which doth it discover in the ground of it, through which there is a coming to receive the Gospel of Peace, which is the Power of God, not to be preach∣ed to the Wicked things, under which the just do suffer, which the Law is to, but by the Lord of glory, through the Light, preached to the Spirit in Prison, that it, through the Condemna∣tion of the other, may grow up to lead and guide the Creature in all things, in obedience to Gods will, from a true sense of his Love in the heart, whereby his whole Law comes to be fulfilled, and the Promise and the Blessing received in him, who is the end of the Law, who is the Light, given into man, to let him see, and to condemn the sin, the which man being dead in, and in Trespasses, doth not love, but is afraid of that which in secret judgeth and reproveth him, from the which man flying, forsak∣eth that by which he should come to receive the Mercies of the Lord; but Wo to them forever, who strive with their Maker, and call him Belzbub, who is the Light in the Heart, and should be Master in the House. Therefore let all take heed of despising the Law, which is written with the singer of God in the heart, whilst it is yet hard; sor the Law of God is perfect, making wise the simple, and the Ministration thereof is to destroy that which did it Transgress, and lead unto him by whom the Transgression is finished: And this is not a Temptation, but a Dispensation of Gods Justice Through
his Righteous Law upon that which sinned, over which the Law hath Power so long as that liveth, which the Law is to kill, that through the death of it, that might come again to live which was before the Law, and before the death, and before the sin. And now when the Law or Ministration of Condemnation cometh, man is to stand still and wait quietly under it, and not let any thing break through in a haste, to rage or gaze, and wonder at that which is so dreadful that man is not able to stand under it, without unspeakable Astonishment, because of that which then is over him, who then is commanded, not to break through, lest he dye; for the Law is to break through that which cannot keep it, and make way to that which is to keep it, and live forever; but man is not to break through, from under the Condemnation, to that where the Law is ministred, until that is received by which the Law may be kept; for such who in the Condemnation do abide, come at last to see and receive him that is made under the Law, and is the end of it, and taketh away the sin; but such who come to the Law, and break out from un∣der the judgment, before the Lord had broke through, and cut down all that in them which could not keep it, such have let in Death again to reign over that which with judgment should have been redeemed, to bear away that which the Law had po∣wer over, and arise up with that Power, Love, Life and Obedi∣ence to God, as in all things to fulfill the whole Law of God, which until then, doth still stand in force over that and them in which sin remaineth, which doth transgress the Law, one tittle whereof shall not perish till all be fulfilled, though some coming to the Law have broke forth, and then healed the Wound slightly, supposing it would serve their turns to talk of the fulfilling of it by and in another for them, and without them, seeing themselves not able to keep it in all things, not waiting to the end of the Law, by it to have all that destroyed which could not keep it, and receive that which cannot break it; [Mark] and in it keep, by it to be led out of the Wilderness of sin, in the promised Land to rest, in it to have the dayes prolonged and the life preserved; for Christ the Light cometh to save the Life. And there are many that are now come to peace, dominion and the land of Rest, who did once come to know the judgments of
God upon Cain's nature, which then cryed out, That his punishment was too heavy to bear, and have also come to see the Beast, whose head is full of the Names of Blasphemy, and yet have they not started aside like a broken Bow, from under the judgment, nei∣ther suffered the Enemy to prevail over them by Temptations, to curse God and dye, nor to call him Belzebub, who is the Light, which condemns, and should be Master in the house; neither have they dispised Moses Law, which is the Ministration of Condem∣nation, and in its time is glorious; but in patience and long∣suffering under it have waited, and that without murmuring, or suffering that to break forth in rage, which Gods judgments are to; neither have they suffered Unbelief to prevail over them, but in love to him who was made a Curse, in patience have endured all these things, and have been made as free to drink the Cup of Astonishment, with the Dregs thereof, as the Lord was to pour it forth unto them, who now drink the Cup of Salvation, even the Blood of the Lamb, which cleanseth from all sin, whose life saveth them from the Terror of the Pit, who have come to feel the seed born and brought forth (though with Pangs and Sor∣row) which the blessing is to. Those may see, hear, and understand what I write, who are come to know how the Law is handed forth by a Mediator (who was before the Law) and the Righteousness of God manifest without the law, and sin discovered by the Law, and Gods Righ∣teousness revealed by that which was before the Law; and that notwithstanding the Law must be received, yet by the works thereof no flesh shall be justified, but by obedience of Faith to∣wards God in the Blood of his Son, by which all that is done a∣way which trangress'd the Law; and so not of Works, nor of Merits, but of Faith and Love, is the Law fulfilled. Concerning Temptation. And that those who were born blind, and have been ever since covered with the blackness of Darkness, through their own Wis∣dom, being dead in Trespasses and Sins, not feeling nor savour∣ing the things of God, but remain in that Religion and Profession
which crucisied his Son, who is a man of Sorrows, and called him, A Blasphemer, who is the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the World; and said, he had a Devil, who came to condemn sin in the flesh, whose Light in every Conscience is the Condemnation, so long as the Evil deeds remain; the which Condemnation is not a Temptation; for God, who is Light, temp∣teth no man to Evil. Therefore in love is this written, that no man through blindness and ignorance (in his own wisdom) may esteem that to be a Temptation, which doth condemn, and that out of Temptation, all such who are tempted, may be led and kept by that which doth condemn, which is the pure Light of Christ, which doth judge and condemn the Temptations, and the Sin, and the Transgressor (who enters into it) and every E∣vil motion, which is apt to arise in the mind, that is darkned and blinded by the God of the World; which mind from the Darkness to the Light is to be turned, in the Light to believe as he hath said, I am the Light, believe in the Light; and it is a Temp∣tation which hinders man from believing in the Light; and all such keep not the Commands of Christ, who do not believe and obey the Light; and such profess his Words, but deny that in which the power of his Life doth stand. And it is a Temptation which causeth man to deny and refuse the Law (which is Light) and not come under, nor receive the Ministration of Condemnation, supposing he is under Grace, and so not to come back to the Law, because he hath gotten a Professi∣on of Christ, whose day Abraham saw, whose seed came through the Law, of whom Christ came, who fulfills the Law, and mak∣eth an end of sin, who was in the Church in the Wilderness, and in his pity saved them, and bare them all the dayes of old, lea∣ding the humble seed, that through the Wilderness of sin it might come, and at last enjoy that by which the sin is done away forever. And it is a Temptation which causeth man to call that a Temp∣tation which in the Conscience doth sometimes arise and let men see, that he by his sin is in the Fall, the Death and the Curse, and that the Judgments of God belong to him, and that he cannot escape the fierce Wrath of the Almighty, living in that by which sin is daily committed, and the Righteous Law of God transgres∣sed,
and himself out of the Covenant of Life, wanting the pow∣er of God to bear him up out of Iniquity, so that he labours, and prays, and crys sometimes with Tears (like Esau) to keep that alive in the Transgression, which God hath appointed to de∣struction; [Consider this] And strives against that which lettet see the emptiness thereof, and condemns afterwards; if a false joy doth not arise secretly to glory in what was done, whereby that was satisfied and got ease, which the Judgment was to, which of the Judgment was afraid, and from under it led forth to per∣form a Will worship, from the ground where Cain's nature bears rule, who can bring a sacrifice, but the deeds (with the Light) seen to be evil, who at last murthers the just, and the sin lying at the door, which secret sin cannot be hid from the Light in any that commit it, or in whom it is, though never so secret. And it is a Temptation which worketh in the dark corners of the heart, in the time when Condemnation cometh to drive man to despair, by reason of the fierceness of the Judgment, and drives him from God and his Righteous Judgments, into Unbelief and Hardness of Heart against God; and herein the Tempter pre∣vails over many, some whereof then go to destroy themselves, not keeping in patience under the Judgment, which was to de∣stroy the sin; for Christ the Light comes to condemn and destroy the sin, but the Life he comes to save; Others through Unbelief have hardned their hearts in sin, their minds being in that in which they cannot believe, That ever they shall overcome sin, nor be saved from it; and such grow worse than before, and use all means in vain lustful Delights to murther that in them which checks, reproves and condemns them for sin; and many here turn aside from under the Condemnation, many and various ways, some who are blind calling it Melancholly; so that few endure to the end, and enter through the strait Gate by the Death, through it the Life to find, not waiting with long forbearance out of that which hasteth, in patience in the Light to see, feel and know the seed of Abraham (brought forth of the barren Womb) which against hope, in hope believe: And these Temptations lead further into sin, and is not that which condemns for sin; for that would keep out of sin, though its Judgments be never so heavy upon man for sin.
And being that God is known in the ways of his Judgments, and that they who are to receive the Promise, must keep Judg∣ment, and that with Judgment Sion's Redemption is to be witnes∣sed, and when Judgment begins to be set up in the heart, to judge, condemn, confound, overturn and cut down the Head, Body and Root of all that which by the Light is seen to be in the Transgression, having the form of Godliness, but not the Power which keepeth out of, and free from all sin, which the Judgment is to pass upon: Therefore is that a Temptation which then draweth forth the mind from under the Judgment, to get ease by a supposed Peace with God, from the Comprehension of some∣thing done without afar off or long ago, and so climb up ano∣ther way then by the Light within (which I know is the door) which condemns and bringeth to Judgment the hidden things of Darkness, and brings fire and sword upon the Earth, and send∣eth not Peace to it, but setteth two at variance within, where∣by there is much striving in the Womb, and not rest day nor night, because of the War between the two seeds, out of which trouble being led, by that which in the Judgment could not stand, so that getteh ease again, and then man preached peace unto him∣self, having got out of some trouble, he then striveth more strongly to keep out of it then he did before, and labours much to comprehend a resting-place to abide in, though that be not redeemed with Judgment out of Bondage, which thereby should come to obtain rest and peace for evermore. And being that the Law and the Prophets (together) are until John, and that the Law is to judge and cut down that which is above the seed exalted; and that the Prophecies and Openings from the Testimony of Witness, is to uphold and preserve under the Judgment, whereby some secret hopes or refreshings come unto that which at last out of Bondage shall be redeemed; there∣fore it is a Temptation which leadeth forth (on that hand) in a Joy, through the reason, with great swelling Imaginations in the vain light Mind, out of the fear of God, not standing in his Counsel, but like the rest of the false Prophets coming to true Openings, from it run forth, before that through judgment be brought forth, which should go before, and lead them in God's Wisdom and Counsel to stand; and such speak great swelling
words in a secret pride, boasting of their Experiences, but are become the untimely Children of the Mother of Harlots, who with their Mother must be turned back into the Bed of Tor∣ments. And being the Lord God of Life hath given his Son a Light in the Heart, that man might be led, taught and guided by him out of sin, and giveth power to all them that love, follow and obey him, to overcome their sin, whose light being in Man a free gift from God, and that by no other Name, Way or Means man can ever be saved. Therefore that is a Temptation which leads out from that in the Heart [Which in it is given, there to make an end of Sin] to follow that which doth not make an end of Sin, nor minister Power to them that follow it, to overcome their sin, so that they cannot receive that which cleanseth from all sin, such have the root and ground in them, from whence sin cometh; but the Root of Jesse, in whom there is no sin, they are only professing and talking of without them. And that is a Temptation that leadeth man to commit any manner of sin whatsoever, and keeps man from believing in him that maketh an end of Sin, and keeps man in sin, and from Re∣pentance and turning from sin (whilst that of God in the Con∣science is striving with him against sin) perswading him, that he cannot be free from sin, and to put off the time of true Re∣pentance until Gods Spirit by the Light in the Heart, hath ceased striving, and then such think all is well, because that which judged and condemned them for the least appearance of Evil, hath ceased striving with them, that so they are now quiet, and not judged as formerly for what they do, though they do the same things for which formerly they were judged; but let such assuredly know, That that which was sin, is sin still, though they (instead of coming through the Law) are gone back from the Law which did discover it, and come to that state again, which was before the Law (or a worse) where Death reigns, and Sin is in the World, though not discovered by the Law to them who have despised the Law, and so become dead to that which should fulfill the Law, and also dead in that which doth transgress the Law, even so dead in sin, that now feeling the weight and bur∣then thereof, neither yet feeling any thing of God in them,
striving in them against it; and is not their latter end like to be worse than their beginning? And are not such as these, who have got a Profession, more hardned in their Sin, and pleading more strongly for their continuance therein, than the Publicans, Harlots and Prophane? And that is a Temptation which draws forth the mind to fear, love, serve, obey or respect any man, or created thing, glory, honour, or whatsoever may be named, more than God, or to deny obedience to God; for the attaining or retaining thereof, or to let any of the most glorious Creatures of God fill and take plnce in the heart, that in it room may not be found for the Power of God to enter; so that the life, virtue and substance of all things, in which there is full satisfaction, cannot be received. And that is a Temptation that leadeth forth to seek or love the praise of men; for if that was out of the Faith, which re∣ceived Honour from men, then that must needs be of the Devil which would compel Honour to be given to it; that is it in man of the Devil, which would have the begotten of God, honour and worship it, which would take the due honour and praise from God, to whom alone belongeth all Dominion, Glory, Honour and Obedience, and Praises forever and ever. And that is a Temptation which draweth forth the Mind to worship any other God but he that made all Men of one Blood, and is above all, and through all, and in you all, who dwelleth in his People, and what of him may be known, is manifest with∣in, whom all may feel after and find, whom the World by Wis∣dom doth not know; who abhorreth the Sacrifices of them whose Hearts are Uncircumcised; and is wearied with the Peo∣ples Words, Mat. 2. 17. and grieved with their Iniquity, who heareth not the Prayers of men of Sin, but waiteth to be graci∣ous unto such who wait for him in the Light of his Son, who was led as a Lamb dumb, and is of the Seed of David, who was dumb with silence, and opened not his Mouth while the Wicked was in place. But when the wicked thing is removed out of his place, and the humble Seed of the Shepherd raised up in his Throne upon his Hill of Holiness, having his Enemies under his Feet, then he speaketh with Authority, and not as the Scribes.
Thus man coming into the fear of the Lord, and waiting in the Light of his Son in the Heart, with it may he see and dis∣cern between that which discovereth and condemneth Sin, and that which tempteth to Sin, out of which that man may be re∣deemed (and kept out of Temptations) is this written in love to the Seed, over which the Beast, the Dog and the Swine do vaunt themselves, who have nothing to do with this, but only to receive the Cup of Astonishment, which to the Serpents is to be poured forth, who are not to feed upon this which is written. A Direction in the way to that within the Vail, by which Temptations are overcome. TRuth is that in which the Power of God doth stand, and in the Truth there is no Lye; and all them who receive Truth from God, in it they receive his power, whereby they are made his Sons, in his power to stand in obedience to his will, which is that by which they are sanctified, and by obedience of Faith thereunto are preserved, keeping in stedfastness by the mighty Power of God, out of that which doth defile, are pre∣served in that Dominion and place of Holiness, into which the Harlots (out of the Truth and Power) and all proud Boasters (and such who are intruding into things they have not seen, and all Murmurers, who complain for want of Power) do not enter. Therefore, all People who profess the knowledge of the Truth, and yet have not received the Power of God, in which no Sin doth stand, wait ye all in the Light to know the Vail rent, and the ground to be removed, from whence the Words come, which darkens that in which the counsel of God should be received, and wait to feel Judgment and Condemnation up∣on the Earthly, that over the Seed doth rule; and keep Judg∣ment, that through the Condemnation that may spring, which never yet was found: For certainly till there be a coming through the Ministration of Condemnation, the Pearl is hid under the Earth, and the Earthly bears rule over it, whereby it still in Bondage lies, and the Creature sometimes led by a fight of that
which it doth not possess, holding the Truth of God in that which is not his Righteousness; for his Righteousness is revealed by Faith through the power of him that takes away the Sin; and so its not comprehended in, by that mind which is out of the Co∣venant. And this know assuredly, That many may see that which is afar off, and not feel the Life of what they see; and so are ma∣ny high Professors in the World, who change from one Opinion to another, and are all yet but fruitless Trees, which are to be cut down and rooted up. And many there are who call him that is the Light, Lord and Master, but to the Light are not obedient in Self-denial, nor ta∣king up the daily Cross, which is the Power of God, and cru∣cifies unto the World; and so the first Man of the World being not crucified nor put off, the new Man is not received; and so little more is witnessed by many, who profess Truth with∣out the Life, than was in the time of other Forms: for if the Death be not known, the Resurrection of the Just received, and the Dead raised, then is all in vain: And this is not known by any but such who know the Judgments of the Lord set up in the Heart, and the Cup of Astonishment to the Adulterous Seed, which comes of the will of the Flesh, and cannot lay down the Life for the Friend. Wherefore (I say) wait to know the Birth that is Immortal, and feel that born up which never yet was raised in them, over whom the Vail yet is, that the free Birth may be known, and the Seed, whom God hath appointed the blessing unto, from un∣der death redeemed, that by the powerful risings thereof, the understanding may be opened with that which was before Forms were, that to it you may come, which giveth Life unto the Soul, and know a Saviour born of the barren Womb, and a Deliverer brought forth in the place where he hath not been known, and the Plant to spring out of that ground which is yet dry, that it may be overshadowed with the loveliness of its spreading forth, that a way may be opened in the Wilderness, and the humble ex∣alted in the Valley, and so come to learn of that which is yet little and low; and take heed of taking counsel of the Serpent, whose subtilty will soon lead forth from the Simplicity, neither cover your selves with any thing before the Righteousness of God
(which is perfect) be received; but love that which comes from the man of Sorrows, who comes to break the peace of all them who walk not in the Everlasting Way of Life. Let all them who are out of it, search their Hearts with the Light. And take heed of that which is high, froward or strong in the Will [for we are weak] which is not brought to the Cross; for there is the first Birth from the wrong grounds, which will speak and act that which it lives not in, neither is able to confirm it in Faithfulness to the Death and Loss of all; for things may be true in themselves, and that which is out of the Truth may speak of it; yet such vain Talkers cannot suffer to Death for what they speak. For that which cometh forth first, is strong in the Earthly, and would live forever, and have the Blessing, and would rule over the meek thing in the particular; and in others, having a secret desire to be admired, being far unwilling to take a Servants place; but certainly it is the meek, humble, suffering Seed (which in many is yet oppress'd) that is to last forever, who through Death comes into the Dominion. Therefore sink down out of the airy Comprehension and Sub∣tilty, above the Life, and first come to suffer with that which is meek and low, if ever you intend with it to reign in that Peace and Life, which from all that without the Vail is hid; and in silence watch, and be sober, to see him come which saves the Soul, and clothes it with his own Righteousness, that you be not found without a Covering of the Spirit, Power and Life, among the foolish Virgins; for few there be that find the Way of Life, and abide therein. And I knowing the Terror of the Lord that will certainly come upon all them who dye out of his Covenant, therefore I Warn all People every where (as the Lord enlargeth me) to wait to feel the powerful Word of Repentance, and with the Light to make diligent search into the ground and foundation of all Pro∣fessions, Words and Actions. For the Lord will make inquisition for the Blood of the Just, and reward the Double-minded according to the intents of their hearts, the Gaul whereof will be rent with the Power of his Might, which will sweep away the refuge of Lyes, and con∣found,
your Divinations in the head of that knowledge above the seed; and a day of Desolation must come, Sword and Famine must you know, and the Earth to be removed, and your Heavens shaken, that the poor may come to receive the glad Tidings of the Gospel, which is the Power of God; for the fat and the strong are for judgment both within and without, and they are still sent away empty; but the poor are they which are to be satisfied, not the rich, high, wise, strong, mighty, prudent Diviners, and Orthodox men, and zealous Professors, and liscentious Liber∣tines (as they are called) who profess a Saviour to come, and some would have a King to reign hereafter; but they are not a∣greed how, nor when, nor where their King shall reign (whom they imagine shall come) but are found Despisers, not Lo∣vers nor Faithful Followers of him that is come, the Glory of whose KINGDOM is already shining over the World, and is established in Righteousness, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who is our Head, our Law-giver and our King; and we do not look for another, as the Drunkards of Ephriam do, who are drunk, but not with Wine, and stagger at Noon∣day, and must be dashed one against another, and broken to pieces as the Potsherds of the Earth, who are looking for a King to come, and know not the King who is already come, who is the Light, to which they will not bow, though it in secret doth them reprove, and shew us plainly of the Father, and lets them see their Disobedience. To it now therefore bow and bend, for plainly the Lord God, who is Light, will not alwayes strive by the Light of his Son in your hearts: And this know, That as I tender the least honest desires that are begotten in any after the living Truth of God, yet I am to deal plainly with all, and clear my Conscience of all who are covered with their own Conceivings, and in Words and Writing to warn all in the Spirit of Truth and Meekness, as the Lord moveth me in faithfulness to declare against that which yet in any bears rule over the Seed, which by Judgment must be o∣verturned, and all the Judgments of the Lord are true. Wherefore, ye that are willing to come out of Temptations, in∣to that where the foolish Virgins cannot enter, wait in the fear of the Lord to feel his Work within, whilst the day of Salva∣tion
lasteth, lest thick Darkness come upon you, and you be found in the Night, in which none can work; and take heed of a secret High-mindedness, and prize your day of Visitation more then Life or Liberty, and take heed of that which would contrive a way to shun the Cross, or stop the mouth of the Wit∣ness; but let the honest Simplicity come to rule in the measure of it; and take heed of entring in and yielding to Temptations; for many ways hath the Serpent (which is near) to beguile and destroy the Life from man; which is not overcome, but in the continual fear, through the Cross to the Will, with the Power of the Light, which is given to lead through all these things, into the rest which is prepared only for them who are faithful to the Light. For this have I not learned nor received from men (the Lord God knoweth I Lye not) but through the operation of the migh∣ty Power of God, whose Indignation I have born, in whose Judgments I rejoyce forever, and glorifie and praise his blessed Name, who by it my Wisdom confounded, and suffered me to be sifted and tempted by the Enemy divers wayes, yet preserved my Life under the shadow of his Wing, that I might praise and serve him in the Land of the living, and declare his Wonders among the Sons of men, and let them also see with the Light the narrow way that they are to come, which in some measure hath been declared, though in that Language which the Wisdom of the World may not understand, and call it legal, to whom as foolishness it may appear; but my voice may be known to the Spirit in Prison, whom my Soul travels for in the bowels of my Father's love. Given forth for such who say, they see, and yet their Sin remaineth; and may be serviceable to such who can hear and understand the things of God, that those who are yet blind may no longer put Dark∣ness for Light, and Light for Darkness. H. S.
The Meditations of an humble Heart. Written only for Friends, who can read it. To the Ʋndefiled of God, Elect, Chosen and Precious. ELect, Chosen and Precious, whom God hath loved, and doth love, and cannot but love from Everlasting to Everlasting, with an Everlasting Infinit Love; who art the most delightsom Plant, of most Honourable Renown; renowned with honourable Dignity forever; the Delight of all the Upright, the Life of all the Virtuous; the Spouse of all the Undefiled Virgins; the Staff of Abraham's Strength, the Bread of Jacob's Soul; the Succour of Joseph in time of need; the Mouth of Moses's Wisdom, the Rock of Israel's Srength, the certain Hiding-place of all the Troubled, the House of all the former scattered, the Bed of Repose, wherein the beautified Damsels fill themselves with the solace of most heavenly divine Delights; whose Beauty surpasseth Expressions of words; whose tender Offers have invited many; whose Love hath allured the hearts of Thousands; whose Pleasant Countenance hath prevail∣ed with a numberless Number to love thee forever; whose plea∣sant Smiles have gathered unto thee innumerable Doves of the Wilderness, and thy Virtue hath caused the barren desolate to bring forth both Bud, Blossom and Fruit in abundance; the Breath of thy Nostrils hath enlivened the Dead; the sound of thy Voice hath quickned the Weary, & by thy Power hath the bar∣ren brought forth in abundance, whereby the Earth hath been covered with thy fruitful Riches; Thou art clothed with Innocen∣cy forever; thy dwelling is hid from all the disobedient Children of men; Thou hast bound thy self (to live out of their sight) with thy Darlings in a stronger Covenant than all outward Marriages; Thou deckest thy Beloved for thy self, and then thou delightest in her; Thou preparest thy Spouse for the joy of thy heart, and then lovest her because of her Beauty; Thou deckest her with
Ornaments of well-refined Gold, and causest her face to shine; Thou fillest her with Glory within, and causest her to dwell among the Honourable, and walk with the choicest Virgins in the Paths of great delight, and she is become the Daughter of the King of Kings; Thy Goodness doth much overcome the hearts of many; thy Wisdom pleaseth the Prudent; thy Meek∣ness delighteth Hundreds; thy Strength upholdeth an infinit Number, and thy Life nourisheth Thousands; thou renewest the strength of the Faint; thou turnest the shadow of Death into a Morning; thou keepest thy Flock under the shadow of thy Wing, and nourishest them with the choicest Food; thou guid∣est them with the hand of thy Power, and succourest them at every needful time, and thou relievest their greatest wants: The Consideration of thee (which brings thy Goodness into re∣membrance) even filleth the hearts of the Flock of thy Fold, and thou art He who only satisfieth them forever. Oh! where wast thou in the day of Adversity? and where was thy dwelling in the time of the Night? Where didst thou hide thy self in the day of Transgression? and to what place didst thou confine thy self when Iniquity ruled? and what was thy state in the time of man's Sin? Ah! how wast thou then as a slain Lamb, and as a meek Prince deprived of his Kingdom and Government? How wast thou, as a true Heir deprived of his Right, and as an only Son from the Father's House, and found not wherein to rest thy head? How wast thou grieved in that day, and how wast thou wounded by thy pretended Friends? How was thy Glory defamed, and thy Honour laid aside? How was thy Beauty marred, and thy Wisdom bound up as in an ob∣scure place? How did Darkness compass about thy dwelling? How was thy Strength put by, and thy Comliness, as if it had not been? Wast thou not as in a Grave in the midst of all the Wicked? And wast not thou taken in their Pits, and lay long slain in the streets of the Sodomites, and exiled as the greatest Cap∣tives. Oh! where didst thou hide thy self when the Dragon cast forth his flood, when the Waves swelled, and when the Land was fruitless, when the Birth failed in the Womb, when the Seed came not to Maturity; when the blade was killed in the
Spring, when the sharp nipping Frost cut down the head of the tender Herb; when the Winter nights were long; when the boistrous Storms were many; when the whole Earth was covered with thick Darkness; when the Heavens were as Brass; when the Rain descended not; when the distilling Dews came not down; when the Blossom withered in the time of Drough; when the Path to dwell in was not known; when the Stars shone not; when all the Lights of Heaven were eclipsed; when the Voice of the Shepherd was not known; when the Eye of the Traveller was dim; when none could direct him in his Way, nor supply him with Food for his Journey, nor Water in his greatest thirst, nor succour him in the time of the Storm; when he knew not the end of his Journey, neither perceived the way to go, nor ever could have rest till he came there; when the feet of the Virgin stuck in the Mire, and the Young man failed of strength; when no way was known but a Wilder∣ness; when no succour was found but a Forrest of most fearful devouring Beasts; when the Scorpions did bite in the day-time; when the Lyon did roar in the night; when the Dragon was near to devour; when the Wolf yelled for his Prey; when the Foxes spoiled the tender Grapes; when the brazen-Serpent could not be seen; when thy Lambs cryed as in the day of for∣getfulness; when the Young lamented the birth for want of the food; when thy Damsels fainted with thirst; when Pity was not to be found amongst men; when Mercy could not be seen in Heaven, neither would the Earth open her mouth and swallow up, to end the state of Misery; when the day of Jacob's Trouble was as in a Whirlwind, or as a combustious Thunder in the midst of heat and cold, which none doth know but the man that hath seen it; who in the bitterness of his soul hath long travelled as a Woman in her sore pangs of Sorrow, through the Warfare, in the grievous troublesom day of Distress? O! how wast thou then as a Prisoner in the Pit, and where was thy place to be found, or who could search out thy dwel∣ing? O! Thou now well-known to be the much more than the threefould Chiefest of ten Thousand hundred Thousand, and of Thou∣sands of Thousands! to whom my Soul's love can never be fully expressed.
Arise now thou meek One of Wisdom, spake forth thy self in thy own Virtue; let thy Spouse hear thy Voice and rejoyce in thee for evermore, whom thou hast fitted for thy self, a chaste comely Virgin, to shine forth thy Glory in forever: for thy Beauty hath often filled my heart with precious Oyl, and the De∣sire of Thee hath drawn me out of my self; my lips at first have stammered at thy presence, but thou hast healed the wounded heart; Thou art the chiefest of all Delights, and happy are all them that know thee. To the Espoused Virgin. ARise out of the dust, awake as in the days of old; let thine Eye be more bright with the Light of the Day than in the Ages past; adorn thy self with Comliness, deck thee with Or∣naments, prepare thee with sweet Oyntments; put on Beauty as a Beam of the Morning, shine forth as the fairness of the Sun; enrobe thee with Righteousness, as with a Garment, and deck thy self with precious Jewels as the choicest Bride; grow up as the tender Plant, spring forth as the Lilly; blossom as the Rose, be fruitful as the Vine; grow up as the Cedar; spread as the Vine-branches; let Salvation be the Wall on which thou layest hold; come forth as the encreasing Herbs of the field, with many stems from one Root, and many branches on every stem, and many blossoms on every branch, and (much more) many seeds of fruitful encrease under or after every blossom, that the Sower may be made glad with the abundance of the encrease thereof; that the good Husband-man may rejoyce in his la∣bour, that the Planter may delight in the works of his hands. Let thy Fruit be as of an Apple-tree, whose Boughs there∣with do bend; let the taste thereof be as sweet as the Ho∣ney, and the smell thereof as the sweet Odour; let thy Bold∣ness appear as the Morning, and thy Meekness as the Bay-tree that is alwayes green; be more fruitful than Labanon; let no Female that God hath made bring forth the fruit of her Womb more often than thee; in labour be more diligent than the Ant; in multiplying, bring forth more often than the chiefest of the
Conies, though she make her Nest in the Rock: In fragrant smell, let not the sweetest Flower or Oyntment surpass thee; in Beauty, let nothing exceed thee; in Meekness, come not short of Sarah; in Wisdom and Prudence, let neither Abigail, Ruth, Easther nor Mary excel thee; receive thy beloved as the choicest of Princes, and imbrace him in the Arms of Righteous∣ness forever; Bring forth according to his Nature, and let thy increase be of his own Image; keep clean thy Garments, let not thy Beauty be spoiled; defile not thy breath with the Garlick of Aegypt, nor thy taste with the Grapes of Sodom, drink not any thing down which may defile the savour of thy Breath, that may offend thy Prince, neither let any Covering remain upon thee, which may cause him the less to love thee; let all thy wayes be pleasant to Him, & all thy Robes delightsom in his Eye; let thy foot-steeps be ordered as in the sight of the King, and let thy words be grave and sound, which may not offend Him, that his love may both continue and encrease towards thee, and he de∣light in thee, and rejoyce over thee, and the smiles of His Countenance fully gratifie thee for all the fowns of thy (former) now forsaken Lovers; that thy daily delight may be in Him for∣ever, and flourish under his Arm as the beautiful Rose of Sharon, with its blossom of many doubles, and remain fruitful as the O∣live-tree forever. So will the King delight in thy beautiful Excellency, and so shall the Prince be satisfied with thy fruitful Virtue; thy Arm shall gather thee Riches, and thy Faithfulness shall give thee strength; thy Boughs shall reach over the Earth, thy spreading shall be over the Sea, & thy Fruit shall shine affar off, thy Root shall remain firm and steadfast; thy Branches shall enlarge themselves, and the weak shall lay hold on thy Skirts; thy Leaves shall be pleasant to many, and thy Sap shall ever spring up from the Root; thou shalt never be forsaken in the troublesom Night, nor re∣moved with the greatest Storm, nor overturned with Wind or Sea, but shalt be kept from the Darkness which thou hast seen. Hereby let all the Barren hear the Voice of the fruitful Vine, and she that sate in the desolate place come to see the Light of the Morning; and let the Spouse be prepared, and the Virgin adorn∣ed;
and let the Voice of Meekness be heard in the solitary place, and Life spring forth as the Noon-day, that the Prisoner may come out of the Pit to sit in his Throne forever, and the Captive from Exile to the enlargedness of Dominion; that the Bounds may be broken, and the boundless known where no limit is. Something how the Marriage of the Ʋndefiled Lamb, and the Virgin came at first to be. THe slain thing had God's Power in it, even in that state; and when it became as a Servant, because of man's Sin, in the great service of love to help man out of Sin, who hath Power both to serve and to rule; both to lay down his Life, and to take it up again; who in himself is still the same, and his Power is exercised in his Suffering as well as in his Ruling; or, as when He exerciseth his Power in Ruling: And He that was dead is a∣live, and he hath taken unto him his great Power and doth reign over the Creature, and the Sin (having done it away) with the same Power, whereby before he came so to serve man under the Sin, as to help him from under it, and so to bring man with himself in his Power, as it suffered by the Sin, out of the Sin, and out of that Power which captivated under, or into the committing of Sin, & so to the end of it, with Christ over it to live and reign forever, as it is received in that way, manner and operation, which at first it doth come and shew forth it self in the Power of its sufferings, whose Power and Virtue therein at first is known. And so, such who know Him in his suffering-state, He permitteth, chuseth and electeth to live and reign with him in his Ruling-state. And so he that hath power to Reign, hath power to Suffer, and so to Suffer that he may Reign, the exercise of whose pow∣er in his Suffering is in order to his Reigning, and such as feel, know and receive his Power, first enabling them with him to suf∣fer, they with the same are brought to the end of sin and sin∣ning, by which the suffering came upon the Just for the Unjust, and as man to this is joyned in his sufferings, its Power worketh man's Redemption (and so not of man) or brings man back from under that power which held in the Transgression and Separati∣on
from the Bridegroom of the Soul, and takes away that which captivates it, and so breaks the Wall which stood be∣tween the desired Liberty and the present Bondage, and so brings the true and lasting Peace; and so both receive each other, and are made one in each other (and not otherwise) It is certain∣ly so. And that man which truly suffered with it, reigns with it, who was joyned to it in its suffering, till it came to reign, and then to submit unto it and serve it, in its Motions, Leadings, Rulings and Governings in the power of its Love, which winneth the heart so to do, as the chaste Wife to the Husband, so with it, in the Power of it, man comes to reign over that which was both contrary to it, and to the upright hearted man, until all its Ene∣mies are put under it, and so under the man that is one with it, and whose Life is in it, being truly joyned to it of the Lord (then not to be put asunder) and so loving of it, and in all things submitting to it, more than the true chaste Virgin to the Hus∣band, living in the Power, and the Power living in man, and so both becoming one in Sufferings, one in Tryals, one in Tribu∣lations, one in Afflictions, one in Joy, one in Peace, one in Liber∣ty, one in Captivity, one in Riches, one in Poverty: And so tru∣ly one, partaking with each other, in all states unseparable, may well in some measure be termed, The Marriage of the Lamb which is come (and more of it may be known) and the Virgin being thus and more fully espoused, to the undefiled, unspot∣ted of God, they are thus far made one, and she becomes the Daughter of the Husbands Father, the King of Kings, or the Adopted Child of God. And thus the undefiled One of God and the Virgin of Sion, becomes one in the unspeakable Unity, which Unity being felt, both as one, (preceive me) and my Lines are understood, and my Words received in Love. And this is written and sent forth among all Friends, who de∣sire to hear of me, and who have known me in the invisible Truth, and such to whom the Lord hath made me serviceable in the precious things of the Kingdom of God, which is of Peace and Righteousness, where my Rest is; that hereby they may
hear from me, and know that I remain in the labour of the Gos∣pel (which is very great) and in the Fellowship of the Saints: Your Brother in the unexpressible Love of the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour, Humphery Smith. From Cogshall in Essex (in which parts very many of late have re∣ceived the precious Truth) the 12th of the 5th Moneth, 1661. This is to all dear Friends who keep faith∣ful in their measures to the end. My dear Friends, THe Father is well pleased in him who is meek and lowly in the heart, and in Obedience unto him, through the leadings of his Spirit of Power, in which the Father's love is manifest, which leads in the low Ground, where the safe Way of everlasting Peace is known, where all things are quiet and still, where the small still Voice is heard, whereby the dead come to live in the Powerful Life of the Fathers Love, which compasseth about the seed, as a Wall of everlasting Defence, whereby there is boldness, and courage comes in, to Jacob the worm, that its then able to stand, in that everlasting strength, which is made perfect in weakness, and to the weak  only to be known, that the weak then may say, I am strong, feeling strength ministred forth from that which is begotten of the Father, wich never was comprehended by the earthly Wisdom, which is all scattered as the smoke before the Wind, when he ariseth that was laid in the Earth, who hath long been as a Servant, and is now to be served, that he may be Lord over all, who is a Man of Sorrows, and leads through the suffering state, that by the O∣bedience of Faith, through the Power of the Cross which cru∣cifies, and brings to the death that which is to dye, that the Vail
may be rent, and the way into the holiest of all made manisest, and that received in the new ground, which abideth forever, even that which comforteth the weary Soul, and satisfieth the longing Spirit, and replenishth the dry and barren Land with the Rivers of the Valley and the springs of the Desart, that the meek in the Earth may rejoyce forever, and through the Earth may grow as a Lilly in Summer. For painly its the poor that receive the Gospel, and the meek of the Earth that shall in her it Substance, and it is the thing that is low that will last forever, and that shall be set on the Throne, and he that is low shall never fall, neither shall his Footsteps at all be moved; he leads the creature in the Father's fear, and guideth the Tongue in Wisdom, and its him alone that all are to wait for, to receive and continue in, even him that is acquainted with Grief, who never openeth his Mouth in perversness, but speaks Life in Wisdom, through the Power of the Fathers Love, which overpowers the Soul as an overflowing River of Oyl, which makes all well, and heals the grieved Spirit, which none ever comes to find, but such who alone walk with him who humbled himself to the Death of the Cross, and became as a Ser∣vant, though he was Lord over all, in him there is safety; for he is the Rock, and the sure hiding-place, even out of the sight of the World, and from the Tempters power; for the Devil hath nothing in him who is meek and low, in whose mouth there is found no guile; & this is he that hath been long set at naught, whose tenders of Love constrain Obedience to himself, because of the beauty that is in him, which from them is hid, over whom the Vail is, through which they cannot see the Comliness of his Love. I rest in the Fathers will, your Souls Friend, H. S. FRiends, the Lord is with us, and the God of Heaven is on our side, and the Lord is our Defence, who hath spoken Life and Peace to my Soul; behold, he will be with us forever, and the holy Arm of his precious dreadful strength shall no Nation under Heaven prevail against; dwell all in the Power of God, and the blessing of the God of Heaven will be upon you all forever.
THe Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, and he then Prophesi∣ed; but after, for his disobedience he lost the Kingdom, and was afraid of the shame before the People; and the King∣dom is rent from such who disobey the Lord, though they were among the Prophets, like Saul, who afterwards went to the Witch: And the Witchcraft is near to all such as stand not in the Counsel of God, to cause the People to hear his Word, and not their own, whose Word feeds not the flesh above the seed, but is as a Hammer to break the Rocks in pieces, and it kills and makes alive, and opens a way through the Earth, for the Prisoner of Hope to come forth. And the Spirit came upon Balaam, who was reproved by the dumb Ass, that he was exalted above, and resisted, and he durst not go beyond the Word of the Lord, he durst not go beyond that which was quick and powerful in the heart, nor over-reach it, to do more or less, for the gaining of half a Kingdom in the Earth∣ly. And such as exceed Balaam therein, may expect to be cut down also by the true seed, as he was, and so to fall among the rest of the Enemies of the Israel of God, who is dreadful in Power. And the Spirit came upon Jephthah, who after offered his own Daughter for a Sacrifice; and the Spirit came upon Sampson, and yet he not standing in wisdom, was bet∣trayed of his strength by a Daughter of the Philistines, who al∣so afterwards put out his eyes: And so the Spirit may come up in some, and yet afterwards they lose that with which they should see; and some there are that use their tongues as in the Name of the Lord, upon whom the Spirit never came (mark that.) And Caiphas the High Priest prophesied, and he spake not of himself, and yet he was an enemy to Christ the Power of God, and such as are got up high, like high Priests, above the measure of the Man of sorrows, speak from self or flesh, and are in that by which he that is the Light doth suffer, and the power is resist∣ed, and the seed in others oppressed, and they not brought to the Living Minister within the vail, that abides a Priest forever, but are in that which will dye. And many might be named, upon
whom the Spirit came. And Judas also had obtained part of the Ministry. ut now consider; the Spirit resteth upon the branch of the Root, even the seed it self; for the Spirit came upon many, but it rested and relieth upon the se ed only, even the Spirit of Wis∣dom and Understaning, and counsel and might, and knowledge, and of the sear of the Lord, in the fear of the Lord which is a fountain of Life, which Life all are to feel, and not be kept from by words without it, but to feel that which comes from it and favour that, that Jacobs Tent all; may know, which who so dwell in, are blessed, against whom there is no enchantment, and where the Witch-craft cannot enter, which leads from the strait and narrow way, to the Spirit and Life, into a liberty to that which is fleshly, where that is kept alive, which the word in the heart, as a hammer and a sword, should have broken and cut down; for Paul was grieved with such, who at first could almost have pluckt out their own eyes for him, and after sought occasion against him, and themselves to be made perfect in the flesh, and all flesh as grass, is to be cut down with the Sword of the Lamb, and where the flesh is above, the Spirit suffers by it, and the vail is thickned, which keeps from the Unity, and out of the Life and Power of God. H. S. THe Lord God of Heaven preserve all every where in the Love, Long-suffering, Forbearance, Meekness and Gen∣telness, out of the Strife or Self-seeking; for suerly Wo will come upon that Spirit where-ever the Lord finds it, and even the Lord knoweth the desires of my heart in true Simplicity hath been, That his Righteous Judgments might pass betimes upon every appear ance thereof in my self, and all others; and I believe that God will never prosper it in any; therefore my Exhortation in the Ever∣lasting Love of the God of Heaven is, That you all every where live in true Brotherly Love, & remember Joseph's Advice to his Bre∣thren, That they fall not out by the way. The heavenly God of Pow∣er, and Life, and Virtue keep ye out of all this, in the Life of Wis∣dom and Meekness, where Strife shall never inhabit, nor Death
enter within the walls of Zion, in which their dwellings are, who keep themselves undefiled, and remain in the fear of God, to whom I commit you all, and to the Power of the Word of his saving Grace, praying to the Lord for you, that evermore you may continue in the Love of Christ. Your Freind and Brother, Humphry Smith. To the meek and open hearted Lambs and Flock of Heaven, in meekness of Love, with Greetings of Peace, from the Seat of Infinite. Mercy. endred unto, and sent to be read among them all, who live in the humble State. THere was a time of Blackness and Darkness, which co∣vered all flesh, and the Guilt of Sin was upon all Con∣sciences; and Hardness of Heart possessed every Ves∣sel, and the Minds of all was astray from God, and their Souls in the bonds of Iniquity, in the day when none was able to deli∣ver his brother; O! who can utter the distress and the Languish∣ing state, which the Sheep then scattered were in? O! the se∣cret Groans of the Out-casts of Israel, which God hath now ga∣thered! Why should it be forgotten? Who could pluck their Feet then out of the Snare, or deliver their Souls from Death, had not the Lord in mercy looked down from Heaven? surely many had sunk in the Pit of Misery, and never come to see the Light of the Morning, for the which the Bowels of the humble yearned in secret, and the Sights were deep in the Solitary Place. And then did the Lord in the Bowels of his Mercy let open his Ear, and for his own Names-sake had regard unto the Com∣plaint of the poor and needy, and he caused Light to break out of Darkness, and Truth to spring from its secret hidden place,
and Life to grow up in the midst of Death, and to break through the Powers of Darkness; and the Lord in his Power gave utter∣ance to his Servants and Messengers, and then were the words of his Truth as Food to the Hungry, and with much gladness of Heart was the sound of the Way of Life by many received; then did Love begin to arise in the Heart, and a tenderness in the Bowels, and a willingness in the Mind; and then was a Joy, like the Joy of Harvest, among the People, and many began to invite one another, saying, Come, and we will return to the Lord, and we will resolve to walk in his Paths forever; then was the Voice of Thanksgiving among the People, and the wayes of the Lord became more delightsom than Gold, and the footsteps of Righteousness more pleasant than all the Treasure in the world. O! it even melts the heart to remember the dayes that are past, and to consider the infinite Goodness of him that is the God of the Poor and Needy! Then were many made willing to run and to leave their filthy Garments behind them, even before they well knew how to do it: O! how loathsom was Sin in that day? and how wearisom was the Land of Darkness? and how desir∣able, even beyond expression was the unsatisfied thirsting Soul af∣ter the Presence of God? Could the Treasure of the Earth then have given Peace? or, could Silver have satisfied the hungry heart? Or, could the choisest Love of the most nearest Relations have quenched the thirst of the parched ground? Surely none but the Lord was then desired; yea, other Lovers became as loathsom, and other Delights became burthensom to the weary Travellers, and all Vanities began to vanish as a Vapour of Smoke, and the Wind of Heaven was daily a scattering the chaff, and the barren Womb mourned for the quickning Life of God, who had put it into the hearts of his long afflicted scattered Ones, to follow him in the Ways of Truth & Equity; and then did the Lord visit such again and again in his Loving-kindness, by his Servants, whose Living Words of Truth, through them, did yet more open the Under∣standings & Hearts, & satisfie the judgments of the humble Peo∣ple, in the knowledge of the way to Rest and Peace, in leaving the evil & chusing the good, & to walk & come to live therein forever. And then came the time of Trial and Exercise, when the Cross must be taken up to the Worlds wayes, and all foolish Va∣nities
left behind, and the needless words no longer used, nor that Religion continued any longer in, which made nothing per∣fect: Then did the People gaze and wonder, and the Relations and the Acquaintance stood like as from David afar off; and then was every ones greatest Enemy (with the Light) found in his own House; then did the Tribes of the Earth mourn; then did the Dragon stretch forth his Power; then did the Doubtings, and Fears, and Thoughts, and Unbelief come roling in like Floods; O the straights that many then were in, even seeming greater than any before, and none but the Lord could deliver, so that then the Cryes were doubled, and the secret Groans came on afresh again, and the greater the Cryes of such were, the more they prevailed with him that was to help, but with his Rod he forced them to submit unto his Will, by departing out of that which had caused him to frown upon them, and by leaving that which had polluted their Dwelling, and as they began to obey him therein, so he began to let forth the smiles of his Favour to∣wards them, and when they offended again, he chastized them fore, and scourged them for their Negligence, and corrected them because they forgot their Obedience to his will; and as thereby they drew near unto him, he eased the stroke of his Justice, and let them taste of his Mercy, and sometimes invited them with love, as a Father draweth the Child. And thus he left not working with them, and in them by his own secret Wis∣dom and Power, until he had brought them to be after the desire of his Heart, that he might delight in them forever, and that they might never more be scattered upon the barren Hills, nor yet the dark Mountains. And as Obedience, in Truth and Innocency, was willingly yeilded to the Lord, Peace began to take hold, and Satisfaction got some entrance, and a little secret hope there was, which be∣came as an Anchor to the Soul, against the Stormy time, and al∣so in the midst thereof; and as Inniquity was departed from, so there came into the humble Heart some satisfaction from God, and some stability in his way of Righteousness, and then refresh∣ings of Life attended the heart in the Morning, and the Water which reneweth the Thirsty, began to open it self in the midst of a barren Land; and then nothing was more desired than the
living upon that Food, with which the God of Heaven doth nourish only his Children; which he freely gave and brought down, even near to the Tents of Israel, and he caused them to know his Statutes and his Judgments, and he put his perfect Law in the midst of them, and his Mercy seat within the Vail, that they might ask Counsel at the living Oracle; and he gave them his Spirit, which all the circumcised of Heart do rightly know to be the chiefest good; and to this end did he bestow that most precious Gift upon them, and gave that Spirit of Life into them, even to guide, counsel and direct, inform, instruct, reprove, defend and succour them, and nourish their Souls for evermore. And so, he set before them the way in which they should walk with him, wherein he would be their Father, and the Rock of their strength, and made known unto them the secret Mysteries of his heavenly blessed Will, which had been long concealed, and doth yet so remain from the Disobedient, and covered from the Children of men. And when even the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had done all this, and much more for you, O ye now well beloved Friends! then did he begin to try your patience, and to exercise yo, yet further to prove you, and to make known unto you even more of that which had long been in the heart; and then he suffered a calm to come over you, and much quietness there was with many; and then did the Enemy begin to assay again to bring into Care∣lesness, and present a spirit of slumber, with dulness and negli∣gence attending, and then the Seed was again burthened, therewith and the Upright hearted durst not give way thereunto, before whose Eyes the pure heavenly fear still remain∣eth; surely it were almost endless to relate the sundry Tryals and States which have been known among the flock of Jacob; Who could have believed, that the strong should have been so tempted as they were, and the mighty so assaulted divers wayes, as they have been, and yet that the weakest, who continued in the Grace, which teacheth to deny Ungodliness, should stand and remain? And how wonderfully hath the Lord preserved his whole flock unto this day? even so, that with true gladness of Heart in living Praises, it might truly be said, That no Weapon formed against Gods Israel hath to this day yet ever prospered, though
no man hath appeared, either in Field or Court on their behalf, nor visible hand appeared for the defence of the flock of Heaven, O! where is that Lamb of the fold, who now stands in the Covenant of Redemption, that cannot breath forth the Praises of God, in the heart-breaking Power of his Love, and the sensible feeling of his tender unspeakable Mercies: Behold, O friends! the good∣ness of God is unutterable, yea, I have not words to express it, and such that feel it, may taste of it, and drink of the fulness thereof, beyond the narrowness of my broken speech; and let such draw near unto me, and let lose that which bindeth and closeth up in the Bowels, that we may meet at the entrance of Widom's Gate, and live one with another, and one in another, so as the World did never now, neither in their nature shall e∣ve understand; for my heart is filled with Love, and my dwel∣ing is enlarged with boudless Borders of Peace, and my Life streams forth in meekness: Behold! there is none can stop it, where the seed springs up as a Lilly, and where the dawning of the day is witnessed, where undefiled Love, which cannot think Evil, hath its resting-place, and where the true simplicity of meek∣ness remains. Even there my Lines are read, my Words are heard, my Mind is Known, my Language understood, my Love received, and even my Life takes entrance; What shall I say? I am with, near, or in the midst of a the Innocent Lambs, by the virtue of that Power and invible Spirit which filleth all in all, and in silence with you could  long rest, where the World should nei∣ther know, nor yet perceive me, & the same Bread which I receive in the invisible Power, & break unto, or disperce among the Lambs of God, who can feed upon no other; Even so, the same is it which my Soul at present doth live; yea, behold I live, who once was dead, and my Life is hid among the rest, with Christ in him, from whence the heavenly Food, and the Souls-saving and hearts-satisfying Power doth come. And this is to stir up your Minds, and to put you in remem∣brance of the Lords dealing with you, and his large Loving∣kindness towards you, and his effectual work of Love in you, that you may never forget him, nor be unmindful of his fatherly Pity towards us all, when we were all in our low estate; and that you may feel the Revivings of his virtue, and the Inlivenings of
his power, and the quicknings of his Spirit, That you may grow therein, and wax fruitful to God, and come to be seated and established in the Land of Life, blessed from Heaven, with much more fruitful increase than the Land of Goshan; That the fruit of Lebanon may be known, and the Rose of Sharon, and your selves as the Cedars that are full of Sap; and your Life as the Vine that never wanteth Nourishment, whose Fruit aboundeth to the glading of the Vine-Dresser, that the Lord may rejoyce o∣ver his Heritage, and delight himself in the midst of Zion, and be glorified in his People, and admired of all them that be∣lieve. THe Lord God of Heaven preserve all every where, in the Love, Long-suffering, Forbearance, Meekness, Gentle∣ness, out of the Strife or Self-seeking; for surely Wo will come upon that Spirit wherever the Lord finds it, and even the Lord knoweth the desires of my Heart in true simplicity hath been, That his righteous Judgments might pass betimes upon every appearance thereof in my self; Neither do I believe, that God will ever prosper it in any, nor any with it; Therefore, my Ex∣hortation in the Everlasting Love of the God of Heaven is, That you all every where live in true Brotherly Love, and remember Joseph's advice to his Brethren, That they fall not out by the way: The Heavenly God of Power, and Life, and Virtue keep you out of all this, in the Life of Wisdom and Meekness, where Strife shall never inhabit, nor Death enter within the Walls of Zion, in which their dwelling is, who keep themselves undefill'd, and remain in the fear of God, to whom I commit you all, and to the Power of the Word of his saving Grace, praying to the Lord for you, That evermore you may continue in the Love of Christ. From the feeling and refreshing whereof in the heart, this is written unto you by him that in the Truth can serve the least of you, being your Friend, Humphry Smith. ANd Friends, this is a time of quietness and stillness, or a time for you so to be, and there hath been a large time of gathering, and for convincing; and now the Lord is proving
and trying them that are gathered; And after this time, blessed and thrice happy shall they be, that are found faithful in it, and worthy to be Crowned with Heavenly Honour, and to be further employed in Gods service, and to remain as Pillars among the Flock of Heaven, and as Lights to invite others home to the dwel∣ling of God. And, now should all Friends be kept in Wisdom, and take heed what words they use among men, or concerning any men, though they do contrive against us: Had the Lord left us where they are, and set them where he hath placed us, then might we have been this day as ignorant of the Way of Peace to∣wards Enemies, and of the Path of Innocency and Righteousness, as they now are, but the Lord hath shewed us Mercy; And I say, the God of Heaven forgive them and defend us; And all that dwell in this, may come at last to see a time of greater Gathering, than ever yet was: Oh! my Pen cannot write it. And if all were quiet in their own measures, and little at all were moved in that measure, either to write, print or speak at this time, waiting singly upon God; Oh! he would plead for us, and he a∣lone would help us, and keep us, as in his Arms, until the Indig∣nation were over-past. And this I write, that you might know of my continual confidence in the Lord, if he had or did not at this time, raise up, or make use of any of us to help him, or to be workers together with him: But a Remnant he hath, whose hearts he enlargeth with prayer, and some of them with strong inward desires and groans, and some with utterance to declare the good will of God unto others, in your Assemblies, and some stead∣fastly to believe in God, that he will never leave us, and all this as∣cends up before the Lord even as one sacrifice. And he that hath heard and had mercy on us when we were not his People, and turned not back our complaints in that day; O! how shall he now forget us, now we are his people, and are purchased unto him with a Ransom more precious than all the Gold in the World? Who is it among all the flock of God, but have already had much experience of his Love, good Will and Mercy? And where∣fore then should any of the Sons or Daughters of Zion, sup∣pose, that God will ever forsake or leave them in distress? I even say, doubtless and certainly it will not be so, but the Lord will stand by us; and the God of the whole Earth will go before us,
and the wonderful, dreadful, powerful Presence of the most High will be with us, over us, among us, and in us, for ever∣more, and we shall certainly be preserved by his Power. And by this (my tenders of Love in these Lines) all the dear an humble hearted Friends of Christ may hear from me, and understand, that something of the virtue of the Vine, is, and remaineth in me, and if the will of God should be so, that my Body suffer in this close unsavory Prison at Winchester, many Moneths or several Years longer, yet shall the Lord be my God forever, and my Rest unto the end of Troubles, and in silence and secret, shall and doth my Heart and Soul pour forth In∣tercession to the Throne of Power, in the behalf of his own Truth and People, and for every feeble Plant which God hath planted. And when I have put you in mind, that you ought not to for∣sake the Assembling of your selves together, I leave you to God at present. H. S. ANd you should all take heed of that which would lead you up an easier way than by the Light that condemns sin, and terrifies and troubles you; for by it doth God speak, and in it calls for Repentance, and in it strives with you, and many more so strongly, that they cannot rest night nor day, being not yet reconciled to it; but this consider, that this will not alwayes strive with you; therefore while the Light is, and is not put out, if you will hear his Voice, by whom God speaks peace, that Peace you might enjoy forever; then take heed of that by which a hard∣ness comes upon the Heart, and a Vail so thick with unbelief, that the true Mourning is done away, that there cannot be then a secret Crying unto the Lord for help and deliverance, in the true brokeness of Heart, which openeth to God, with Bowels of Love and Tears, whereby Gods Mercy is felt; but a hard∣ness upon the heart, and a wrong thing ask for Peace, in the un∣belief, from that, which darkneth: Take heed of this thing. And this know assuredly, that when Trouble comes in the inward parts, and the rumour of War is heard between the two Nati∣ons, Jacob and Esau, both in the Womb, and the Light con∣demning
in the heart, which hath been fleshly, and the Witness of God awakning the Conscience, that then if there be not a Brokeness thereby, and a Mollifying of the Heart, and a hum∣bling of the lofty part, then will Hardness take place, and Rebel∣lion prevail with thee against the Light. Therefore in its sea∣son let these things have entrance in you, and come to that which can receive it in love, faithfulness and plainess, as it is written. H. S. The Cause of the long Afflicted and sore Oppressed; sent forth (in brief) from Win∣cheste Prison, big a Copy of the Mittimus, whey Hmphry Smith was again committed (in oth pace of his former lon suffering, in the same streight unsavory Prison) wih his Answer (which was then sent bck thereunto; As likewise a shot Relation from the rest of them called Qua∣kers there. The Mittimus. To the Keeper of his Majesties Goal at Winton, or to his sufficient Deputy, Greeting. YOu shall herewithal receive the Body of HumphrySouthton Smith, who was taken at unlawful Meetings at Al∣ton, being a Ringleader, and one of the chief of the Quakers, who travelleth the Country to seduce the People, and disturb his Majesties Peace, contrary to the Law in that behalf made and provided These are therefore, in his Majesties Name, to will and require you forthwith, that you receive the Body of him, the said Humphry Smith, into your Custody, and him to detain
in your said Goal, until he shall be delivered from thence by due order of Law. Whereof fail you not, at your peril: Given under our Hands and Seals at Alton, the 14th day of October, in the thirteenth year of his Majesties Reign, Anno 1661. John Norton, Humphry Bennit. The Answer. THe Jews (who denyed him that said, I am the Light) laid hands on Paul, crying out, Help, men of Israel; this is the man that teacheth every where against the Law, Acts 21. 28. And the Jewish Christians (who denied the Light) laid hands on Humphry Smith, and in the Mittimus say, He was at an unlawful Meeting. And so, these called Christians say, Our Meetings are Un∣lawful, or against the Law. And just so it was said of Paul, That his teaching was against the Law. Again, John Norton and Humphry Bennit say, That Humphry Smith was a Ringleader: Likewise, Turtullous said, That Paul was a Ringleader, Acts 24. Again, Humphry Smith is accused for one of the chief of the Quakrs, and for travelling the Country to seduce the People: And in the same manner Paul was accused for a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, Acts 24. 5. (and if so, then Paul was a greater Traveller than Humphry Smith) And as Hum∣phry Smith is here accused for seducing the people; so Paul was ac∣cused for setting forth of strange Gods, and for preaching new Doctrine, Acts 17. 18. And again, Haman accused the Lords People, That they kept not the Kings Laws: And these men accuse us, that we disturb the Peace, contrary to the Kings Laws. And the Rulers accused Paul for teaching things that were not Lawful: And these accuse Humphry Smith, That he did that which was contrary to the Law, which they say, is made and provided, which is as much as if they had said, We have a Law, just like their Fathers, who (crucified Christ and) said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye: And so, these who have Envy (which is Murther) in their hearts say, We have a Law made and provided, and by the force thereof Humphry Smith (who is a member of Christ) must be Imprisoned (his Body, [Mark] not his Soul, then his Soul may be at liberty.) And them Ma∣gistrates
cast Paul into Prison: And so these did by H. Smith. And they charged the Goaler, To keep Paul safely, Acts 16. 12. And these charge or require the Goaler in no less than his Maje∣sties Name, and at his own Peril, to receive and detain the Body of Humphry Smith in his said Goal, until he shall be delivered by due Order of Law. And in this their acting and writing, they themselves have com∣pared Humphry Smith with Paul (and others of Gods people) And themselves with Pauls Persecutors, andBut now they have a∣bove a year together, contrary to Law, depri∣ved me, of the benefit of all their Law and Liber∣ty. other such Rulers, who accused and Impri∣son Gods people formerly, who pretended a Law then as these do now: And so, here is still much Law spoken of, but little Mer∣cy, and less Justice or Equity either among them or these: And thus we are daily brought before Magistrates, and cast into Pri∣son, where the Members of Christ have been sick, and some have dyed too; whom these called Christian Magistrates never vi∣sited: And thus in pretence of a Law doth Christs Members suf∣fer by these now, as he himself did by those then, who said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye. And hereby all People may plainly perceive (who are not wilfully blind) that here is not one thing charged against H. Smith, but what hath been Charged against Gods Servants in the days of old: And all persons may easily see, that Humphry Smith is not any otherwise accused than the Members of Christ have already been. And all the Rulers themselves may hereby know, that in all this, there is not one word or particular thing by which Humphry Smith doth now suffer, but what the Lords dear people have already suffered by and under, and that by the Magistrates, or the Rulers of the People, by whom likewise now Humphry Smith doth Suffer; and so, he is hereby and therein the more de∣clared to be one of Gods Servants, and they by whom he thus suffers, are manifested the more, to be of the same Generation, who still accuse and Imprison, and by cruel hands cause Gods Servants to suffer; but Christ hath promised (whose word shall stand for∣ever) That these things should turn to us for a Testimony, Luke 21. 17. And this may and doth this day testifie to the World (and for us against the World) that we are of God, and that
Humphry Smith is his Servant, and that he doth this day suffer by the Rulers, under the same accusation, and no other, and for the same Truth, and so in the same cause, as Gods People of old did, and not for any thing else, nor any other thing pretended a∣gainst him, nor in the least laid to his charge. And if this will in no wise convince these Rulers of their Evil herein, nor other People, of the Innocency of my present suf∣ferings, Then let them all take heed lest the God of this World hath wholly blinded them, and hardned their hearts therein, and chained them up in obscurity, and bound them under the Powers of Darkness, and so far Seduced them already, that they are be∣come past Sense, Sight or Feeling, and then no more bt a most fearful looking for the Righteous Judgments and Indignation of the Almighty, which will one day devour, and none shall deliver. And then shall they all know, both Rulers and People, that I am Gods Servant, this day in Bonds for the Testimony of Jesus (against the Cruelty of men) in close Prison at Winchester; be∣ing known to the wicked World by the name, Humphry Smith. This was in short time sent back to them that committed me. A Coppy of a Paper sent to the lte intended (but Adjourned) Sssions.. WE are men that do fear the Lord, and do also truly desire peace with and amongst all men, among whom we have likewise behaved our selves in peace and quitness, labouring with our hands in the things that are honest, whereby to pro∣vide for our selves and Families, continuing also in carefuless therein, that though we suffer in body and estate, that neither we nor them, might be chargeable to any, neither have we wil∣fully provoked the Officers and Rulers against us, but in Humi∣lity in that we dare not but obey the Lord that made us, in wait∣ing upon him, for the which only and for no other cause, on our parts, we have already suffered before this Imprisonment so much cruelty and Inhumane Usage, that several sheets of Paper might be filled there with, though it would not be easie to be be∣lieved,
that English-men should so unmercifully be abused, by Souldiers, and other men, of their own Nation, as hath been daily inflicted upon us in the Town of Portsmouth, the place of our aboad and habitation, where for the space of one year and half, few First-dayes therein, but we were by the rudest Souldi∣ers (that they could chuse for the purpose, and such like Officers) either haled out of our Meetings (before the Law was made, as against us) or beat forth with much Voilence, or thrust or beat with Muskets along the streets, or punched, or knocked with the great ends of Muskets, and so with Voilence drove forth at the Gates, from our own Habitations, and then were hindered from coming in again to our Employments; and most, if not all these things were daily inflicted upon us, • with many more crueler Beatings and Bruisings of our Bodies, than is herein writ∣ten; and our Goods have been spoiled, and some carried away and our Windows battered down, even after we were beat and turned out, as aforesaid; and such First-dayes as we escaped, these things, we were shut up together in our own Houses, and Armed men set on every side to keep us in, both Men and Wo∣men, in a most evil and unseemly manner, and food denyd to be brought in to us, and sometimes our food that was sent us, taken away by the Souldiers, and other times we were some of us kept in several nasty Holes, which are so bad, that most people do esteem it a hard thing for the worst Fellon or Offender, to be kept a few dayes, where we were constrained to be several weeks, having also both Friends, and our own Wives and Relations, yea, and Food it self, and other needful things then kept also from us; and in Feltons-Hole the Waves of the Sea have so beat in on one of us in Winter-season, that he hath stood in water up to the Ancles: for the which things the Lord God hath and will visit them that were the Actors thereof. And when we had for the space of one year and half in much patience suffered many such things as aforesaid; then Affliction was added by the severe Execution of a Law against five or above meeting from their habitations, and assembling together, under pretence of Worship; the which, though our Meetings were not in pretence, but really intended, and absolutely for the Wor∣ship of God; yea, notwithstanding, though we were not this
time (for the which we yet suffer) the Number of Five that de∣parted from our habitations, and so not Transgressors of that Law, as we made it appear unto the Mayor and Rulers that com∣mitted us: Neither could they themselves affirm and prove, that we had therein transgressed that Law; yet notwithstang they im∣posed the utter most penalty upon us, which in the said Law is men∣tioned against them that transgress it, and so kept us full three Moneths in Prison in that Town, and three Weeks moreover then the three Moneths. And then in our Mittimus they did not so much as deal justly with us, but writ therein, That we were lately taken at a Meeting, as though it had been very lately in∣deed; and thereby have sought to conceal the long Imprison∣ment we had then suffered for the same Meeting therein signified; and concerning which we have also suffered nine weeks more in this Prison of Winchester, this 13th of the 11th Moneth, 1662. And these our heard and unreasonable Sufferings, and grievous Abuses, doth even cause a Cry for Mercy, and may claim Com∣passion in Equity, as well as Justice from you, who in Justice ought to shew Mercy, in relieving the oppressed; who having suffered all these things only upon the account of some difference in Opinion, in matters of Religion, or matter in us of Con∣science to God, wherein also the King's late Declaration offer∣eth us Relief, the benefit thereof we shall gladly receive; but if otherwise, then we say, The will of the Lord be done, whom we dare not but follow, though it should be to the loss of all. John Austin, Jonas Goff, William Bucklan, Thomas Cozens, Nichlos Cumplin, William Jennings. Solomon Nun, also a Prisoner eleven Weeks, for not paying four Shillings for being absent four First-dayes from their Church at Fareham, which in Conscience he could not pay; and so he is kept from his Masters business, being a young Apprentice-lad. John Bishop, also a Prisoner nine Weeks, being taken out of his own House, from the which he was not departed, neither were there then found with him any more men but two. Humphry Smith, a Prisoner one year and three Moneths, and ne∣ver called at Assize or Sessions, nor suffered to come to any of the Rulers in the County to lay before them the true state of his Case.
And now seeing the hardness of the hearts of the Rulers is such, that though a Copy of this fore-going Paper was sent unto them, at the time of their late appointed Sessions, and they not release the said sufferers nor commiserate their long and fore suf∣fering Cause, being some of them but poor men, and seeing the said Paper, was turned again, and so the cause of the long op∣pressed turned aside. Therefore is this published (with the other) that both Rulers and People may hear and see the long and many Afflictions of the harmless. And now, as touching four Coats that in cold Winter wea∣ther were stript off us, since we came to this Prison, and openly carried forth (by one whose name we forbear to write) and the Money for them drunk presently in strong Beer; concer∣ning the which, although we mentioned not a word amongst the rest of our sufferings, in the fore-going Paper: And yet seeing it is so, that just thereupon we were curbed and checked, and Friends kept out from us, and bitter words used at them that were let in (though the Goaler had profit by them) and that even by the Goaler's Wife (she having slighted Gods love, and so now hath little Pity for us) and this being also done at the same time, when the King's Declaration was come forth, which is so largely tending to our Liberty: And that the said Goalers Wife and himself (if they own that action) may know, that it was out of forbearance of love, and not of slavish fear of any, that we mentioned not these our Coats in the said Paper. Therefore are these few lines pertaining to this matter, now added to the rest of the sufferings of us J. A. T. C. J. G. N. C. This 14th day of the 11th Moneth 1662. And the cause, or the Reasons wherefore the Copy of the Mit∣timus, with the answer of me, H. S. is herein made publick, are these. First, Because John Norton and Humphry Bennit, have not only thus committed me upon no other account, but for being such a man as Gods servants were in the days of old, and for doing no other thing, but what was (though sometimes unjustly) charged against them, and also before this late Law was made (intenti∣onally) against Meeting. Secondly, Because they have kept me
close Prisoner one Year, three Moneths and upward, and that only upon this account. Thirdly, Because I have been all this time deprived even of that benefit of the Law in this Land which Thieves and Murderers have, being not all this time called at Assize or Sessions. Fourthly, Because the said John Norton refused to let me have any liberty for a little season, when a Friend came to seek it of him, after I had lain here almost a Year. Fifthly, Be∣cause nothing of evil is proved or brought in against me, nor any Law known, by which they thus keep me in long Bondage, though wrongfully in the Mittimus they have pretended a Law. Sixthly, Because I am more hardly dealt with (in my imprison∣ment) then the High-way-men, that break out of Prison, or any other Ossendor here, by their order, for the keeping of Friends from coming in to visit him that is one of the Members of Christ in Prison. Seventhly, Because that by no means all this time I can be permitted once to pass forth to any House in the Town; and several Reasons more, wherein I am unreasonably dealt with, all which having so long, and with much silence and patience un∣dergone. Eightly, Because all this and much more of their hard dealing, and my sufferings are so little regarded by the said John Norton and Humphry Bennit, and other Rulers, who some of them said, I might Rot here. Therefore, I say, thus much is at present published, and that other tender hearted people, and the meekest among the Rulers, may both read and consider the cause of the Oppressed, and also the long sufferings of Humphry Smith. The time cometh that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth God service, John 16. 2. If the World hate you, ye know, that it hated me, before it hated you, John 15. 81. But in the great day when it shall be said, Come ye Blessed, and Go ye Cursed; the things then laid to their charge will be these, I was Hungry, Thirsty, a Stranger, Naked, Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not; Answer, When saw we thee so? Reply, In as much as ye did it not unto one of the least of these, ye did it not to me, according to Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.
The the Sons of Men. YOu Sons of men, whom God hath made to shew forth the works of his hands, listen a little, be quiet and hear, and let your Minds be still; Why should Envy arise in your heats? let my words be received in Love; for behold, I speak in Righteousness and in Peace, from him that hath good∣will towards man; let your vain thoughts be denied, and in cool∣ness of Spirit, in true Moderation give ear a little; Why should the true fear of the Lord be dispised by you? And why should you not receive instruction, that your Souls might live in Peace forever? Or, why should I be esteemed by you as an Enemy, for bringing the Message of Everlasting Peace to you, which long did want it? Be quiet now therefore, and hear, all ye Judges, Ru∣lers, Governours, Justices, and all other Officers and People whatsoevr, upon the face of the whole Earth, who ignorantly from your Zeal in that knowledge which puffeth up have had a hand against a dispised, rejected, forsaken People, that are accounted the Off-scouring of all things, and are accounted as sheep for the slaughter, and are killed all the day long, who fol∣low him in the Travail of their Souls and brokenness of Heart, whose face is marred more then the Sons of men, to whom from him no Beauty nor Comeliness doth appear, nor any thing, wherefore he should be desired, who indeed and in truth is not of this World. Behold, I say, unto you, who have persecuted the Innocent, and smote the harmless with the Tongue, and the Fist of Wick∣edness, if you will let the humble seed arise in you, and read with fear, and consider in Meekness, with a true desire to re∣ceive the Power of God's Love, unto you is this Word of Visitati∣on sent; therefore, O ye men, feel ye that which opens the heart; for behold, I was made of one flesh with you, and the Lord God, and Father of my Life, made all men of one Blood that they might feel after him and find him; and surely, from the true sence
and feeling of Gods infinite Love unto Mankind, that he might be saved from Wrath to come; Therefore am I moved, with my Father's Pity, to visit you, to whom Gods Love is, and in whom the Seed lieth in Bondage, and is not brought to the birth nor de∣liverance, but the Earth is over it; and you that should be gathered into God's Everlasting Covenant of Peace, who lie yet in the Bon∣dage, why will you not believe my words, which are the Truth of the Lord, in the Power of his Love, which will stand forever? And so, all your Hating, Reviling and Imprisoning the Ser∣vents and Seed of God without you, in the Nation, and your ru∣ling over the Innocent, Honest, Plain and Harmless, is unto you a true figure of your hating, resisting and imprisoning the Seed of God which is in you; and your ruling over the honest meek thing in you, with Tyranny and Cruelty in the strength of your wills; and this hath long been so, and by this figure, hath the Lord been pleased to preach unto you of late years, that you might hear, and see, and understand; and this is plainly so, you being not reconciled unto that of God in Bondage in you, Therefore is your hatred against them without you, who are re∣conciled to God, and have no Confidence in the flesh; and be∣cause you are not reconciled to him that made you, therefore hath his witness in you often times disturbed and broke your Peace in the Earth, and the hand of the Lord hath so followed you, that many times you could not cause his Spirit to cease striving with you for some time, but even trouble from it hath come upon you, even in the Night-season, when you would have Peace; and when the Power of the Enemy of your souls, hath risen up in you, with Wrath and Envy, in hastiness and passion against the Ser∣vants of the Lord, and thereby have been moved with Envy, to act that which was Evil against them, intending thereby to make the true Jews bow down unto Haman's spirit in you; then afterwards, and some at the very time, hath the witness of God in you arose and brought Judgment, and Trouble, and Torment upon you, when some of you have been alone, in quietness, then hath the Lord been secretly Dealing with you by his measure of Light in you, the which you have strove against, some not know∣ing what it was, and sought Peace and ease another way, and so have not loved that which came to confound your Wisdom,
nor received that which is to bring the understanding of the pru∣dent to nothing; for that prudent understanding is in man, and that which is to confound it, is to be received in man; I speak what I know, and the Truth of which will stand forever: but you have not received that which in the heart began to judge you, nay, rather are you not afraid of being judged, and of that which judgeth in you? And is it not a hard saying unto you, that have talkt of God, to preach him unto you, who confounds the Wisdom of the Wise, and brings the Ʋnderstanding of the prudent to nothing? and to tell you, how that which may be known of God, is manifest in you? Is it not therefore plain, that you are yet joyned to that which is to be confounded, and so have not received that which is to con∣found, though it be in you; for the Kingdom of God was in the Pharisees, but they not knowing it, did neither know the Lord of Glory, but crucified him without them, and resisted that which was holy in them, yet professed the Scriptures without them, as you do, whose minds are out from the measure of the Inspiration of that Spirit in you, which gave forth the Scriptures, which are without you, which Scriptures also testifie of the Light of Christ, which is in you, and of that which may be known of God in you, to which you are to come; for unto them who had the Scriptures without them, Christ Jesus said, Come unto me, I am meek and low in heart; and his Name is called the Word of God, which is nigh, even in your hearts, though from you there it be hid as a Treasure hid in the Field; but though it be hid from you, yet it is there, and though you have been unprofitable, yet have you had a Talent; yea, the Lord God hath given Gifts to the Rebellious, (though they receive it not) that he might dwell in them; ye hard-hearted, stiff-necked and uncircumcised! why will you not believe my words? Why will you not receive the Truth? When will you bend and bow before the Lord God of Life? Can you say in your hearts, like the fool, That there is no God? Would you shut him out, from having an entrance in you? When was it that you did come to this thing which is hid in the heart? And when did you try this thing, which sometimes judgeth, condem∣neth, troubleth or confoundeth, whether this thing would give you the knowledge of God? And is not the Light to give the knowledge of God? And doth not he that is the Light enlighten
every man? And is not the Light that which doth make manifest? And is not there something in you, that doth at sometimes make manifest? And is there not something in you, which doth judge and condemn you for Evil, which is made manifest by it? You that talk of trying all things; Is not there one thing, and have you not yet need of one thing, even that which gives Power o∣ver sin, and cleanseth from all sin? And have you tryed this one thing, the Light, or that of God in you? Whether this will bring you to Peace with God and man? And whether by this in you, you may overcome the World, which is let in the heart? And was not he that is the Light and the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World? And hath not the World such a Foundation in you, and such a growth and stature over you, that you cannot see to the end of it, nor believe to the overcoming of it? And is it not therefore, that you are joyned to that by which the Lamb is slain, so that his Grave is with the Rich, and his Burial with the Wicked; read and understand? And doth not the Blood of the slain Cry from the ground against you? Did you never hear the the oppressed Cry? Did you never feel a seed in you, cry aloud for Life, though it lies in the Death? Did you never know the house of Mourning, nor feel him near, who is a man of Sorrows? Are you quite dead and past feeling; Nay nay, there is many of you; are not so far hardened, nor yet so much given up how∣ever, the time hath been that you all might have known this thing I declare, of which belongs to your peace, you that have the Scriptures, and are talking of the place of holy Worship, take heed, hearken and hear a little, He that makes an end of sin is come near unto you, he who remains a Priest forever, Mourneth o∣ver you, and your day of visitation is come, yea, behold the Lamb, the meek, harmless, unspotted, beloved of God, comes meek∣ly, though esteemed not able to save himself, yet behold, its the King of Glory crowned with Immortality forever, who rides meekly in Righteousness, and gentle in the Father's Wisdom; yea, the Heir is come, resist him not, lest the thing which belongs to your Everlasting peace be hid from your Eyes, for evermore, and you left desolate, only having the Scriptures of Truth, but not the Truth in the inward parts, where the knowledge of it makes free.
For behold, the Prince of Everlasting Peace I proclaim unto you, even the Word by which the World was made, by which Word all things are upheld, and the Word of Reconciliation, reconcileth the heart (Mark, its the Heart) of the parents to the Children, and the Children to the parents, that the Earth may not be smitten with a Curse, and who so have received that Word, so as it comes to be ingrafted into them, thereby their hearts come to be reconciled one to another, and have Love, U∣nity and Peace with all those Things, Persons and Creatures, which were at first made, and are upheld by the Power of that Word, to which he that is come, of him its written, In Famine he shall redeem thee from Death; and in War, from the Power of the Sword, and thou shalt be hid from the Scourge of the Tongue; neither shalt thou be afraid of Destruction, when it cometh; at destruction and famine thou shalt laugh; neither shalt thou be afraid of the beast of the Earth, for thou shalt be at league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be in league with thee, and thou shalt know, that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin. And you that are far off from coming to read this within, may search the Scriptures, and read it there of a seed, that shall be great; as the off-spring that shall be as the Grass of the Earth for Number; so shall they be multiplied, in whose Mouthes there is found no guile, & are Children that will not Lye, that are come to him who is the Prince of Peace that makes an end of sin, and is the Word before the sin, and the Covenant of God, the Everlasting Father, who proclaims Liberty to the cap∣tive, and is the one thing needful, in the which all things are re∣conciled to God, and in him to one another whether things in Heaven, or in Earth, or under the Earth, whereby comes Peace in the receiving, and submission unto that Word of Power by which all things were made, and are upheld, and the Light of that word is that which is become unto us both Rest, and Joy, and Life, and Peace. And this is that which is ministred into every Creature; and this we have heard in secret, and proclaim on the House tops, and this is to be preached unto all Nations, that by it he that is a∣bove all, through all, and in all, may come to be known, which is the Gospel of the Kingdom; and this I proclaim unto
you, and publish, within your borders, and make mention of his Name within your Gates, that the Life of Immortal Peace there you might feel, and this is it, which you have long resist∣ed, as your Fathers did, and when you have rebelled against this, like them before, that also rebelled against the Light, Job 24. 13. And having resisted it in your selves, then you rise up against us, who believe in the Light, John 12. 39. and when you have even murthered the witness in your selves, then you seek to destroy us; who bear witness, that he is come, who reproves the World of sin; and the World is set in the Heart, and the Light is come into the World, and that which reproveth for sin is in you, though by reason of sin it is wounded, and often overcome, and with that which is wounded in you, we mourn, and with that which sometimes troubles you, we have Peace; and that in you is our Friend, and pleads for us against you, whom you re∣fuse to hear! and that which you are most afraid of, we love and embrace; and that which would break your hearts, hath broke ours, and that in you which is to kill the Life you live, is that which hath brought us from Death to Life, by which we now live; for that which was alive is dead, and that which was dead is a∣live, and the first born is slain, and the seed is come forth from under Deaths Bond; but you that are Rich, and think you need nothing, in whom Wickedness is found, are the grave, (Isaiah—) in which that is buried, as a dead thing, which should save from Death, and give power over the Grave, and bring peace for evermore; And if that in you arise not, to give you Life and Peace, and so fellowship with us, whose Life is in it, yet do we with it rejoyce in its Righteous Judgments, and have fellow∣ship with it, as it ariseth to judge and condemn you for your disobeying and contemning of it; for absolutely if you will not let it now arise, to mortifie the Lust and bring down the Life, which is in the strength of your wills, and so to give you peace, then will it arise hereafter, to judge and condemn you, when you shall not be able any longer to resist, nor overcome the strength of its dreadful power, in executing Judgment upon the Trans∣gressor.
To Friends at Ailsbury (Prison) and in them parts. DEar and well-beloved Friends, who continue true Fol∣lowers of the Lamb of God in faithful Sufferings for the Testimony of his Name, and remain Prisoners for the same Truth and Testimony of Jesus, for which also this Bo∣dy of mine doth and hath long suffered Restraint and Bonds, and my Soul grieved with the Sodomitish Wickedness and Hea∣thenish Prophainness of Hard-hearted Rebellious to God, and dis∣obedient Ungodly People, whose Judgment slumbereth not, and whose Damnation will certainly come and be just from God up∣on them, who have made a Covenant with Death, and shew forth themselves as a people at an Agreement with all the Powers of Hell, in which is the Reward of all the Wicked, that have for∣gotten God and wholely rejected the manifold Manifestation of his Mercies, which unto you, O ye dear and tender-hearted! is as precious Oyl, and as desirable Treasure! Who can but prize the Mercies of the God of Heaven? How refreshingly hath it often flowed in upon the thirsty Habitations of many, to the abundant refreshing and comforting of the weary Land? Oh! how sweetly, and with what pleasantness hath mine Eyes beheld the springing up, and the growth and spreadings of the tender Plants, after the distiling streams of the Heavenly Dews upon them, and every one standing in his place flourishing with their Branches over the Earth, not one offending the other, and all casting forth a sweet favour, being daily replenished with the springings up of the Sap of Life, and comforted with the Sun Beams of Righteousness? How harmoniously then doth the Gar∣den flourish? And how beautiful is every Plant, whom God hath planted? And is it possible for any other plants to bring forth Fruits unto holiness, but only such whom the God of Heaven causeth to grow? And how sad is it for any one Plant to hurt, kill or destroy another? And who can without some Remorse
or pity behold the withering and fading of any such Plants, whose flourishing was once so delightsom, that all who passed by, and took notice thereof, commended them for their virtue; or at least, took some special notice of their prudence, and the wis∣dom of him by whom they flourished, in that they grew, multi∣plied and prospered, though they could not perceive, nor un∣derstand, by what invisible virtue they thus were nourished, nor whence it came I say, again, when I have beheld the Trees of the Lord, the Plants of the Garden of God, in their fresh green growing, flou∣rishing united State, in the Life of Liberty, my heart hath of∣ten been refreshed, my Soul quickned, my Spirit revived, and my mind and desires abundantly satisfied; Then hath my life founded forth the precious praises of the Almighty in the Assem∣blies of the upright, and my Heart broken therewith, in the de∣lightsom Love, hath poured forth Thanksgiving, with tender∣ness and tears in secret: O! how then hath the overflowing of Mercy reached over the uttermost borders of my dwelling? and how sweetly have we then been comforted and revived one in an∣other? How lovely then hath the face of the Righteous been, when Righteousness it self, in the Meekness of Love, looked forth at the Windows? How were the Bowels of each other, then enflamed within them? How sweet was the Beauty of Meekness to the Beholders? Who then could but receive the love of the loveliness it self? Dear Lambs of the fold of Heaven, whose hearts are still open∣ed, by the feeling of the virtue of life, who only know me, and can hear the words of my Life, and understand the Voice of my Love; My Heart and Soul salutes you, my Love is dear unto you, my Life hath long reached forth it self towards you; in my Remembrance your Life is written, I am your Servant in the Love of God, a Member of the Body with you, a Brother in Tri∣bulations, a Companion with you in your Warfare, a Feeder with you at your Table, and one that rejoyceth with you, in the Joy un∣speakable, being made with you a partaker of that precious Inhe∣ritance, that fadeth not away, where Life, and Love, and fel∣lowship, with Praises and Thanksgiving aboundeth forever. Wherewith should I greet you, in the Greetings of that Love,
which cannot be uttered? And how should I Salute you in that which cannot be declared? What words might I use to speak forth the Life of Wisdom, or reach forth the true love of a bro∣ken Heart? Behold! I may become as a Babe herein and be si∣lent as a Child, yet learning utterance, lest in reaching forth of my strength, I should signifie my weakness to unfold the unde∣clareable Infinitness of the fulness of Virtue, Wisdom, Meek∣ness, Life and Love, from the measure whereof my simple words most certainly do at present proceed, as some few amongst many will surely perceive hereby, who remain in the single-heartedness of undefiled Unity, whose desires are still afresh enflamed, and whose Bowels yet daily yearn after a more fuller enjoyment of God, and the encrease and preservation of his Precious Truth, and who for the same can still deny themselves, to serve others in the true sense and feeling of the undefiled brotherly Love, and who can lay down their Crowns that the Lamb may be ho∣noured, and suffer in the inward man, that the Brother may be preserved; for whom Christ dyed, and towards whom Gods Love was, even when he was an Enemy, the which love of God being continued towards thee, in the same Love shouldest thou continue towards thy Brother, and there-with mayst thou do him good, and perform some service towards the Lord, whose love was towards you both; and then from him shalt thou receive a Reward into thy own Bosom, and in the needful time, God will deliver thee, and at the hour of Tryal he will Succour thee, and thou (the dear Plant of the Lord) thereby mayst stand, though some that were stronger then thee be overcome and fall into the Snare of the Enemy in that hour of Tryal, and be then entan∣gled with many Incumbrances, and that of divers kinds. The Lord God of Heaven and Earth preserve my dear ten∣der hearted Lambs and Brethren out of such things, that a Vail may not come over you, and so the Life be stopt from springing up in you; for then may such again go Mourning all the day long, when none doth pity. Friends, the often Incomes of Gods Love, and the forth flow∣ings of the same towards you, and the precious seed of God in them parts, hath constrained me at present to visit you in the true love of my Soul with these Lines, that so you might not only
hear from me, but also in some measure be comforted in me, and likewise some of you a little refreshed hereby. For Behold, the God of Heaven is my Refuge, and strength, and the Lord of Host is my Upholder, and the holy One of Israel is my Ever∣lasting Support, and the daily Incomes of that which doth truly comfort, is as Marrow to my Bones, yea, the Lord hath prolong∣ed my dayes, inlarged my Borders, and beautifyed the Place of my Dwelling! My heart is overcome with his Love, my Soul is filled with his Virtue, and my Tongue doth declare of his Good∣ness; the praises of the Lord ascend up to Heaven, whose Mer∣cies refresh the Earth; Oh that you might partake with me of the unspeakable Blessings of God, and feel and receive in your selves, the true Tenders and Offers of the tenderness of my Love here∣by presented unto you, that you might feel your Hearts begin to open therewith, to receive the same, that in the Life of the Spi∣rit of Truth you may truly perceive me to be present praising the Lord with you, and likewise pertaking with you of your suffer∣ings, having also Acquaintance of your Grief, and being truly sensible of your manifold Tryals and Tribulations: The Lord preserve you to the end thereof. And Friends, let not your hearts be sad, neither be ye over∣much cast down with any thing whatsoever (of which I forbare to mention) neither be ye discouraged by reason of any thing that the Lord bringeth or suffereth to come to pass, either a∣mongst us or concerning us, neither let the multitude of Tryals, nor the length of dayes therein cause you in the least to distrust the Lord, who in his secret Wisdom (in the end of all things) bringeth forth good unto such, who in all conditions, and un∣der all Tryals, do truly love and cleave unto the Lord their strength. But why should I multiply words? The intent of my heart is, that you might have benefit by the increase of the same love of God, and the Springings forth thereof, of the which we have all received; For you know the Truth which teacheth all things, and a measure of that Life, from whence all these words do come, which do service for the Lord, and are helpful to his Servants, and comfortable to his Chosen people and for the refreshing of the tender Lambs, and the building up of the members in the
holy Unity, to grow up in the holy Life for the honour of his Glorious Name forever, in whose blessed Name, Life, Strength and Virtue is found, the which indeed is become a true Refuge unto the Chosen Israel of God, where they are succoured, when none can help, and where they are preserved, when none other can uphold, unto whom they can pour forth their Complaints in secret, and Address themselves at every needful time, whose com∣plaints are never by him rejected, nor turned back upon the Up∣right hearted; as sometimes it hath been, when help or com∣fort hath been expected from some of the Children of men, who may also be tempted, and in danger of being overcome, but the Lord can never be overcome, neither can he ever Err in his Un∣derstanding, or mistake in his Judgments, nor reject that which is truly simple and tender, neither yet receive that which is deceitful, though appearing or seeming never so Glorious. Let all Friends, whose hearts are tender, in the tenderness thereof still, return unto him, from that which causeth a hard∣ness, and out of that which bringeth distrust, to leave that which bringeth darkness into the mind, and so to get from the barren places into the fruitful Habitation of the living. Then shall Peace flow as a River, and Unity shall flourish as the varieties of the various Flowers in the Field, and Righteousness shall spread over all as the Morning dew; and then the Beauty of the Righte∣ous shall shine, and the Glory of the Lord shall yet more abun∣dantly appear, and fruit shall encrease as in the Summer season, and the Vineyard of the Lord shall yet again flourish in Righ∣teousness, and the Lord shall be glorified in his Saints, who is greatly admired by all them that truely believe. Oh! that the seed might lift up the head! Oh! that the Plants of Righteous∣ness might spring! that the true Mourner might be comforted, That fruit might abound in abundance, That the weak might re∣ceive strength, That the Seed of the Lamb may know the Bold∣ness of the Lyon, That all might be refreshed together, and that you all might live, and grow, and encrease with the Encreases of God. The Lord God of Heaven and Earth grant these things unto you, and fulfill them in you, that you may be filled with Vir∣tue, and wax bold and Valiant to the end, in the noble Life of
the honourable Power of God, whose Name is blessed for ever∣more, Amen. From Winchester Prison is this sent forth towards you, and the true Love and Simplicity of Heart, by your Brother in the fellowship and Testimony of Jesus, and the Bonds of the Gospel. Humphry Smith. To the Young and Tender, and to the late Convinced People of God a∣mongst the rest of the Elect and al∣ready Chosen, whose outward Ha∣bitations are in and near the County of Essex. To be read amongst them in much Wisdom, Meekness, Deliberation, and most chiefly in the true fear of the Lord God. THe sound of the everlasting Truth of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth hath passed through and amongst you, and the Word of his Power, in the dread of his holy Name, hath been published within your borders, and the way of everlasting Life and Righteousness hath plainly been declared to the understanding, and the Covenant of everlast∣ing Peace and Truth hath been tendred unto your Hearts, and the Day of Visitation from God hath been freely offered unto your Souls, and the things which belong to your everlasting happiness hath been set before your Eyes, and those things of the Kingdom of God, which pertain to the Sons of men to know, in the power of his Wisdom, and in the strength of his Might, hath been demonstrated among you, and the ten∣der
Call of God in the day of his love hath been unto you: Oh that your Hearts might retain it forever, and that your Eyes might be abundantly opened, to see into the unsearchable things of God! Oh, that your understandings might yet be more opened to receive the Riches of the invisible Truth of God! Oh that your Hearts might come to be more enlarged therewith! and that you who have known the Call of God, and felt the working of his Grace in your hearts unto a true Convincement, might all come to live the Life of Righteousness, end forever hereafter to walk from that more and more, which you are truly convinced of to be evil, either in Word or Deed, or any manner of Practice whatsoever, and to walk with more Circumspection, and Integrity, and Faithfulness to the Lord, in obedience unto all things, truly made known unto you to be right, and justifiable in the sight of the God of Heaven. This certainly is the breathings of my Soul unto the God of Heaven for your everlasting Well-fare. And the true desire of my present enlarged Heart for your Eternal Happiness, is, That as the Lord of Heaven and Earth hath counted you worthy of his Call, in the power of his Grace, which bringeth Salvation unto all, you may not judge your selves unworthy of the Kingdom of God, but may cleave unto his Truth in the inward parts, leaving all that which hath kept you from it, whatsoever it be; and all that which hath hindred you, and doth hinder from the Life and Virtue of it in your own Hearts; this all to leave behind you forever, and to give it away freely, and as freely willing as a man would part with Dross for Gold, and present mortal Honour for immortal Renown forever; for behold, the Glory of the World passeth away, and all the Beauty thereof shall be as a fading Flower when it is fully ripe, the strength thereof shall melt away like Wax before the Jealousie of our God; and Aegypt shall be judged, and Babylon confounded, and the strength of the Op∣pressor brought down; and the Lord will weaken the power of the Heathen, and all the Earth shall know, that he is the same God of Power and righteous Judgments as ever, in the day when he cometh in the dread of his Power to assemble the Heathen to Judgment, and to pour forth Floods of Indignation
upon the Wicked, when Anguish shall enter the dwellings of the Ungodly, and intolerable perplexity seize upon the Con∣sciences of the Unfaithful; when the Hypocrite shall no longer cover himself, nor the Adversaries of Sion rejoyce against her! when the Lord shall reach forth his Hand and scatter his open Enemies, as in the day of slaughter, and consume the Bryars of the Earth, as with endless Burnings and unquenchable Flames in the strength of his Fury, when he pleadeth by the Fire of his Jealousie and the Sword of his Mouth, with all the Wicked, Un∣godly and Unfaithful ones, who make Flesh their Arm, and depart from the Word of the living God in their Hearts, which then they shall know to be Powerful against all Unrighteousness, and quick in executing Judgments accordingly. Oh! happy is the Man that then shall know a Refuge, and blessed shall the People be whose God is then the Lord, and full well will it be for them who then know a hiding place! Then shall Sion alone rejoyce, and Jerusalem be glad forever, and only the redeemed of the Lord shall walk in the Paths of his Judg∣ments, and in the midst of devouring and consuming Fire, which to them shall be as a Wall for everlasting defence round about them, and as precious healing Oyl of Joy and Gladness in the midst, and as pure Oyntment poured out into the Wounds of the broken-hearted! Light shall shine forever in their Habita∣tions, and Wisdom shall be found in them, like as in Daniel the Servant of God in the dayes of Old, and only the Faithful shall stand, and the Upright-hearted shall endure, and God will keep his little Ones, and the Weak shall be strengthened by him, and the Poor of the Flock shall be comforted; and the Feeble among men shall receive strength from God as the Morning, and re∣newing of virtue as the dawning of the day, and the Lambs of the Fold shall be kept, and only Gods People shall stand; yea, they shall stand, and the Gates of Hell, with all the powers of darkness, shall never prevail against them; the Lord hath spoken it; whose Words shall stand forever, which shall seal it unto the Heritage of God, and the Dross must be purged away, and the Unbelieving must stand behind; and the Careless will stagger at the Promises; and they that seek themselves shall have Self enough; but Self shall never help them in that day, neither
shall their own Wisdom stand them instead, neither yet their Righteousness, in the Day of God's Controversie, when the great Oaks shall fall, and the lofty Cedars shall bow to the Dirt, when no covering at all shall hide, but that which is put upon men by the Power of God's dwelling Spirit in the Heart of every individual, by the virtue thereof, and not otherwise. And this moreover I say to every, particularly unto you who were late astray from God, and lately were convinced of the precious Truth of his Son, that in the Name and Power of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth from him to you was I sent, and that more chiefly to gather the Out-casts, than to feed the Lambs, who were already gathered; and rather to call home the lost Sheep, than to nourish them that were already brought home, and to call Sinners to Repentance, and for the opening the Hearts, Understanding and Eyes of those, who though they truly desired, had not clearly understood the secret things of the hidden Wisdom of the Almighty: And truly, my Love was to Sinners, and the true affections and breathing of my Soul for the Prodigals in them parts, which were most chiefly my Message from God at that time, and my Service of Love unto the Souls of such in them parts, and to publish the Name of the Almighty in the great Congregations; and surely my own Bre∣thren, even the gathered Flock of God, attended in much patience, whilst I thus performed my Service of love to you; neither did I turn my Face from you to them, nor with-held from you the Counsel of God in truth; neither was I negligent in the Service to do you good; neither yet sparing of my strength, nor with-holding my Speech, when God gave utterance; but rather can truly say, I could even have been spent for you, in the dis∣charge of my Conscience to the Lord my strength. And now, this is that which my Heart desireth of you, and my Soul desireth for you, That you all, and every of whose Hearts then God touched with the feeling of his Love, by the power of his Immortal Word, through me his weak Earthen Vessel, that you all may obey the Call and Visitation of God in the requiring of his Light in your own Hearts, thereby wil∣lingly to depart from the wayes of the Wicked, the professions of the Hypocrites, and the paths of Ungodly men, and to stand
no long in the way of Sinners, nor regard the counsel of them who hate the Light and Truth in the inward parts, and to come out from amongst them that are unclean, who live still more and more in that which pollutes them, who live in their Sins, professing God and serving the Devil, until they have finished their Sins, which then bringeth forth Death; and he that dyeth in his Sins, not believing in the Light, which makes an end of sin, cannot come where Christ is. And so, the Tree falling, there it lieth; and as Death leaveth, Judgment findeth; and as Judg∣ment findeth, so shall the Reward according to the deeds be. And then shall every man stand or fall to his own Master; the Ser∣vants of the Devil to their Master, and the Servants of God to their Master; and there is no more Masters but them two, and no man can serve both, though Thousands profess the one and serve the other, who in that day must give an account whom they have served, and not whom they have professed; for they who professed God, and served the Devil, were Hypocrites; and so are unto this day, of whom the World is full. And blessed are they who by the living Power of the Soul-saving Grace of God, are truly redeemed out of the way, works, worships and nature of such, to serve the living God in the newness of the spirit, through Faith and Patience, and to walk in Innocency before the Lord for evermore. Such shall come to rejoyce in the Truth, and the Arm of the Lord shall bring them more nearer to himself, that they may come to see the Lord in his Glory, and to praise him in the Land of the living, and to behold Sion in her perfect Beauty, and to feel their Unity with Gods Elect, and to enjoy the Covenant of Everlasting Peace, that shall never be broken, to be bound up together in the life of Immortality, Wisdom and Righteousness, to shine forth as the Morning, like the Jewels of the Lamb, and to be beautified with Meekness as the Members of the unspotted of God. Oh! the Crown of Rejoycing and Everlasting Felicity that is set before you, to whom I am not able to express the infinite bounty and goodness of the Almighty! Oh! who can hold when the Lord hath spoken, or conceal his loving-kindness, when the Almighty giveth utterance? The Lord hath enlarged my Heart, let me not therefore enquire among you, where
there is room to receive it! Oh! let there be an inward search, whether that the door be open, and the straitness taken away, that he which was with you may find entrance in you, and you truly come to feel the receiving of his life, to the glad Tidings of your Hearts. From such an outward Prison cannot keep me, nor from them the vast distance of Miles cannot with-hold me! Behold, I say, in the Name of God, I am near unto you. And when you are assembled together with one accord, in the place where the Light is a Ministry to the work, this read among you in the fear of the God of Heaven; then shall many of you know it so to be, & that the Lord hath given me of his unlimited Spirit, which I freely let forth unto you: And the breathings of my life are, that you might receive benefit thereby, and be com∣forted together. And be strengthened in the inward man, that the Devil may not prevail, nor the love of the World overcome the innocent desires which God hath begotten; let no unbelief nor slavish fear hinder you in your spiritual progress toward the at∣tainment of the Crown of Life in the Kingdom of blessedness, which God hath certainly prepared for the upright and in∣nocent. And now, behold, I turn unto my Brethren, the called and chosen of God, whom my Soul hereby saluteth, unto whom I cannot by words sufficiently express my Love, neither have I room to publish the enlargedness thereof in writing, neither will usual phrases of Speech satisfie my broken Heart. Oh! blessed be the day that ever you were called, and the hour of your Vi∣sitation, and the time of the Conception of the Seed in the Womb, and the season of the forth-coming thereof into the liberty of Peace! Blessed be the Lord forever on your behalf, who hath chosen you to the riches of life, and brought you to the Well-springs of Mercy, and caused you to drink of the Rivers of his strength, which hath daily been renewed unto you, Oh! blessed be the God whose love hath not been with-held from your Souls, and who hath not with-held counsel from your Eyes! Friends, God hath opened my Heart unto you, receive me therefore as in the Bowels of Mercy, that now we may praise the Lord forever: Oh! that your Souls may with me forever
magnifie the unutterable Power of the God of Heaven, and that you may this day with me drink freely of the Cup of Eternal Sal∣vation, that then we may rest together as in a Bed of Repose, in the delightsom Arms of our Father's love, that forever we may sing the Song of the Lamb, and sound forth the Praises of the Almighty together, that you may know the Lord is with me, and that the holy One of Israel is indeed become my ever∣lasting Support. And unto you all, Friends, Erethren and fellow Members of the heavenly Body, these are the pourings forth of Gods infinite Love, free for all that can receive it. And thus in few words as unto you, my Brethren, even desiring to be felt and received in that which comprehendeth all words, and is more than words can express, in which the words end, which was before the words were, where my dwelling is; and you that truly know me, know it so to be, where-with you in the eternal Beeing and Substance of all living, I rest in the Fountain of Mercy, desiring daily, in my pourings forth of my Soul unto God, that you all may walk blamelesly, and be pre∣served in the Truth of your Hearts, to stand stedfast in the day of Tryal at hand. And so in the power of Wisdom, which is the Refuge of the Innocent, the Lord God Almighty of Hea∣ven and Earth preserve you all, and keep you all for evermore, Amen. And hereby you may likewise know, that I am in health and strength of Body and Soul, and that my Heart is sometimes enlarged with the Power of Gods Love, and my Spirit at Liberty, which is out of their power to imprison, by whom my Body is shut up in the close unsavoury Prison of my late and long sad Sufferings in the common Goal at Win∣chester, where this is written by him that God hath called herein to be your Servant, in obedience to his blessed Will; known to the World, but unto you in that which is nearer than this Name, Humphry Smith.
Concerning TYTHES. TYthes at first were not required, but given only of the Spoils of the War (only once) by Abraham, unto him that was made like unto the Son; but the Substance be∣ing come (even Christ) who was before the Wars, and before Abraham, he redeems out of the Lust, from whence the Wars arise; and so bringeth to an end of that from whence Wars come, and so to an End of that from whence Tythes were first given, and so to give nor pay Tythes any longer, being redeemed out of Lust, and Wars, and Fightings, by the Blood of Jesus, who said, I am the Light, that abideth a Priest forever; and his day A∣braham rejoyced to see, who brings to the End of the Tythes, and makes War with that, and slayes that, which caused men to Slay one another in the Wars, who comes to save the Life, who is Greater than Abraham, who being now come, denyeth fight∣ing, and saith, He that taketh the Sword, shall perish with the Sword: And so that was to perish whereby Tythes were first given; then must there needs be an end of Tythes, which also perisheth with the using, and the Law for the Tythes (which had a shadow of good things to come) decayes and waxes old, and vanisheth away, the good things themselves being come, and good will towards man, and the Covenant of Light to joyn the hearts together. For Tythes were never given nor paid until after men had kil∣led, and slain, and done violence and wrong one to another; and Christ saith, Love your Enemies; and if he smite thee on the one Cheek, turn the other: And such as are come to that, and obey his command, are come out of the Wars and the Strife unto the Prince of Peace who was before the Wars, and so know the peaceable Covenant, which will not wax old, but last forever, in which there is no Wars nor killing one another, and so comes to the End of that Covenant, which commanded the Tythes, and to the change of the Law, the Priest whereof; and they that receive the Tythes, murder and slay him that is to bring to the
End of Tythes; so that by him to the End of Tythes they are not come, nor from under the first Covenant, where the Tythes are paid whilst the vail is over the Heart, and that Ministry standing, which makes nothing Perfect, and will dye, and change, and perish, but he that Redeems out of and from among them, and that which perisheth, abides a Priest forever: and of him it is said, he liveth. And so him we bear Testimony of, who is en∣tred within the Vail, in whom the Vail is done away, and so that is seen, and departed from, and made an end of, which stood whilst the Vail was not rent, and the way into a more Holy known than the first Covenant, wherein the Tythes were paid, the Vail being over the Heart, and is yet over the Hearts of all them who pay or receive Tythes, and all that uphold it; who may take notice, that the first Priests that ever took by force Of∣ferings, were Sons of Belial, and knew not God, whom the Lord destroy'd, and they perished in the Wars with the Sword, 1 Sam. 2. 12. ver. 16. Therefore we cannot but deny Tythes, and the upholding of it, and all such as take it (especially) ly force, which Actions are the fruits of such Priests as know not God, and such he will overturn. For the Seed of God in many Thousands, Cryes unto him, by reason of the Cruel Oppression of Tythes, from under which the Lord will deliver us. Humphry Smith. This for my nearly related Friend Eliza∣beth Smith at Little Cawerne. THe God of Heaven, that made me, and the Lord God of Power that called me to obey and follow him, even in that day when I was not acquainted with his Voice, and who hath been my Guide, Defence, Succour and Comfort unto this day and moment, and who hath ever upheld me, as a Fa∣ther the Child by the Arm of his Power, whom the world neither did nor can by its Wisdom ever know, who is the only wise In∣visible
Spirit that upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power, who is dreadful to the Heathen that know him not, and more pre∣cious than ever can be expressed with Tongue or Pen, unto them who have felt and received and live in the true sence of the En∣larging incomes of the virtue of his Power, the Life whereof to them is most desirable. My Strength, Life and Refuge alone is he, whose service I have no cause to decline, and whose precious powerfull call he never gave me cause to repent; for with himself he hath and doth dayly gratify me with a full Reward for all, and all manner of my manifold Tryals, and daily Sufferings, and Exercises, which I meet with in the way, but really and Abso∣lutely I can truly say, that none of these things move me in the least from that foundation, upon which the God of Heaven and Earth hath long since established me, that I might stand for him and the Glory of his Name, who hath both set and appointed me thereunto, and given me Courage, as a fortified Tower, to stand as a mark for the Adversaries of Sion to vent forth the utmost of their limited Fury. And in the Lord my strength is my Consi∣dence, neither have I believed that ever I should distrust him, though since the day that I have known him he hath even suffered the Sorrows of Death, and the pangs of Hell, and the Powers of Unutterable Darkness at sometimes to compass me in on every side, and to lift up themselves in the vaunting Arrogancy of the swelling Pride thereof, as Mountains never to be removed. But behold, he who hath his way in the Whirl-wind, and his path through the midst of the deepest Ocan, him alone it was that my broken Heart was by the power of his constraining Love re∣solved to follow forever, even through the greatest difficulties, and the most hardest Straits, Tryals and Hardships, with all manner of outward and inward Sufferings, that might be per∣mitted to happen unto or fall upon any one of the Children of men. Oh! that I could now sufficiently declare his Goodness, and so fully and effectually make mention of his Power, as it de∣serveth! or as the Lord hath given into my Heart to desire of him to be made use of, in the Declaration or Manifestation thereof in this my day, unto the Sons and Children of men. Surely, when I am waiting of him, and of his unutterable Goodness and Po∣wer, my Words and Lines are also short of setting forth, the
Virtue and Fullness of the most unexpressible divine excellency thereof, that sometimes I am rather ready to dwell in silence with and in the fullness thereof, which overcomes with unutterable Virtue, than to be writing of that which in its self can never be written, though what is written may be by and with, and from the overflowings of the same, and so be as drops or little streams of heavenly Water, to refresh the dry and thirsty Land, which therein doth its service, and then the praise thereof is to return unto him who is the alone fountain of all Virtue, and the Life which giveth Life, even unto the dead that hear his Voice, where∣by he comes to be known to be Infinite in Wisdom, Power and Virtue, whom my soul doth Honour, my heart doth Praise, and my spirit adoreth forever; for none is like to him, neither doth my soul desire any other but he whilst in this body, or for ever∣more in the Life which yet doth come. Let all that know him bow before him, and let all that hear his voice be humble and meek, and let every one that truly de∣sires after him wait with diligence and in patience upon him, and let all that are faithful to him rejoyce in his Love, and prize him for much more then the liberty of their bodies, or the En∣joyment of Thousands and Thousands of Thousands of Tem∣poral Visible Earthly thing, All which are his, and he is ours, yea, he is certainly mine, and I am his, and my soul doth mag∣nifie him, and my spirit doth yet breath farther to sound forth his Praises, not only all the dayes of my life, whilst in this Earthly Tabernacle, but likewise in the hearts of Thousands of them yet unborn, and among the Generations that are yet to come by my faithful upright Testimony, and the Record thereof, which may remain, when the God and Father of my life hath gathered me, with the rest of his servants of old to live with him, in the delightsom Ocean of the Infinite Fullness of his most de∣sirable Power and precious Presence, the streams whereof already are as the free Issuings forth of Life Eternal, and as the streams of Mercy, and the dews of the Morning Refreshing, even the outmost borders of my dwelling, and Comforting the mournful places of my Habitation! Who can express his Goodness? What man can utter his Bounty, or how can man either in words or with Pen sufficiently signifie forth the Fullness and
Virtue of that which passeth Knowledge? Behold, my Dwelling is in it and my Life is bound up with the inocent Lambs, who live in the feeling Virtue of that which much super-aboundeth the most pleasantest and delightsom'st Words that ever my Tongue can utter, and yet those that hear them hear the Truth in the which the Life doth stand; and they that hear the Truth hear him from whence the Life doth come, which Life it self in the power and virtue of it, is the center of the Upright, the Refuge of the Innocent, and the thing it self, unto which it self is drawing and gathering, that it may be known within, even to those who have been astray there-from, that the one Fold, the one Succour, the one Food, the one Shepherd, the one Refuge, the one Spirit, the one Heart, and the one Mind may be known, and so the One God, in the one only Ʋnity worshipped, served, and praised, from the Power, Life, and Virtue of the one Spirit which comes from the only One God of Heaven and Earth, before whom let the Heathen be Astonished, and the ungodly fear and Tremble, and the Brambles of the Earth prepare, for the day of his Righteous Judg∣ments, and Fiery Indignation, which as the breadth of his Nostrils, be∣ing mixed with Flames of Endless Burnings, he will plead with his own open Adversaries, which shall be more fully manifest in the great Day of the Lord, when all Mankind must give an account to him both of idle and wicked words; and likewise of their deeds done in the body. The Lord God hasten that day, and let him come, even him who cometh as a Thief in the Night, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who said, I am the Truth, the Spirit whereof the World cannot receive, but we have known him, and received him, and know that he is true, and have believed on him, and have often drunk of the Living Water that springeth up unto life Eternal, in those that truly believe. And this I say, forever blessed are they that believe and endure to the End, for whom Gods Crown of Life is prepared, and for all who give up their Lives, and suffer faith∣fully, for the Honour of him, who hath so far honoured them, as to account them worthy to bear their Testimony, and to suf∣fer for him: In the which I say, The Lord preserve my Friends and Brethren every where, who have tasted of Gods loving kindness, and remain sensible at present of the meekness of his love. And let all Friends so dwell in the faith which is the gift of
God, over the World, as to live thereby, and not to lose the Crown of Glory, and Immortality which was desired from the breathings of the seed in the day of Jacob's Captivity; and the Lord God of my Life preserve and defend the plants of Righ∣teousness even by his own Power and his own Spirit, in that day and at that time, when all other helps may not be available, that then the sufficiency of the Greatness of his own Wisdom and strength may be apparent, and then most happy shall those be, who are found worthy to suffer, and endure all manner of Try∣als, Cruelties, and Hardships for him and his Names sake, and to live and reign and enjoy his unutterable Peace and Rest, which is in himself treasured up as a full Reward, and much more then could have been expected for the Ʋpright in Heart, who end their dayes in Truth, and finish their Course in Righteousness, and lay down their Lives for his sake, to live with him for evermore. And this is that thee and others may hear from me, and know that I remain in the service of God, and in faithful Long suffer∣ings, for the Gospel of his Son as at this day, being the 6th of the 7th Moneth 1662. In the straight Prison at Winchester, where I am known by this name, Humphry Smith. THE END.
