S4109 09581528 43715
Christian Religion's APPEAL From the Groundless Prejudices of the SCEPTICK, To the BAR OF Common Reason. Wherein is Proved THAT, 1. The Apostles did not delude the World. 2. Nor were themselves deluded. 3. Scripture-matters of Fact have the best Evidence. 4. The Divinity of Scripture is as demonstrable as the Being of a Deity. By JOHN SMITH, Rector of St. Maries in Colchester. 1 Cor. 1. 20. Hath not God made foolish the Wisdom of this world? Acts 26. 25. I am not Mad, most noble Festus, but speak the words of So∣berness. Acts 26. 26. The King knoweth of these things; none of these things are hidden from him; for, this thing was not done in a Corner. Acts 2. 22. Jesus of Nazareth; a man approved of God among you, by mi∣racles, wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as yee your selves also know. LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1675.
TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT LORD ARCHBISHOP OF Canterbury, Primate of all ENGLAND and Metropolitan. My Lord. THe benign Aspect you were pleased to cast upon the Em∣brio of this Discourse, and the Unworthy Author, in conjun∣ction with the importunity of some Learned and Pious Per∣sons (who weighed more the Seasonableness of such like, than the Likelihood of that poor Essaie's prevailing with an Age so ob∣durate
in its opposing pure and undefiled Religi∣on) had almost brought it to the Birth before its time: When the Edition of that excellent Trea∣tise of Doctor Stillingfleet upon the same Subject, in that juncture, inclin'd me to think of Stifling it in the Womb as altogether useless. But when I ob∣serv'd that the greatest part of the Serpents Brood stopped their Ears to the Doctors Learned Charms, it came in my mind, that the Cure of this Tarantu∣la requires (according to the different Constituti∣ons of the Patients) different Tunes, and that per∣haps a less skilful hand might hit upon Lessons, that might recover some out of that distemper, which re∣sist the Musick of smoother Airs: I therefore re∣turn'd to my old Opinion, that I could not put the hours I spare, from dayly business incumbent upon me, to a better improvement, than by expending them in study how to reason the World out of that High-way to Atheism it is faln into. The Re∣sult of these Studies I humbly submit to the Censure, and commend to the Patronage of your Grace, as that Person whom the Holy Ghost hath made Over-seer over the whole Flock of God within the Pale of that Province, whereof by your Graces Benevo∣lence, as Patron, and Institution, as my then Dio∣cesan, that part was committed to my Cure, whereto I have hitherto diligently, though, God knows, un∣profitably attended. To whom I therefore think my self peculiarly bound (in Conscience as well as Gratitude) to give an account even of my Leisure, as well as Work, in that part of the Vineyard where
it pleased your Grace to assign me my Station and Im∣ployment. Humbly requesting your Graces Par∣don of those Nods you may possibly see me take at a Work of this Length, and interwoven with such variety of Matter, and some Threads that have ei∣ther been snarl'd or not well unravel'd by the best Criticks: (wherein if my Pen hath dropt a word or sentence prejudicial to the Common Faith, Good Manners, or the Peace of the Church, I heartily wish it cancel'd,) [Secundas partes habeat, mo∣destiae; qui primas non potuit habere, sapienti∣ae: qui non valuit omnia non paenitenda dixis∣se, paeniteat quae cognoverit dicenda non fu∣isse.] And your Candid Acceptance of this my good meaning and Labour for the Vindication of the Cre∣dit of Religion, as being a Sacrifice that hath not cost me nothing; your Grace being both privy to that mature Deliberation I have taken in moulding these Meditations, and apprehensive of the Industry is required in making so many Quotations out of Se∣cular Authors: which have long lain out of my rode, and which I was therefore forc'd to run over again, that I might speak to the heart of those in∣genious Fools, with whom nothing is savoury but Humane Learning. In which Particular I am not conscious to my self of trusting to any but mine own eyes, in any material Testimony, except where I make Reference to Second-hand Authors. And lastly, your Graces Blessing, and Intercessi∣on for the Blessing of Heaven upon these poor endea∣vours. May the saving Strength of Gods right Hand
still support your Grace in a patient continuance in well-doing till he crown your Endeavours (in his own good time) with happy success, as to the Con∣cerns of the Church; your Head with eternal Glo∣ry after the expence of a good old Age in his service; and in the mean while, may the assured expectance, of reaping with Joy what you sow in Tears, be your hourly Companion and Crown of rejoycing. This is, and through Divine Grace, shall be, the dayly, hearty Prayer, MY LORD, Of Your Graces Most Dutiful Son, And humblest Servant, John Smith.
THE PREFACE Expressing the Occasion and Design of the Work. IT was one of Licurgus his Constitu∣tions, (Plutarch. Lysander) that men should wear the Hair of their Head and Beard at full length, grounded upon this Reason of State; because by this means white-liver'd Milksops would look more comely in the eyes of their Mistresses, and grim-fac'd Soldiers aspect be more terrible to the enemy. Indeed this was a way to make them look out like Lions upon their Foes at a di∣stance: but that wise Law-maker should have consider'd that these Hair-ropes would serve the enemy in a close fight for handles to catch hold of and pull them down by. Upon which Consideration the Abantes whose Custom it was to fight pell-mell, as Plutarch observes out of Callimachus, were wont to shave their foretops and chins, (Plutarch Thes.) Alexander's imitation of which Custom contributed not a little toward his Conquest of the World in the opinion of the same Ju∣dicious Author. While Religion kept her Grave Pri∣mitive Cut, she triumph'd in the Conquest of the
World, the enemy gall'd her with his Darts at a di∣stance, but durst not come to handy-gripes; or if he had the boldness to close with her, he was sure of a foile, having nothing to fasten upon in a Doctrine which is all Reason, all Piety, all Justice, all Tempe∣rance. But when by the false Glosses of men of corrupt Minds or debauch'd Practices it degenerated into a Do∣ctrine abetting such Immoralities as even natural Con∣science abhors. It is no wonder if it fell into such dis∣grace with men, who had Reason enough to see the im∣piety of the Additions, and not Grace enough to di∣scern and abstract from thence the Piety of the Original; as I cannot altogether blame the zeal of those well∣meaning men, who to render it more august in the eyes of the Vulgar (who are taken with out-sides) Periwigg'd it with a Border of Reverend Ceremonies. Though I should more have commended their Discretion had they cut off those Elf-locks which Heretieal pravity had fa∣stened to it (as the first Four General Councils did; thereby depriving the enemy of that hold he had up∣on her.) For though this adventitious Cover did hide those Asses ears, and Religion lookt out of this borrow∣ed Hair with some kind of Majesty, while none durst approach nearer than the Principle of Implicit Faith [All is holy that holy Church teacheth and practiseth,] conducted them: yet when men grew bold to make nearer address to this seeming Lion (and certainly with Religions leave hitherto they were no more bold than welcome) It is not to be thought strange if persons Atheistically inclin'd, and who sought occasion against Religion, pul'd her by the false Beard and triumph'd o∣ver her as a feigned thing: but rather to be admired, that God should give so many thousand Protestants, as appeared in that happy reformation which all pious men groaned after, so much wisdom as to discern the Body from the Dress, to distinguish betwixt Religion and the Innovations annexed to it: and so much Mo∣deration, as that by their hands not one Hair of its na∣tive Growth, nor Hair-breadth of its natural Length fell from the Head when they pluckt off the false
Locks and Beard, wherein the Demy-politicians had disguised her; (those pious Reformers were led by ano∣ther Spirit than that, which hath since hurled some blind zealous Furioso's into an humour, to shave Religion so close, in point of external Decency, as she looks fright∣fully, and not as she did while she cast her Doves-eyes from under her native Locks;) But Religion thus re∣stored to her Primitive majestick Purity, look'd too gravely upon persons of prophane Spirits and loose Lives; who when they could not by their Antinomian glosses pervert her, to Patronize their Villanies, Perju∣ries, Blasphemies, Treasons, Rebellions, and whatsoe∣ver Debaucheries of Humane Nature, the most skil∣ful Artist of Iniquity could arrive at, (but that she still ecchoed back the guilt of their crying sins, into the Ears of their Consciences, from such immoveable Rocks of irrefragable Placits, and such plain Texts, as stand firm to their genuine Sence, against all possibility of mis-interpretation) enter'd into a wicked Consulta∣tion with their own hearts, how they might put to si∣lence so great a troubler of their peace, so incessant a disturber of that Repose, they are resolv'd to take in the bosome of their Dalilahs: And finding no occasion a∣gainst her, they are resolv'd to make some, by fast∣ning certain Prejudices upon her, as so many Foretops to take hold of, and thereby to tumble her down from that Throne she had erected in their Consciences, and from that Pinacle of highest Respect she had gain'd in the World. By these Methods, this (Generation of men shall I call them, or) Cage of unclean Birds are grown to that height of impious audacity, as (with Plato in Socrates his Dream) they sit perching upon the venerable Head of that sacred Philosophy wherein they were initiated; pecking at those bald places they imagine they have espied, and crowing over it some∣times as a meer trick of Policy; sometimes as silly and Ridiculous, sometimes as Despicable and not Divine. In a deep Resentment of these unthankful Returns to God that made them, and to that Faith that would have sav'd them, I have undertaken the Patronage of Religion
against their Surmises, in the following Treatise; where∣in I endeavour to dis-intangle her from those Prejudi∣ces that are taken up against her, and by occasion where∣of, the Sceptick misrepresents her to himself, and other credulous inobservant Persons: To scare these foetid Harpies, from laying their impure Talons, upon that Pro∣pitiatory Sacrifice, wherewith God hath ratified the Co∣venant of Grace betwixt himself and Abrahams Chil∣dren, by the Voyce of Birds of the same Feather, by the Testimony of Heathens and Dictates of Reason, which are either born with us or enter into us, by the Senses: To allay their priding themselves in a Conceipt, that they are the only Birds of Apollo (because forsooth they are witty in contriving their own Perdition;) while I discover them to be Minerva's Birds, a Flock of Owles; who can neither open their Eyes upon that Natural Light, which gilded the World with its Rayes in our Saviours Age, nor that Supernatural, which shines in the admirable Matter and contexture of Sa∣cred Scripture: And demonstrate the Misprisions wherewith they load Christianity, (in revenge that they cannot force it to gratifie their Lusts) to be (like the Allegations of the Elders against Susanna) mere groundless prejudices, and false Beards fastned unto it; that snatching hold thereon they may pull it down and rowle it in the Mire of Calumny. And this (if God permit) by the Confessions of their Fellows, by the Testimonies of as great Enemies to Holy Religion as themselves, and the Witness of Vulgar Sentiments, attesting to the Truth of these Four Propositions, which are the Basis of the whole Discourse, and the Argu∣ments of so many books, viz.
BOOK I. THE ARGUMENT. It was Morally impossible that the Apostles could impose spurious Stories or Miracles upon that Age wherein they flourish'd, it being fortified against all such Impostures, by all imaginable Helps: or that they would (if they might) they being Persons of the greatest Integrity, that ever liv'd. THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. The Age wherein the Apostles flourish'd, was sufficiently secured a∣gainst the Impostures of Empiricks, by its Knowledge in Physicks. Ignorance in Naturals the Mother of superstitious Credulity. The Darkness at our Saviours Crucifixion compared with that at Romulus his Death. Heathen Records of the Darkness at Chrst's Passion. CHAP. II. Poetry improv'd to the utmost, about our Saviours birth. CHAP. III. Our Saviours age too much skill'd in the black-art, to be cheated with Magick tricks. CHAP. IV. The World never better seen or practised, in sound Politicks, than in our Saviours time. § 1. The world secured against Innovations by the soundness of its then Politicks. While the Shepherds sleep the flock made a prey. The Emperour Augustus (a solid States-man himself) had a most sage Council. Tiberius, a versatil head-piece seconded with wise
Sages. § 2. The genius of the then Roman policy disgusted the in∣troduction of a strange God. Tiberius upon Pilates information moving the Senate to Canonize our Jesus, is repuls'd. The Ro∣mans admit of no forreign Gods till they have renounced their old Temples and Altars. Constantine upbraided by Licinius with his embracing a strange God. Our Jesus the first forreign God which the Roman State embrac'd. § 3. Of Simon Magus his deificati∣on at Rome. § 4. Christ got the start of Magus in the point of obtaining Divine Honour at the Romans hands. Augustus e∣rected an Altar, To the first begotten. Suidas his story of Augu∣stus his Altar defended. Augustus his unhappiness in his Issue might probably put him upon referring the choice of a Successour to the Oracles determination. His slighting Apollo argues the An∣swer he receiv'd, not to have made for Apollo's credit. § 5. Some passages touching this Argument in Tertullian cleared from the A∣nabaptistical gloss. Where the Emperours and Senates shooe pinch'd them. How much this State-maxime prejudic'd the Apostles. CHAP. V. A prospect of the Holy Age, the Age wherein the Gospel was first publish'd, in respect of its skill in Theology. § 1. Natural Theology then in its highest acme by the improvement of the Pythagorick, Platonick and Socratical Philosophy. Within that Century lived Varro: his Encomium. Scaevola and Cae∣sar great Divines. Cicero and Cratippus well seen in Natural Theology. Seneca the Miracle of Humane Divines. Thraseas un∣der Nero a Martyr for Moral Divinity. § 2. Prophetical Theolo∣gy exploded by Pagan Philosophers. Divination by Dreams and Oracles censur'd by Cicero. Apollo's Oracles ambiguous; at last silenc'd. Phoebus Philippizing. Chaldean prognosticators vain. Praenestine Lots and Auguries decided. Divination by Prodi∣gies taunted. This a barr to credulity towards the Gospel. § 3. Historical Divinity decried in the Schools (when the History of the Blessed Jesus was first published) as reporting things unworthy of God. The Apostles could never have hoped to induce the dispu∣ters of this world to a belief of as unlikely stories, had they had no more than an arm of flesh to trust to. The conclusion of the whole matter. God's Tabernacle set in the Sun shining out in its great∣est lustre of humane Sciences. § 4. The Civick Religion both with the Vulgar and Politicians in high respect in our Saviours Age, proved, from the Philosophers salvo's, by consequence, and di∣rectly from several examples. The world was enjoying her self, Pig∣malion-like, in the warm embraces of her-own-made sacred ani∣mals.
CHAP. VI. The Advantage the World had to try Apostolical Doctrine by the Touch-stone of the Septuagint. § 1. The Septuagint was the worlds guard against all possible delusion. The light of the Original Tradition shone out of the East; Judaea the Navel of the earth had plenty: thither Pythagoras, Socrates, Pla∣to, &c. finding a Famine at home, travell'd for the Corn of Hea∣ven, &c. § 2. Josephus, and the Church History of the Translati∣on of the Seventy, defended against Scaliger's exceptions. Her∣mippus and Aristaeus reconciled by Anatolius. The Authority of Socrates comes short here of Josephus. § 3. The Sanhedrim held correspondency with the dispersion; no harder a task for the Jews, whose Mother-tongue was Hebrew; and who for Commerce sake were forc'd to learn the Greek, the common Language of the Empire, to turn the Hebrew into Greek, than for the Belgick Chur∣ches amongst us to turn a Dutch Bible into English. § 4. Whence Pto∣lemy learn'd that curse he pronounc'd upon them that should add or take from the Seventy's Translation. Whence the fiction of three days darkness, and the application of Solomon's Text, there is a time to rend. § 5. The Legend of the golden letter'd Jehova. Ptolemy might be a bad man, and yet curious in point of Learn∣ing. He was a kind of Jewish Proselyte, and as good a one as He∣rod Poppaea, &c. God can make bad men Instruments of good. The Fathers and Primitive Churches esteem of the Septuagint. § 6. The Candour of the blessed Jesus in sending the picture of the Messiah, drawn by the Prophets before he came in person, that there might be no mistake of the person: in appealing to a Religi∣on pre-existing to and co-existing with that of his erecting. CHAP. VII. The World over run with Barbarous Ignorance when the Impie∣ties of Turk, Pope and Pagans imposed themselves upon its Credulity. § 1. Platina his Censure of the sixth Century: Pope Sabinian, an Enemy to Learning; monstrous Presages. Phocas (in Baronius his stile, the Red Dragon) gave the Title of Universal Bishop to Boniface the third. § 2. As Darkness increased, the Pope in∣croached, till at last he set his foot upon the Necks of Princes. The Eyes of those Centuries, the Lights of the Church, (as they will be called) were Darkness. Formosus, Stephen, Romanus, The∣odore the second, John the tenth, and nine Popes succeeding him in less than nine Years, Benedict the fourth, Leo the fifth, all Heads of the Roman Church, like that Head in the Carvers Shop, brainless. These in the ninth Century. § 3. The Popes of the tenth Century, Baronius stiles abomination in the holy Place. Ge∣nebrard
reckons from the Hermophrodite, Pope John or Joan, above fifty in two hundred Years, who were little better than In∣carnate Devils; amongst whose Predecessors was John the thir∣teenth a Stallion, Benet the ninth in time succeeds, a Monster made up of a Boar below, and an Ass above. § 4. The Popes of the eleventh Century light their Candle at the Devil's Match. Sil∣vester compounded with the Devil for the Papacy: Onuphrius his Evasion obviated. Benet rides the Devil in Purgatory: He was a wondrous great Scholar that had learn'd his Grammar. § 5. Pa∣ganism crept in, in the dark, before Commerce. Heathens care to conceal their God-Births. Minerva turns the tatling Crow out, and takes the Bird of Night, the Owl, into her service; the Eleu∣sine Mysteries. Mercury's hand upon his mouth. Alexander must not reveil Aegyptian Mysteries, nor Petronius his Ruffians, the Secrets of Priapus. As Traffick increased, the World gives over teeming with new Gods. Alexander, Plato, Caesar, Ari∣staeus, were born out of time to be made Gods. As the Theology of those obscure times came to be enquired into, by several Nations comparing Notes, it grew out of Credit. Euemerus his Sacred Hi∣story, Annons Birds. CHAP. VIII. The Apostolical Age was fortified against Surprisal by the Exter∣nal Advantages of Posts and Peace. § 1. They find as speedy a way for conveyance of News, as we: Vibul∣lius, Caesar, Sempronius, Tiberius, their incredible Posting. In∣telligence flew in Persia as fast as Cranes. The Roman Eagle as swift of Wing, as the English Unicorn is of foot. § 2. That Age enjoyed so long a Peace, as Intelligence might pass without Inter∣ruption: Janus's Temple shut by Augustus, a rare thing in the Ro∣man Annals. § 3. Tiberius had a peaceable Reign, so had Cali∣gula; all the Warlike Marches that be made was in pursuit of the Cowardly Ocean, running from him at the Tide; and in lopping down the Bows of a Coppice. Palsey-headed Claudius felt no sha∣kings in his Empire, no Trumpet of War then sounded, but that of the Silver Triton in the Ficine Lake. In Nero's third Year, they had much ado to draw the Sword, it had layen so long rusting in the Scabbard. § 4. This peaceable Season was the Seed-time of Christ's Labourers, wherein they dispenc'd the Gospel through the Empire. CHAP. IX. The Judean Stirs, were the Empires Advantage against Surprisal. § 1. Objections from the Commotions in Judea answered and retorted: Those inconsiderable and not so great, as that delicate and repining People would represent them▪ § 2. The Stirs that were in Judea
put the Ministers of State upon a more diligent enquiry into what there fell out; whereby they got a more full information, of the state of that great Controversie, between the Jews and Christians. § 3. The Judean Commotions drew the Imperial Eagle to six her eye more narrowly upon Emergencies there, as things of highest State-concern; in respect of that then famous Eastern Prophecy, of one to arise at that time in Judea, who should be King of the Universe. § 4. At that time when the Erection of an Universal Monarchy was (according to that Prophecy) expected, appeared Persons of a more Lordly Spirit amongst the Romans, than any former Age had brought forth. Caesar and Pompey's Ambition sprung from this Prophecy. The then greatest Spirits courted the Jews favour, and used means, that they might be that oriundus in Judaea. § 5. The arts which the Roman Candidates for the Universal Monarchy u∣sed, to bring the World into an opinion, that they were designed by Heaven to something extraordinary. Julius his Dream; his clo∣ven-footed Horse; his Mules; his Triton; his pressing to have the Title of King, because the Sybils had prophesied one at that time would be King of all the World, The Fathers quotations of Sy∣bils vindicated. § 6. Augustus had his Education amongst the Velitri, who had a Tradition of the tendency with the Eastern Prophecy, that one of that City should obtain the Kingdom of the whole World. The Roman Prodigy before his Birth. His Mother Atia conceives him by Apollo. Her Snake-mole. Nero's Brace∣let. Atias Dream of her Entrals. Nigidius his Prognostication. The Prediction of the Thracian Priests. His Fathers Vision. Ci∣cero's Dream. § 7. Tiberius his Omens. Scribonius's Pre∣diction. Livias crested Chick. The Altars of the conquering Le∣gions. His Dye cast into Apon's Well. Galba's Mock-prophecy. § 8. Titus and Vespasian's Motto, Amor & deliciae, in English, the desire of the Nations. The Prodigy of Mars his Oak. The Gyp∣sies Prediction. Dirt cast by Caligula into his Shirt. The Dog bringing a Man's hand. The Oracle of the God of Carmel. His curing the blind and Lame, &c. CHAP. X. The more open Practices of soaring Spirits in grasping at the Judean Crown; their hopes to obtain it, and (as to some of them) their Conceit of possessing it. § 1. Cleopatra's Boon begg'd of M. Antony denyed. Herod's Eye Blood-shot with looking at the Eastern Prophecy. § 2. Vespasian jealous of Titus. The Eastern Monarchy the Prize contended for by both Parties in the Jewish Wars. Mild Vespasian cruel to Da∣vid's Line. § 3. Domitian jealous of Davids Progeny. (Genea∣logies. Metius Pomposianus his Genesis and Globe;) his Dis∣course with Christ's Kindred about Christ's Kingdom. Clancular Jews brought to light. Trajan puts to death, Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem, for being of the Royal Line. § 4. Glosses upon the
Eastern Prophecy under Adrian involve the Empire in Blood, Jew∣ry in Desolation, Fronto taxeth benumm'd Nerva for conniving at the Jew. CHAP. XI. St. Paul's Apology before Nero, was in Answer to some Interroga∣tories put to him, through the Suggestion of his Adversaries, touching the matter of the Eastern Prophecy. Ex. Gr. Is not this Jesus whom thou preachest to be risen again from the Dead, that Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye call King of the Jews? § 1. Tertullus his Charge against St. Paul, a Ring-leader of Na∣zarites. Lysias his Interrogatory, art not thou that (Alexan∣drian) Egyptian? Nero put in hopes of that Kingdom which St. Paul preach'd Christ to have obtained. Poppaea Nero's Minion. Disciples slink away. § 2. Why St. Paul stiles Nero, a Lion of the Kingdom of God. The Lions Courage quails at St. Paul's Apo∣logy. Nero, after that, trusts more to his Art, than Gypsies Prophecies. §. 3. St. Pauls Appearance within Nero's Quin∣quennium. Pallas, Foelix his Brother and Advocate, out of Fa∣vour in Nero's third. Festus hastens St. Paul's Mission to Rome; the Jews, his Trial. §. 4. Nero, not yet a Lion in Cruelty, but in opinion, Judah's Lion. St. Paul's Doctrine tryed to the bot∣tom, before Nero desponds. An Apology for this Pilgrimage through the Holy Age: its Use. CHAP. XII. As no Age was less like to be Cheated, than that wherein the A∣postles flourish'd; so no Generation of Men was less like to put a Cheat upon the World, than the Apostolick and Pri∣mitive Church. § 1. The Apostles and Primitive Churches Veracity evinc'd, by their chusing Death rather than an Officious Lye to save their lives: Pli∣ny's testimony of them. §. 2, 3. They hide not their imperfections; nor the Truth to please Parties, or to avoid the Worlds taking offence. The offence which Heathens took at some Gospel-passages. § 4. All false Religions make lyes their Refuge. Pagan Forgeries. § 5. Papal Innovation founded on lying Legends. Sir Thomas Moor upon St. Austin. Gregory Turonensis and Simeon Metaphra∣stes devout Lyars. The Story of the Baptist's Head.
BOOK II. THE ARGUMENT. As they could not, nor would not, delude others, so they were not themselves deluded persons, or Men of crazy Intellects; but propounded to the World a Religion so every way fitted to the Dictates of Common Reason, of the most Refin'd Philosophy, and of pre-existent Religion, as it was impossible for them to have fram'd, had they not been of perfect Memory and sound Minds. THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. The Gospel's Correspondency with Vulgar Sentiments. § 1. The Testimony of the Humane Soul untaught to the Truth of the Christian Creed in the Articles touching the Unity of the Godhead; his Goodness, Justice, Mercy. The Existence of wicked Spirits. § 2. The Resurrection and Future Judgment. Death formidable for its Consequence to evil Men: No Fence against this Fear, pro∣ved by Examples. § 3. In hope of future Good, the Soul secret∣ly applauds her self after virtuous Acts. This makes the Flesh suf∣fer patiently. CHAP. II. Reason nonplus'd, help'd by Religion, acquiesceth in her Reso∣lutions. § 1. Man's Supremacy over the Creatures, the Reason of it not cog∣noscible by Natural Light: § 2. Yet generally challenged even o∣ver Spirits, whom men command to do what themselves disgust. § 3. The way of Creation a Mystery; Reason puzzel'd to find it out can but conjecture. § 4. Divine Revelations touching both, ac∣quiesc'd in as soon as communicated. Scripture-Philosophy excels the Mechanick. Plato's Commendation. § 5. Nothing but the God of Order's Grant can secure States from Anarchical Parity and Club-law. § 6. Heathens assented to the Reasons of both assigned by Scripture.
CHAP. III. Natural Conscience Ecchoes to Christian Morals. § 1. A Dispraise to dispraise Virtue, or praise Vice. The Comicks Li∣berty restrained. § 2. How the worst of Men became to be repu∣ted Gods. § 3. Men were deified for their Virtues: Vice ungod∣ded Gods. § 4. Stage-Gods hissed at. The Infamy of Players. The Original of Mythology. CHAP. IV. Christian Religion concords with the highest Philosophical No∣tions. § 1. Divine Knowledge counicated from the Church to travelling Philosophers. Our Religion elder than Heathenism by Heathens confession. § 2. Christian Articles implied in Pagan Philosophy's Positions. Man's happiness through Communion with God, and Conformity unto God. § 3. This Conformity and Communion effected by God-man. God manifest in the Flesh, born of a Virgin. § 4. Plato falter'd under the burden of vulgar Error. A man from God. Whence Multiplicity of God-Saviours. Pagan Independen∣cy. Their mutual indulging one another. § 5. Not many, but one Mediator, the result of the Heathen's second thoughts: Plato's Sentences entenced by Platonicks. Nothing can purge but a Prin∣ciple. St. John's Gospel in Platonick Books. The Christian Pre∣misses yielded, their Conclusions denied by Gentiles. Plato's Sen∣tence (under the Rose.) CHAP. V. None of their Local Saviours were able to save. § 1. Their white Witches impeded, in doing good by the black. Lu∣can's Hag more mighty than any of their Almighties. § 2. None of their Saviours Soul-purgers. § 3. Porphiry's Vote for one u∣niversal Saviour: not known in the Heathen World. Altars to the unknown Gods; whether God or Goddess. § 4. The unknown God. § 5. Great Pan, the All-heal, his death. § 6. Of their many Lords none comparable to the Lord Christ; to us but one Lord. CHAP. VI. God the Light, Man's Reliever. § 1. Plebean Light mistaken for the true. All-healing Light. Joves
and Vaejoves. Mythology an help at a dead lift. § 2. Wisdom begotten of God; Man's Helper; the Fathers Darling. § 3. Made Man. Sibyls maintain'd, as quoted by Fathers: Come short of Scripture-Oracles. § 4. Virgil, out of Sibyl, prophesied of Christ. The Sibyllines brought to the Test. Tully's weak Exceptions a∣gainst the Sibyllines. § 5. Sibyl's Songs of God Redeemer; the Eternal Word; the Creator. Apollo commends Christ. Local Saviours exploded. CHAP. VII. Man healed by the Stripes and Oracles of God-man. § 1. Jew hides face from Christ. Greatest Heroes, greatest suffe∣rers; the expiatory painfulness of their Passions. § 2. Humane Sacrifices universal. § 3. Not in imitation of Abraham. Por∣phyry's Miscollection from Sancuniathon. Humane Sacrifices in use in Canaan before Abraham came there: And in remotest Parts before his facts were known. In Chaldea before Abraham's departure thence. § 4. It was the corruption of the old Tradition of the Womans Seed's Heel bruised. Their sacred Anchor in Ex∣tremities. § 5. The Story of the Kings of Moab and Edom vul∣garly mistaken: different from Amos his Text. King of Moab offer'd his own Son, the fruit of the Body for the sin of the Soul. § 6. What they groped after exhibited in Christs Blood. § 7. Mans Saviour is to save Man by delivering divine Oracles. Heroes cul∣tivated the world by Arts and Sciences. § 8. Gospel-net takes in small and great. The Apostles became all things to all men; how? CHAP. VIII. The Gospel calculated to the Meridian of the Old Testament. § 1 In its Types. § 2. Its Ceremonials fall at Christs feet with their own weight. The Nest of Ceremonies pull'd down. That Law not practicable. § 3. Moses his Morals improved by Christ by better Motives: Moses faithful; Christ no austere Master. Laws for Children; for Men; for the Humane Court; for Conscience. Christ clears Moses from false Glosses. § 4. It was fit that Christ should demand a greater Rent, having improved the Farm. St. Mat. 5. 17. explain'd. Christian Virtue a Mirrour of God's, ad∣mired by Angels; St. Mat. 7. 26. urged. The Sanction of the Royal Law, § 5. St. Paul's Notion, of Justification by Faith only, explain'd; it implies more and better work, than Justification by the works of the Law, Judaism hath lost its Salvifick Power. Much given, much required. The Equity and Easiness of Christ's Yoak. Discord in the Academy; none in Christs School.
CHAP. IX. Gospel-History agrees with Old Testament-prophecy. § 1. Christ's Appeal to the Prophets. § 2. The primary Old Testa∣ment-Prophecies not accomplishable in any but the blessed Jesus. Jacob's Shilo; Gentiles gathering. Scepter departed, at the de∣molishing of their King's Palace. § 3. By consent of both Parties. Not till the Gentiles gather'd. Children to Abraham of Stones. Gentiles flock to Christ's Standard. § 4. Signs of Scepter's de∣parture. Price of Souls paid to Capitol. Not formerly paid to Caesar. Mat. 17. 25. explained. § 5. Jews paid neither Tythes nor his Pole-money to any but their own Priests before Vespasian, who made Judah a vassal to a strange God; such as their Fathers knew not. CHAP. X. More Signs of the Scepter's departure. § 1. Covenant-Obligation void. They return to Aegypt, &c. § 2. Temple-Vessels Prophanation revenged of old, not now regar∣ded. § 3. Titus and Vespasian rewarded for their service against the Temple. § 4. Judah's God deaf to all their Cries. § 5. They curse themselves in calling upon the God of Revenges. § 6. Jewish and Gentile Historians relate the Watch-word, [Let us depart.] § 7. Jacob thus expounded not by Statists, but the Apostles. CHAP. XI. The Prophecies of Daniel's Septimanes, and Haggai's second House, not applicable to any but the blessed Jesus. § 1. Porphyry and Rabbies deny Daniel's Authority: The Jews split their Messias. § 2. The unreasonableness of both these Eva∣sions. § 3. Daniel's Prophecy not capable of any sence, but what hath received its accomplishment in our Jesus. § 4. Daniel's se∣cond Epocha: § 5. Christ the desire of all Nations fill'd the Se∣cond Temple with Glory. § 6. That Temple not now in Being. § 7. The conclusion of this Book.
Book III. THE ARGUMENT. 3, We have as good grounds of Assurance, that the matters of Fact and Doctrine contain'd in the Scrip∣tures of the Prophets and Apostles, were done and delivered accordingly, as they are therein related; as we have or can have, of the Truth of any other the most certain Relation in the World. THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. The Universal Tradition of the Church a good Evidence of the Gospels Legitimacy. § 1. The inconquerable force of Universal Tradition. § 2. No dan∣ger of being over-credulous in our Case. § 3. Reasons interest in Matters of Religion. § 4. We have better assurance that the E∣vangelical Writings and History are those mens Off-spring, whose Names they bear, then any Man can have that he is his reputed Fathers Son. § 5. The Sceptick cannot prove himself his Mothers Son by so good Arguments, as the Gospel hath for its Legitimacy. § 6. Bastard-slips grafted into Noble Families. The Sceptick in Religion, is a Leveller in Politicks. CHAP. II. The Suffrage of Adversaries to the testimony of the Church. § 1. Pagan Indictments shew what was found Christianity in Pagan Courts, § 2. Christian Precepts and Examples Civilized the Courts of Heathen Emperours. § 3. Pliny's information concer∣ning Christians to Trajan. § 4. What it was in Christians that Maximnus hated them for.
CHAP. III. The Substance of Christian Religion, as it stands now in the Gospel, is to be found in the Books of its Adversa∣ries. § 1. The Effigies of the Gospel is hung out where it is proscribed. § 2. Hierocles, attempting to outvie Jesus with Apollonius, hath presented to the World the Sum of Evangelical History. § 3. More Apes of Christ than Apollonius. § 4. Christs Do∣ctrine may be traced out, by the footsteps of the Hunters who pur∣sued it. CHAP. IV. Every Article of the Apostles Creed to be found, as asserted by the Church, in those writings which opposed Christian Re∣ligion. § 1. Maker of Heaven and Earth. § 2. His only Son. § 3. Con∣ceived by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary. § 4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, &c. § 5. Rose again the third day. § 6. As∣cended into Heaven: thence, &c. § 7. The Holy Ghost. § 8. Ho∣ly Catholick Church, &c. CHAP. V. The Truth of the Gospel-History attested by Secular Wri∣ters. § 1. Old Antagonists did not persist in the denial of any point of Gospel-History, save that of Christs Resurrection: and the man∣ner of their denying it, proves the Truth of it. § 2. Josephus his Story of John Baptist accords with Gospel-History. § 3. His Text in testimony of Jesus vindicated from the Exceptions of Vos∣sius, &c. § 4. Josephus his date of Christs and the Baptists Story falls in with Gospel-Chronology. § 5. The Stories of He∣rod, Herodias, Aretus, Artabanus, Philip, Lysanias, in Josephus, Tacitus, Suetonius, timed to Sacred Chronology. § 6. The Twin-Priesthood of Annas and Caiphas at Christs Baptism and Passion, cleared. § 7. The Date of Philip the Tetrarch his Death.
CHAP. VI. The Date of Christs Birth, as it is asserted by the Church, main∣tain'd by Scripture. § 1. Christ homaged by the Magi early after his Birth. § 2. Christ born and Baptized the same day of the year. § 3. God would have the Church observe the day of Christs Birth. The Priestly Courses the Character of it; which from the first Institution, by Solomon, to the last and fatal year of the Second Temples stan∣ding, were never interrupted. § 4. The Calculation of these cour∣ses leads us to the Conception and Birth of the Baptist and our Sa∣viour. § 5. Christs Baptism and John's Ministry in the same year of Tiberius Reign. point out the same thing. Objections an∣swered. § 6. The taxing of all the world ill-confounded with that of Syria. CHAP. VII. Josephus his Suffrage to the Evangelists in the Substance of their History of Christ. § 1. He appropriates the Compellation [Christ] to our Jesus, speaks of the Churches growth in a Gospel-stile. § 2. Describes Christs Dis∣ciples by Evangelical Characters; gives the Evangelists Reasons why others did not embrace the Gospel. § 3. He peremptorily as∣serts Christs Miracles, how he came to a certain information there∣of. Appion and Justus would have found it out, if he had pro∣ceeded here upon presumptions and uncertainties. § 4. He de∣scribes Christs Miracles after the Evangelical Model. § 5. And affirms them to have been such as the Prophets had foretold. The Touch-stone of Canonical History. § 6. He asserts Christs Resurre∣ction with all its Circumstances. CHAP. VIII. Josephus confirms St. Lukes History of Herod Agrippa. § 1. He paints him in Evangelical Colours, as the Jews favourite, as a Prodigal, as much in the Tyrians Debt, and therefore displea∣sed with them, &c. § 2. He Dates his Death according to St. Luke, St. James Martyred in the third, a Famine at Rome in the second and third. In Judaea in the fourth of Claudius. § 3. He describes his Death after St. Lukes Style. Two Acclamations: im∣mediately after the second he was struck by a Messenger of Death, an Owle. § 4. Angels assume what form the divine mandat pre∣scribes: Evil Angels God's Messengers. § 5. Herod the Great died of the like stroke. Josephus gives the natural Symptoms of Agrippa's Disease. § 6. A Digression touching St. Paul's Thorn in the Flesh.
CHAP. IX. Other Secular Witnesses to the Truth of Sacred History. § 1. Phlegon of the Darkness and Earthquake at Christs Passion. § 2. Thallus his mistaking that Darkness for an Eclipse. § 3. The Records of Pagan Rome, touching that and other Occurrences. § 4. The Chronicles of Edessa though Apochryphal, yet true. Juli∣an's Prohibition of the use of secular Books in Christian Schools: his Testimony. § 5. Moses his History of Joseph attested by Pa∣gans. § 6. His History of himself. § 7. Of Noah, Balaam, &c. avouched by Secular Writers. CHAP. X. The Adversaries forced upon very great Disadvantages to their own Cause, by reason that they could not for very shame re∣sist the Evidences brought in defence of Sacred History. § 1. Christ accused of working by the Prince of Devils: that Accu∣sation withdrawn in open Court: and this Plea put in against him, that he made himself a King, and therefore was an Enemy to Cae∣sar. § 2. Pety Exceptions rebound upon the heads of their Fra∣mers. § 3. The Modern Sceptick's half-reasons too young to grapple with old Prescription. § 4. Christs Works, Gods Seal to his Mis∣sion. § 5. The present Age as able to judge of the Nature of those Works, as that was wherein they were done. § 6. Atheistical Ex∣ceptions against particular points of Religion, an Hydra's head, yet they all stand upon one neck and may be cut off at one blow by proving the Divine Original of Religion.
BOOK IV. THE ARGUMENT. 4. The Divine Original of Sacred Writ is as demon∣strable as the being of a God, from the Infinity of Wisdom, express'd in its Prophecies, and of Power in its miracles. THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. The Being of a Deity Demonstrated. § 1. The Existence of a Deity demonstrable from the frame of the world; the composition of humane bodies. § 2. The Garden of the Earth did not fall by chance into so curious and well order'd knots. The ingenuity of Birds sings the Wisdom of their Maker, &c. § 4. The Heavens declare the glory of God. CHAP. II. The Author of Christian Religion hath stamp'd thereon no less ma∣nifest Prints of infinite Science, than the Maker of the World hath left upon that his Workmanship. § 1. Heathen Prophecies the Result of Ratiocination. § 2. From ge∣neral Hints which, for mens torments, God might permit the Devil to communicate. § 3. The Ambiguity of Oracles, on purpose to hide the Ignorance of them that gave them. § 4. It was by chance they spake truth. § 5. Scripture-Oracles distinct; of pure Contingen∣cies; their Sence plain; punctually fulfill'd. CHAP. III. Instances of Prophecies fulfill'd, whose Effects are permanent, and obvious to the Atheists Eyes, if he will but open them. § 1. Predictions that Israel would reject their own Messia, made by Jews Confession, many hundreds of years before Christ. § 2. The Prophets foretell Gods Rejection of the Jews, for their Rejection of his Son. § 3. Texts proving a final Rejection. Christs Blood calls down this vengeance. § 4. These Menacies executed to the full: Temple, City, and all vanish'd, Spirit of Prophecy past from the Synagogue to the Church.
CHAP. IV. Gematrian Plaisters too narrow for the Sore. § 1. The Ark. § 2. Holy Fire. § 3. Urim and Thummim. § 4. Spirit of Prophecy in the Second Temple. § 5. Exorcisme, and Bethesda's all-healing vertue, the second Temples Dowry. CHAP. V. The Jews rejected Messias, to be called the God of the whole Earth: and all other Gods eternally to be rejected. § 1. The God of Israel every where worship'd where Christian Religion obtains place. § 2. The God of Israel hath his Priests amongst the Gentiles. § 3. No acceptable Oblation but what Christians offer, tender'd to Israels God. § 4. The Gospel hath utterly abolish'd I∣dols, made Virmin-Gods creep into holes. § 5. Daphnaean Apol∣lo, choakd with the Bones of Babilas. Heathen Testimony for the silencing of Oracles; the Vanity of their Reasons. § 6. Gross I∣dolatry in the Roman Pale by her own Doctors Confessions and Definitions (the Legend of the Golden Calf) yet not in the proper and prophetick sence. CHAP. VI. Touching the Millenium, Revel. 20. § 1, Pagan Idol's Fall, and Satans binding Synchronize. Christia∣nity grew upon the Empire by degrees. § 2. Charity's Cloak cast o∣ver the first Christian Emperours. § 3. Theodosius made the first Penal Laws against Paganism: § 4. Honorius made Paga∣nism Capital; then was Satan bound. CHAP. VII. The Millenium yet to come, is a Dream of Waking Men. § 1. The Millenaries shifting of Aera's, Apes of Mahometans and Papists. Alsted's Boreal Empire, § 2. Mr. Meed's Principles overthrow the Faith, and Placits of the Ancients. Christ will not come to convert but destroy the Jews. Satans Binding Syn∣chronizeth with the downfall not of Mahometanism but Gentilism § 3. America, though anciently inhabited, yet unknown to the an∣cient Church; and therefore implicitly only comprehended in her Faith, Hope, and Charity. § 4. The Millenaries impious and un∣charitable Conceptions touching the Gogick-war. Their Triumphant Church-Militant. § 5. Christ will find more Faith in America
than in this upper Hemisphere. § 6. Satan's Chain shortned in the lower, not lengthened in this upper Hemisphere. CHAP. VIII. That Satans loosing will not be till the Dawning of the day of Judgment; Problematically discuss'd. § 1. Elect gathered into the Air over the Valley of Jehoshaphat. Chancells not all Eastward; but all toward that Valley. § 2. The Elect secur'd, Satan reenters, and drives his old Demesne. The wicked destroyed as Rebels actually in arms. Believers tried as Citizens by the Books of Conscience, and Book of Royal Law. § 3. Gog. (Revel. 20.) a greater multitude than will meet before the day of Judgment. When Prophecies are to be expounded Li∣terally, when Figuratively. § 4. The Ottoman Army is not this Gogick. § 5. The Fire of the last Conflagration carrieth Infidels into the Abyss. The Goats are cast into it after they are convict by the Covenant of Grace. White Throne. New Heaven and Earth. Flames of Fire divided. § 6. They that are in Christ rise first: but Infidels are first judged. The Objection from their being in termino. § 7. The Jews Septimum Millenarium is the eternal Sabbath. The days of a Tree, (Isa. 65. 28.) The Text Para∣phrased. CHAP. IX. The Force of the general Argument from Prophecy urged. § 1. Prophetick Events demonstrate the Reveilers infinite science. § 2. And Omnipotencie. § 3. The Divine Original of the Gos∣pel. § 4. Christ Circumstantiated old Prophecies of Jerusalem's Fall. § 5. When her Fall was most unlikely. § 6. Precognition demonstrates Pre-existence. CHAP. X. The Demonstration of Power. § 1. Christians Gleanings exceed Pagans Vintage. § 2. Christian stories of undoubted, Pagan of dubious, Credit. § 3. Pagan Mi∣racles mis-father'd. § 4. Rome's Prosperity whence. § 5. Won∣ders among Gentiles for the fulfilling of Prophecies. § 6. For the punishment of Nations ripe for Excision. § 7. Empires raised miraculously for the common good.
CHAP. XI. The Deficiency of the false, Characters of true, Miracles. § 1. Heathen Wonders unprofitable. § 2. Of an impious Tendency. § 3. Not above the power of Nature. § 4. Moses and the Magi∣cians Rodds into serpents. § 5. The suns standing still and go∣ing back. The Persian Triplasia. § 6. Darkness at our Saviours Passion. § 7. Christs Resurrection, the Broad-seal set to the Gos∣pel. CHAP. XII. The Supernatural Power of Salvifick Grace. § 1. The Church triumphs over the Schools. § 2. Christianity lays the Ax to the Root. § 3. The Rule imperfect before Christ. § 4. The Discipline of the Schools was without Life and power. § 5, Real Exornations before Verbal Encomiums.
Christian Religion's APPEAL To the BARR of Common Reason, &c. The First Book. It was morally impossible, that the Apostolical Church should delude the World with feign∣ed Miracles or Stories. CHAP. I. The Contents. The Age wherein the Apostles flourish'd was sufficiently secured against the Impostures of Empiricks by its Knowledge in Physicks. Igno∣rance in Naturals the Mother of superstitious Credulity. The Dark∣ness at our Saviours Crucifixion compared with that at Romulus his Death. Heathen Records of the Darkness of Christ's Passion. Sect. 1. HOW easily, how certainly, would the fraud have been de∣tected, had our Saviour and his Apostles wrought their wonderful Cures and stupendous Works by the Appli∣cation of Natural Causes? That Age wherein they were done, being an Age of the most improved Wits in Natural Science, that the benign Genius of any Age had, till then, or hath to this day, produced. Pliny, that great Secretary of Na∣ture, so industrious a searcher into her Mysteries, as, in pursuit of the knowledge of the Causes of Vesuviums Conflagration, he made so near an approach to that burning Mountain (while the dreadful fragor of that fierce Eruption put the most undaunted Spirits into that fright, as they fled as fast, and far, from it, as their heels would carry them) as he was stifled with its Sulphu∣reous Steam: choosing rather to die in the attempt of seeking out, than to live in the ignorance of, Natures secrets; and to throw himself into its fla∣ming Mouth (by which it vented what was in its Heart) rather than not to know, from what abundance of the Heart, its now opened and gaping Mouth
spake. This unparallel'd Example for our modern Virtuosi (who think they infinitely oblige Humane kind (and let them never rap the fruit of their ingenuous labours, who grudge them that honour!) by the Experiments they make, at the Expence of so much sweat, and with the hazzard of stop∣ping their own breath with the Exhalations of their Furnaces.) This so di∣ligent an Attender upon Natures Cabinet-council, was our Saviour's Con∣temporary, by that compute of his age which his Nephew Plinius Secundus gave to Cornelius Tacitus (Lib. 6. Epist. 16.) requesting from him an account of his Unkles death, that he might, in his History, transmit to posterity the memory of so brave an Exploit. A little before him in years (and not behind him in sagacity after Natures footsteps) flourish'd Mithridates King of Pontus, (whose name to this day is famous in Dispensatories: [Regum Orientis post Alexandrum Magnum maxi∣mus,] the greatest of all the Eastern Kings, after Alexander the Great: so potent, as he held the Romans in play 40 years, and in his ruine involved almost the whole East and North (L. Florus, Appianus, &c.) having 25 Provinces under his Dominion; and understanding as many Languages as well as the Natives; so that he answered all Embassadors in their Mother Tongue. (Agellius noct. Att. l. 17. c. 17.) Ingentis industriae consiliique , &c. (Eutropius l. 6.) A per∣son of such vast industry and contrivance, as he enquired of his Subjects scattered through his large Dominions (and sent the most skilful of them to search) what was the Virtue of every Root, the Property of every Plant, that grew in such variety of fertil Climes: By which means he grew to that skill in the Botanick Art, as he composed Commentaries upon that Subject (I had almost said from the Cedar to the Hyssop) which Pompey, in rum∣maging amongst his Treasures, found and received with very great delight. (Plutarch▪ Pomp.) This Princely Philosopher, who [tam Marte quàm Mercurio] both at pen and pike, excell'd all Kings, not only of his own, but former Ages, (Just. hist. l. 47.) flourish'd not above 60 years before the Virgins Con∣ception. (Alsted. cron. Medicorum.) About the same time, the Natural History of Animals was so well improv∣ed, as Aelian (who lived under Adrian) in the Preface to his History of Ani∣mals, makes an Apology for his writing upon that Subject, after so many famous Authors; and bids his Readers expect nothing new from his Books, but stile and method, [.] A while after Mithridates (still nearer Christs time) began the Secta Me∣thodica; of which Themison Laodicaeus was the Institutor: his immediate Suc∣cessors were Dioscorides, an acquaintance of Mark Antony, (and M. Antony himself is reported by Scribonius (in his Epistle to the Lantgrave of Hess) to have emulated the ancient Egyptian Kings in the knowledge of Physical Operations) Antonius Musa Physician to Augustus, Antipater, Thessalus, rallia∣nus, Scribonius, Agathinus Magnus: all under Tiberius; who, by help of that Library which Lucullus (in emulation of Mithridates) had erected at Rome (Plutarch. Lucull.) (whence Tully confessed he borrowed his most refined philo∣sophical Notions) rendred that Age the most learned of all Ages, (Sleidan Clav. l. 1.) and lick'd the Off-spring of the Empiricks (then come to its full growth) into form, platting their scattered Flowers into Garlands, setting their Woods into orderly Rows: Nature seeming ambitious, not only to strow the way before that Root and Off-spring of David (that Rose of Sharon) with Roses; but to adorn the Temples of the God of Nature, at his Incar∣nation, with Wreaths of Flowers, framed by men of such skill in that Art, as none of their Progenitors equall'd (Apollo and his Son A sculapius not except∣ed; for the Father was a mere Jugler, and the Son drove a pedling Trade at, Epidaur, with Water-germander and Swallow-wort: (Tertul. Apol. ad gent. cap. 23.) The latter of those Herbs bears his name indeed, as if he had first found out its Vertues: but Tarquilius (quoted by Mornay de ver. Christia∣nae Rel. cap. 22. pag. 388.) will not allow him the honour of that; but saith, Chiron taught him the properties of that and the other Simples.) Neither have
any of their Successors exceeded them, or better merited the surname of Great, than one of them (Agathinus) did: who had the honour of that Title conferred upon him, in an age wherein nothing was reputed so, but what really was great. Albertus, indeed, bore away the compellation of Magnus; but that was when the World was such a Pigmy in liberal Science, as whosoever therein attain'd to the ordinary Stature of Man, was account∣ed a Giant. Sect. 2. Before the World had learnt to spell the Characters of Nature, it was a matter of no great difficulty, to impose upon her Credulity, whatever any Craftsmaster pretended to read to her out of that Book. Be it (for in∣stance) that Berenices her devoted hair was conveighed out of Venus Temple (where it was offered for her husband, and brother Ptolomies Victory) into the Zodiack, and there placed ad caudam Leonis: Conon the Mathematician can perswade the credulous people, that he can point them to the brightness of her golden locks sparkling out in seven Stars, which to this day retain the name of Berenices hair, (Hyginus, Poetic. astronom. tit. Leo. pag. 217.) Or that while the Moon was under an Eclipse, she was assaulted with charms, threatning to hale her head-long from her Orb; except her ears were stopt with the louder noise of Trumpets and Cymbals; Cantus & è curru lunam deducere tentant, Et facerent si non aera repulsa sonant. Propertius. This was enough to sound the females especially (as partaking most of the ductile spirit of our Mother Eve) of that Hemisphere wherein the Eclipse was visible, to their Kettle-Drums, or the more shrill Trumpet of their clamo∣rous Tongues. Una laboranti potuit succurrere Lune. An effect of ignorant Zeal no less ridiculous, than that which (in Aug. de Ci∣vit. 10. 16.) Vives reports, of his own knowledge, concerning that grave Se∣nate, which (at that time that barbarous ignorance had almost put out the eye, not only of Religion, but of common sence, and that Maxime [Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion] had reduc'd Germany to a zeal without knowledge) to do the world right, solemnly sentenc'd that Ass to be ript up whom his wise Master had accused to have drunk up the Moon; he having seen her shadow at the lips of the wiser beast of the two, while he was a drinking; and she immediately sculking behind a cloud, and there continuing till the Executi∣oner freed her from the belly of the Ass. And yet such doctrine past for cur∣rant, before the knowledge of that upper was descended, from the father of lights, upon the lower world, not only among the vulgar, but such as past then for great men and sublime wits, elevated above the ordinary pitch: such were those famous philosophising Poets, Stefichorus and Pindar, as Pliny affirms. Pliny natural. Hist. lib. 2. Viri ingentes & supra mortalium naturam in defectibus stellarum scelera aut mortem aliquam paventes syderum—Quo in metu fuisse Stefichori & Pindari sublimia ora palam est. Yea whole armies at first dismay'd at the sight of an Eclipse, as a Prodigy, have by a favou∣rable interpretation of that Prodigy, by help of their inscience of the natu∣ral cause, been animated to that height of courage, as they have defeated their late formidable adversaries, Plutarch. Dion. Thus Milthas the Augur cheated Dions Army, trembling at the omen of the Moon Eclipse, (hapning at the instant of their offering sacrifices, for the success of that battle they were the next day to ingage in,) by assuring them it portended the di∣minution of the Syracusian Dionysius; there being nothing below the Moon so gay and splendid as that Peacock-feather'd King. The same Plutarch in his book de Superstitione tells, how Nicius the Athenian General (an Eclipse hapning when he was about to ingage the enemy) counted it so ominens as he durt
not think of fighting, but sate still till the enemy had surrounded him, and taken or slain 40000 of his army. Sect. 3. I shall not force the Moon beside her well-known seasons, nor my discourse beyond its due bounds, by inserting here St. Austins (De Civitate 3. 15.) observation upon the politick use, which the Roman Senate made of that Eclipse of the Sun that hapned at the translation of Romulus: they per∣swading the multitude to ascribe it to the vertue and splendor of that new made God, outshining the Sun: And his comparing it with that, that fell out at Christs passion, on the fourteenth day, at the full of the Moon, when those great luminaries (in the course of nature) were to be directly opposite to, and as far from each other, as East and West, as North and South; and that there∣fore the Moons body could not, at that time, be brought as a skreen before the Sun, by any power less than his that measures the whole circumference of Heaven with his span, and at his own pleasure dispenseth with those other∣wise unchangeable ordinances, (Jeremy 31. 36.) Upon which consideration Dionysius the Areopagite, St. Paul's convert, (Act. 17. 33.) cryed out to his then fellow Student, Either God is suffering for, or sympathizing with the suffering world. But hear we the account that himself gives of this (in his Epistle to Bishop Polycarp) Apollophanes, (you say) calls me a patricide, because I urge the sentences of the Grecians against the Grecians. But ask him (I pray you) what he thinks of the Suns Eclipse hapning while our Saviour was upon the Cross: For we were both together at Heliopolis, and stood unexpectedly beholding the Moons interposition of her self before the Sun, from the ninth hour till almost sun-set: If thou canst or darest (Apollophanes) refel these things, or deny them, was not I with thee, both seeing, and with admiration inquiring into this wonder? Didst not thou thy self then fall a divining what the matter might be? Didst not thou then burst out into these words? . (These are mixings of Heaven and Earth, as Plutarch speaks (in his Treatise of exile) ) Oh good Dionysius what change of divine things does this portend? Did not I then reply, Oh Apollophanes, , either the frame of the world is dissolving, or God is suffering? Whoso questions the genuineness of this authority may be, confirmed in the truth of the things, viz. that the Pagan Philosophers observ'd that E∣clipse, and conceived it miraculous, by what St. Origen tells Celsus, (Orig. cont. Celsum, lib. 2. colum. 27.) that Phlegon a Pagan Writer had recorded and made mention of this Eclipse as a wonder in the thirteenth or fourteenth Book of his Chronicle. And by Tertullian his asserting to the faces of the Roman Judges, that this Eclipse was entred in their own publick Records as a Prodigy, Tertul. apol. cap. 27. Eum mundi casum in archivis vestris habetis: To which Records he would never have appealed before those adversaries of Christ, in whose custody those Records were, had he not been so well verst in their Antiquities and publick Rolls, as he was sure there they might find this mi∣racle entered. The signs in Sun and Moon, which the Heathens urged to obtain belief of those Deities they introduc'd, were shown to an age that had not learnt the first Elements (or forgot them) of the Book of Nature; but suffering a greater Eclipse of knowledge, than the Sun did of light, permitted it self to be led, as a blind man in a string, whither its guides pleased. But the signs of Christs coming, of our Gods manifestation in the flesh, were presented to an age in which the greatest mysteries of Nature, her most hidden secrets, were by the sagacity of inquisitive wits, found out and ransack'd. (Aristotle is stiled by some the praecursor of Christ, in naturalibus, Heylin. Geog. pag. 2.) And par∣ticularly the reason of Eclipses so familiarly known, as that at Christs pas∣sion was generally esteem'd to have faln out beside the common rule, non ex canonico syderum cursu, to use St. Austins Phrase (De Civitate 3. 15.) Quam solis obscurationem non ex canonico syderum cursu accidisse satis ostendit, quòd tunc erat Pascha Judaeorum. The bastard slips of Pagan Gods grew up, when men
scarce knew men from trees: but the root of Jesse put forth the branch, when the earth was covered as much with the knowledge of Vegetables, from the Hysop to the Cedar, as with Vegetables: when the Physical Sciences stood in a full body ready to receive the Gospels charge. No hopes then of atchieving any things worthy its pretensions, but by breaking through the thickest ranks of the best disciplin'd natural Philosophers. CAP. II. Poetry improv'd to the utmost about our Saviours birth. Sect. 1. POesie, that art of feigning, that ape of Gods creating power, framing most exquisite pieces out of nothing but the Ideas of the mind, was screwed up to its loftiest strain, when our divine Apollo, the God of wis∣dom, the wisdom of God, modulated his sacred Pipe; if I may without prophaning it, allude to that Evangelical passage, we have piped unto you, &c. It is Bullingers observation [Seculum hoc si quod aliud poetarum feracissimum] (in Dan. par. 2. tabul. 5.) That this was an age of all others most fertile in Poets. It was not long before our Saviours birth, that the most eminent Greek Poets flourished. Such were,   Anno mundi. Sophocles 3490 Bacchilides 3540 Eupolis, Aristophanes 3660 Menander, Cratinus 3670 Theocritus, Aratus 3680 Lycophron, Callimachus 3700 By whose pregnant and witty invention how far Poetry was improved, may be sufficiently evidenc'd from what the most judicious Plutarch (Moral. tom. 2. compar. Aristophanis & Menandri) delivers concerning one of them, viz. Me∣nander: That his style was so squared and tempered, as it kept an equal tenour in the greatest variety of expressing the several passions: That he could make his shoe fit every foot, his visor every face, his vest every body: That he had an art of affecting all sorts of persons; and so framed his Poesie, as it was the common Note-book of all the good men that Greece had brought forth, proceeding every where with a most inevitable power of perswading. The Latine Muse, having those admirably sweet-ton'd Nightingals of Greece to set her lessons, got upon the wing, and soared the highest pitch al∣most as soon as she had broke the shell, at the dawning of our Saviours day; when flourish'd Plautus, Terence, Pacuvius, Lucretius, Archias and Catulus. Catullus, Virgil, Horace, Manlius, Gallus, Propertius, Tibullus and Ovid were almost our Saviours contemporaries: Whom succeeded Persius, Seneca, Lucan, Silvius, Italicus, Martial, Juvenal. (Sleidan. clavis, lib. 1.) As if the Muses had been contending which Quire should excel other: That which before his birth sang his Genethliacon (whereof Virgil was the Master, and performed his part so well in discanting upon the Sibylline Ora∣cles (in his fourth Ecloque) as St. Austin doubts not to affirm that he there∣in congratulates the Nativity of our Jesus, and supposes St. Paul to have cast one corner of his eye upon that and other the like gentile Testimonies, in his farewel speech to the Jews, Loe we turn to the gentiles, i. e. betake our selves to those Testimonies to the truth, which they have given. (Aust. tom. 6. fol. 27. Contra Judaeos, Paganos, &c. oratio.) [Convertimus nos ad gentes: demon∣stramus nos etiam & gentibus testimonium Christo esse prolatum, quoniam veritas non tacuit clamando etiam per linguas inimicorum: nonne quando poeta ille
facundissimus inter sua carmina dicebat [Jam nova progenies coelo dimittitur alto] Christo testimonium perhibebat] And the learned Vives (in Aug. de Civitat. 10. 27.) disproves Servius his application of it to Asinius Pollio, as inuring on Virgil the brand of a false Prophet; the Civil Wars of Rome long out-last∣ing his Consul-ship.) Or that which after his death sang his Epicaedium: That which sounded his coming into the world; or that that sounded the march to his conquest of the World: The Satyrist, setting his Trumpet to his mouth, and lifting up his voyce to make that crowd of bestial immora∣lities make way, that wholly bid defiance to the sober instructions of the Go∣spel: or the Comick gently distilling those principles of vertue into mens minds, as prepared the world for a more ready imbracing of the Royal Law. To be sure the masculine poetry of that age, ushered Christs doctrine into the Empire, as the Baptist did into Judaea (for what the Law was to the Jew, that the liberal Sciences were to the gentile, a School-master, to bring them to Christ, as Clemens Alexandrinus (Stromat. 1.) affirms) and, as it were, set the game for the net of the Gospel, as the same learned Father observes: Or, as Theons Musicians in Aelian, (Aelian. var. hist. 2. 44.) prepared the expectant spe∣ctators, with their incentive Songs, for a more plausible reception of the ex∣press Image of the eternal Father, riding upon his white horse, conquering and to conquer. So serviceable was Poetry to the Gospel, as St. Paul quotes it thrice in confirmation of the Divine Truth. But it would have done it as great disservice, had it been the figment of the Apostles brain, and not His Poem, (to use the Apostles phrase, Ephes. 2. 10.) who gives to man the power of invention, and of framing Ideas. Sect. 2. It is bad halting, we say, before a Criple: 'tis worse counterfeiting before a Poetical age, an age so well seen in the art of feigning. Homers fig∣ments past for truth, Hesiods God-births for good Divinity, while they singly monopolized the spirit of Poetry, and had that spirit elevated to extraordina∣ry degrees of divine heat, by the antiperistasis of the coldness of the cir∣cumjacent impoetical age, wherein they flourish'd: but not when all was full of Poets. Tully himself then, though a knee-worshipper of those Gods, yet in heart explodes them: that Poet in prose quickly smelt them out to be fig∣ments. A babe will buss a baby of clouts, bewray that innate principle of Ido∣latry, (that Pope i'th' belly) at the sight of the most rude-drawn picture. In the simple age of our fore-fathers, it was argument enough, with the vulgar, to conclude a story true, if they had read it in a Ballad. It was no demon∣stration of Apelles his art, that he drw Alexanders image so near the life, as Bucephalus neigh'd at sight of it (Aelian 2. 3.) [Alexander, at Ephesus, see∣ing an image of himself, that Apelles had drawn, did not praise it to the liking of the Painter; who therefore hangs it in the sight of his horse, and he neighing at it, as he used to do at the sight of his Master, Apelles told Alexander, he per∣ceiv'd his horse was better skill'd in the art of painting, than himself.] I should ra∣ther have concluded it well done, had Alexander himself not disprov'd it, who was better able to judge of its artificialness than his horse, [Quid enim vacua rationis animalia arte decepta miremur?] (Valer. Max. 8. 11.) It would have been, to me, no absolute commendation of the Painters art, to have seen the Birds pecking at Zeuxes Grapes, (for I frequently see the like cheat put up∣on silly fish, whom every Boy and Country Swain can have to leap at a made Fly:) but had I behold Zeuxes, in scorn, offering to pull aside Parrhasais his painted curtain, that the spectaters might take a view of the picture (as he supposed) behind it, I should hardly have refrained those loud applauses of so admirable an Artist, as would have scared away the Birds from Zeuxes Grapes. The Metaphor from Painters to Poets is not far fetcht. The Pri∣itive Church must have had as stupendous a degree of daring any thing, as Parrhasus: If they had a mind to deceive with fables, they must devise them so cunningly, as the most critical age in the art of devising, cannot de∣tect the forgery. Had their draught of the way to heaven, through the veil,
been a painted curtain, it must have been shadowed with such incomparable dexterity, as to cheat, with its show of substance and reality, an age, not of Babes, Brutes and Birds, but of Painters. CAP. III. Our Saviours age too much skill'd in the black-art to be cheated with magick tricks. Sect. 1. YOu may surmise perhaps (as both Jew and Gentile of old ob∣jected) that Belzebubs hand was in this draught: That they that made the show cast mists before the worlds eyes, and by diabolical inchant∣ments fascinated the otherwise clearest sighted spectators. (Celsus in Origen. lib. 1. cal. 5. 7.) Vide August. de consensu Evangel. lib. 1. cap. 9. [Ita vero isti deci∣piunt, ut in illis libris quos Christum scripsisse existimant, dicant contineri eas ar∣tes quibus eum putant illa fecisse miracula quorum fama ubi{que} percrebuit.] Tom. 4. pag. 162. But before whom were these supposed pranks play'd? was it not before a generation so well (so ill seen (quo melior eo deterior) in those kinds of arts, as he that could have the confidence that way to deceive the world, must think himself able (as we say) to cheat the Divel? So famous was Ephesus of old, for its skill in the Black-art, as , &c. were proverbially used in the ancient Comicks. The forms of whose diabolical mysteries claim as great antiquity, as Jove him∣self: (for they that rock'd him in his cradle, the Idaei Dactyli, were the inventors of the six Ephesian charming words, as Clemens Alexandrinus testifieth, (Stromat. 1. 5. 18.) and in our Saviours time were grown to that bulk, as the price of the Books, writ upon that subject, found then in one City, and in the hands of those Citizens that were converted, amounted to 50000 pieces of Silver: which summ, whether it amount to 9000 French Crowns, as Calvin; or but 8700, as Beza computes, and the Independent brethren plead (in their rea∣sons against the Presbyterians inference from the Church of Ephesus:) or to more, as the Presbyterians urge, (in their answer) (for they are ever for the greatest summ) is one of those many fruitless, endless questions, with which, as with knotty wedges, the now Church has been cleft in pieces. At the lowest rate, it demonstrates, to what an height those curious, cursed arts were then grown to. Can we think that St. Paul would have singled out that place where Satan was inthron'd, to have wrought miracles in, for the confirmation of the Divinity of the Gospel, had they not been special miracles (!) as St. Luke stiles them? Act. 19. 11, 12. Would he have given ex∣periments of the healing vertue conveyed from his body to aprons and hand∣kerchiefs, where counter-charming amulets were of that common use, as the proverb of Ephesia Alexipharmaca speaks them to have been? What would it have profited, to have invocated the name of the Lord Jesus over the sick, there, where were extant such a number, , of books teaching how to unravel the Conjurers work; had the Apostle not been as∣sured that the vertue of that name, (and of his own body, through that name) was, both as to cause and effect, above every name, above any word they could find in their books of curious Arts? that name of Judahs Gods imposing, having infinitely more power, than the word of Ida's Tactyls in∣vention; though it came not with that boysterous harshness, as did their  and , &c. as Clemens reckons them in the place above quoted. Sect. 2. This Image of Diana, this counterfeit of the Divine Magia, de∣scending from faln Jupiter, was not only worship'd at Ephesus, and in all Asia, but throughout the Roman Empire. In whose Metropolis, the Sect
of those black Philosophers was grown so numerous under Tiberius; as his decree to banish them the City had taken effect, if the multitude of Families, which that hook threatned to extirpate, and their promise to give over the practice of those curious arts, had not made the Emperour relent. (Sueton. Tiberius 36.) By this connivance, Magical operations attain'd to that perfe∣ction in Nero's Reign, as men could not promise themselves to find their grounds on that side of the hedge next morning, where they left them over-night. For Pliny (lib. 28.) reports, that at that time an Olive-yard, belonging to Vectius Marcellus, was by Magick removed one night unto the other side of the high-way. A thing so strange, as I should hardly give credit to Livies re∣port, but that I find Apuleius make mention of it in his Apologie, as a thing so usual and ancient, as the Laws of the twelve Tables made provision a∣gainst it, by making it capital. The naming of Apuleius his Apology, brings to mind the occasion of it: which was to purge himself of the crime of Magick, wherewith he was charged before Claudius Maximus, Lievtenant of Africa: as Apollonius Thy∣aneus was of the same crime before Domitian: A pair of the fiercest Pagan ad∣versaries to our Religion. August. de Civitat. 8. 19. The Jews indeed had a sharper edge against us: and as strange a back as Hell could forge, coming not one whit behind the Gentile in his proficiency in the black Art, being grown more Samaritan than the Samaritan himself. 1. Not only in their charmings, by the explication of (the Tetragrammaton) Jehovah in twelve, and in forty two letters; to which they imputed that force, as they affirm'd (with no less blasphemy to their own than our Religion) that Moses wrought all his miracles by means of Shemhamphorash, the twelve-let∣ter'd explication of the name Jehovah, ingraven on the rod of God: And that our Jesus by vertue of the same, sowed within his skin, effected those great works which he performed. And that Rabbi Chanina, by vertue of the two and forty letter'd name of God, did whatsoever he would. (The Jews father'd this Art upon Solomon, who they say left forms of conjurations, of the effica∣cy whereof one Eleazar gave proof before Vespasian, and his Sons, and their whole Army, Josephus being present, as himself reports, (Antiquit. lib. 8. cap. 2.) Yea, that whosoever knew these explications, being modest, humble, of a middle age, not given to anger or drunkenness, and wore them about him, would be belov'd above and below, in heaven and in earth, rever'd and fear'd of men, and heir of this and the world to come. Buxtorf. lexic. voce . 2. But in their Wisemens reading certain verses over wounds, laying Phylacteries upon sick persons, charming away serpents and an evil eye: of which practices the Jerusalem Talmudists (amongst whom our Saviour converst) make frequent mention. In particular, they tella story, (in Sotah) of R. Meirs being too hard for an Inchantress; and (in Sanhedrim) R. Joshuah out-vying a Sama∣ritane conjurer of Tyberias, quoted by Dr. Light foot in his Harmony. It were endless to trace Josephus through all those passages, where he describes Judaea in our Saviours time, to have been over-run with Magical Juglers. Under Felix (saith he) Judaea was again full of Magical Impostors and Seducers of the unskilful vulgar, who by their inchantments drew companies into the wilderness, promis4ng they would shew them from heaven manifest signs and prodigies: at the same time a certain Jew out of Aegypt came to Jerusalem, professing himself a Prophet; who perswaded the multitude to follow him unto Mount Olivet, pro∣mising that from thence they should see the walls of Jerusalem fall so flat, as through their ruines, there should be a way opened into the City. (Joseph. Ant. Jud. 20. 6.) Which Aegyptian in another place he styles Magician. (Jos. . Jud. 2. 12.) Nay, he scarce mentions a sticker in the Jewish wars, upon whom he sets not this brand, that he was a jugling conjurer: Such was John the son of Levias, &c. (Josep. . J. 4. 4.) Sect. 3. The Primitive Church was so beset with these snares of Hell, as she thought good to caution her Catechumens of the danger of falling into them, not only by informing them, that in their renouncing the Devil and
all his worship at Baptism, they renounc'd Auguries, Divinations, Amulets, Magical Inscriptions on Leaves, Witchcraft, Incantation, and calling up of Ghosts (Id. Catech. illuminat. 4.) . But by inserting into the Greek Liturgies, this form of abre∣nuntiation; , I renounce Conjurations, Charmes, Amulets, and Phylacteries: St. yril Catech. Mystag. 1. . Idem Cat. &c. But what need we any other Witness of the infamy of that Age, for the then general spreading of this Diabolical Art, than the Satyrical reflections which their own Poets made upon it? Juvenal in his sixth Satyr, Horace in his Epode against Canidia, and Virgil in his Pharmaceutria, do in the chain of their Golden Verses, hale that Cerberus out of his Kennel, into so clear a Sun-shine, so manifestly discover those depths of Satan, and bring to light those hidden things of darkness; as the reading of their Poems is enough to initiate their over-curious Readers in those mysteries of iniquity which were then working, and the translation of them might lay a temptation before the ductile vulgar, to essay the efficacy of their Charmes and Philtres. I there∣fore refer the Reader to the Poets themselves, and to his own impartial judg∣ment, for the determination of this Question, whether it carry any (the least) shew of probability, that the Apostles of our Lord would have ventur'd, in the strength of Diabolical Arts, to have wrought Miracles before an Age so expert therein, and so abilitated either to out-vie, or at least to detect them? Would they have shewn themselves before these Thieves which were set to take them, had they been Thieves? (for I remember Clemens Alex. by the Authority of Aristotle calls Conjuring the Art of Thieving, Stromat. 1.) Durst Moses (the History of whose contending with the Egyptian Magicians is mentioned by Heathen Writers; Plin. Nat. Hist. speaks of Moses, Jannes and Cabala; (lib. 30. c. 1.) Numenius the Philosopher (in Eusebius praep. Evang. 9. 8.) speaks of Jannes and Jambres skill'd in the Egyptian Rites, and infe∣riour to none in Magical Arts. Celsus (in Origen. lib. 4. pag. 205.) mentions, , the History of Moses, Jan∣nes and Jambres.) Durst Moses, I say, have thrown down his Rod among the Magicians Rods, if he had not been sure it was the Rod of God, and that the Serpent it grew into, would eat up theirs? To what degree of fa∣scination must that man be bewitcht, that will play the witch in Egypt (the School of Conjurers) before and against Jannes and Jambres (the Masters of the School?) It has ever been the happy lot of Gods dreamers, to tell and Interpret Dreams, before persons of as great skill in that profession, as Art could advance men to: Joseph before all the Magicians and Wife-men of Egypt, after they had been baffl'd and non-plust, interprets Pharoah's dreams; and that was his Argument to the King, That it was not he, but God that gave Pharoah that answer of peace, Gen. 41. 8, 15, 16. Daniel tells Nebu∣ehadnezzar his forgotten dream, after that neither his pricking them on with promises, nor lashing them with the whip of menaces, could force the whole teame of Magicians, Astrologers, Sorcerers and Chaldeans, to make one strain, one offer towards the drawing back of his dream into his memory, they standing (as so many restiff Jades yoaked to a tree) and ecchoing, to the sound of those lashes he laid on them, their sense of the impossibility of that injunction: There is not a man upon earth can shew the Kings matter; ne∣ver any King, Lord, or Ruler asked such things of any Magician.] This Que∣stion has no place assigned it, in any of the twelve Celestial Houses, It is a rare thing that the King requires, and there is no other can shew it, except God, whose dwelling is not with slesh, Dan. 2. The truly Divine (Theourgist) worker of Miracles has ever perform'd his Operations before them, who were greatest Artists at counterfeiting; Simon Peter before Simon Magus. Arnbius (Cont. Gentes, lib. 1.) speaking of Rome; In qua cum homines essent Numae artibus occupati, non distulerunt tamen res
patrias relinquere & veritati coalescere Christianae; viderant enim currum Si∣monis Magi, & quadrigas igneas Petri ore difflatas, & nominato Christo evanu∣isse. In Rome they that had been used to Numa's Arts lost all when they saw Simon Magus's Charriot and fiery Horses dispell'd with Peter's mouth, and va∣nish at the name of Christ. That this was not a Fable invented by the Chri∣stians, appears from Suetonius his mentioning one to fly in the Air in the 12 th of Nero, who in his fall bespatter'd Nero's Robes with his blood, which some interpreted to be an unlucky presage of Nero's approaching miserable death by his own hands. Who could this be but Magus? with whom for St. Peter to have contended for precedency, in arbitrating the Divine Power, (Magus giving himself out to be the Mighty power of God) would have been the act of a frothy brain, if he had not known himself to have been Peter (a Rock, against which the gates of Hell could not prevail.) St. Paul wrought one of his before Elymas the Sorcerer, with whom for him to vie, would have been the part of one more blind in his inward, than he made Elymas in his outward sense, had he dealt with him at his own weapon; and not with those weapons of his warfare, which he knew were mighty through God, to the casting down all Satanical power, exalting it self against their Gospel. Besides these already mention'd, the follower of Magus, Menander, (as Eusebius affirmeth, l. 3. cap. 26.) [] was not in∣feriour to his Master in Magick, but more vainly profuse in his portentous under∣takings. The persecution by Valerian was raised upon the instigation of the Magicians, complaining to the Emperour that the Christians hindered their Inchantments: [for the Godly did then and do at this day (saith Dionysius Alexand. in Euseb. Eccl. Hist. 7. 10.) so far prevail that they being present did as it were blow away and scatter the bewitchings of those detestable devils.] Un∣der Domitian, Apollonius Tyaneus wrought such Magical feats as Hierocles in Eusebius compares with, nay prefers before, the Miracles which our Saviour wrought; one of which was the calling of fire down from Heaven, (Philo∣strat. de Apollonio Tyaneo, 5. 5.) Antipas was accused under the same Empe∣rour, for that he drove away the Devils that were worshipt at Pergamos, and hindred them from receiving the Sacrifices that were offer'd to them, (vide Dr. Hammond's Notes on Revel. 2. 13.) That which moved Julian the Apostate his choler against the Christians of Antioch was his conceiving Apollo's Oracle at Daphne to be silenc'd by the Corps of Babilas the Martyr, and the Christians singing at their translation of that Corps, that triumphing Psalm, Confounded be all they that worship graven Images, &c. (Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. 1. 35. Socrates Eccles. Hist. 3. 9.) Before so great a number of expert black Artists, that Spouse of Christ would never have ventur'd to shew the effects of that power her Heavenly Husband had endowed her with, in that day of her Espousals, had she not deem'd it to have been from above, and able to over-master all infernal Principalities.
CHAP. IV. The World never better seen or practised, in sound Politiques, than in our Saviours time. § 1. The world secured against Innovations by the soundness of its then Politiques. While the Shepherds sleep the flock made a prey. The Emperour Augu∣stus (a solid States-man himself) had a most sage Council. Tiberius, a versatil head-piece seconded with wise Sages. § 2. The genius of the then Roman policy disgusted the introduction of a strange God. Tiberius upon Pilates information moving the Senate to Canonize our Jesus, is repulst. The Romans admit of no foreign Gods till they have renounced their old Tem∣ples and Altars. Constantine upbraided Licinius with his imbracing a strange God. Our Jesus the first foreign God which the Roman State im∣brac'd. § 3. Of Simon Magus his deisication at Rome. § 4. Christ got the start of Magus in the point of obtaining Divine Honour at the Ro∣mans hands. Augustus erected an Altar, To the first begotten. Suidas his story of Augustus his Altar defended. Augustus his unhappiness in his Issue might probably put him upon referring the choice of a Successour to the Oracles determination. His slighting Apollo argues the Answer he re∣ceived, not to have made for Apollo's credit. § 5. Some passages touch∣ing this Argument in Tertullian cleared from the Anabaptistical gloss. Where the Emperours and Senates shooe pincht them. How much this State-maxime prejudic'd the Apostles. § 1. NOtwithstanding that the World was so well fortified against Sedu∣ction, by its being so well seen in the above-mentioned Arts; yet had the Gospel found it in a disordered posture, through its defect of polity, this might have given an advantage to the Assaylants to subdue it to the be∣lief of things not rationable or credible. While every man is left to do what is good in his own eyes, as the Jews were when there was no King in Israel, the stragling Sheep may easily become the prey of Wolves and Foxes. How many vast, valiant, expert and (while well marshall'd) terrible and in∣conquerable Armies, have through want of Discipline, in a disordered march been put to the Rout by a less strong and worse skill'd Enemy? But the Gospel charged the world, when it stood in a full field and well ranked body to receive the on-set; not in that condition wherein the Danites found Laish, careless and heedless, without a Magistracy to put them to shame in any thing, and keep them in order, which was the great incouragement their Spies gave them to make an attempt upon that City: (Weem's Exercitations on Judg. 18. 7, 8, 10.) For that part of the world, wherein the Apostles ob∣tain'd most ground, was then united under the newly erected Standard of Augustus, as General, and under the Conduct of twelve as famous Gown'd Captains (I mean Lawyers and Politicians) as ever appear'd at one Muster, viz. (Sleidan. Clav. Hist. lib. 2.) Lucillus Balbus, P. Octavius Balbus, C. Au∣fidius, C. Juventius, C. Orbius, Sext. Papirius, Lucius Servius, Sub. Rufus, Tesa, Offilius, Casselius, Tubero, all flourishing in the Reign of Augustus; who himself was the most substantial and well weighed Statist that meer Na∣ture has exhibited to the world, equal'd by few that have had the benefit of Sacred Politiques: (but for that they may thank their studying Machiavel more than Melchisedeck:) Of him the Heroick Poet, under the shadow of Counsel, draws as high an Encomium as any Prince is capable of in point of prudence for the Administration of Empire, Excudent alii spirantia molliùs aera, Tu regere Imperio populos, Romane, memento. Hae tibi erunt artes—
Let others learn to mould brass, do thou learn to govern men. To these succeed∣ed (Sleidan. Clav. Hist. l. 2.) Caesius, the two Aufidii, l'acuvius, Flavius Pris∣cus, Varus, Labeo Father and Son, (the Son of that repute as he left his name to a Sect of Lawyers) Nerva Father and Son (to one of whom, Coccejus Nerva, Tacitus ascribes all kind of Knowledge both in Humane and Divine Laws; and reports him to have been a man of that foresight, in Civil Af∣fairs, as, to prevent the seeing of that mischief which the dissoluteness of Ti∣berius, at his beloved Capreae, would immerse the Empire in, he chose to end his dayes by a voluntary death; notwithstanding the Emperours per∣swasions to the contrary, Annal. lib. 6.) both the Longini, from whom the Cassian Sect had its Sirname and Original: All these under Tiberius, (Al∣sted. Cron. Juridicorum) who in point of vafrous cunning, deserv'd the name of Fox, as much as he, upon whom our Saviour bestowed that ti∣tle, Herod. This was the Scheme of that Heaven of the Roman Empire, when the Son of Righteousness enter'd upon his race from the one to the other end of it, through the Zodiack of his Twelve Apostles (beyond the circumference of whose Doctrine once deliver'd that Sun never moves in his illuminating the world with saving Light; all pretended supernatural Revelations eccen∣trical to that, are but the dwindles of blazing stars.) The two Luminaries (Augustus, of stay'd policy, Tiberius, of versatile craft) moving successively through a Zodiack of Twelve Statists, stars of the greatest magnitude that ever shin'd at once in the firmament of that State: The two first Judges of the Universe, that enter'd upon that preferment, by way of inheritance (as∣sisted each of them, with a full Jury of as able Lawyers as ever past Verdict together) sitting successively upon the Bench, when the Cause of the Gospel was first pleaded; as if they had been impannell'd on purpose to take notice of the Evidence brought into Court. The Empires skill in Law was at its highest exaltation, when the Royal Law came out of Sion; our great Law-giver disdaining to vie the Arcana of his Empire, with any State-maximes, but the very best of humane invention. Would the blessed Babe have ven∣tured to thrust in his head among these sage Councellours, had he not been the everlasting Councellour, the Antient of Dayes; to set up his Post, against this Post, had it not been, like that at the Temple Gate, stability it self; to erect his Kingdom, against this so well model'd an Empire, had not his been the gift of him that said, Thou art my Son, &c? § 2. Especially if it be further considered, That the genius of the Ro∣man Polity disgusted the introduction of any Foreign, over the head of its own Domestick, Religion. Ovid shuts up the discourse of the translation of Aesculapius with an Epiphonema, [His tamen accessit delubris advena nostris] though he had begun it with this Salvo of the Roman maxime, Not to re∣ceive any foreign God till he had given a sign of his renouncing his former Altars, —quáque ipse morari Sede velit, signis calestibus indicet, optant. Annuit his motisque deus rata pignora cistis, Et repetita dedit— —oráque retro Flectit: & antiquas abiturus respicit aras, &c. (Met. 15.) The Senate would not allow their General Lutatius, in the Punick War, to consult the Oracle of the Goddess Fortune at Praeneste, for this reason, (al∣ledged by Valerius Max. cap. 3. l. 1.) because the Roman Republick ought
not to be administred by the Conduct or Counsels of any God but their own. Tiberius himself (saith Tertullian, Apolog. cap. 5.) could not obtain of the Senate an Edict, to have our Jesus canonized for a God at Rome, though he moved earnestly for it, upon Pilate's Letters informing him what had past in Judaea. Celsus that fierce enemy of Christian Religion (in Orig. l. 4. Cal. 11, 12.) will allow the Jews their own Religion; and if they please to esteem Christ, their Lord and King, illa se jacret in aula, he will not envy him that honour in his own Countrey: but, that that obscure and despi∣cable Nation should impose a God and a Religion upon the whole world, this is that he so highly disgusts. The Pestilence raging, and the people run∣ning for help to every God they could think of (in the Consulship of A. Cor∣nelius Cossus and T. Quintius Pennus) there was strict charge given to the Ediles [ut animadverterent, nè qui, nisi Romani Dii, nen quo alio more quàm patrio colerentur:] (Liv. lib. 4. 30.) That they should take care, that no other Gods, but Roman, nor they, after any other rites than Roman, should be wor∣ship'd: Esteeming the innovation of Religion a greater plague than the Pe∣stilence; and scorning to be beholding for their deliverance from that deadly malady to the help of any but their own Gods. 'Tis true, the Romans re∣ceived most of the Gods and Religions of those Countries which they con∣quer'd: but this was done upon supposition that they were turned Roman. For as the Egyptians of old had an Art to make Gods, (as Trismegistus not without admiration observes) so the Romans had a way to make the Gods of other Nations their own, to make them forget their own Country and Fa∣thers house, to forsake their own Altars and Rites for the Roman; hinted by the Poet: [Discessêre omnes adytis arisque relictis Dii quibus imperium hoc steterit—Eneid. 2. To their old Cells and Altars the whole crew Of Guardian Gods (Troy falling) bid adieu.] And more fully exprest by Vives, in Aug. de Civit. 2. 22. When the Romans besieged any City which they intended to demolish, (that they might not seem to wage war with its tutelar Gods, and turn them out of doors against their will, by pulling down their Temples about their ears) the General, by certain charms, obtained of them to forsake the tutelage of the City destin'd to ruine, and betake themselves to the stronger side, to the conquering party. Thus Camillus decoy'd the Veijan Gods; Scipio, the Carthaginian and Numantian; Mummius, the Co∣rinthian. And lest others might serve their Guardian God with the same sauce, they concealed (as divers Authors have thought mention'd by Servius in his Epist. vir. Illustriss.) the true and proper Name of their City: for publishing of which secret Valerius Soranus was severely punisht. (Goodwins Antiquit.) A strange oversight in so wise a State, to trust their Cities fortune to the cu∣stody of that unruly member, the tongue. The Tyrians would have taught them a surer way; who, to secure their Patron Hercules, or Apollo, (for Dio∣dorus Siculus, (in telling the story, how the Tyrians besieged by Alexander the Great, and being warn'd by a Vision, that Apollo threatned to forsake the tuition of their City, bound the Image with a chain) indifferently calls their Idol sometimes Apollo, sometimes Hercules; a good argument that the Ty∣rian Hercules was Apollo, and Apollo the Sun, which performs his twelve la∣bours in passing the twelve Signs of the Zodiack (Diodor. Sic. Biblioth. lib. 18. pag. 548.) whether soever of them was their Patron, to secure his resi∣dence among them in spite of Charms, bound him fast to the pillar of his Temple with a Golden chain. It was upon the same score, that Numa caused Mamurius to make eleven shields, so like the Ancile of their Patron Mars, wherein they conceived the happiness of their City to lie (as Thebes her good fortune in Nisus his golden lock, and Meleagers life in the fagot-slick)
as it was impossible to discern one from another. (Plutarch. Numa.) This in imitation of Dardanus, of whom Dionys. Halicarnas. (lib. 1. cap. 7.) out of Callistratus, Satyrus, and Aratinus, reports, That Dardanus drew a coun∣terfeit Palladium, like that which Minerva bestowed upon him, with a promise, that Troy should stand while it kept that Palladium; and that it was the coun∣terfeit which the Grecians stole; Aencas bringing the true to Lavinium. The form of this evocation of Tutelar Gods, and infranchizing foreign Deities, and naturalizing them into Roman, Macrobius (Saturn. 3. 9.) sets down, as he found it in Sammonicus Serenus his 5. Book Of hidden Secrets. [If it be a God, if it be a Goddess that hath the People and City of Carthage in protection, and thou especially (whosoever thou art) the Patron of this City and People, I pray and beseech and (with your leave) require you to abandon the City and Peo∣ple of Carthage, to forsake the places, Temples, Ceremonies, and inclosures of their City; to go away from them, and to strike fear, terrour and astonishment into that people and City; and having left it, to come to Rome, to me, and mine: and that our Temples, Places, Ceremonies and Cities, be more acceptable, and better liked of you; that you would take the charge of me, of the People of Rome, and of my Soldiers, so as we may know and understand it. If you do so, I vow to build you Temples, and to appoint for you Solemn Games.] No peny, no Pater Noster, no room in Rome, for any God that will not turn Roman, and wear the City badge. Upon this custome Tertullian (Apol. 24.) grounds this Note: Tot sacrilegia Romanorum quot trophaea; tot de Diis quot de gentibus triumphi; tot manubia quot manent adhuc simulachra captivorum Deorum. i. e. Look how many Trophees the Romans have erected over conquer'd Cities and Countries, so many Sacrileges have they committed upon the Gods of those places; they have had as many Triumphs over the Gods, as over Countries; the many Images of captive Gods remaining to this day in that City, are but so many spoils taken in war. § 3. So exceeding wide of the mark of truth is that fools bolt of the vulgar opinion, that Rome was conquer'd by the Gods of the Nations whom she conquer'd: for in very deed she gave the Gods no other quarter, than she did the men, capitulating with them upon no better terms than those which Jacobs Sons tender'd to Sechem. [We cannot do this thing (to give Divine Honour to a God that is not Italianized) but in this we will consent unto you, if you will be as we are.] It would not stand with the Polity of that stately Lady, to marry a strange God, to be baptized in his Name; till by a strange Art of Palingenesie, he had baptized himself into the Roman Name, in the blood of his deserted Father and Mother, the people and place of his first birth. Jupiter must become Capitoline, Mars Quirinal, before those Hills will afford room for their Temples. The Egyptian Serapis must turn the Indian Bacchus Italick before they can be worshipt at Rome. Serapide jam Romano aras, Baccho jam Italico furias, &c. (Tertull. Apolog. 6.) Aesculapius his mp (his Serpent) must come away with his Idol, before he can have re∣ception in that City. The Mother of the Gods (in their repute) must shew her readiness to forsake the patronage of her antient pupils, and to embrace the Office of Protecting S. P. Q. R. by following the slender twine of the Vestal Nuns garter, before she can arrive on Tibers shore. Male and Female Deities must veil the bonnet  to Goddess Rome, (so termed in the Inscriptions of antient Roman Coyns, set down by Goltzius in Thesauro) before she will bend the knee to them. To the Goddess Rome, the people of Smyrna built a Temple, and therefore were prefer'd by the Senate before the rest of the twelve Cities who stood in competition with her in that contest that was moved by those Cities in the Senate, which of them should have the priviledge granted to build a Temple to Augustus, (Tacit. Hist. 3. Annal. 4. p. 110.) taxed by our Propertius: —colitur nam sanguine & ipsa More Deae: noménque lci ceu numen adorant.
The very City of Rome it self is worshipped as a Goddess by Sacrifices; and they adore the name of the place as a Deity. Thus hath Antichristian Rome, both Pagan and Papal, exalted her self above all that, in the most extensive sence, is called God or worshipped. What hopes then could the Apostles have, had they been supported by no other but an arm of flesh, to obtrude upon that Empire, that unknown, that strange God whom they preacht? A thing, First, so ill resented by that State in Constantine the Great; as Licinius, in his Speech to his Soldiers (mentioned by Eusebius in the Life of Constantine, lib. 2. cap. 5.) whets their courage, and animates them to the fight by this argument alone, That the Army they were to ingage against had imbrac'd a strange God, and intended to fight under his colours. Secondly, Of so harsh a sound in the ears of some Christian Theologues, as not knowing how to put a good sence upon that phrase when they met with it in Daniel, (Dan. 11. 39.) they have mangled the coherence, making a meer hotch-potch of that prophecie, and perverted its sence, forcing it (to point at the marks of Antichrist) from its plain intendment to describe the conquest of Christ, and his subduing the Empire to an abrenunciation of the Gods of its Ancestors, and the acceptance of himself, that foreign God to them, (Mede in locum) that () unknown God (Act. 17.) that only Potentate, God blessed for ever, that should set his conquering Banners upon the Walls of that proud City, that had set hers upon the Temples of all other strange Gods; and gather that Eagle as a Chicken under his, that had made the Gods of all Nations creep under her wings; the full experiment whereof he gave in the Reign of Constantine. And that's the clear importance of Daniels prophecie, and of Li∣cinius his Argument. The first perverter of Daniels words to a sinister sence, was the Patriarch of those hackney Commentators, that think it a strange thing, that the Empires embracing a strange God, should be taken in a good sence, and import the Christning of it into the name of our Jesus. But if the Name of a foreign God startle some of our Divines, it is less to be wonder'd, that, Thirdly it should grate so harshly upon Pagan-Roman ears, as that State could never be charmed into the imbracing of any strange God upon his own terms, before or beside the blessed Jesus; [nisi homini placuerit Deus, Deus non erit; homo jam Deo propitius esse debebit] (Tert. Ap. contr. Gent. 5.) all others, before their reception, were capitulated with, and forc'd to lay their Crowns of Divine Honour at the Senates feet, before they were permitted in that City to wear them on their own heads: they must undeifie themselves, and become no Gods of other Cities, before they are allowed to be Gods in that. From which custom Eusebius (Hist. 2. 2.) ascribes it to a signal providence, that our Jesus was not received, by the Senate, for God, upon Tiberius his motion; Which no doubt (saith he) was done to this end, that the wholesome Doctrine of the Divine Preaching might not need the approbation of men, the commendation of such men: i. e. That Christ might not seem to enter at the common door, in a precarious way, with cap in hand, till the Senate was pleased to bid him be cover'd: that his Divinity might not, like that of other Gods, (as Tertullian speaks ubi prius) de humano arbitratu pensitari, pass for no more than it weighed in the unequal scales of humane arbitre∣ment, but settle it self among them by its own weight, and over them upon his own terms. § 4. There is but one instance in all History that bears any semblance of opposition to this last assertion [That our Jesus was the first foreign God whom the Romans received without capitulations] and that is of Simon Ma∣gus; who seems to have prevented our Saviour in the honour of being pro∣claimed a God there. Which knot some attempt to untie, or rather rashly to cut asunder, by a back-blow against the truth of those current Stories which Eusebius (out of Justin Martyr and Irenaeus) reports of Simon's Deification; the sword with which they wound the credit of this History comes out of the forge of Peter
Ciaconius, who suspects this to have been Justin's mistake, because about the place where he reports Simons Image to have been erected, there was, Anno Christi, 1574. the basis of a Marble Statue digged up, with this inscription, SIMONI SANCO DEO FIDIO: But to this answer it may be replyed, That though it be very certain that there were Pillars or Statues in Rome and Reatina bearing such like inscriptions [SEMONI SANCO FIDIO DEO: SANCTO SANCO SEMONI DEO FIDIO: SANCO FIDIO SEMO PATRI, (Ovid. Fast. 6.) Quaerebam Nonas Sancto Fidióne referrem, An tibi Semo pater: tunc mihi Sanctus ait, Cuicunque ex istis dederis, ego munus habebo, Nomina terna fero: sic valuêre Cures. whom Vossius rationally concludeth to have been Hercules from the testimo∣ny of Varro, (lib. 4. de L. L.) and of Festus, [Herculi aut Sanco; qui sci∣licet idem est Deus.] Vossius de Idololatria, lib. 1. cap. 12. pag. 46, 47. Etiam inter indigites Deos Romanis fuit Semo Sanctus: qui & Fidius, quia per eum jurando fieret fides. Inscriptio Romana, SEMONI SANCO DEO FI∣DIO SACRUM; & alia, SANCTO SANCO SEMONI DEO FIDIO SACRUM: Yet the place assigned by Ovid agrees not to that, which Justin Martyr assignes to Simon Magus, [Hunc igitur veteres donârunt aede Sabini, Inque Quirinali constituêre Jugo.] In whose Temple Tanquill or Caia Caecilia resided with her whorle and distaff, as out of Varro Pliny reports, (lib. 8. cap. 48.) Now, though Justin might easily mistake [Semoni] for [Simoni] yet sure he must have had a beam in's eye if he took a Temple on the Quirinal Hill for a Statue on Ti∣bers Bridge. And that Tertullian should follow him in that mistake, being so great an Antiquary, and which is more, by Profession a Lawyer, and therefore skill'd in the Roman Fasts and lect dayes, is still a greater wonder: And therefore notwithstanding Vossius his Arguments to the contrary, I still think those great Lights of the Primitive Church did not ground their story of Simon Magus upon such palpable mistakes. And as to Ciaconius his rea∣son from the so late invention of that Statue dug up in or near the place where Justin reports Simons Statue to have been placed, I would think, That the Authority of Justin and his writing this by way of Apology for the Christian Religion to the Emperour, within that Century wherein it was done; and Tertulian's mentioning it in his Apology, (who was a man better skill'd in that Cities Antiquities than to be imposed upon in a thing of which he might have had ocular demonstration,) are enough to blunt the edge of this sword, if not to turn it against those that use it; and make men of sober minds ra∣ther suspect those diggers deceived, and that new-found basis to be a confir∣mation of Justins History, That coming so near the Inscription of Magus his Statue mentioned by him, and the difference betwixt that and this being, in all reason, imputable to the teeth of time, which corrodes the most durable Marble; against which, while the Characters could bear up themselves, they presented this Motto, SIMONI SANCTO DEO FILIO: besides the canker of Age, a blow with a Mattock might sooner make an alteration in a Letter or two, in one Image besieged with Mattocks, than the Mothes conspire to gnaw out a piece of a Letter in three several Authors. I have ever dislik'd too much Criticisme in the consuring of approved Authors, as the Devils engine, insensibly, to screw men up to infidelity, and disbelief of the sacred Scripture it self, that being conveyed down to us in the same way of pen or press-tradition that other writings are. But to the Objection, from Magus his Canonization, this will be answer sufficient; That whatever ho∣nour
was conferr'd at Rome upon him, was given him as the Perkin Werbeck of the blessed Jesus, as his shadow and counterfeit; for he giving out him∣self to be that very Jesus who appear'd in Judaea; (Iren. contr. haer. 1. 20.) and by his inchantments, (Justin Mart. Apoleg.) perswading many of the Samaritans, and some of other Nations, by Name, Roman Citizens, and perhaps that Mushrome Emperour Claudius, that he was indeed that person whom he personated, and upon that ground had a Statue erected to him: So that Simon obtain'd Divine Honour under Claudius, according to Justin Martyr, or by Claudius, according to Irenaeus and Tertullian, no otherwise than Dru∣sus his shadow obtain'd Imperial, and the pseudo-Alexander Regal, Honour, at the hands of those deluded Greeks and Jews, that took them for the per∣sons whose parts they acted. His Image was the Image of the supposed Christ, from the belief of whose Deity, first embrac'd, proceeded the Opi∣nion that that first begotten of the Devil, who gave himself out to be that Jesus which was Crucified at Jerusalem, was the Holy God. To speak all in a word, and but too intelligible, Simon Magus was the James Naylor of that Age, to whom his deluded Followers cryed Hosannah, taking him to be him whom he counterfeited. § 5. And yet (to cast in over-weight) had this Sorcerer's Statue stood upon its own, and not a borrowed basis; he would not have prevented our Jesus in an early obtaining Divine Honour, who as he was censed in his Cratch by the Wise-men of the East, so he had an Altar erected to him in his non∣age, by the Emperour of both East and West, if Suidas (in the Life of Au∣gustus) play the part of a faithful Historian; for there he tells us [That Au∣gustus consulting the Oracle of Apollo, who should be his Successour, received this Answer, Hence, hence Augustus from my silenc'd Cell, I must not thine, my own fates I may tell. Our Tripos is turn'd Infant by the Babe Of Hebrew birth; our self to dismal shade Of lowest Hell must forthwith pack away; So bids that Boy whom all we Gods obey. Whereupon Augustus reared an Altar in the Capitol, with this Inscription, ARA PRIMOGENITI FILII DEI, The Altar of the first-be∣gotten Son of God. Christ then got the start of Simon Magus, in point of Time, as much as Augustus preceded Claudius; in point of Place, as much as the Capitol is above the bridge of Tyber; in point of Title, as much as [Pri∣mogenitus] the first begotten, excells [Sanctus] the Holy Son of God; and Lastly in point of the Divine Honour conferr'd, as much as the dedicating of an Altar is an higher degree of sacred homage, than the erecting of a Statue. If the Authority of Suidas, backt with Nicephorus and Cedrenus their mentioning the same Story, be not of sufficient weight to make it currant; we have those Historical Observations to cast into the seales, as will make it down weight. 1. Augustus his unfortunateness in his Off-spring might in all reason put him upon consulting the Divine Wisdom in the point of Succession; the only hopeful branches of the Caesarean Tree, Caius and Lucius, both dying within the space of 22 months of one another; the two Julia's, his Daughter and Niece, being for their infamousness, thrust by his own Decree into exile; Agrippa for his sordid and salvage disposition dis-inherited; (Sueton. Octavius 65.) and his only remaining Heir Apparent Tiberius, (that dirt mixt with blood, as Theodorus Gadareus called him, Tacit. Annal. 1. Sueton. Tiberius 57.) not able to conceal from so piercing an eye, those latent seeds of cruelty and arrogance, he began so early to put forth: so far incurring Augustus his dis∣pleasure,
as if he had not been prevented by death (suspected to have been procured by Livia in favour of Tiberius) he had a purpose of re-adopting Agrippa: of which he made more than shew, in the affectionate visit he gave him, in his exile, a little before his end. This his so great mishap in his Family-concerns, himself was wont to express his deep resentment of, not only in calling his three Children his three Wens and Impostumes, but in that his Proverbial exclamation, —, Happy they that live without Wives, and die without Children! (Suet. Octav. 65.) Here was, if ever, Deo dignus vindice nodus, a snarle in his fortune requiring the aid of a Divine Solution. To which, no doubt, but so over Religious a Prince would apply himself. For if mans natural propensity to invocate the Divine, when humane counsel fails, was radicated in Tiberius, (notwithstanding his irreligiousness, [Circa Deos ac Religiones negligentior] Suet. Tiber. 69.) so deep, as he in the like case (to counterfeit Augustus in commendable things, where his native pravity would permit him to write after so good a Copy) durst not appoint his Successour, till he had supplica∣ted the Gods, by some manifest token to determine whom he should choose, Joseph. Antiq. 18. 8. [Consilium cui impar erat fato commist] (Tac. an. 6. 137.) Can we reasonably suspect Suidas of falsehood in reporting Augustus, where he found the last Act of the Comedy of his life thus perplext, to have call∣ed Apollo into the Scene, to unite this knot, referring the choice of an Heir, where he had so bad choice, to the umpirage of the Divine Wisdom? 2. And that the Answers which that, and whatever other Oracles he con∣sulted, gave, were as little to the credit of the Gods, as Suidas reports them to have been, appears from that low esteem which in his old Age he had of both, exprest by his condemning to the flames, when he was great Pontiff, two thousand Oracles, (Sueton. Octav. 31.) though at his entrance into that Office, he was so devout an Adorer of the old Religion, consisting in a great part of those Oracles, as he preferr'd his Augurate above his Empire; fast∣ning his name at his reforming of the Calender, rather on that month when he commenc'd Augur, than on that wherein he began his Reign: and pro∣testing, that if any of his Nieces had been old enough he would have pre∣ferr'd her to the place of a Vestal, fallen void by the death of one of those Nuns; with that protestation upbraiding the Senators irreligiousness, exprest in their making means that their Daughters might not be called to that lot. Touching Apollo himself, and the rest of the twelve great Deities what his thoughts were grown to, by that time he was grown old, he more than intimated in his erecting of that strange Order of Table-Knights (Sueton. Octav. 70.) instituted (as not only Antonius but the common Libels object∣ed against him) in contempt of Apollo, whom Augustus as Master of the Or∣der personated, and the other eleven he and she Deities, whom the rest of the Knights represented in that his supper of the twelve Gods, Impia dum Caesar Phoebi mendacia ludit, &c. While impious Caesar and his Godded rout Spurn Phoebus Tripos with insulting foot. This was the burthen of the City Song, descanting upon his  his twelve Gods, discovering that degree of sacrilegious impiety (to speak in the then modern Roman dialect) towards the Gods of the greater Nations, and especially to Apollo, as so devout a person as Augustus was, could not have arrived to, by any other wind, but what blew from that coast which Suidas points out; He durst not without the leave of these Gods have been thus fa∣miliar with them.
§ 6. This may suffice to vindicate Suidas, and prove the truth of this po∣sition, That the Polity of Rome was so averse to the entertainment of a fo∣reign God, as our Jesus was the first strange God that that Empire embrac'd, either by Publick Edict of the Senate, or the private Conscience of the Em∣perours, as Tertullian (Apol. cont. gentes, cap. 21.) distinguisheth, Ipse pro sua conscientia Christianus; He as to his own private perswasion being already a Christian. Senatus respuit, Caesar in sententia mansit, (Id. ibid. cap. 5.) The Senate rejected Tiberius his motion for the Canonization of Christ, but Tibe∣rius persisted in the Opinion of Christs being God. Sed & Caesares ipsi credidissent super Christo, si aut Caesares non essent seculo necessarii, aut si & Christiani po∣tuissent esse Caesares, (Id. ibid. cap. 21.) Yea, even the Emperours themselves would have become Christians, if they had not been hamper'd with secular in∣terest, or if that Christians could have been Caesars. Upon which passages, be∣cause they give both light and strength to the preceding discourse (though not without hazard of spilling my Readers patience) I shall venture to make these reflections. 1. To clear that clause [aut si & Christiani potuissent esse Caesares] from the Anabaptistical gloss; this Note will be sufficient, That Constantine and his Successors reconciled this inconsistency of Christianity and Empire, and there∣fore it was not absolute but only occasional and temporary; nor of all Em∣pire or Civil command, but particularly respected the Roman Empire. For there were Christian Magistrates, and that under the Emperour, very early in the Primitive Times, both Martial, as Cornelius, and Civil, as Sergius Pau∣lus, as Judicious Grotius observes. [Ob temporum circumstantias quae vix fere∣bant exerceri sine actibus quibusdam cum Christiana lege pugnantibus, (Grotius de Jur. bel. & pacis, l. 2. 9. 3.) The circumstances of those Times were such as did scarcely permit the Office of the Emperour to be exercised without certain Acts contrary to the Christian Law.] 2. It will be therefore worth the while to enquire, what that Secular In∣terest was, in which the Emperours were so involv'd, in that juncture, as it was a Remora to their casting their assistance on Christ, and a bar to him that was a Christian to become Emperour. Let him that tied, untie this knot: let Tertullian himself (Apol. 5.) determine, who infers the story of Tiberius above-mentioned, with an [ergo] from that old Decree quoted by him in the preceding clause. Vetus erat decretum, nè qui Deus ab Imperatore conse∣craretur, nisi à Senatu probatus, There was an old Decree, that none should be Canonized for a God by the Emperour, (Euseb. interpr. Tertul. [ab Imperatore] by [] Hist. Eccles. 2. 2.) whereby this seems to have been an ancient Constitution made under their Kings (who were also Generals in War, and were hereby prohibited to adopt new Gods either at home or abroad without the Vote of the Senate) and renewed with this alteration of Name when the Senate held the Soveraignty at home, and the Emperour or General abroad without limitation of their Power while their Commission lasted, saving in this particular, that they should not at their conquest of Na∣tions or Cities make any foreign God Free of the Roman State, till he had first been approved of by the Senate. In which Decree Reason bids that we should take Emperour, not in the then new, but in its old sence, as it signi∣fies a General, as the next words [ut M. Aemilius de deo suo Alburno] im∣port: for Aemilius was in no other sence an Emperour but as he was the Roman General, whose Office it was to evocate the Gods of conquer'd Ci∣ties (as we have heard before) and offer them fair quarter. Now lest the General might dubb upon the place any such God; this Decree was added, by way of caution, to that former which Crinitus (Tri. de honest. discipl. lib. 10. cap. 3. vide Junii notas in Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.) out of the Books of the Pontiffs, delivers, in these terms [Separatim nemo siet habens deos novos sive advenas, nisi publicè adscitos privatim nè colunto] which Law Cicero thus translates, Separatim nemo habessit deos, neve novos: sed nè advenas, nisi pub∣licè
adscitos, privatim colunto, (Cic. de legib. l. 2. p. 318.) Let no man have any new or strange Gods; Let not any be worshipt in private that are not pub∣lickly infranchised; that is, till those signs they gave, of their renouncing their former Cities and People, and their coming over to the Roman, had been canvast in the Senate and approved of. Upon which Eusebius hath this Note (Hist. Eccl. 2. 2.) out of Tertullian, , If God do not please man he shall not be God: well exprest in the following clause, , With you humane judgement confers divinity. By this we see where the Senates and Emperours shooe pinches in the case of our Jesus: His not complying with them in this great maxime of State; his not induring this humane test; his not condescending to their terms, of renouncing Judaea's, and undertaking the patronage of the people and City of Rome. Pilat's writing him in his Letter to Caesar, as he had writ him in the Inscription over the Cross, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, was that very thing which would not down with the Senate; that which made the Evangelical Doctrine too strait a glove for their gouty hand: had it not been for this they would have drawn it on: And had they drawn it on, Ti∣berius would have worn Christs colours, and not only have prohibited the persecution, but have commanded the profession of the Christian Religion: the Senate's sticking at his Canonization, being that secular concern which stifled the light of his Conscience; he choosing rather to save his Crown than his Soul. The fear of suffering shipwrack of a good Conscience upon the shelf of this temptation, together with the custom of exhibiting an oath to the Emperour, at his ingress to the exercise of that dignity [not to over-top the Senate in those privileges the ancient Laws had establisht them in] and also the College of the Pontiffs installing him in the great Pontificality, and committing to him the chief ordering of the affairs concerning the Ethnick Ceremonies; a thing that Gratian said (and thereupon refused the pontifical Stole) was unlawful for a Christian (and 'tis a wonder how the former Chri∣stian Emperours could wear that Stole without galling their shoulders) (vid. Mord. vol. 2. pag. 746.) These circumstances (I say) were the Lion in the tho∣row-Christians way to the Imperial Crown, and made the Inauguration in that dignity incompetent to a Christian indeed, as not being tenable or at∣tainable in that juncture but upon those terms, which were in effect and in∣terpretatively, an abrenunciation of Christ. From all which may be inferr'd, for a conclusion of this Argument, the invincibleness of the Empire to the obedience of Christ, by an arm of flesh, and the ridiculousness of attempting to batter down this strong hold, (where∣with the Empire had immur'd it self, against the fiercest assaults the illumi∣nated consciences of their own Emperours could make) without the greatest assurance of the Divine aid. Had Aegypt been the head of the worlds Em∣pire, (that Wind-mill head turning its sailes about to every new wind, to the imbracing of every new and strange Deity) or Greece, which both Di∣vine and Secular Histories describe to be in love with novelties: It would have been a business of no great difficulty, to have reduc'd it to the belief of a well-coucht new Fable. But to prevail with it, to renounce its old and imbrace a strange God, when Rome was become its Metropolis, hic labor, hoc opus est. To poak out Leviathan, from under that shelf of prejudice against a strange God, by the Apostolical rod, into the Net of the Gospel; to draw him to that shore he had such an antipathy against, by that slender silken twine wherewith the Apostles fisht for men; to intice him with the bait of a foreign Deity cloathed in so mean and outwardly despicable flesh; can be imputed to nothing less, than the cooperation of that power, with those mean in∣struments, that's able to subdue all things to it self, and bring to nought things that are, by things that are not. The making of that stone, which the Gentile as well as Jewish builders, of all others rejected, the head stone of the corner, higher than the highest in the Capitol, was the Lords doings; a work
not to have been attempted without extream madness, but in the confi∣dence of his Almighty assistance. CHAP. V. A prospect of the Holy Age, the Age wherein the Gospel was first publisht, in respect of its skill in Theology. § 1. Natural Theology then in its highest acmen by the improvement of the Py∣thagorick, Platonick and Sacratical Philosophy. Within that Century lived Varro: his Encomium. Scaevola and Caesar great Divines. Cicero and Cratippus well seen in Natural Theology. Seneca the Miracle of Humane Divines. Thrasea under Nero a Martyr for Moral Divinity. § 2. Prophetical Theology exploded by Pagan Philosophers. Divination by Dreams and Oracles censur'd by Cicero. Apollo's Oracles ambiguous; at last silenc'd. Phoebus Philippizing. Chaldean prognosticators vain. Prae∣nestine Lots and Auguries decided. Divination by Prodigies taunted. This a barr to credulity towards the Gospel. § 3. Historical Divinity decried in the Schools (when the History of the blessed Jesus was first published) as reporting things unworthy of God. The Apostles could never have hoped to induce the disputers of this world to a belief of as unlikely stories, had they had no more than an arm of flesh to trust to. The conclusion of the whole matter. God's Tabernacle set in the Sun shining out in its greatest lustre of humane Sciences. § 4. The Civick Religion both with the Vulgar and Politicians in high respect in our Saviours Age, proved, from the Philosophers salvo's, by consequence, and directly from several examples. The world was injoying her self Pigmalion-like in the warm imbraces of her-own-made sacred animals. § 1. ALthough the World by this four-double shield (of knowledge in Arts Physical, Poetical, Demoniacal and Political) was thus well guarded against the surprizals of Impostures: yet had it wanted the eye of Theology, a cunning Stalker might possibly have catcht it on its blind side: Had the Sun of Metaphysical knowledge been cold set upon it, the Apostles might have presumed, in the darkness of that night, to have dazeled its eyes with the splendor of the Gospel, and to have struck it with their fish-spear, or have drawn their net over it, while it lay astonish'd with the strangeness of that sight: As we see Salmons caught with the flame of a broom-fagot, and Larks with a low-bell. In order therefore to our clearing the Apostles from the charge of designing to put a cheat upon the world, it will be expedient to take a view of the posture it then stood in, in point of Religion; which though miserably depraved, with the inventions of its own foolish and judi∣cially darkned heart, through its letting slip, in that vast tract of time, what was once deliver'd to it by the Sons of Noah; and in lieu of the old tradi∣tion taking up, and filling its hand with vain imaginations: yet (whether it were through that Ages improving of Natural Principles, or retrieving of Supernatural, either by a more familiar converse with that Nation, to whom God had concredited the custody of his Oracles; or by means of the divulg∣ing of the Septuagint; or by Gods blessing upon their faithfulness in a little;) never did any Age before it, since the first General Apostasie, stand better de∣fended against Impostors in Religion than this did. The Three Sects that only deserve the name of Divine, the Pythagorick, Socratical and Platonick, being about our Saviours time grown to that improvement, as more substan∣tial Divinity occurrs in the writings of one Roman, who then turn'd his stile that way, than in all the Volumes of preceding Philosophers. Then lived Varro, so indefatigable a Student and Writer, as Terentianus
Carthaginensis (in his Phaleucick Verses) sings of him after this manner: [Vir doctissimus undecunque Varro; Quae tam multa legit, ut aliquid Ei scribere vacâsse miremur; Tam multa scripsit, quàm multa Vix quenquam legere potuisse credamus.] The learned Varro useth to expend So many hours in reading, as we deem A winged minutes scantling can scarce lend It self unto his pen: yet that doth seem To trust more notions to his sweating Page, Than quickest eye can run o're in an Age. Gellius reports (lib. 5.) that he writ 490 Books. A man of that profound Learning, as Tully (transported with the admiration of it) in his Academick Questions, while he's commending him for a Divine, forgets that himself was an Academick Philosopher; and, contrary to his profession of hesitancy and suspension of assent to all other propositions, speaks positively and confi∣dently of Mark Varro, that he was, without doubt, of all men the most acute and learned (Academ. Quaest. lib. 1.)—[Cum M. Varrone hominum fa∣cilè omnium acutissimo, & sine ulla dubitatione doctissimo] and a little after, While we were wandring (saith he) in our own City as strangers, thy Books (O Varro) did as it were bring us home to our selves, that we might at length know where we are, and what we are. Thou hast open'd to us the Antiquities of our Country, the description of the Times, the Laws about Holy things, the Offices of Priests, Domestick, Publick Discipline, the definitions, distinctions, properties and causes of ALL THINGS both HUMANE and DIVINE. That African Tully St. Austin praiseth Varro in as high a stile as this Ro∣man, giving him this Encomium (de Civitate 6. 2.) [Quis M. Varrone cu∣riosiùs ista quaesrvit? quis invenit doctiùs? quis distinxit acutiùs? quis conside∣ravit attentiùs? quis diligentiùs plenisque conscripsit?] Who hath with more curiosity inquired into those things (concerning Religion and the Divine attri∣butes) than Varro? who with more learning found them out than he? who with greater attention weighed, with more acuteness distinguisht, with more copiousness and diligence writ of these things than M. Varro? But we cannot have a clearer demonstration of the brightness and magni∣tude of this Star, (which Providence order'd to arise in the Heathens Hemi∣sphere, as an Usher to the Sun of Righteousness) than his obtaining (while he lived and was obnoxious to the envy of his Emulators) by a general vote the Sir-name of the most learned of all the Gown-men: and the Virgin∣honour to have his Statue (in his life-time) plac'd in that Library which Asinius Pollio erected at Rome. Then lived Scaevola the Pontiff, whom St. Austin stiles the most learned Pontiff (Vives in Aug. de Civ. 6. 2.) out of whose Theological polemical writings St. Austin produceth some sound and Gospel-proof Divine maximes. To whom Tully, a man read as much in Men as Books, applyed himself to learn Divinity, after the death of, his former master in that Science, Scaevola the Augur. (Aug. de Civit. 4. 27.) Then lived Caesar; who acquitted the Office of High-Priest as dexterously as that of Emperour; in his directing the world to time her devotions, by re∣forming the Calender, so near the precise Rule, prescribed by God to those Luminaries, which he hath placed in the Heavens, to measure Times, as it served the whole World to calculate Seasons by, above 1500 years; in which large tract of time, that Julian Account has not misreckon'd 13 dayes; whereas he found the computation so corrupt, as he could not bring the hand of his reformed Calender to the right hour of time, without the intereala∣tion
of three months. (Sueton. Jul. 4.) And in the rest of his pontifical ad∣ministrations, not failing the expectations of the Electors, who were two to one for him more than all his Competitors obtain'd the Votes of, though the other Candidates for that Office so far exceeded him in Age and secular Dig∣nity, as Caesar had nothing to commend him to the Electors, but his quali∣fiedness for that function, by the worth of his parts, Id. Ib. cap. 40. Then lived Cicero; as great a Proficient in the Colledge of Augurs, as in the Schools of the Orators. Witness his Books de Divinatione, de somnio Scipionis, de Seneciute, de Legibus, his Paradoxes, and Academick questions; wherein he traceth the Deity, by the foot-steps of the Creature and common Providence, more near its seat of inaccessible light than he durst openly, or in his own person, express; and therefore communicates his conceptions upon that subject by way of Romance under borrowed names, as Plate had done before him in the like case [sed nimirum Socratis carcerem times] (Lactant. de fal. rel. 1. 3.) both of them skulking under the shades of deceased Philo∣sophers, for fear of the impending whip of the Areopagites over Plato, of the Imperial Laws over Cicero: both of them having heard the sound of the whip laid, on Socrates before Plato's, on Varro's back before Cicero's face: for that Roman Socrates (for opening too wide, and not running with the com∣mon cry) had been soundly lasht by the then great Hunter the Roman Nim∣rod, having his Person proscribed, his Library rifled, and his Books burnt, as disfavouring the Religion of that State; yet for all this Tully sets this Royal Game, and gives the World notice (as it were by wagging his tail when he durst not open his mouth) where it was squatted, against the Apostles should come with their Net. Then lived the Learned Cratippus, whom Cicero, in the Proem to his Of∣fices, stiles the Prince of Modern Philosophers: but, his commending his Son to his Nurture, was a commendation of him, in fact, beyond all the streins, even of his, Rhetorick. Then lived Virgil; of whom Vettius (in Macrob. Saturn. 1. 24.) Equidem inter omnia, quibus eminet laus Maronis, hoc assiduus lector admiror, quia do∣ctissimè jus pontificium, quasi hoc professus, in multa & varia operis sui arte ser∣vavit; & si tantae dissertationi sermo cancederet, promitto fore ut Virgilius noster Pontifex maximus asseratur.] Of whose admirable skill in Theology he giv∣eth instances (in the third Book of Saturnals) to make good this his general commendation: That amongst all the praise-worthy qualifications of Maro, which in his daily reading of his Works he took notice of, he wonder'd at this, that throughout the whole Series of his Poems he so learnedly observ'd the Pon∣tifical Law, as if he had been Professor of it; and if I had time (saith Vettius) to discourse that point, I promise you I could obtain from you an assent to this, That Virgil deserves to be accounted worthy of the high Priest-hood. Then lived that miracle of humane Divines, Seneca the Philosopher, the Glory of the Heathen, the shame of the modern Christian World; who gave the greatest experiment of the power of Stoicism, that ever man did, in his rooting the sentiments of a Deity, and, with them, Morality, so deep in that most barren heart of Nero, as those Seeds sown there by him flourish'd, and bore excellent fruit for the first five years of his Reign▪ in spite of the natural dyscrasie of that Monster, and the temptations to an earlier Apostasie, which an absolute Sovereignty laid before him. (Vid. Tacit. an. 15.) And who was himself as much a Philosopher in the inward of his Soul, as in the outward habit of his Beard and Gown; as much a Moralist in practice, as contempla∣tion and precept: As the great Humanist of France the Lord Nountaigne (Essayes l. 1. c. 32.) hath more than Essay'd to vindicate him to have been, against Dion's calumniations; (Xiphil. è Dione. Nero. pag. 519.) grounded upon Tigellinus and his parties reports; whom to have his enemies and slan∣derers was Seneca's honour: Tigellinus being a person of so filthy and calum∣niating a tongue, as Dion himself (but three pages before he condemns Se∣neca, upon the suggestions of Tigellinus) commends that sarcastical Apothegm
(as he calls it) of Pythia against him: who when she was urged by him to accuse her Lady Octavia Augusta of dishonesty, spate in his face, and said, The privities of my Lady, Tigellinus, are more clean than thy mouth. As himself de∣monstrated, in his discourse with Nero, after he was grown the object of Ti∣gellinus's envy, for his wealth, and of Nero's hatred, for the freedom he used in rebuking him; than whom, no man better knew (as he told Granius Si∣loanus) how far Seneca's genius was averse to flattery, or how much his brave spirit was elevated above love to the world, or fear of death. And in his conference with his Wife betwixt his condemnation and death, where∣in he recommended to her (who was most privy to what he was at home with himself) the remembrance of his vertuous life (in those actions of it wherein there had been least personating) as the best expedient against her immoderate sorrow for his departure. And lastly, as the ancient Fathers of our Church implyed, in their opinion, that he had familiar converse with St. Paul; conceiving it scarce possible, that he could, in Life and Doctrine, hit so right upon the sence of Evangelical precepts without some such In∣terpreter. Then lived Thrasea, that Martyr (under Nero) for Natural Theology, whom Tacitus calls the light of the Roman world, and thus prefaceth his Story: At last Nero covets to extirpate vertue it self, in putting Thrasea to death: having no other cause of displeasure against him, but his going out of the Senate, as refusing to give his Vote for the condemnation of Agrippina, upon the barbarous motion of her unnatural Son; and his not appearing at those Funeral Solemnities wherein Divine Honours were conferr'd upon that Court Drabb Pop∣paea. A person of that Divine presence and discourse, as his friends were con∣fident he would have thunder-struck the Senate and Nero himself, if they could have perswaded him to have stooped so far from the contempt of death, as to plead for his life, and make his defence. In which point, through his belief of the Souls immortality (of which he was discoursing with Demetrius the Philosopher at that instant) he was of so well a com∣posed mind, as he did not so much as change countenance, (except it were to a more chearful aspect) at the news of his condemnation. (Tacit. l. 15.) [Illic à Quaestore reperitur laetitiae propior.] And while his life was breathing out at the veins of both his arms, he spent not his breath in effeminate la∣mentations, but in discourses upon that endless life to which he assur'd him∣self he was hasting; and calling the Questor who was sent to see his execu∣tion, Look here (saith he) young man, we are pouring out this offerings (Jovi liberatori) to God Redeemer. I pray God divert the Omen, but verily thou liv∣est in such times, as it's very behoofeful to get thy mind fortified against all tem∣poral evil, by such examples of constancy, as thou seest me set before thee. § 2. But I go about to number the Stars, in attempting to reckon up all the Philosophers then flourishing, when the Christian Philosophy was first commended to the world: I will therefore cease the further prosecution of that point, and glance at their Dogmata, the Divine Axioms they deliver'd, touching Divination by Auguries, and prophetical Theology; where that I may avoid tedious repetitions I shall in a manner confine my self to the Col∣lector of the opinions of others, Tully, who though himself an Augur, not only derides Divination by Birds, by Dreams, by Oracles, &c. but evinceth the vanity of them by Chrysippus his reasons, affirming, in general, that they are the productions of superstition, which dispersed through the Nations of the world, taking occasion from humane imbecillity, had almost opprest all mens minds, and tyrannized over them. [Ut verè loquamur, superstitio fusa per gentes, oppressit omnium ferè animos, atque hominum imbecillitatem occupa∣vit.] de Divinat. l. 2. pag. 265. 1. In particular he explodes Divination by Dreams from several instances: Of one that, being to run in the Olympick Games, dreamed he saw himself over-night carried in a Charriot drawn with four horses; which one interprets
to signifie that he should win the prize, because of the horses swiftness: an∣other, that he should lose it, because he had seen four swift Creatures before himself. Of another, who dreamt he saw an Eagle; That portends thou shalt win (quoth one Augur) for that's the swiftest bird: Thou shalt lose (saith another) for the Eagle pursueth all other birds, and is her self pursued by none, therefore she's alwayes hindmost. [Quae est ista ars conjectoris elu∣dentis ingenio? an quicquam significant, nisi acumen hominum ex similitudine ali∣qua conjecturam modò huc, modò illuc ducentium?] Pag. 2. 64. What is this else but the Art of a Guesser wittily shifting off his want of wit? What do those interpretations signifie, but mens quickness of wit, from some resemblance or other drawing their conjecture sometimes this way, sometimes that? 2. Divination by Oracles he derides, as fasten'd by impostures upon thë Divine Spirits motions: [Id certe magis est attenti animi quàm furentis: hoc scriptoris est non furentis, adhibentis diligentiam, non insani.] Pag. 251. When their being, most-what, given in Verse speaks them to be the result of hu∣mane industry: And their ambiguity fathers them upon persons providing for saving their own credit, let come what will. [Partim falsis, partim casu ve∣ris, (ut fit in omni oratione saepissimè) partim flexiloquis & obscuris, ut interpres egeat interprete, & ipsa sors referenda sit ad sortes; partim ambiguis, &c.] p. 252. They being sometimes false, sometimes true by chance (as it frequently falls out in all kind of discourse) sometimes so equivocal and obscure as the Interpreter needs an Interpreter, and the Question what is the meaning of the Respond is harder to answer than the question which was put to the Oracle; and sometimes so ambiguous, &c. Such as that which Herodotus reports Apollo to have given to Craesus, Craesus Halym penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim. which Oracle would have proved true, whatever had betided Craesus in that expedition; whether, (as he interpreted it) he had made spoyl of the Ene∣mies, or (as it fell out) of his own wealth: But what reason have I (saith Tully) to believe that Apollo did give this Respond, or to deem Herodotus to make a truer report of Craesus, than Ennius did of Pyrrhus: for what man living can think that Pyrrhus received from Apollo's Oracle this Respond? Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse; Pyrrhus the Romans shall defeat. For first, Apollo never spoke Latine; secondly, the Greek Writers make no mention of this Respond; thirdly, before Pyrrbus his time Apollo had given over versifying; and lastly, though Aeacus his Progeny were a stolid Generation, that acted by main strength, not by policy, being belli-potents not sapienti-potents; (Bellipotentes sunt magi', quàm sapientipotentes] ex Ennio.) yet they could not be so thick-scull'd but to understand that this Verse pro∣mised no more to them than to the Romans; that amphibolie which de∣ceiv'd Craesus might have deceiv'd Chrysippus; but this not Epicurus himself. This affected obscurity of Oracles Macrobius complains of (in som. Scipion. 1. 1.) [qualis solet in divinationibus esse affectata confusio?] How great an affected confusion useth to be in divinations? And touching Oracles that prove true by chance, Cicero alledgeth this Example among others; The Water-man in Copponius's Fleet foretold indeed such things as fell out: but that was no more than we all fear'd; only, what wisdom taught us to hide, the extremity of it forc'd him to reveal his fear.—I appeal to the Gods and Men, to say, whe∣ther 'tis more likely, that the Gods should communicate their Counsels to that
half-witted Seaman, or to some of us who were present at the same time, in the same Fleet, such as Cato, Varro and Copponius himself. But (which is chiefly to be considered here) if our Ancestors have not imposed Fables upon us touching these Oracles, how come they to be ceast, not only now, but a long time ago, so as nothing can be more contemptible than Delphos is at present? saith Tully (in the place forequoted.)—[Sed, quod caput est, cur isto modo jam Oracula Delphis non eduntur; non modo nostrâ aetate sed jam diu, jam ut nihil possit esse contemptius?] They that say the vertue of that place, whence those breathings issued, that impregnated the mind of the Prophetess, are decay'd through age, speak as if they were discoursing of Wine or Pickles; such things in∣deed in time will grow insipid: but what length of time can wear out Divine Power? and what more Divine than such breathing from the ground, as makes the mind foresee things to come, and enables it to compose in Verse its praecon∣ceptions? But when did Delphos lose this Vertue? not till men began to be less credulous of old wives tales, and to ponderate the unlikelihood of such stories. It is almost 300 years ago since Demosthenes said Apollo's Priestess did Philip∣pize: as much in effect as if he had said, Philip had corrupted the Oracle, and put words into the Prophetesses mouth. Whence we have reason to suspect, that in the rest of the Delphick Responds there was jugling, as Cicero argues; and upon these considerations he grounds this resolution: [Nec ego Publicio ne∣scio cui, nec Martiis vatibus, nec Apollinis opertis credendum existimo, quorum par∣tim ficta apertè, partim effutita temerè, nunquam nè mediocri quidem cuiquam, non modò prudenti probata sunt. I think we ought not to believe either I know not what Publicius, or Mars his Prophets, or Apollo's Ridles, whereof some be∣ing apparently feigned, others rashly blabbed out, were never approved of by any, not only prudent but moderate person.] But I know not how, those superstitious, and almost fanatick Philosophers, had rather have any thing be, than themselves wise; they had rather think that Prophetick breath to have breath'd out its last (which if ever it was in being would have ever been, as Divine and not expirable) than not believe things incredible. Sed nescio quomodo isti philosophi supersti∣tiosi, & penè fanatici quidvis malle videntur, quàm se non ineptos. Evanuisse mavultis id, quod si unquam fuit, certè aeternum esset, quàm ea quae non sunt cre∣denda non credere.] pag. 264. 3. The Chaldaean Astrology he stiles monstrous; [Ad Chaldaeorum monstra veniamus:]—(pag. 241.) and quotes this sentence of Eudoxus, Plato's Scholar, (one, in the judgement of most learned men, second to none in that Science,) The Chaldaeans are not at all to be regarded in their Predictions and Calculations of Nativities: And Panaetius, (though a Stoick) affirming that Archelaus and Cassander, the prime Astrologers of that Age, never used this kind of Divination: And Scylax Halicarnasseus, an intimate acquaintance of Panaetius, and an excellent Astrologer, wholly repudiating the Chaldean way of prediction. Of which Opinion also was M. Crassus, who in his Expedi∣tion against the Parthians, being told by an Astrologer, it would not prove prosperous, by reason of some ill aspect he found in Scorpio; Tush, saith he, I fear not Scorpio, but Sagittarius (Heylin. Cosm. Persia. 10. Parthia;) mean∣ing the Parthians those excellent Archers. Yea, Tully himself after the sta∣ting of the grounds laid down in defence of Judicial Astrology, explodes the Chaldean Principle of the Conjunction of the Stars with Moon; they being so vastly distant in height from her, as 'tis not imaginable how at that distance they can infect her; (pag. 143.) brings in Examples of many thousands who all had the same end, though born at different times and under various Schemes; and of divers who had differing Fortunes, though born at the same time. And cryes out; Oh incredible dotage! worthy of a worse name than folly! And having named L. Turutius Firmanus his Calculation of Romes Nativity, though he were Tully's Familiar, yet he upbraids his folly with this exclamation; O vim maximam erroris! (pag. pag. 245.) Oh the wonderful force of Errour? Must the Cities birth-day belong to the influence of Stars? Say we, that it is of concern to a Child, to have the Heavens in such a posture at his
birth; can this have any influence upon brick and mortar, the Cities materials? But what need more be said toward the refelling of the Chaldean vanity, than daily experience of the not coming to pass of their Divinations? How many things do I remember the Chaldeans to have predicted, of Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar, of this tendency, That none of them should die, but in an old Age, at their own homes, and in great Renown: Insomuch as to me it seems very strange, that any man living should give the least credit to these men, whose Prognostications they so every day refell themselves by the event. [Vt mihi permirum videatur, quenquam extare qui etiam nunc credat iis, quorum praedicta quotidie videat re, & eventu refelli.]—(pag. 246.) 4. Touching Divination by the Praenestine Lots: he laughs at the invention of them by Numerius Suffucius. [Tota res est inventa fallaciis, aut ad quae∣stum, aut ad superstitionem, aut ad errorem: (pag. 240.) The whole business is a cheat, invented either for the sake of gain, or superstition, or errour.] And to the Stoical subterfuge to the omnipotence of God, he replies; Would God he could make the Stoicks wise, that they might not, with a miserably distracting so∣licitude, believe all they hear, though never so incredible. But as for this kind of Divination (saith he) 'tis now every where exploded but at Praeneste. 5. As to the original tradition of the Art of Augurizing, he thinks the story of Tages so ridiculous, as it deserves not a confutation; and calls him∣self a greater fool, than those were that believed it, for spending so much time in evineing the impossibility of it. [Sed ego insipientior quàm illi ipsi, qui ista credunt, qui quidem contra eos tamdiu disputem]—(pag. 127.) It was (saith he) ingeniously said of Cato; That he wonder'd, how this kind of Pro∣phets could refrain laughing, when they saw one another: how few of their pre∣dictions have taken effect? and those that have been follow'd with events sutable, what reason can be alledged that they did not fall out by meer chance? King Pru∣sius, when Hannibal (lodging then with him in his Exile) had a mind to give battle to the Enemy, said, he durst not, for that the entrails of the sacrifice por∣tended ill luck; but Hannibal replyed, Wilt thou give more credit to the in∣wards of a Calf, than an experienc'd General? [Carunculae vitulinae mavis quàm Imperatori veteri credere?] Did not Caesar himself, though forbidden by the Chief Aruspex, waft over his Army into Africk? which if he had (as he was advised) deferr'd to do, till after winter, he would have had the whole body of the Enemy united before his arrival. What need to enumerate the Responses of such Fortune-tellers as have had contrary effects? In this our Civil War, good God! how many things did they delude us with? What strange Responses were sent us into Greece from Rome? What said they of Pompey, &c? Can there be a greater madness than that men should modulate their affais, and tune their Counsels after the Notes of Birds? Which kind of Divining that it was out of request with intelligent persons long before Tully's age, appears from that story which Josephus (Joseph. cont. App. lib. 1.) relates from Haecateus Abde∣rita to this purpose; [As Alexanders Army was marching towards the Red Sea, the Augur espying a Bird, commanded that the Army should make a halt: one Mosellanus asking what was the matter, the Augur shewed him the Bird, telling him, that if she sate still, the Army must not march; if she flew back again, they must face about, &c. Mosellanus, without other reply, bends his Bow and kills the Bird: the Augur and the Army storming hereat as an impious act: What mad men are you (answers he) thus to trouble your selves, about a silly Bird? How could she advise us what way to take for our safety, that could no better pro∣vide for her own? who had she known what would have come to pass, she would have kept her self out of the reach of mine arrow. 6. The Roman Oratour is as free of his Sarcasms against Divination by Prodigies; taunting first the reports of the Prodigies themselves, as not di∣gestable to a considerate mind. It was reported (saith he) to the Senate, that it rained blood, that the river flowed with blood; that the Images of the Gods were all on a sweat: Do you think that Thales, Anaxagoras, or any Natural Philosopher would have given credit to the Messengers that came
with such tidings? and next charging with levity and inconsiderateness, the exposition and application of them. What levity of mind does it argue, to conceive, if a Mouse corrode the shields of Lanuvius (as before the Marsick War) this portends some sad fate to attend our Armies? As though it made any matter whether Mice should have gnawn Shields or Bran! If we make such things grounds of fear, I had cause to fear some mischief would betide the Common-wealth, when I was Consul, not so much from the provisions that Cataline made, as from the Mice, gnawing (of all the Books then in my Study) Plato's Common-wealth: Or should Epicurus his Book touching pleasure be corroded, we must conclude the price of Viands would rise in the market. If the foaling of a Mule, the trembling of the Earth, the appear∣ance of Meteors in the Skies (or any thing that seldom happens) portend mis∣chief to ensue; to be wise must be ominous: for I believe Mules births to be more frequent and less rare than wise men. Such as he, to whom a person applying himself to know the meaning of a Prodigy (as he conceiv'd) had befallen him, when he found a Snake to have wrapt her self about the Barr of his door, receiv'd from him this answer: If you had found the door Barr wrapt about a Snake, it had been a prodigy indeed. The Male and Female Serpents found in the house of C. Gracchus imported no more to him or his Wife, than a pair of Mice there found: and though upon his letting the Fe∣male escape, Gracchus died; his death must be imputed to the sharpness of his disease, not to the emission of the Serpent, any more than Troy's endu∣ring a Ten years war is chargeable upon Calchas his nest of Sparrows, and not rather the valour of the Trojans, and dissensions of the Greeks: Or Silla his victory, to the Serpent appearing on the Altar as he was a sacrificing, and not rather his own wise managing of that Battel. The Ants carrying grains of Wheat into Midas his mouth, and the Bees sitting on Plato's lips (when they lay in their cradles) may perhaps be meer fictions; but be they true, the predictions made upon them were only witty conjectures, and the fall∣ing out of their fortunes accordingly was fortuitous. As to Roscius, the sto∣ry may be false; but if it be true, that he was in the Cradle swathed about with a Snake, this is not to be wonder'd at, especially in his birth-place, So∣lonium, where Snakes usually crawl about the harth: but rather the Respond that was given upon it, that Roscius would be a most noble and famous per∣son. For to me it seems a wonder, that the immortal Gods should portend the future famousness of a Stage-Player, and not of Scipio Africanus. What if Flaminius his Horse trip and cast his Rider, is this a strange thing? What if the Ensign-bearer cannot pluck up his colours? may be he stuck them down with a better will than he plucks them out. Needed Dionysius his Horse a divine inspiration to move him to swim out of the River; or the Bees to fasten on his Main? If the Spartans hear the clashing of Armour in Hercules his Temple, and if his Temple doors at Thebes open of their own accord, or the Shields there hung up be found fall'n down and lying on the ground, why should we look on those things as the effects of special and not com∣mon providence? The setting of the golden Stars of Castor and Pollux at Delphos so as they never appear'd again, argues they fell into some Thieves pocket: But that the Greek Historians should write, that there never befell to the Lacedemonians a greater Prodigy, than an Apes overturning Dodona's Urn, and scattering the Lots deposited in it, I again and again wonder at, far more than at that busie creatures spilling a Pot full of Lots. This was the then School-doctrine concerning Divinations: Whatever Antiquity had propounded touching that subject, that Age made no reckon∣ing of, if it would not abide the test of Reason. Would it not then have been prodigious madness for the Apostles to have attempted to impose up∣on that Age with the Evangelical History, wherein there is so frequent men∣tion of Dreams, Visions, Responds from Heaven, and Prodigies, as unlikely in their own nature, as most of those against which Cicero makes exception? Could they think that that Age, whose proud reason exalted it self above and
against the Authority of their own Annals, publick Records, and the unin∣terrupted Tradition of their Forefathers; would stoop to the Authority of a company of poor Fishermen, in things more above the sphere of reason than those things were they had rejected, though backt with so great Authority, meerly because they could not apprehend the reason of them? What hope could they have that the disputers of this world (termed so signanter by our Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.) who would thus exactly weigh and tell money after their Father, would let the Apostolical Shekle pass as currant without bringing it to the Tally? That the inquisitive disceptators of this Age () who with their altercation and Ergo's had turn'd out of their Creed the Amen of their Progenitors; would at the perswasion of illiterate persons, turn their Ergo into Amen to the Evangelical Philosopher? Durst the most learned of them St. Paul have challenged them to a dispute, with a Where is the disputer of this Age, had he not been well assured that he spake, that wisdom, and by that spirit, which none of them were able to resist? that Evangelical Prophecies, Divination, Oracles, Dreams, Visions, and Prodigies moved in a region above those blasts that had scatter'd all other such like things pretending to Divinity? § 3. The Divine Sentences we read in the former Section are found writ∣ten in the Porch of Philosophical Divinity: for Divination is no otherwise reducible to Divinity than as the Proem to the Discourse, as the portal to the house: we will in this repeat the Sermons ad Clerum that were preacht in the Church, take Notes of the Doctrine of the Schools that had Divinity for its Text, when it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to confound the wisdom of the prudent. In which juncture I find the whole body of Eminent Philosophers, (however Sceptical in most, and jarring in many) yet with one mouth consenting in this point, that, of all kinds of Theology, the Poetical and Fabulous is most destructive and dangerous. Cicero, in his Tusculan Questions, (Lib. 2.) speaking of this kind of Di∣vinity, calls those points he there mentions, the fictions of Homer, shaping God after the pattern of man; of which kind of Divinity he saith, [I thought, then when I wrote those Books, and am of the same opinion still, that I cannot do my self or friends a greater courtesie, than if I wholly eradicate and throw down to the lowest stone the foundations of it; (de Divinat. lib. 2. pag. 265.) In his de Natura Deorum, (lib 2.) he introduceth Lucillius Balbus thus discoursing. [Seest thou not how from natural things happily and profitably invented, Reason hath been forc'd aside (equivalent to St. Pauls [becoming vain in their imagina∣tions)] to counterseit and feigned Deities? which thing hath produc'd false Opi∣nions, turbulent Errours, and most doting Superstitions. The Shapes, Ages, Ap∣parel, Ornaments, Off-springs, Marriages, Kindreds of the Gods are all drawn after the Copy of humane infirmity. Yea, the Gods are presented to us as men subject to passions of mind: We hear the Poets discoursing of their Lusts, Anger, Envy, Sickness, &c. which things to believe or affirm of God is a thing full of vain and extreme folly and levity. Seneca, in his Book against Superstition, quoted by St. Austin, (de Civit. 6. 10.) but not extant (except some diligent hand have of late retriev'd it from the mothes) does boldly, copiously, and vehemently inveigh against Theatrick Divinity; affirming that the world, through Poetical delusions, worships them for Gods, who if they should animate, (and appear to men in) those Images in which they were worshipt, would be thought monsters. [Numina vocant, quae si spiritu accepto occurrerent, monstra haberentur.] Dost thou think (so Tully proceeds) the dreams of Titus Tacitus, of Romulus, of Hostilius ever a whit more true than Poetical Fables, or any thing more lewd than these? How they came to put their Gods into such monstrous shapes, Hyginus informs us (in his Poetick Astronomy tit. Sagittarius.)—[Ita Jovem fecisse, ut cùm omnia illius artificia uno corpore vellet significare, crura ejus equina fixisse, quòd equo multum sit usus; & sagittas adjunxit, ut ex his, & acumen, &
celeritas esse crederetur: Caudam satyricam, quòd Satyris aeque ac Musis sit delecta∣tus.] A right Jack of all trades, painted with all the Escutcheons and Arms belonging to his several professions. But Tully is no where more unmannerly and sawcy with the Poetical Gods, than in his Morals, where forgetting the gravity of a Stoick, he pours out such like Sarcasms as these upon the Poetical Jove: Seeing Jupiter is descri∣bed by the Poets pencil to have been so exceeding salacious, why does he not yet beget Children if he be alive? hath age gelt him? the Law of Papias re∣strain'd him? or hath he obtain'd the priviledge of three Sons? Of Scaevola's Doctrine, touching this point, St. Austin (de Civit. 4. 27.) giveth this account; That he maintain'd the Poetical stories of the Gods to be nugatory and trifling, feigning many things of them unworthy of them: making one a Thief, another a Murderer, another an Adulterer, Incestu∣ous, &c. Varro's Assertion was (as the same Father (de Civit. 6. 15.) reports it) that in fabulous Divinity there are many things, not only contrary to the dignity and nature of God, but such as cannot, without great opprobrie and absurdity, be affirmed of the most debaucht and despicable man. I shall have occasion afterward of reassuming this point, and introducing more Testimonies: I will therefore let Cicero who spake first speak last; who writes to Atticus (his great familiar, and therefore this he spake under the Rose) that he would give his Daughter Livia that vertuous Education, as (if the world understood what he did) she should be worshipt as a Goddess, rather than either Juno or Minerva: for she is not (saith he) in any laudable thing inferiour to the best of the Poetical Goddesses. The greatest part of his third Book de Nat. Deorum, he spends in exploding the Stoical and Poetical Divi∣nity; If the Planets must therefore be concluded Deities, because of their regu∣lar motion; let's take Tertian and Quartan Agues into the number of Gods. If Jupiter and Neptune be Gods, are not their Brethren so too; Orcus, Acheron, Cocytus, Styx, Phlegeton, &c? why, next, are not Charon and Cerberus re∣puted Gods? Nostri quidem Publicani, cùm essent agri in Boeotia deorum im∣mortalium excepti lege Censoriâ, negabant immortales esse ullos, qui aliquandò homines fuissent: Our Sequestrators, when the Law of the Censors had excepted the Lands in Boeotia belonging to the immortal Gods, would find no such lands; alledging that the Deities there having been once mortal men, could never turn into immortal Gods. Thus, though Socrates his death over-awed those in whose memories the fate of that Philosophical-proto-Martyr was fresh, yet length of time having pretty well digested that cold flegm and crude fear, which Socrates his Aco∣nite had bred in former Ages; the whole company of the then modern Phi∣losophers (except Epicurus his herd of Hogs) began, about our Saviours time, to prick up their bristles, and proclaim their dislike of that fabulous Divinity, that had in former times obtain'd credit in the world. In which Age, thus well secured from seduction by the most plaufible and insinuating fables, for the Apostles to assault the world with naked and plain stories, of one Jesus of Nazareth, born at Bethlem, King of the Jews, &c. and of things as much exceeding humane belief, as any the most unlikely fictions of the vainest Poets, would have been the most sottish attempt that ever was undertaken by the most insensate changelings, had not the adven∣turers been themselves throughly perswaded of the truth of those unlikely stories, and perfectly instructed with a power to demonstrate the truth there∣of to others. St. Paul's disputing at Athens (the great Mart of Learning) concerning the Living God, his offering to prove to the Philosophers face, that Jesus of Nazareth is that God, by a bare telling (by babling over as they at first re∣puted it) the History of Christ, had been ground enough for Agrippa's charge, [Paul, thou art beside thy self,] if his own consciousness to its truth, and the irrefragable demonstrableness thereof to others, by Gods Hand and Seal set
to it, had not animated him to that attempt. Could that chosen vessel hope to vend his commodities, had they been adulterate, among such cunning Merchants; his Gemms, had they been but Bristol-stones, among such know∣ing Lapidaries? Would he have shown his Treasures of Wisdom to an Age so inquisitive, and so happy in its inquest, after Wisdom, had they not been such as would abide the severest scrutiny, even of them that had tryed all former stuffs of the same nature, in appearance, and exploded them as spu∣rious; of them, whom the authority of Homer, the antiquity of Hesiod, the reverence of Orpheus, or the fear of Municipal Laws could not impose silence upon, when they saw the world imposed upon in matters of Religion by po∣pular fictions? The light of Natural Knowledge, even in Divine things, had never shone brighter, neither had the windows of mens minds been ever set more wide open receive in the beams thereof, than when the Gospel was first exposed to the world: Had not therefore this Eaglet been the genuine Off-spring of supernatural light, it would not have ventur'd to out-face this noon-day-sun of Natural Knowlege. For that which we read [in them hath he set a Tabernacle for the Sun] the Ancients read [posuit in sole Taber∣naculum] he hath set his Tabernacle in the Sun; and some of them expound it to be a Prophecy of the Apostles publishing the Gospel (the summ whereof is the Tabernacling of God in man) in the clearest day of Humane Know∣ledge that had till then shined out upon the world; or, as the Prophet para∣phraseth, when men should run to and fro, as dissatisfied with former science falsly so call'd, and by that disquisition and canvassing of old traditions, in∣crease in Knowledge. Christ did not shuffle in his Doctrine in the dark, but produc'd it, when all kind of Humane Literature was improved to that Gi∣antick stature, as none before that, reached to; and whoever since have stood Candidates for the repute of excellent Humanists, have not by a general vote obtain'd the honour they stood for, except they have been found imitators or emulators of that Age. Among Poets, he bears away the Laurel, even at this day, as the best Lyrick, Heroick, Satyrist, Comick, Tragick, &c. who approacheth nearest those that then flourish'd, Horace, Virgil, Ovid, Juvenal, Terence, Seneca, &c. Among Orators he hath the general applause, that shoots nearest the mark which Pliny set himself; who was so far from taking as an opprobrie what M. Regulus objected against him, that he was Tully's Ape, as he gloried in his being esteem'd an emulator of so unparallel'd a precedent, protesting that the eloquence of his own Age was too low a lure for him to fly at, (Plin. secund. lib. 1. ep. 5.) Among Politicians he's reputed the craftiest that most resembles Tiberius, he the solidest that writes best after the copy of Augustus. Among Patriots, Cato's, among Historians and Martialists, Caesar's transcripts, are the only men of account, in our modern Calculations of mens deserts. As for Divine Philosophy the Platonick, which attain'd to its full growth about our Saviours time (Aristotle being then, and many hundred years after, scarce taken notice of, till (in the Reign of Severus) Aphrodisaeus brought him into credit) hath ever been in St. Austin's judgement (de Civit. 8. 4.)—[non quidem immeritò excellentissimâ gloriâ claruit] of best esteem, and such as all other Sects must strike top-sail to in those Seas. Aristotle in∣deed, justly carries away the name of Daemon (for his universal insight into all things) yet he must yield to Plato the title of , for his surpassing Know∣ledge in things Divine. Now it was against the Sun of Platonick Philoso∣phy, shining out in his greatest splendour, that the Primitive Church held up the Gospel. It was in this Galaxie they shed the milk of the Word; had it therefore not been sincere, the whiteness of this milky way would have be∣wrayed the adulterate mixture. This observation Tertullian urgeth to the Gentiles in his Apology, (Apolog. 21. cap.)—[Christus non rapaces, & feros ad∣huc homines multitudine tot Numinum demerendorum attonitos efficiendo, ad humanitatem temperavit, ut Numa; sed jam expolitos, & ipsae urbanitate de∣ceptos in agnitionem veritatis oculavit.] Christ did not temper to humanity wild and savage men, by amazing them with a multitude of Deities, whose favour
must be purchast as Numa did: but gave the faculty and means of seeing the true Religion to those that were already polisht, and deceiv'd with Urbanity it self: (Let me add) with Religion it self, and that Religion abetted by the greatest Champions that ever appear'd in its defence. What would Christ's squadron of Fishers have been in the hands of such Goliahs, had they not been the Army of the living God? § 4. The world, in respect of its sentiments touching Religion, was im∣mured within another wall, a fourth defence against surprisal, when the Go∣spel made an on-set upon it, enough to have sunk the assaylants spirits into a despondency of obtaining the victory, had not that brazen wall, of their being not couscious to themselves of having any base design upon it, been their Royal Mount, and the Lord of Hosts their Leader: nothing less than this could have animated them to attempt, to impose a new, which the Learned party were so much prejudic'd against (as has already been shewed) and wrest the old Civick Religion out of its hands; at that time, when the vulgar through the sly insinuations of the Politicians had as great, if not hotter, zeal for it than ever: As is apparent, from the most illumina∣ted Philosophers providing salvo's, for the securing the grandeur of the Ci∣vick Devotions, and the then establisht Religion, against the side-blows them∣selves seem'd to give it, in their commending of Natural, and decrying Fa∣bulous Theology: though they quitted their hands of this (indeed impos∣sible) undertaking so awkly, joyn'd the Asses head of these salvo's to the Lions body of their preceding discourse, so unhandsomly, and thereby made the parts so incongruous, discoherent, inconsequent, nay, contradictory to one another, as they could not have devised, how to have more openly sig∣nified to the diligent Reader, that they set these pack-sadles upon the backs of their generous Palfreys, not for the ease or satisfaction of their own, but to gratifie the deluded consciences of the rabble, (who by this means might ride a cock-horse without galling in that most tender part (which they mis∣call Conscience) which their sharp-backt reasoning of fabulous Divinity into contempt, would otherwise have gall'd) and to make their own peace with the State, for paring its Religion too near the quick. These were the weights St. Austin observ'd to hang at the lines end, and pull the soaring Varro down again, when he was upon the wing, and flying aloft in pursuite of the Poets Fables, with as opprobrious language as ever came out of that grave mans mouth; Vide Aug. (de Civit. lib. 6. cap. 4. 5. 2.)—[Hic certè ubi potuit, ubi ausus est, ubi impunitum putavit, sine caligine ullius ambiguitatis expressit—Quid existimare debemus, nisi hominem acerrimum ac peritissimum—oppressum fuisse suae Civitatis consuetudine a clegibus?] Here indeed where he might, where he durst, where he thought his liberty of speech not punishable, he declares his mind without the darkness of the least ambiguity.—And when we hear him plead for that in our Temples, which he had condemn'd in our Poets, what can we deem but that this sharp-sighted, and most skilful Divine was opprest with the custome and laws of the City? This was it which clipt the tongue of Cicero, when he was hotly declaiming against Divinations, and made him eat his words, and seemingly to cross out all he had writ, with such dashes of his pen as these (de Divinat. lib. 2. 217.)—Quam ego Reipublicae causa communisque re∣ligionis colendam censeo] As vain as it is, it ought to be retain'd for the sake of the Republick and Vulgar Religion. Again, [retinetur autem & ad opinionem vulgi, & ad magnas utilitates Reipublicae]—(de Divin. 2. 235.) Though in this Antiquity err'd, yet this errour is to be retain'd, to keep up in the vulgar an opi∣nion of Religion, and for the benefits that thence accrew to the Common-wealth. And therefore P. Claudius, and L. Junius, for sailing contrary to the Omens ex∣hibited, are worthy of the punishment they underwent; for they ought to have ob∣served the Rules of our Religion, and not with that contumacy have sleighted the manner of the Countrey: Tamen postea Reipublicae causa retentam, &c. (Id. 237.) To conclude these Quotations with what he concludes his Treatise of Divina∣tion.
[Nec verò (id enim diligenter intelligi volo) Superstitione tollendâ reli∣gio tollitur; nam et Majorum instituta tueri sacris, ceremoniisque retinendis, sa∣pientis est.] Neither is Religion destroy'd in rooting out Superstition, (I would have you mark that diligently) for it is the part of a wise man, to maintain the institutions of our fore-fathers, in retaining sacred Rites and Ceremonies. Did ever words coming out of one mans mouth, at one breath, blow hot and cold, as these do. Oracles, Auguries, inspection of Entrails, observation of Birds, mindings of Prodigies, &c. are vain superstitious things; and Superstition must be rooted up: but as vain as they be, they are the institu∣tion of our Fore-fathers, Rites and Ceremonies appointed by our Religion: and therefore a wise man must not reject them. This made Porphyry fetch so many doubles before he squatted down on his seat, before he came to a full point, in that discourse of his touching Sa∣crifices: one while affirming that all bloody Sacrifices are the food of evil Spi∣rits, and to be abstained from by wise Men. (Porph. de Sacrif. l. 1. 315.) [vir igitur prudens atque temperans cavebit ejusmodi sacrificiis uti.] And yet with the same breath making it necessary for Cities to make evil Spirits propi∣tious to them, by such sacrifices, hereby tying them (as it were by the teeth) not only from doing them mischief but to do them good. [Civitatibus fortè necessarium hos daemones conciliare.] (Id pag. 316.) Of which kind of Dae∣mons he had, in the precedent page, past this doom, that they never do good. Absurdissima opinio vel à bonis mala, vel à malis bona contingere posse, p. 312. firmiter credendum, neque bonum unquam laedere, neque prodesse malum daemonem; non enim caloris est ut inquit Plato frige-facere. (pag. 314.) It is a most absurd opinion that either bad can come from good Spirits, or good from bad: we must therefore firmly believe that a good spirit never hurts, that an evil spirit never profits any man; for it is impossible that heat should make cold, saith Plato. And that their malicious and libidinous natures are not tamed or allayed, but fed, and made more fierce by such oblations. [His pinguescere solet; vivit namque vaporibus & fumigationibus & nidore sanguinis, & carnium vires assu∣mit.] (pag. 315) And yet at last granting a liberty, nay imposing a neces∣sity upon his wise man, to do as the vulgar do; that is, with bloody sacrifi∣ces to cokes impure Spirits: (and this by the authority of Theophrastus, and consent of Pagan Divines, and example of Philosophers,) and to mitigate their malignity by Sacrifices, Prayers and oblations: to which, saith he, as we partake of the common nature, we must be compell'd in order to the sav∣ing of our bodies and estates from the destructive effects of their anger. [Vn∣de meritò compellemur improbam potestatem demulcere.] Porph. de sacrificiis l. 2. 316. The freedom of Seneca's speech in his book of Superstition, is such as he reprehends the Urban Religion more copiously than Varro did the theatrick and fabulous, saith St. Austin (de civit. 6. 10.) And so vehemently that the sharpest taunts, which Tertullian gave the civick worship, were not comparable to those bitter declamations of Seneca against it; as Tertullian himself testifies to the Gentiles face in his Apology (cap. 12.) [O impiae voces, Sacrilega con∣vitia! infrendite, inspumate, iidem estis qui Senecam aliqua re pluribus & ama∣rioribus de vestra religione perorantem non reprehendistis.] (Thus I find Tertul∣lian's Text corrected by the copy of P. Pitheus in the Preface to Seneca's second tome.) When I speak thus reproachfully of your Gods (saith Tertullian) you cry out, O impious expressions! O sacrilegious raylings! grind your teeth, spit in my face, and yet you are the same men who did not reprehend Seneca, though he made a formal speech against your Religion, in far more and sharper words. But what liberty this Philosopher took in writing he denied to himself in living; Philosophy did but make him half free; not free indeed, as the son of God makes his Disciples: for he worshipt what he reprehended, he did what he condemned, he ordered what he blamed; [Aug. de civit. 6. 10.) [Affuit ei libertas scribenti, viventi defuit; quasi liber locutus est, ut servus vixit, colebat quod reprehendebat, agebat quod arguebat, quod culpabat adorabat.] That he
might not seem negatively superstitious to the world; he thinks with the wise, but walks with the crowd: and in the temple does what he sees others do; conforming himself to the Laws and Customs of the City, in the outward act; keeping his Philosophy to himself in the inward man. And seasoning his precedent reproofs of the madness of the Urban Religion, (that his Citizens might better relish both writing and writer) with these grains of Salt sprinkled upon them: [Sa∣piens servabit tamen haec omnia tanquam legibus jussa non tanquam diis grata.] Yet a wise man must observe all these things, as commanded by the Laws, not as ac∣ceptable to the Gods. Than which Aphorism (bating his notion of more Gods than one) applyed to indifferent Rites, never any thing was uttered either of more truth, or more tending to peace: for the wisdom from above teacheth us to keep our faith to our selves; and in our external actions, conform to the Laws, where they enjoyn nothing that the supreme Law hath prohibited. But as he applies it, it is the most unsavoury expression that ever fell from his pen: for thus he proceeds. [Omnem istam ignobilem eorum turbam, quam lon∣go aevo longa superstitio congessit, sic adorabimus ut meminerimus cultum ejus magis ad morem quàm ad rem pertinere.] We should so adore this whole rascal company of these Gods, which ancient Superstition in a long tract of time hath scraped up on an heap, as to bear in mind that the worship of this crew be ascribed to custom ra∣ther than be thought pertinent to true devotion. So heavy did the Vulgars dotage and the sanction of the Laws lie upon the loins of these most strong sinewed Philosophers, as it made them bend under it; one part of the discourse upon this subject interfere with another, and their life differ from their doctrine. § 5. 2. But this does only consequentially imply the common peoples, and the commanding parties zeal to the then establish'd Superstition. Vale∣rius maximus speaks it out directly in words at length, and not in figures; who writing to Tiberius, makes this use of all the stories he produceth of men con∣temning the Religion of those times; that whatsoever mischiefs befel them or their posterity, though many Ages after the decease of the Promeritors, were inflicted upon them in revenge of that contempt. If the Army under Varro miscarry at Cannae, it is because he had not ce∣lebrated the Circean Festivities with due Ceremonies (l. 1. cap. 2. Sect. 3.) If the once noble family of the Potitii fall into decay, if thirty Youths of that house dye all within the compass of one year, 'tis because Appius Censor com∣mitted that Priestly Function, which Originally belonged to the Potitii, to per∣sons of a sordid abstract, thinking that office to be too mean for that then flourishing Family. If Turullius Antonie's Lieutenant cut down the sacred Grove about Aesculapius's Temple, and Caesar in that place discomfeit his Ar∣my, that is interpreted a divine revenge taken upon the delinquent and an ex∣pedient used by that reputed God, to vindicate his own honour and regain a greater veneration. If, on the other hand, the Roman affairs be more under the eye of indulgent Providence, than the concerns of any other people, 'tis in reward of their scrupulous care, and cautious observance of the least punctil∣lios in matters of Religion. If Posthumius have good success in the Affrican wars, he may thank Mitellus the Pontiff, who would not permit him to budg one foot out of the City, till he had obliged the God of War, by solemn in∣vocation, to be on his side: and his own religious obsquiousness, in submitting the Fasces to the Mitre. Innumerable such instances might be produc'd, but what more can be required to demonstrate the devotedness of the Roman Em∣pire in Tiberius his reign to the received Religion than that which this Author gives upon occasion of mentioning L. Furius Bibaculus, who, being Praetor, (notwithstanding that the privilege of his place exempted him from the exe∣cution of that office,) at the command of his Father, (who was one of the Colledge of the Salii) condescended to go in procession, bearing the sacred Ancile before his father, with his six Mace-bearers before himself. Upon which story Valerius hath this note: Our City hath ever deem'd that all things ought to be set after Religion: wherefore the greatest Generals have vouch∣safed
to officiate Divine Service, thinking they should then best manage Se∣cular affairs, when they did well and constantly serve the Divine Power. Hence Lucilius (in Ciceron. de nat. Deor. lib. 2.) [Pub. Claudii temeritas, qui etiam per jocum deos irridens &c.] imputes P. Claudius his overthrow and punish∣ment to his temerity in deriding the Gods. In this posture lay the World, at the dawning of the day of the Gospel. enjoying it self in the warm and close embraces of her Sacred Animals, her Statues, into which were charm'd the Spirit of the holy Gods, as the Amora∣do thought: and those thoughts so fixed, as, though the World knew they were Venuses of its own carving; and had explicite reasonings with its self answerable to those in the Prophet (Is. 44.) yet so had the veneration of An∣tiquity, the commonness of Custom lull'd it into a Lethean forgetfulness of its own handy-work, as the perswasion that they were Gods indeed, and that to their Religious Observances they were indebted; for all the benefits were powred down upon them, could not be eradicated by the closest and most convincing Arguments. The conceit, that they had found the Lips of those Statues warm, in propitious responds; their bosoms soft in gracious returns to their votaries; that they had felt the beating of their Pulses, in their de∣clared liking or disliking of Persons and Actions proportionable to the Worlds Genius; had so far prevail'd with this Pigmalion, as his knowledge of the contrary is cast into a dead sleep, while he is entertaining himself with these pleasing dreams. Now had the Apostle attempted to interrupt the world, in those fancied enjoyments with fancies, had they instead of those Sacred Animals, thrust in∣to the Bed a dead Image, or a Pillow stufft with Hair; what could they have expected, but to have been deservedly clamour'd against, as men upbraiding the World with the imputation of more insensate Stupidity, than can possibly seise upon a Rational Soul, what▪ leave those Gods, under whose wings I have been brooded to this perfection of honour and happiness, whose present relief I have as often found as invocated; for one that was but the other day in Clouts, and could not save himself, when he was dared to do it to his face, nor be heard, in that fervent Prayer for releif he preferr'd to him, whom he called his God and Father? What reply could they have return'd to these expostulations, had they seen no more in Christ than Man? had they not known him to be the living (as well as express Image of the living) God? to be that eternal word, which by his power bears up all things, and of power enough to bear down before him those strong men, who had got such firm possession of the house, as none (no not among the most Rational Philosophers) could out but a strong∣er than they.
CHAP. VI. The Advantage the World had to try Apostolical Doctrine by the Touch-stone of the Septuagint. § 1. The Septuagint was the worlds guard against all possible delusion. The light of the Original Tradition shon out of the East; Judaea the Navil of the earth had plenty: thither Pithagoras, Socrates, Plato, &c. finding a Fa∣mine at home, travell'd for the Corn of Heaven, &c. § 2. Josephus, and the Church History of the Translation of the Seventy, defended a∣gainst Scaliger's exceptions. Hermippus and Aristaeus reconciled by Ana∣tolius. The Authority of Socrates comes short here of Josephus. § 3. The Sanhedrim held correspondency with the dispersion; no harder a task for the Jews, whose Mother-tongue was Hebrew; and who for Commerce sake were forc'd to learn the Greek, the common Language of the Empire, to turn the Hebrew into Greek: than for the Belgick Churches amongst us, to turn a Dutch Bible into English. § 4. Whence Ptolemy learn'd that curse he pronounc'd upon them that should add or take from the Seventy's Translation. Whence the fiction of three days darkness, and the application of Solomon's text, there is a time to rend. § 5. The Legend of the gold∣en letter'd Jehova. Ptolemy might be a bad man, and yet curious in point of Learning. He was a kind of Jewish Prosylite, and as good a one as Herod, Poppaea, &c. God can make bad men Instruments of good. The Fathers and Primitive Churches esteem of the Septuagint. § 6. The Candor of the blessed Jesus in sending the picture of the Messiah, drawn by the Prophets be∣fore be came in person, that there might be no mistake of the person: in ap∣pealing to a Religion pre-existing to and co-existing with that of his erect∣ing. § 1. THis Age wherein the Gospel was first preach'd, had (besides all those fore-mentioned guards against surprisal) the advantage of a peculiar Expedient, to try the truth of what the Apostles publish'd even at their own bar, and by their own avowed Principles; and to have proved it false, had it indeed so been, to the Apostles own faces, themselves being Judg∣es: by means of Ptolemy's having procured (some hundreds of years before our Saviours incarnation) the Translation of the Old Testament into that Tongue that had  the vulgar Tongue of the Empire some while before, and was in the age of the Apostles familiar to the learned Romans. Those sa∣cred Oracles having been lock'd up from former ages in Hebrew, a Tongue barbarous to the Western World. So that it could have no knowledge of the Contents of those Divine Writings but what was communicated, by the O∣ral Tradition of Jewish Teachers. From whence, notwithstanding those most famous and incomparably knowing Philosophers, that travell'd for Learning into Judaea, Aegypt, and the Countries circumjacent, gather'd such Maxims as served them, like so many straight Rules, to discover, in a great measure, the crookedness and deviations of the commonly received opinions, touching God and Nature. The first Graecian Theologists, Pherecydes, Py∣thagoras and Thales, are acknowledged with one mouth to have been the Scho∣lars of the Aegyptians, Chaldaeans and Hebrews (as Josephus saith, contra Ap∣pion. lib. 1.) for the confirmation of which, he alledgeth the authority of Hermippus, a Pagan Historian, who (in the life of Pythagoras, lib. 1.) writes that Pythagoras did translate out of the institutions of the Jews, many things into his philosophy; and Clearchus, Aristotle's Scholar, who, in his Dialogue of the Jews, brings in his Master, confessing he had learned the best part of his knowledge of a certain Jew. The Swarm, that hived in Plato's mouth, came from Mount Carmel, and was a Call of the School of the Prophets there.
The Honey which that Attick Bee made, was gathered from the Flowers of Moses's Paradise and Solomon's garden; of which, his Philosophy so perfect∣ly relisheth, as many of our ancient Christian Writers, wondering at the con∣gruity of his Doctrine to Christian Verity, conceived he had conference in Ae∣gypt with the Prophet Jeremy: of which opinion St. Austin sometimes was, but retracted it upon the account of that light which Cronology gave him to see his error, (it being thence apparent, that Plato was born almost an hun∣dred Years after Jeremy was dead,) and pitcheth upon this, that this busie and industrious Bee suck'd that part of his Philosophy from the lips of an In∣terpreter (as he did the Aegyptian) as well as he could, (de civit. 8. 11. ti∣tulus.) [Unde Plato illam intelligentiam potuerit acquirere, qua Christianae pie∣tati propinquavit.] Whence Plato might possibly acquire that Understanding whereby he approach'd so near to Christian Religion. Of which that learned Father, there, makes proof, by instancing in several Platonick Sentences and Notions, so agreeing in the Main, and yet differing in the Circumstance, as speaks Plato to have partly understood Moses his sence, but not his words. But what need I urge the Authority either of St. Austin, or Justin Mar∣tyr, who in his Exhortatory to the Gentiles; or Eusebius, who in his Prae∣paratory to the Gospel: or Theodoret, who in his Books of the Affections of the Greeks, write, that Plato did translate many things into his, out of Mo∣ses his Books. When Numenius the Philosopher stiles Plato the Moses of Greece. ; What is Plato but Moses, speaking in the Attick Dialect? Vives in Aust. de civit. lib. 8. cap. 11. God, planting his word in Judaea, the Center of the habitable Earth, left all men without excuse, who by natural Sentiments, finding a Dearth at home, did not travel thither to buy Corn: so that it is not to be wondred at, that inquisitive men should come out of all Nations, and hang upon the Skirts of the Jews. But towards the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, the day Star of the Septuagint arose in the sight of the Gentile Empire: Temple light, confin∣ing it self no longer to that Kingdom of Priests, diffused its beams, not faint∣ly through the Crannies of verbal Tradition to a few, but in their full Lu∣stre to all through its Windows, made by this Translation as wide on the out-side as the material Temples were on the inside. So that those Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, to which the Apostles appeal'd for the proof of what they taught, had been, for some hundreds of Years, made common to Gen∣tiles, and in every man's hand that listed to read them; by which means the World is put into a capacity to try (by that Touch-stone) of what Metal the Gospel was. A way of tryal it would never have ood to, much less have called for, had it been conscious to it self of the least Adulterate Mix∣tures. Is it possible by false transcribing, to put a cheat upon that man, that has the Original in his custody? Why? the Old Testament is the Origi∣nal draught of the Messiah. The Gospel pretends it self to be the Trans∣script of that Original. And therefore had the Serpent intended to have cheated the World by a false Copy, he would have taken Pen in hand, before the time of the Apostles, before the Original Deed had come to its hands. This Argument, that never sufficiently praised Apologist for the Christian Faith, Tertullian (as his use is,) pithily and strenuously presseth to the Con∣science of the Gentiles, (Apol. advers. gentes, cap. 18.) [Nec istae nunc la∣tent, Ptolemaeorum eruditissimus (quem Philadelphum supranominant) & om∣nis literaturae sagacissimus, cum studio bibliothecarum Pisistratum (ut opinor) ae∣mularetur, inter caetera memoriarum, quibus aut vetustas aut curiositas aliqua ad famm protrocinabatur, ex suggestu Demetrii Phalerei grammaticorum tunc probatissimi, cui praefecturam mandaverat, libros ae Judaeis quoque postulavit, proprias scilicet & vernaculas literas, quas soli habebant.—Sed ne notitia vacaret, hoc quoque Ptolemaeo  Judaeis subscriptum est, sepuaginta duobus interpretibus indultis: quos Menedemus quoque Philosophus provi∣dentiae vindex de sententiae communione suspexit. Affirmavit haec quoque v∣bis
Aristaeus, ita in Graecum stilum ex aperto mnimenta reliquit. Hodie apud Serapaeum Ptolemaei bibliothecae cum ipsis Hebraicis literis exhibentur. Sed & Judaei palam lectitant, vectigalis libertas vulgo aditur, sabbatis om∣nibus: qui audierit, inveniet Deum, qui etiam studuerit intelligere, coge∣tur & credere.] The Old Testament Scriptures (wherein is laid up the trea∣sure of the whole Jewish, and from thence of our Religion.) Quibus the saurus totius Judaici sacramenti collocatus & inde etiam nostri. (Id Ib. paulo inferius.) are now divulged. For the most learned of the Ptolemy's Sur-named Philadelphus, a diligent inquirer after all kind of literature, emulating (as I suppose) Pisistra∣tus his Library; among other memorials, which either their Antiquity or rareness commended to publick Fame, upon the suggestion of Demetrius Phaleraeus, whom he appointed Library-keeper, required of the Jews those Books that were writ in their Mother Tongue, and no where extant but in their own custody alone.—But that the World might no longer be destitute of the knowledge of them, the Jews yield to Ptolemy's request, and give Licence to Seventy two Interpreters to translate their Bible: for whom Menedemus the Philosopher, Menedemus, (non ille Cynicus Coloti Lampsaceni Discipulus: sed Socraticus Phaedonis filius.) Jo∣sep. autiq. 12. 3.) Not the Cynick who was the Scholar of Colotus Lampsace∣nus, but the Son of Phaedon and the Disciple of Socrates, (that defender of the Doctrine of Providence) by reason of those Scriptures agreement with his Opinion, had a very great respect. Aristaeus also hath affirmed to you these things, having left manifest Memorials thereof in Greek. (Hieron. prefat. in pentateucham.) [A∣ristaeus Ptolemaei ,] not the Procounaesian whom Strabo condemns as a fabulous and jugling Historian, who lived in the Reign of Cyrus and in the fabu∣lous age of Greece, though Josephus Eusebius and others stile this man Aristeus. (Franc. Junii not. in locum Tertulliani.) Ptolemy's Library, together with the Hebrew Scripture which they translated, is at this day to be seen in the Temple of Serapis. [Serapium templum it a exornatum ut post capitolium—nihil orbis ter∣rarum ambitiosues cernat, in quo bibliothecae fuerunt inaestimabiles & septuaginta voluminum millia, Ptolemaeis regibus vigiliis intentis, composita, bello Alexandrino dum diripitur civitas, sub Dictatore Caesare conflagrasse (Am. Marcellin. lib. 22.) The Temple of Serapis (so beautified as next to the Capitol, the whole world af∣fords not a more stately Piece: wherein were Libraries of inestimable value, and 70000. Volumes gather'd together by the two Ptolemies,) was burnt in the Ale∣xandrian War when Caesar was Dictator; yet through special Providence, if not the whole Library, yet at least the Hebrew Testament which the Seventy translated into Greek escaped the fire, as is manifest from this Appeal of Tertullian to that Hebrew Copy. And if you be unwilling to go so far, to inform your selves in the truth of these things  you may have assurance of it at home; for in Rome the Jews read this Translation publickly, and as long as they pay their Composition for enjoy∣ing this liberty, the Vulgar repair every Sabbath to their Synagogues, where he that hears may find the true God, and he that labours to understand what he hears cannot chuse but become a Christian. § 2. The learned Scaliger with-holds assent to this so currant Story of the Ptolemaean Version, conceiving that book of Aristaeus (out of which Jo∣sephus, and from him the Fathers borrowed that story) to have been feigned by some Grecizing Jew, to get the greater Reverence and Authority to that Translation. (Scalig. animadvers. in Eusebium ad an. 1234.) We will consider his reasons, not so much for the weight of them: as for the esteem of the Author; (to whose inestimable parts, some perhaps may not think fit to cast in that Allay, which the judicious and impartial Doctor Heilin mixeth with them; , but of equal ar∣rogance. Heilin Belgium. 362. pag.) and importance of the effect for it, up∣on every slight critical exception, we suffer the credit of those generally ap∣proved Historians, whose fidelito has pass'd for current, and gained the pre∣scription of so many Ages, (who had better means of detecting the falsity  we have, and as much honesty to put them upon the improvement of
those means,) we shall, at the long run, turn all faith out of doors, except it be of this Article, that every modern Mercury is Trismegistus, ter maximus & omnia solus. One with whom wisdom was born and shall dye, Job. 12. Scaliger's First Objection. Hermippus (in Diogenes Laertius) affirms that Demetrius Phalereus, whom Aristeus brings in as the procurer of this Translation, was so far out of favour with Ptolemy Philadelphus (for perswading his father to dis-inherit him) as in the beginning of his Reign he banish'd him: what can therefore be more improbable than the report of Aristaeus? Answer, 1. Should we grant to Hermippus in Diogenes, an equality of Autho∣rity to Aristaeus in Josephus (which to him that considers the disproportion, either of time or place betwixt Josephus and Diogenes, will seem a very une∣qual Match,) yet this would not prejudice the story of Aristaeus, as to that Circumstance the learned Critick cavils at. If we weigh what Anatolius Bishop of Laodicea affirms in Eusebius; (Eus. ec. Hist. 7. 31.) where commending Aristobulus, he saith, he was one of them who were sent to translate the sacred Scripture of the Hebrews unto the gracious Princes Ptolemaeus Philadelphus and his father, (Am. Marcellinus also useth the plural number, [Ptolemaeis regibus vigiliis intentis composita.] lib. 22.) which passages, as they fully re∣concile the seeming contradictions of the Fathers, in their Computations of the time of this Version (St. Jerom and Eusebius placing it in the beginning of Philadelphus, Irenaeus attributing it to Ptolemy Lagi, and Clemens Alexandri∣nus questioning to whether of them it should be referred; are not adverse, but divers expressions of the same date, viz. the later end of Lagi his Reign, in the two last years whereof his Son was his Colleague.) So it clearly solves the Objection, for after Lagi his death, (possibly) Philadelphus, at the begin∣ning of his Reign alone, might bannish Demetrius; and yet in the beginning of his Reign with his Father, be so far from discovering his displeasure against him, as to hide his grudge from his Father's apprehension (whom he could not but think would stand betwixt Demetrius and harm) he might very well put him upon that imploy about his Library, which was like enough to take up all the thoughts of so bookish a Man, and to divert them from being im∣ploy'd about the securing of himself from that fatal stroke he intended for him as soon as his Shield was taken away, as soon as the days of mourning for his Father should come. But to put it beyond all doubt that the Translation was forwarded by Demetrius Phalereus under Lagi. Clemens Alexandrinus states it thus, the Scriptures of the Law and Prophets were translated as men say, in the Reign of Ptolemy Lagi; or as some say, in the time of Philadelphus, (cum maximam ad eam rem contulisset diligentiam Demetrius Phalereus, & ut verterentur vehementer procurasset,) after that Demetrius Phalereus had (to wit under Lagus) used a great deal of diligence towards the effecting of that thing. (Clem. Storm. 1. 110.) As if this sagacious and most learned Father had so many hundreds of Years before smelt Scaligers Objection. Answer, 2. But to answer thus, from the Allegation of this Laodicean Bishop, may seem to some, to have too much of the Laodicean temper in it, to be too luke-warm a Reception of so hot a Charge, against so great an Authority, as the story of the Septuagint comes armed with: to gratifie, therefore, the just Zeal of them that are of that perswasion, let us weigh the opposed Testimonies in an equal Ballance. In one Scale we find Hermippus, in the other Aristaeus: say they yet hang in an equal poyse, (jam sumus ergo pa∣res) I can give free lieve hitherto to suspend assent. Let then the overweight that is cast into both these Historians, cast the Scales. 1. The voucher for Hermippus is Diogenes Laertius; who about the ear of Christ 145. wrote the Lives of the heathen Philosophers: an Author of good credit and judgment, where he writes intentionally, but every occasional dash of his Pen, as this was, touching the Septuagint, cannot seem with intelligent persons to be
of credit sufficient, to dash out the authority of Josephus, who voucheth A∣ristaeus his story, and not only lived nearer the time of this transaction, by al∣most an hundred years, but upon the place where the chief part of it was perform'd; a man so peculiarly qualified by all helps imaginable for the giv∣ing a full and faithful account of the Jewish affairs; as he that knows how well skill'd he was in their Antiquities. and how free he stood under the pro∣tection of the Roman Emperours, and of his own Judgment (being a Pha∣risee and Priest in Judaea, and therefore not of the Alexandrian Interest) of any temptation to flatter the Jew in general, much less the Alexandrian and Greecizing faction: and how accurately he discharged that part of the Jewish History the matter whereof fell under the ocular inspection of men then living when he put it forth: (in so much as Agrippa for his part gives him those Testimonies. (Josephi vita.) It appears by thy Writings, that thou needest no information in any of these things whereof thou writest, and again, I have read thy Book, wherein thou seemest to me to write History more accurately than any man else). And how strenuously he maintains, against Appion's Cavils, his Hi∣story of the Jewish Antiquities, (proving the truth of those passages against which Appion excepts, by the Testimony of those Witnesses, whom the Grae∣cians themselves esteem most worthy of belief, (Cont. App. lib. 1.) And the self-contradiction of those were alledged against the truth of this History): And how well he vindicates (against Justus his exceptions) his History of the Jewish wars; not only in retail, but in gross, appealing to common sence, to judg whether of them were more like to hit the mark of truth! Justus, who did not publish his History until twenty Years after the writing of it (when those Caesars, King Agrippa, and Captains that managed the Wars, were de∣ceased); or himself, who out of consciousness to the truth of his own Histo∣ry, dedicated and delivered it into those Emperour's hands, through whose hands the Affairs had past which he wrote of, and in whose custody were kept the Journals of all those Proceedings. He, I say, that knows these things, and hath the Art to judg of Hercules by his foot, or rather of his foot by his body, will think that Josephus came not short of the mark he set himself in his Writings, exprest thus, (at the close of the Jewish Wars.) Touching the truth of this History, it will never repent me, confidently to affirm, that that alone hath been the mark I aimed at in all my Writ∣ings: Nor that he overshot himself in that bold assertion, (at the end of his Antiquities) I dare add that no other Writer, Jewish or Forreign, could have pro∣secuted this Argument more faithfully than I have done. 2. If Aristaeus had no other Second but Josephus, his credit would be strong∣er back'd than Hermippus's is by Laertius: how much better armed then is he than his Antagonist, since Josephus brings with him the Jewish Archives, and makes himself a Principal in this Combat, by producing out of them the same Circumstances that Aristaeus relates: for thence he bringeth the Epistle of Ptolemy to Eleazar the High Priest, and Eleazar's to Ptolemy, wherein are contained the substance of what he quotes Aristaeus for, (and therefore imputes it to Apion's want of reading, if he knew not of those Letters: Joseph. cont. Ap. 2.) Is it not strange that the Chambers of the Jerusalomitan Temple should be the Receptacle of those Alexandrian Records that were forged in fa∣vour of the Greecizing Jews? 3. Add to this, that as Josephus is not only a Second to, but a Principal with Aristaeus; so he is not his only Second, but with him appear on Aristaeus his side, of Jewish Writers Philo Judaeus who gives the same ac∣count of this Seventie's Translation, (in his Book 2. De Vita Mosis, cirea initium.) And of Christian Doctors. Eusebius, Justin Martyr and Tertulli∣an; of the Validity of whose Judgments; to discourse severally would take up too much time, I shall therefore confine my self to Tertullian: who, had there been any weight in Hermippus, as Laertius reports him, to counter-bal∣lance Aristaeus his Testimony, would have as soon discerned it as the Eagle-eyed Scaliger; or at least suspected it, and that suspicion had been a caution to
him to forbear all edging an Author of a crack'd credit, to such circumspect Adversaries as he had to deal with: who, could they have found this flaw in Aristaeus, Tertullian would quickly have had it on both sides of his ears, and have been told, with a witness, what kind of fellow that Aristaeus was, whose Memorials (communicated to the Gentiles: for so I interpret his, (vo∣bis) he had quoted, for the proof of the Ptolemean Version. Besides all this, Tertullian mentions Menedemus, and therein confirms the story of Jose∣phus touching him, and appeals for the truth of the whole story to that ve∣ry Hebrew Bible which the Seventy brought with them to Alexandria, as be∣ing then to be seen in the Temple of Serapis, when he writ his Apology, and those many Greek Copies of the Translatours at that day, openly in the Jew∣ish Synagogues, which any man that pleased might go, and hear read; and lastly, refer all this, but especially, the preserving of the Hebrew Copy out of which the Translation was made, when so many Thousands of Secular Books were consumed by fire, to a gracious purpose in God, to make his sav∣ing health known among all Nations. The Tradition then, of the Septua∣gint is strengthened with such Authority, as whatever is brought against it by way of inartificial Argument, is less considerable than the dust upon the Bal∣lances. We will therefore proceed to his Artificial ones, and to § 3. His Second Objection, Drawn from the unlikelihood of every Tribe's yielding six men apiece, so well skill'd, both in the Hebrew Text, and Greek Tongue, as to be a∣ble to translate the one into the other: and of Eleazar's being in a Capacity, to summon every Tribe; ten of them being so long before dispers'd, and not under the High-Priests Jurisdiction. A Stone, which also the learned Ju∣nius stumbles at, and is forc'd by, out of the Road of the common Tradi∣tion, to an opinion that the number of those Translators was not proportio∣ned to the Tribes, but the great Sanhedrim. To the later Branch of this Argument I answer: that the dispersion was as much at the disposal and devotion of the great Council at Jerusalem, as the Inhabitants of Judaea: not so much out of awe of its power, which could not reach so far; as out of an innate and inbred Ambition to be held, and kept a peculiar and distinct people from the Gentiles, among whom they convers'd: and out of their devotedness to their Law and worship. (Light∣foot. Har. in act. 9.) Nay, in all probability, there was a better correspon∣dency betwixt Judah and Israel, after the scattering of Israel, than when they continued two distinct Kingdoms in their own Land; as having then no sha∣dow of Authority, wherein they could center, but that Council to whom they made application, and whose determination they followed in all dubious and adiaphorous Cases: So as nothing more frequently occurrs in the Jewish sto∣ries, than Communications of Intelligence and Counsel betwixt them of Judaea and other Countreys; than Letters missive from the High Priest and Estate of Elders, upon all emergencies, to the brethren of the twelve Tribes dispersed (for there was a dispersion of the two as well as the ten Tribes, James cap. 1. 1.) in such forms as these, [To our brethren that dwell in the up∣per South-Countrey, to our brethren that dwell in the lower South-Countrey, peace be unto you; We give you to understand.] [To our brethren of the Captivity of Babilon, of Media, of Greece, and to the whole Captivity of Israel, peace be unto you; We give you to understand, that since the Lambs are yet little, and the time of the first ripe Ears is not yet come, that it seemeth good to me and my fellows to add thirty days unto this Year. (Lightfoot harm. on act. 9.) and if they kept a correspondency in such trivial things, can we think they had not com∣munication together in a business of so great and general concernment to the whole Nation, as was the translating of their Scripture into a foreign Lan∣guage. The sound then of Aaron's Bells rang in the ears of the dispersion: and Eleazar power to cluck his farthest scatter'd Chickens under his Wings:
whether, in probability, six of them, in every Tribe, were sufficiently fea∣ther'd for such a flight, abilitated for such a work, comes next to be conside∣red, as being the first branch of Scaliger's second Exception. Now that every Tribe was able to set out six men a piece, furnish'd with a∣bility to translate their Mother-Tongue, (which Religion constrained them to retain) into the Greek (which their Secular Necessities forced them to learn) seems to me a far less wonder than that a man of so large an heart, as he, should strain at it. Hebrew out of which Language the Translation was made, is the Tongue which that whole Nation speak among themselves to this day. Hammond. An. in Mat. 12. 27. For although the Vulgar at their re∣turn from the Captivity, had forgot the old Character, (and therefore Ezra was fain to turn them to their A B C, to teach them to spell and understand the reading,) wherein was fulfilled that Prophecy, [Give the Book to him, and he shall say, I am unlearned, and cannot read it.] (A thing no more strange than that many among us that can read Latine exactly in the usual Roman Letter, when they are put to read their Neck-verse in an old Print, would lose the benefit of the Clergy, did they not beforehand con their lesson) yet to the end the book might not continually be lock'd up from vulgar know∣ledge under a strange Character. It pleased God, when the affairs of that People were come to that settlement, as to allow time for that work, to stir up the great Council, by the appointment, and with the conduct of Ezra to transcribe the Bible into those Characters that were then and are now vulgar∣ly known. From whence arose that dangerous opinion of some unheedful both Jews and Christians, that Ezra restored the Old Testament by a spirit of Prophecy, after it had been quite lost, and no where to be found. (Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 25. Cont. haer.) upon the same Stone stumbled Clemens Alexandri∣nus, speaking of Ezra. [Per quem divinitus inspiratorum eloquiorum facta est recensio & renovatio: & pascha salutare celebratum.] (Strom. lib. 1. pag. 107.) I call this a dangerous Opinion, truly it deserves a worse Epithite, as that which wholly gives up the strength of Israel into the Enemies hand, and absolutely deprives us of the benefit of pleading in evidence to the supernatu∣ralness of those Revelations, the wonders that Moses wrought. And that the vulgar Jews after the Captivity spake Hebrew, is manifest from the Testimony of Josephus (in his Antiq. Judaic. lib. 11. 5.) where he hath this story, that Nehemiah, as he was walking before Susa the Metropolis of Persia, overheard certain Strangers as they were travelling towards the City, discoursing among themselves in Hebrew; and drawing towards them, he asked, from whence they came? they answered him, from Judaea, and inform'd him in what bad state the Jewish Affairs were, which bad News was the occasion of his looking so heavily as the King took notice of it. Yea, that the Vulgar understood it at their Conquest by Titus, is manifest from Josephus's speaking to them in the name of Caesar, in Hebrew: that not only the Captain of the Rebels, but the vulgar might understand him (Bel. Jud. 7. 4,) Itaque Josephus, ne soli Joanni haec intimarentur sed pluribus, constitit ubi exaudiri possit & mandata Cae∣saris Hebraico Sermone disseruit.] 2 The Greek into which the Hebrew Text was translated, was the com∣mon Tongue of most of those Nations, into which the Jews were dispersed; and to all of them the badge of their subjection to the Grecian Empire, and the then common Key (as Latin was afterwards, and is now in the Western part of the World) to all Provinces, to unlock their minds to one another in natural commerce; so that without the knowledg of that, they must have in∣terdicted themselves of Fire and Water. That the Jews by that time the Law was translated, had upon this account gained the knowledg of the Greek, ap∣pears from the so commonness of that Language amongst them for a while af∣ter, as it is stiled by their own Rabbies, their vulgar Tongue: in the Babilon Go∣mara in Megilla, fol. 9. Col. 2.) They say there are four Languages brave for the World to use; the Vulgar, the Syrian, the Roman and the Hebrew, and some add the Asserian; and that by vulgar, they here mean the Greek, is clear
from Midras Tillius, (fol. 25. Col. 4.) where, speaking of this passage, the Greek is named in room of the Vulgar; and from their interpreting that Pro∣phecy of Noah, [Japhet shall dwell in the Tents of Sem.] by they shall speak the Language of Japhet, (that is, the Greecian,) in the Land of Judea, (read Dr. Lightfoot, Harmon. anno Christi. 62. Nero. 8. pag. 141. To bring this so much disputed Point among those whom too much or too little Learning makes mad, to the capacity, even of Idiots: the Belgick Churches in England, express to the life the state of the Jewish in the disper∣sion, as to their perfect understanding their own, and our Tongue: what Dutch is to them; Hebrew was, yea is, to the Jews: and what Greek was to the Jews inhabiting the Siro-Grecian Empire, that is English to the Dutch with us. And I think it were an easie thing, out of one Congregation of them to single out more, than Aristaeus reports Eleazar to have cull'd out of one whole Tribe; able without Hesitancy, Variance or Mistake to turn their Belgick Bible into English, and in as short a time as that Translation was compleated in, viz. 72. Days; without administring occasion of Wonder (to a man less seen in the nature of things, than the excellent Scaliger,) how that place (Exodus 24. 9.) [Of the chosen of Israel none did disagree, ] could be applyed to the Translators: for, indeed, it must have been through God's laying a judicial hand upon them, had they varied one from another, in translating out of, and into those Lingua's they had at their Fingers ends. § 4. Scaliger's Third Exception. Against the common story of the Seventy is, that it stands not with rea∣son that Ptolemy should have been so ready in propounding that Scripture form of Execration. [If any man shall add or take from this Book, let him be accursed.] Answer, What improbability can this be burden'd with? seeing (as Ari∣staeus there saith) this Form of cursing was common to Greeks and Romans as well as Jews: and if it had not, yet Ptolemy might have learnt it out of Scripture; for he did not pronounce this Curse till he had heard the Law read to him out of the Greek Translation by Demetrius, and had expressed how exceedingly he admired the Wisdom of the Lawgiver, and enquired of Demetrius how it came to pass, that neither any Historian nor Poet had made mention of so admirable a Law: and received from him this satisfactory An∣swer, that this Law was so divine, and worthy of such Veneration, as none of them durst meddle with it; and if any had been so venturous as to lay un∣washen hands upon it, they were sure, not to escape the revenging hand of Heaven: for Theopompus the Poet, being minded to insert some passages out of this Law into his Poems, was struck with madness for thirty days, that is, till in some lucid Intervals, suspecting what was the cause of that divine displeasure against him, he retracted his purpose by repentance, and cryed Pec∣cavi, in his humble addresses to God, for approaching that holy place with his shooes on. And Theodectes, intending to transplant some Slips out of that inclosed Garden into his Tragick Scenes, was afflicted in his eye, till he had acknowledged his Errour, and begged the restoring of his sight. Can it then seem strange that Ptolemy's ears being filled with such like discourse, his mouth should be filled with that Execration against them that should add Prophane to this holy Book, or take from it to add to the Prophane? Sure∣ly no: if we take in one thing more out of Josephus, preceding this fact of Ptolemy, viz. that Demetrius summoning all the Jews of Alexandria, read to them the Translation, in the presence of the Translators; and yet the whole Assembly approved it with one voice, making suit to the King, that he would with his Royal Sanction ratifie the unalterableness of it: could he have de∣vised a form of Sanction more Royal and Obliging than this?
Scaliger's Fourth Objection. If Eleazar and the Jerusalem Sanhedrim had approved this Translation, why did the Hebraizing Jews so hate it, as to keep an Annual Fast, and day of afflicting their Souls in remembrance of it? why did they say there was three days of darkness when the Law was translated? and apply to this time and action that of Solomon (Eccl. 3.) [There is a time to rent.] Thus pro∣ceeds that learned Man to Catechise his Readers: If a Puny, whose ambition it is to sit at the feet of that great Oracle, may have leave to solve these que∣ries, I would thus unty these knots with which he snarles this story. The great Council appointed the Seventy to translate the Bible, to gratifie Ptolemy, but never intended that Translation should be used in Synagogues. Neither does Josephus (Antiq. 12. 2.) assert any thing of that tendency; but that the whole Assembly of the Jews of Aegypt, with their Magistrates and Elders passed their joynt Vote that it should be allowed to be read in their publick Assemblies. Now it was this Vote which the Hebrews abominat∣ed, it was not to the Translation it self: but what past towards the ratifying of it for this use, in those three days of darkness, wherein it was read to the Jews of Aegypt, and obtained this approbation, to which they applyed that Sentence of the Royal Preacher, [There is a time to rent,] the Aegyptian Jews, giving hereby to their Brethren of Judaea the like scandal to that, which the Latines gave the Greeks, by inserting [de filioque] into the common Creed, without common consent; and laying a Foundation for that Schism, which about an hundred Years after this, was perfected by Onias, who with the consent of Ptolemy Philometor, (Jos. Antiq. 13. 6.) (in pretence of fulfilling that Prophesie Isaiah 19. 18.) [There shall five Cities in Aegypt speak the Lan∣guage of Canaan, and one of them shall be the City of the Sun] erected, at He∣liopolis, a Temple after the similitude of that at Jerusalem, and a Church of Jews there (whereof he became High Priest) distinct from that in Judaea, (whereof Alcimus was his Priest) by the name of Helenists or Grecians; as Scaliger observes, and Doctor Hammond demonstrates, from (Act. 11. 20.) where they that upon St. Steven's Martyrdom, travell'd to Antioch, are said [To preach the Lord Jesus to the Greeks;] that is, to the Grecizing Jews; for it is said of the same men, in the preceding verse, that in that their Pe∣rambulation they preached to the Jews only. A plain proof that the com∣pellation of Greeks was not imposed upon them, from their living in Greece, but their holding of that Church, which used the Greek Translation of the Seventy. § 5. Scaliger's Fifth Objection. His objecting the Story of some Neoterick Jews, touching their razing out the Golden Letters of the Name Jehovah, in that Copy which was present∣ed to Alexander the Great, and writing them with Ink, as an Argument, that Josephus is lead by Aristaeus beside the way of Truth, when he saith, that the Copy of the Law, which Eleazar sent to Ptolemy, was writ in Golden Letters; had never been raised by him, upon so Sandy a Foundation, neither had such Rabbinical Fables obtained that High Place among his Golden Lines, as he here assigns them, had he call'd to mind, either what St. Origen writes in answer to Celsus, (In Cels. lib. 2.) [,] the Writings of Modern Jews are mere Fables and Trifles. Or what sometimes dropp'd from his own Pen. (de em. temp. l. 6.) Manifesta est Judaeorum inscitia—multa, quae ad eorum Sacra & Historiam pertinent, nos melius tenemus quam ipsi.] The Ignorance of the Jews is most manifest, we are bet∣ter acquainted with their Religious Customs, and the Histories of their Affairs than the Jews themselves are. Josephus his single word hath more weight with me than hundreds of Modern Rabbies.
Scaliger's Sixth Objection. The last Stone which Scaliger turns is Ptolemy himself: under this in∣deed he finds those Worms of Parricides committed upon his Brethren, those Moths of Incest committed with his Sister, as fret his Surname Phi∣ladelphus (till they change it from its natural Gloss, and make it look as im∣posed upon him abusively) but not Aristaeus his Credit. For first, these Immoralities hinder not, but that he might be ambitious to have his famous Library grac'd with Books so much commended, not only by publick fame and inkling of the Nations (speaking in the language of that Prophecy Deut. 4. 6.) [What Nation is there so great that hath statutes and Judgments so righteous as this Law?] but by the suggestions of Deme∣trius, that the Jewish Scriptures contein'd a most wise, sincere and divinely-inspired Law, and that Hecataeus Abderita assigned that as the reason why neither any Poet nor Historian made mention thereof, because 'tis sacred and not to be taken into a prophane mouth: How must this set an edge upon his curiosity, and incite him after the obtaining a sight, and coming within view of those Books, which, at a distance, cast so alluring a smell into his quick-scented nostrils!] Ptolemy was in Tertullian's Judgment [Omni lite∣raturâ sagacissimus:] (Apol. cap. 18.) Secondly, had we learnt to extend the line of Christian Charity but half as far as it will reach, we should pass a milder sentence than that of Scaliger and Weenobus, upon him, whom God anointed to be his Servant, to bring his Law from Jewish Captivity; and conceive him to have been almost if not altogether a Proselyte: for upon the assurance that Aristaeus gave him, that so far as he could find by most diligent enquiry, the best and highest God, the Maker of the World, whom he worship'd (under the name of Jupiter) was worshipped among the Jews, after a more excellent rite and form of Divine Service, than among any other people upon earth; that that God, who gave to him his Kingdom, had given to them their Law: he presently ordered the Manumission of all the Jews in his Dominion, at his own vast charge, in redeeming above 120000 out of the hands of those they were Vassals to. And upon Demetrius his suggesting to him, that the Jewish Scriptures contein'd a most wise, sincere and divine Law, he order∣ed Embassadors to be sent to Eleazar the High Priest with Letters after this Tenure.—After, I had obtained the Principality, I set at liberty a∣bove an hundred thousand Jews, &c. thinking that this would be an accept∣able, thank-offering to God, for that providence whereby it pleased him to prefer me to this Supremacy.—I have sent also Oblations for the Temple, twenty golden, and thirty silver Vials, five golden Flaggons, a Table of Gold, an hun∣dred Talents to buy Sacrifices with, and for other uses of the Temple. Those presents were as rich and curious as hands could make them, or Art, in∣stigated to do their best by the Kings diligent eye upon them while they were a working: and that the memory of this his Zeal for the House of God might be continued, he not only caused the Workmen to engrave their names upon the pieces which each of them wrought, together with the Donor's; but the whole procedure of this business to be entred in the pub∣lick Records. Of this Ptolemy thus writes Philo Judaeus (de vita Mosis, lib. 2.) Ptolemaeus fuit is Philadelphus, virtutibus regiis, supra omnes aetatis suae superiorumque seculorum principes, nobilis, cujus nunc quoque ex tanto temporum intervallo decus est inclitum, ob tot relicta per civitates regionesque monumenta magnificentiae, ut in proverbium abierit sumptuosa opera ab illo Philadelphea denomi∣nata.—Talis princeps captus nostrae Legis amore, in Graecam linguam è Caldai∣ca transferendam curavit.] This Ptolemy Philadelphus was for Kingly Ver∣tues famous above all Princes of his and former Ages; who is now also after so long a space of time renown'd for leaving so many monuments of his magni∣ficence in Cities and Countries, that sumptuous works are proverbially called Phi∣ladelphian.
This so eminent a Prince, being taken with the love of our Law, caused it to be translated. Lo here, what sooting our Charity may have, to hale us to the more favourable opinion, touching this great Instrument of conveighing the knowledge of God's Law out of Jewry to the ends of the Earth! And the same Charity may cover the multitude of Crimes laid to his charge, they being neither more nor greater than what may be observ'd even in Cyrus himself, who past in God's muster for one of his anointed ones, and (whose Proselytism stood him in as much, as his did Ptolemy) if we would permit the Bee to metamorphize it self into a Dung-fly, upon whom might she not find sore places to fasten and sit upon. Ptolemy slew his Brethren, but Brethren (if even Scaliger's Oracle Hermippus be infallible) whom their Mother sought to promote to the Crown before her Step-son Ptolemy; and was this any more than Solomon did to Adonijah, upon the same account? He married his Sister! But (to say nothing of those alleviations of its guilt, which from the Customariness of the thing, and Reasons of State might be pleaded) was not the Family of the Herods a proselyted Race, and yet intangled in incestuous Marriages? of one of whom (and he the most zea∣lous of them all for Judaism, Herod Agrippa) History records, (Lightfoot, Har. Vit. 25, 26.) that he succeeded his Brother-in-law-uncle Herod, and lived with his Aunt-sister Beronice in more familiarity than was for their credit. Of another of whom, Herod Antipas, sacred Records report Cruelty and Incest, if not equalling Ptolemy's in all, yet exceeding it in this circum∣stance, that the one had the Baptist, the other Aristaeus to reprove him; who had he equal'd Herod's Monitor in the share of Elijah's Spirit, Ptolemy perhaps would have repented. But that worse men than Ptolemy have past for good Proselytes, needs no other examples to be proved by, than that of Herod the Great, for a Male; whom Josephus describes as a Monster in point of Morality, and yet so zealous a Jew, as the Building of the Temple cost him far more than the Translation of the Bible did Ptolemy. And Poppaea a Female; who for all that she had so much Debauchery in her, as to Nero∣nize Nero himself, yet could lisp out [The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord] with such a grace, as Josephus mistook her for a very religious Woman. Thirdly, should we grant the worst of Ptolemy that can be imagin'd; Is he the first bad man whom God hath made an Instrument of good? of whom that All-ruling Providence hath serv'd her self which useth to bring about her own wisest Counsels by foolish Instruments; her greatest Designs by the most unlikely means; the best Things by the worst Men: and would not permit evil Men, could she not make good Use of them? The truth is, the Argument from Persons to Providence, or from Providence to Persons, is like those Islands near St. Omer, of which Heylin (in his Belgi∣um. pag. 367.) reports, that though their surface be so firm, that Cattel do graze upon them, yet for want of a solid foundation towards the centre, by fastning Cords to the Bushes which grow upon them, a man may draw them which way he will. And such an Island the Josephian History of the Seventy seem'd to be to Scaliger, no wonder, then that that Remover of Mountains (to borrow the Rabbies Paraphrase of an Almighty Wit) should tie his Cords to these passages therein; or that his sinewy Arm (able to roll the Earth about, if he had but a place whereon to fasten his foot) should give the Truth of it those Twitches, as make the whole Island seem to float, in those mens Eyes who ponderate his Authority more than his Reasons. But God be thanked, though he move, he cannot remove this firm Land, whose foundations are laid upon the Universal consent of all the Fathers un∣to St. Jerome: and that consent pleaded as a Catachistical point by St. Cyril of Jerusalem (Catech. 4. titul. ) where he tells his Ca∣techumens that they may safely rely upon the 22 Books of the Old Testa∣ment, translated by the Seventy, as being delivered to us by the Apostles and ancient Bishops, who were far wiser than we, [
.] And by St. Austin (De Civit. 18. 42, 43.) the Title of the former Chapter being this [Scripturas Veteris Testamenti singulari Dei providentiâ in Graecum trans∣latas,] That the Old Testament was by the singular providence of God translated in∣to Greek.] And of the latter this [De authoritate Septuaginta omnibus praeferendâ That the authority of the Septuagint is to be preferred before all:] which last Assertion he makes to St. Jerom's face (Epist. 8.) [Septuaginta, quorum est gravissima authoritas—eis praeeminentem authoritatem in hoc munere sine con∣troversia tribuendam existimo;] The Seventy, whose authority is most weighty—I think we ought, without all dispute, give them the preeminence of authority. And maintains it by such solidity of Argument (Epist. 10.) [Neque e∣nim parvum pondus habet illa, quae sic meruit defamari (quôd in multis a∣liter se habet quàm Haebraeorum codicum authoritas) & quâ usos Apostolos, non solùm res ipsa indicat, sed etiam te attestatum esse memini.] Can that Trans∣lation be of small weight (although thou art pleased to defame it, as not agree∣ing with the Hebrew Text) which that the Apostles used, is not only plain in it self, but acknowledged by thee? and (Epist. 19.) [Sed insinuare digneris, à quibus Judaeis, &c.] Be pleased (I pray thee) to tell me, by what Jews this Translation could possibly be corrupted, so as to disfavour the Christian Cause? Not by those who before the Advent of Christ translated it, for they had no tem∣ptation. The Jews indeed, since the propagation of Christianity, may be thought to have had a good will, either to substract, or to adulterate those Texts in the Old Testament, out of which we fetch convincing Arguments, in defence of our Faith. But how is it possible they could have an opportunity? seeing the Trans∣lation of the Seventy is not only dispers'd through the World; but, by reason of Christ's and his Apostles making their quotations out of it, is so tena∣ciously adhered to by all Christian Churches, as they cannot endure to hear what recedes from it in the least tittle: Of which he gives this notable Instance (Epist. 10.) That a certain Bishop reading out of St. Jerom's Translation, in the History of Jonas, [haedera] instead of [cucurbita] the people were so incens'd, as they had like to have proceeded to the Deposition of their Bi∣shop, for corrupting sacred Writ. By such Solidity of Arguments (I say) St. Austin maintains the preheminency of the Authority of the Septuagint against St. Jerom; as that learned Father pleads his own old age, for an excuse, for his not answering them. But the excellent Vossius hath lately so well managed this Province, so irrefragably maintained the Authority of the Septuagint, as all that can be said after him is but labour in vain. Neither indeed did I intend to stand by the Seventy any longer, than I might signifie to the Sheep of Christ, that they may without fear graze upon it, and find that pasture which greater Cattel (of a far larger size than the Modern breed, and whose weight would have sunk it down, had it not been firm Land) have found there: and may chew the Cud of that Observation, for the defence whereof we have made this too large Digression: Were it not that the allowing the matter to have fallen out, as Scaliger fancieth, rather than as Josephus relateth, would render the whole Story juiceless. For say, as he states the Case, that the Jews of Egypt, be∣ing brought to a necessity of disusing their own tongue, and of learning Greek, procured this Translation for their own use; this will make little or nothing to the proof of that Position which the Patrons of the Christian Cause have with one mouth affirmed; viz. That the knowledge of the Law of Moses was the forerunner of the Knowledge of Christ, among the Gen∣tiles: to whom it would still have been a Book sealed up, had it been confin'd to the Cabinet of the Synagogue. But as Josephus tells the Story, it affords a most substantial Basis to that universally receiv'd Opinion, that the Day-break Glimmerings of the Law of God did (out of Judea) appear brighter and brighter to the Gentiles; till at last the whole Body of it arose visibly, (in the Septuagint) as the Day-star to the Sun of of Righteousness. [Volebat Deus gentes non multos post annos vocare per Evangelium—quocirca
curavit codicem sacrum maturè in vulgarem linguā converti, quo legi passim posset ab omnibus per orbem gentibus] (Bullenger in Daniel, par. 2. tab. 4.) If God had a purpose to conveigh the knowledge of his Will to the Gentiles by that Trans∣lation, would he have put that Candle under the bushel of the Jewish Syna∣gogue, and not rather have set it on the Pharos of Ptolemy's Library? If the Law was to be the Gentiles Schoolmaster unto Christ, where could it have set up School better than there, where was the greatest frequency of learned men from all parts of the World; drawn thither, as soon as that Translation was finish'd, by the beneficence of that Philomuse (as Tertulli∣an (advers. Valentin, cap. 12.) stiles Philadelphus (in Junius his emendati∣on of the corrupt Reading of that passage) of whose bounty to proficients in Learning, not only himself, in his Letter to Eleazar the High Priest (at his dismission of the Seventy, (Joseph. Ant.) but Aelian in his various History, (lib. 13. cap. 13.) gives testimony; affirming, that though he exceedingly delighted in Converse with Learned men, yet he took more pleasure in sowing his Temporals upon them, than in reaping their Spiri∣tuals. [.] And after his death, by the fame of his Library, where Learning kept open house for all comers (Can. cron. lib. 2.) [Communia fuerant omnibus disce∣re volentibus, &c.] and flourished in the days of his Son Euergetes no where in all the World more than it did there. A place so beautiful (saith Am. Marcell. lib. 22.) as it was second to none in the whole World, but the Ro∣man Capitol; and its greatest Ornament being a Library of seventy thou∣sand Volumes, all preserved there entire, till in the Alexandrian War (in the Dictatorship of Caesar) while the City was a pillaging, the Temple was set on fire, and the greatest part of the Books burnt. Now from the beginning of Philadelphus unto our Saviour's Birth (that is from the year of Rome built 469. to the year 751.) were almost 300 years (Bullinger in Daniel:) during which time the Old Testament had been communicated to the Gentiles, before the coming of him to whom it pointed. §. 6. Lo here! how candidly, how open-heartedly the Blessed Jesus dealt with the World! dispersing his Picture, before he came to call her beloved, that had not been beloved; that at his congress with her, there might not be error personae, or that the World might not have this to plead, that she had (or ever she was aware, or had well consider∣ed the Person) suffered a surprizal upon her Affections; sending the Se∣ptuagint as the Prologue to his and his Apostles Acts, to communicate to the Expectants the Argument of the ensuing Poem, and communica∣ting the old Grounds of that new Ditty, which was to be sung at his and their appearing on the Worlds Stage: an argument it was no newly devised Fable, but an old Plot; and a certain Expedient whereby the mistakes of the Actors might have been discern'd had they committed any. Would Christ have given the World an opportunity to take the length of his foot that was to come, by the Sandal of Moses, and of judg∣ing whether that Sandal fitted his foot when he was come, if he had in∣tended to delude it? I appeal to all Histories for an instance, of any Re∣ligion but Christ's, that durst abide the Test, much less appeal to the Principles of another Religion, then in being, when it self stood for ac∣ceptance, and acknowledged by the Candidate to be in force. The Ro∣man Pagan-Religion durst not stand a trial by the Books of its Founder, Numa Pompilius, but cried away with them to the fire, as soon as they were produc'd. The Papal Church supprest her Religion (in the Christi∣an part of it) by locking the Scriptures up in strange Tongue from the inspection of the Vulgar, when she imposed her Antichristian Innovations. And Mahomet, though he ground his impious Superstition upon Moses and Christ, as he pretends, yet he decried them both, when he intro∣duc'd
his Alcoran. But our Jesus professeth, that he came not to destroy, but to fulfil (to fill up) the Law and the Prophets; that he would not dash one tittle out of them, till all was fulfilled: and yet he communicated the knowledge of them to the World some hundreds of years before he instituted his Royal Law, and requires the Worlds Vote for the passing of that Law, upon no other terms than its Conformity to what Moses and the Prophets had writ. The greatest advantage imaginable for the detection of false Play, and such as he would never have given the World, had he intended to have put tricks upon it. How does Celsus in the Person of a Jew busie himself to find Lines and Features in our Saviour's Face not answering the Old Testament draught of the Messiah? Here he hath too much of God, there too much of Man; here he's to White, there too Ruddy. How does the Jew himself labour, to make himself believe he sees those Forms in him, that bear no proportion to the Prophetical Description of the Messi∣ah; one while the Place of his Birth is too manifest, another while too obscure, &c. had these men of an evil Eye, discovered the least dispropor∣tion betwixt the Model and that Temple it self wherein the Godhead dwells bodily, in what triumph would they have set their conquering Banners upon it? Would Christ have yielded them the opportunity of skulking behind Moses's Ark, of marching covertly under his Tabernacle, and of making so near approaches to the Rock of Ages, as from thence to spy out where the Fortifications were lowest and weakest? had he not known his weakness to have been stronger than the strength of of men; and him∣self to have been such an exact Copy of Moses, as the most maliciously pry∣ing Eye could not find the least real Disproportion betwixt Jesus of Naza∣reth, and that Picture of him which the Septuagint had delivered to the World, so long before his appearance.
CHAP. VII. The World over-run with Barbarous Ignorance when the Impie∣ties of Turk, Pope and Pagans imposed themselves upon its Credulity. § 1. Platinas his Censure of the sixth Century: Pope Sabinian, an Enemy to Learning; monstrous Presages. Phocas (in Baronius his stile, the Red Dragon) gave the Title of Universal Bishop to Boniface the third. § 2. As Darkness increased, the Pope incroacheth, till at last he set his foot upon the Necks of Princes. The Eyes of those Centuries, the Lights of the Church, (as they will be called) were Darkness. Formosus, Stephen, Romanus, Theodore the second, John the tenth, and nine Popes succeeding him in less than nine Years, Benedict the fourth, Leo the fifth, all Heads of the Ro∣man Church, like that Head in the Carvers Shop, brainless. These in the ninth Century. § 3. The Popes of the tenth Century, Baronius stiles A∣bomination in the holy Place. Gerebrand reckons from the Hermaphrodite, Pope John or Joan, above fifty in two hundred Years, who were little better than Incarnate Devils; amongst whose Predecessors was John the thirteenth a Stallion, Benet the ninth in time succeeds, a Monster made up of a Boar below, and an Ass above. § 4. The Popes of the eleventh Century light their Candle at the Devil's Match. Silvester compounded with the Devil for the Papacy: Onuphrius his Evasion obviated. Benet rides the Devil in Purgatory: He was a wonderous great Scholar that bad learn'd his Gram∣mar. § 5. Paganism crept in in the dark before Commerce. Heathens care to conceal their God-Births. Minerva turns the tatling Crow out, and takes the Bird of Night, the Owl, into her service; the Eleusine Mysteries. Mercury's hand upon his mouth. Alexander must not reveal Aegyptian My∣steries, nor Petronius his Ruffians, the Secrets of Priapus. As Traffick in∣creased, the World gives over teeming with new Gods. Alexander, Pla∣to, Caesar, Aristaeus, were born out of time to be made Gods. As the The∣ology of those obscure times came to be inquired into by several Nations comparing Notes, it grew out of Credit. Euemerus his Sacred History, Annons Birds. § 1. THese Arguments for the fidelity of the Apostles, drawn from the State of that Age wherein they made their report, will recieve that Accession of Strength, as will make them impregnable, by comparing it with those Ages wherein all false Religions have been hatched, No Religious Impostors having hitherto dared to peep out, but in Barbarous Times. To begin with those are next to us, both in time and place; those Anti∣christian Twins, of the Mahometan and Papal Impiety, chose the midnight of Cimmerian Darkness to be born in; an Age as infamous for Ignorance, as that of the Apostles was famous for Knowledg. The Pope, by the Decree of Phocas, obtained the Universal Supremacy over Bishops,—Anno. 606. Mahomet put forth his Alchoran,—Anno. 622. Urbanity was in its highest Exaltation when the Cedar of the Gospel was planted, in its lowest de∣pression when these Tares were sowen; that an Age elevated above the Ela of common Humanity, this sunk down below the Gamut of the most brutish Bestiality. He that would make an equal partition of that Verse in the Psalms betwixt them, must assign the first part for the Motto of that [Man being in Honour,] the last clause for the motto of this [is become like a Beast that perish∣eth.] For, whether it hapned through the innate inconstancy of humane Af∣fairs, in whose still-running Wheel, those Spokes which were then upper∣most, were now become lowermost, nothing persisting in one Stay; but ei∣ther flowing till it comes to its Spring Tide, or ebbing till it falls to its neep;
either waxing towards a full, or waining towards a change: Or whether the just hand of Heaven withdrew natural from them who made no better im∣provement of supernatural Light: Or upon whatever inscrutable reasons of incomprehensible Wisdom, it came to pass: such was the Genius of the World, when Hell drew out those her two Nipples, Turk and Pope, (those Soveraigns of Eastern and Western Babel, of the second Edition; (Herbert's Church Militant;) when that Janus-Anti-Christ set back to back, and entred the Lists against Christ; the one antiquating, the other adulterating the Go∣spel, by the Introduction of their new Religions; as there was none then vi∣sibly appearing, but the Ass, to umpire the Contest betwixt Christ and them; to determine who sung best; these Birds of Prey, or that warbling Nightin∣gale, that Bird of Paradise. The Worlds Ears were never grown to a more Ass-like length, than when those Silvans, and barbarous Pans contended before it, for preheminency above our truly Divine Apollo. That such was the face of the World then, when Papal Innovations, and Mahometan Blasphemies commended themselves to her, will best appear, by taking an impartial Survey of that Age, as it is limned out by the Pencils of Popish Historians, as 'tis measured by their own Chain. Touching the Ignorance and Immorality of which Age, (Cent. 6. 590.) Platina gives a shrewd hint, in his commendation of the then Pope, when the day was shutting in; telling us that Gregory the great had no Peer, for Learning, among all the Popes which succeeded him, good Literature was then on the decaying hand among the chief Bishops; much more therefore among the inferiour Clergy, whose preferment lay at their feet, and whose highest Ambition was to bear the Image of their Ghostly Fathers. If that great Luminary which God made to rule the Day (as the Italian Parasite brags) was eclipsed, how must Darkness needs spread it self over the faces of the lesser Stars? nay, which of them durst shew so little obsequiousness to them, of whom they borrowed light; as not to chuse rather to hide that in∣nate knowledg they had, under a Bushel, than set it on the Table, to out-brave the Sun; having so fair an Item given them, that light offends weak Eyes, in the immediate Successor to the learned Gregory? The rude and unlearned Sabinianus, (Platin. Sabinianus, 604.) upon whom Platina's Pen lets fall these blots; that he was of so obscure Parentage, as the place of his Birth could not be traced out, but yet more obscure in good parts and manners; burning with that spightful Envy against his learned Predeces∣sor, as he attempted to burn his Books, to pull that Light, the Splendour whereof dazled the Eyes of this Owl, out of the Firmament. This was he that instituted the burning of Lamps on the Day time in St. Peter's Church: A charitable and seasonable work! to furnish the Church with corporeal and typical Light, when the substantial and spiritual Temple-Lamp was dwindl∣ing out: and a kind of Prodigy portending the decay of Knowledg; as those other did of Humanity (all but the outward shape) which Platina re∣ports to have appeared in the short Span of his Papacy? and than which (he saith) never any appeared greater: A fourfooted boy, and two Sea-monsters in a perfect humane Shape, manifestly representing the degeneracy of that Age; grown, even under Gregory, to a stupendious degree of Brutishness, If Ulric Bishop of Auspurg be to be believed (and they that doubt the vali∣dity of his Testimony, may find a solid and unanswerable Vindication of it in Bishop Hall's defence of the Honour of the married Clergy, lib. 5. § 1.) who in his Letter to Pope Nicholas the first, writing against the Decree of single life of Priests, produceth the practice of Gregory the first, who once condemned marriage of Priests, but when at the cleansing of a Pond (near his own Collegiate Church) he saw cast up, with the sludge, above 6000. Sculls of Infants, he condemned and retracted his former Decree. Good God! how had this Age lost the common Sentiments of Humanity; which could put this Sence upon St. Paul, [It is good not to marry,] as if he therein made the committing of Fornication, and (to cover the shame of that from
the World) the perpetration of such barbarous Murther upon so many inno∣cent babes more eligible, than to enter into that State, which himself stiles ho∣nourable. And if they of his own Colledg and Family, that lived under his in∣spection, commenced to such a Degree of insensate Savageness, what may we think of others, that had not upon them the restraint of their Bishop's eye; yea, what can be deemed of so brutified an Age, but what Gregory him∣self thought of it? that it was next door to that, wherein Antichrist would shew himself: that now the way was strawed for the coming of that Son of Perdition: as he intimates in that Letter, wherein he returns to the Empe∣rour (expressing how ill he took Gregory's raising of so much Dust in oppos∣ing John of Constantinople, and advising him, that for so frivolous a Word, he would not give so great a Scandal) this Answer, I say boldly, that whosoe∣ver desireth the Title of Universal Bishop, fore-runs Antichrist in Pride, and with the same Pride is brought into all Error. And in his Letter to John himself, who, I pray (saith he) before you ever used this proud word, but he, who despising the Legions of Angels, (sociably joyned with him) would needs burst out unto the top of singularity, and be alone above all. And in his Treatise on Job, saying, Now ere Antichrist himself come, some do preach him by their manners, and others by their words. The Trentish Anathema would fall heavy upon me, should I deny this Pope's infallibility in defining matters of Faith (as this is of Antichrists com∣ing): but I fear not those Bruta fulmina, those causless Curses: yet am led into the belief of this his Prophecy, by little less than Ocular Demonstration of the palpable Effect; for within a Year after Gregory's decease (next after the fore-named Sabinianus.) Boniface the third (anno 606.) is created Pope, and obtains at the hand of Phocas the Emperour (that Parricide, that perjured Murtherer, who slew his Lord Mauritius, and took possession of his Crown, (as Baronius stiles him,) that red Dragon, that gave the spiritual Kingdom to the Beast) that the Bishop of Rome should be called Universal Bishop, the very Title that Gregory affirmed to be the badg of Antichrist. § 2. It was an Age, we see, of gross Barbarism, when Mahometanism in∣croached upon the World; and the Bishop of Rome over the Church, in the claim of Supremacy over his fellow Bishops, he came on the blind side of the Beast, when he skipp'd up into the Saddle. Let us now observe that as this Darkness grew thicker and thicker, he advanced his Power higher and higher, till at last he set his Foot upon the Necks of Kings, and obtained a Soveraignty over Secular Princes. And because it would be an endless work, here to tra∣vel through the Histories of several Nations, and thereout collect the Com∣plaints and Confessions that every where occur of the Worlds general deprav∣edness, I shall consine my self to the History of the Popes (those reputed lights of the Church,) for if I demonstrate the Eye to be dark, he is a very weak Reader that cannot thence conclude, the whole body to be full of Dark∣ness. Formosus (saith Platina (Century the ninth, Platin. Formosus, an. 891.) after he had abjured Rome, and with a prophane Habit, had put on prophane Manners) obtained the Popedom, not by Vertue, but Bribery; upon whose Pa∣pacy, he makes this mournful Reflection, I know not by what Destiny it hap∣pened, that at this time the Vertue and Integrity of Popes failed: most unhappy times (I think) they were, seeing in the Opinion of Plato, the Vulgar follow the Example of their Leaders. Times that would have been in all respects superla∣tively miserable, had it not been for the Vertue and Learning of one man, Remi∣gius Altisiodorensis, who like Shammah, one of David's Worthies, stood it out alone, against the whole Body of the Philistines. A dark time it must needs be when but one Star appears in the whole Circuit of the Firmament. Stephen the sixth, or seventh, (Plat. Stephanus, 895.) that wicked man saith Baronius (ad an. 900.) entred into the Sheep-fold like a Wolf, and ended his
Life in an Halter like a Dog: then all things were turned topsie turvy, at Rome, both civil and sacred confounded, and the advancing of the Pope in their Power that had the longest Sword. Romanus succeeded Stephen, and as soon as he was warm in his Chair, re∣scinds the Acts of his Predecessor: for those Popes ('tis Platina's Verdict Pla∣tin. Romanus, 897.) minded nothing else but to extinguish the Name and Cre∣dit of their Ancestors; than which there can be no greater sign of a base and narrow Soul: and those certainly are not fortified against the edacity of time by their own Vertue, that endeavour with Canine Teeth of Envy to pick bare and gnaw the Bones of those Mens Memories, whom their Vertues have cloathed with immortal Fame: and none are more conscious of their own disability to rise thither themselves, than they that seek by Detraction to throw down others from those Stairs of Honour, to which their merits have exalted them: thus and further does the quondum Library-keeper of the Va∣tican dilate upon this Argument, even till he seems to me to grow passionate, and to write, as if the remembrance of that hard measure he himself received at the hands of Paul the second, had put Vinegar, if not Gall, into his Ink, to dilate, if not to imbitter it: men are never more fluen than when they are prompted with the remembrance of Injuries; I will therefore leave fol∣lowing him in this passionate Vein: alass, the plain story of these Monsters is enough to make Christian ears tingle: and more than I would repeat, were it not to lay naked the folly of that proud Plea of that Chairs infallibility, when their Decrees are as contrary to one another, as white to black, and sometimes among half a score of Popes immediately succeeding one another, not one is to be found, that had wit enough to frame one Canon longer lived than themselves: For Theodore the second rescinds the Acts of Romanus, treading in the steps of these seditious Popes that went before him (saith Platina, Theodore, 897.) And John the tenth (John 10. Platina 897.) served Theodore with the same sauce: the Bucket which Theodore pull'd up; John depresseth, and that which he sunk down, now rises up: for he antiquates the Acts of Stephen, and his second; and revives the Decrees of Formosus. The reasons of this Counter-scuffle Platina assigns partly to the Pope's forsaking St. Peter's Steps, and partly to the supine negligence of secular Princes, laying the Reins upon those mens necks, who were [adeo socordes & nullius pretii ut actum esset] so slothful and worthless, as the Church had been utterly undone, if God, for his E∣lect's sake, had not shortned the Reigns of these Prodigies: for at this time no less than nine Popes succeeded one another in less than nine Years. Of whom Benedict the fourth was one; a man noted by Platina (Platina Bened. 4. 899.) for nothing, but his doing nothing worth noting: but of the then times he thus complains, Mens Industry in all kinds of Vertue waxed cold and decre∣pit, for want of the Spur of Encouragement: they that sate still, or ran-counter, attaining to the Goal of Preferment, before them who pursued it, in a direct course of real Merit. Then did the Line of Charles the Great, by the slothfulness of succeeding Princes, lose both the Kingdom of France, and the Empire of Rome. Then did the Splendour of the Roman Name, by the negligence of the Roman No∣bles and Commons, sit in obscure Darkness. And we can affirm, that the very same Fate befell the Pontifical Dignity; for of Old, the Renown of the Bishops of Rome waxed great by their Sanctity and Learning (even among the many Ene∣mies, and obstinate Persecutors of the Christian Name.) But when the Church began towantonnize, the Licentious Liberty of sinning brought forth these Mon∣sters, who, by Circumvention and ribes, did rather invade than legally possess St. Peter's See. Leo the fifth (Platin. Leo 5. 903.) was so obscure a person, as Historians write him, Terrae filium, a Son of the Earth, not being able to mention his Countrey: within a Month after his Consecration, he is thrown out of his Chair into Prison; and the Papacy posseffed by a single-Sol'd-Priest, of so ig∣noble
an Abstract, as we cannot learn of the most diligent Enquirers, either his Countrey, or Surname; but only, that the Name he was known by be∣fore he was Pope, was Christopher. He, (Christophorus, 903.) obtaining the Chair by wicked Arts; what he had got over the Devil's Back, he lost under his Dam's Belly; being within seven Months after his Installment, thrust into a Monastery. This is the last of the nine short liv'd Popes; whose Hi∣story, Platina thus concludes, These Popes as so many Monsters, God was pleas∣ed (for the good of Mankind) to snatch away in a short time. And upon the last, hath this Note; Observe how despicable the Lives of those Popes had made the Papacy, when such an obscure fellow could thrust the Pope beside the Cushion almost in a Moment, without Opposition, Disdain, or so much as murmur of either Clergy or Laity. Such was that Head of the Christian World, out of which that other Lamb∣like Horn of the Beast budded, with which he pusheth at the Crowns of Princ∣es▪ did ever Head more resemble that in the Carver's Shop, or better de∣serve Aesop's Ape's Aphorism for its Motto? [Oh pulchrum caput.] Oh brain∣less head! except that which it grew to, by that time this Beast became a Buck of the first ead. § 3. In the tenth Century. The History whereof Baronius (Baron. ad annum, 900.) ushers in with this warning to his Reader, that now he would see the Abomination of Desolation standing in the most holy place; and with these expressions of his own re∣sentment of that Age: fie for shame! alas for sorrow! that so many Monsters (A thing horrible to be seen) should be thrust into the Chair that deserves reve∣rence of Angels. The truth is, his Predecessors in Chronology, had with so open a Mouth, and full Cry, pursued the Barbarity of the then Popes, and had followed the scent so close: as Baronius his Fox-like Art, which had serv∣ed him in the preceding Centuries, to find out Stratagems to cast off the Dogs, fail'd him in this: so as for him to have denied, dissembled, or blanch'd over the matter with extenuations would have spoken him so plainly to have been a man of a brazen forehead, as would have tempted the most easily credulous, and ductile Novices to have suspected his fidelity in all the rest: for him (whose declared intention was to present the Church of Rome as the most ho∣ly Catholick Church, as the new Jerusalem, without the compass of whose pearly Walls, there is no possibility of Salvation; and her Bishops as so ma∣ny Vice-Christs, yea, Vice-Gods upon Earth:) to bring upon the Stage above fifty Popes from John or Joan the eighth to Leo the ninth (within the compass of two hundred Years) who, by the common Vote of approved Historians, were little better than Incarnate Devils: (apotactici, apotastatae potius quam A∣postoli (Gerebrand ad an. 909.) without a puling Parenthesis, without shed∣ding his Crocodile-tears; would have spoke him a Man of an Iron Heart, and too like that Age, of which thus he writes (Bar. ad an. 900.) A new Age beginneth, which for rudeness and barrenness of all good, is called the Iron Age; for its turning it self, as Wax to the Seal, to all Forms and Resemblances of Evil, the Leaden: and for want of Writers, the dark Age: And for him, whose design in compassing Sea and Land was to gain Proselytes to the Church of Rome, to have presented his reader abruptly, and without fortifying his eye with some caution, with such a prospect, might have startled a good Catholick in the point of Infallibility, and have diverted him from looking for a visible Church within the Roman Pale in that Age, whereof, a Monster, born with a Doggs head, and presented to King Lewis (as the Author of Fasciculus temp. conceives) was the lively Emblem; (ad annum, 914.) In that Age where∣of Baronius himself (ad an. 908.) gives this further account; Thou seest Reader, the most lamentable estate of this time, when Whores did advance, and pull down Popes at their pleasure: Of which Luitprandus gives a notable in∣stance in the History of John the thirteenth (lib. 2. cap. 13.) who com∣ing
to Rome about business with the Conclave, with his beauty inflam'd the lust of one Theodora, a most shameless Strumpet. This Venus (to draw a Curtain over that filthy part of the story) —videt hunc, visúmque cupit, potitúrque cupito: and for his hire procures him a Bishoprick; but so far from Rome, as he could not give her those frequent Visits her insatiable lust required; and therefore she procures him the Papal Chair, that she might lie at Rack and Manger with her Stallion, his Holiness forsooth, than whom (as Baronius (Bar. ad an. 900.) witnesseth) there never lived a more filthy Beast. To be sure, this Centaur, that had so much of Horse below, had but little of Man above; his Soul could hardly dilate it self vigorously to the Head, which spent it self so much at the Tail; who ever gives the golden Ball to Venus, gives it iratâ Minervâ. This is the Engls of that [Libidinibus dediti de∣bilitatur operatio circa intelligibilia.] (Aquin. Sum. 2. 2. q. 5. ar. 3.) This, for kindreds sake in beastliness, brings to mind the Legend of Pope Benet 9. (though out of due order of Time) who being at the Age of twelve years made Pope, by the procurement of his Father the Marquess of Tuscia, could not so much as read Mass; but was put to that sorry shift of procuring the Conclave to consecrate Gregory to be his Suffragan to per∣form that Office for him (Fascicul. ad ann. 1033.) This Tyrant, Monster and Opprobry of the Church (as Baronius (Baron. ad ann. 1033.) calls him) was skill'd in nothing but the Black Art; by means whereof he enticed Fe∣males into the Woods (as Cardinal Benno affirms) and that upon the evi∣dence of those Magical Books and Journals were found in his Study, after his Judas-like death (for he was strangled in the Woods by Devils) which things (saith he) every Boy in Rome knows to be true. Platina characte∣rizeth him, as one that from his very youth was contaminated with all shameful Vices and Turpitude; given more to Hunting than Praying; the most pernicious and wicked of all the Popes: and for proof hereof tells us, that, of a certain, his Ghost appeared to an Heremite in a prodigious form, having the Body like a Boar, the Head like an Ass: The Platonick Idea, the express Image of a Letcher; an Animal compounded essentially of the Loins of a Boar and the Brains of an Ass. History, indeed, affords plenty of Examples of men, that have been indefatigable Wenchers, and yet never-tired Martialists; famous in the Cabins of Mars, and Cabinets of Venus; but the Fancy of Poets could never stretch it self so far, as to fan∣sie. Apollo (as they did Mars) in bed with Venus. In Mahomet, who sub∣dued Constantinople and the Eastern Empire, the passions of Amorousness and Ambition were almost equiballanced: but when they strove in him for preheminence, the Mutinous heat did ever gurmandize the Amorous flame. That couragious Captain Ladislaus, King of Naples, proposed to himself, as the principal Scope of his Ambition, the execution of his Sensuality, and enjoyment of some matchless Beauty: but herein he shewed himself a man of stronger Nerves than Head-piece, and came to die like a fool, by the stratagem of a poyson'd Handkerchief, in the the arms of that Wench, for whose mortal imbraces he had yielded that Victory to the Florentines which they were ready to yield to him, (Lord Mountagne's Essays) Mark Antony was both a couragious Souldier, and a passionate Amorado; but for want of Wit, suffered his pleasures so far to make him forget the Con∣duct of his affairs, as he may thank Cleopatras dalliances, for his Ruin and loss of Empire. Julius Caesar as he was the first sober man (in Cato's judgment) that ad∣drest himself to the ruin of the Common wealth; so he was the only pru∣dent man of a wanton lascivious Complexion; the only wise man, that addicted himself to all manner of Amorous Licentiousness: yet his plea∣sures could never make him lose one minute of an hour, nor turn one step
from the occasions that might any way farther his advancement (as that Noble Humanist and great Critick of Men, the Lord Mountagne observes.) But if I may with the lieve of his learn'd Ghost dissent from that Judg∣ment he passeth upon Caesar; I would rather think, he did but court Venus in complement, as an Handmaid or Pander to his Ambition; a Trick of State used of old: For Herodotus reports, that Cyrus made love to Tomyris, and courted her to become his Wife; but she, smelling it was only in Complement to her, but in Reality to her Crown, chose rather to answer his suite, in the Field of Mars, than the Gardens of Venus. (Clio; pag. 95.) And that Nitocris, the Queen of Egypt, drew those Nobles, that had an hand in the Murder of her Brother, into mortal Snares, by a train of Love∣powder. (Herod. Eutirpe.) But never more familiarly than in that Age of the first Caesars. Cleopatra courted Herod to come into her imbraces, not so much out of Love as treacherous Policy, (Joseph. ant. Jud. 15. 5.) A∣grippina prostituted her self to Lepidus, and afterwards to Pallas, and at last to her own Son Nero: not out of Lasciviousness, but out of Design to obtain and keep the Sovereignty: [spedominationis] (Tacit. annal. 5. 14. 198.) And lastly, Augustus (Sueton. Octavius 69.) his Intimates excused his familiarity with the Senators Wives, as done, not for the satisfying of his lusts, but out of Reasons of State, that he might, by those Subagitati∣ons of their Wives, bolt out the secrets of their Husbands; with whose Heifers he ploughed, that he might read their Riddles. Augustus (saith Dion.) made so much use of Woman-kind when he was fifty years old, as the Senate thought to gratifie him with a License to have to do with whom∣soever he pleased: (Dion. lib. 44.) I am apt to think, Julius might grind in so many Mills, upon the like Design, as having Cato's concurrence; who in open Senate charged Julius and his Allies, with endeavours to insinuate themselves into places of greatest Trust and Command, by the Panderage of Marriages, [Per nuptiarum lenocinia & hujusmodi mulieres:] this was Cato's sence of Caesar's matching his Julia to Pompey, and his marrying Calpurnia, (Plutarch. C. Caesar.) And his Collegue Bibulus preferr'd this Complaint a∣gainst him; That it was the Kingdom he courted, in making love to the Queen of Bithinia; [Bithinicam Reginam fuisse cordi nunc Regnum.] (Sue∣ton. Julius 49.) Caesar was but a kind of a Lay-smock-simonist. So that for all him, we are yet to seek for one Instance (in all History) of a noted Wanton, that has not been a notorious Fool. But to return from this Deviation, to which the proving of the Medium I here urge (It was a Lascivious, ergò a Sottish Age) hath drawn me. John 12 or 13. (for the Popish Writers are not agreed under what num∣ber to place him; Joan (the She-pope) is the Davus here, turbat omnia) was a Pig of the same Litter, if the learned Council of Lateran were not mis∣taken; for the Fathers there assembled, prefer to Otho the Great, these Ar∣ticles against him (Luitprand. lib. 2. cap. 7.) That he ordained Deacons in a Stable: That he made Boys but ten years old Bishops: That in playing at Dice he invocated the Devil: That he made a Brothel-house of the Lateran Palace; lay with Stephana his Father's Concubine, and drank the Devil's Health. And when in answer to this Charge he sent out his Bulls to bel∣low Anathema's against them, they made bold to return this Reply. You write, by the suggestion of empty-headed Councellors, Childish Threats—we despise your threatned Excommunication, and throw it back upon your self: Judas the Traitor, when he would kill the Lord of Life, whom did he bind but himself, whom he strangled in an unhappy Rope? Pope Lando, this John's Predecessor, was so inconsiderable a person, and his Life so obscure (saith Platina) as many Historians make no reckoning of him at all, but leave his Name and Story out of the Catalogue of Popes, and does thus express the degeneracy of that time: Not only were those fa∣mous Lights which in the days of yore render'd Italy illustrious, extinct; but the very Nurseries, where so excellent roots shot forth, were altogether laid waste and uin'd.
Pope Sergius 3. is complemented by the same Author in the Style of a rude and unlearned man: and the Reader desired to observe how the Popes of this Age were degenerate from their forefathers: For these throwing the service of God behind their backs, like raging Tyrants exercised enmities upon one another; and having none to bridle and keep them in, greedily pursued their own lusts. So devoid of Understanding were those Brutes, as they needed Bit and Bridle: and therefore the Council of Rhemes (held in this Centu∣ry) did prudently, in superseding their purpose of sending to the Pope for Advice in a difficult point, when they heard it averr'd in open Court, that scarce a man in Romo could read the Christ-cross-row, [Romae jam nullum ferè esse qui literas didicerit] (B. Hall. hon of mar. lib. 1. Sect. 23.) § 4. The 11. Century was invelop'd with so thick a Cloud, as the very Light that was in it was gross Darkness; teeming with sixteen Popes, immedi∣atly succeeding one another (from Gerebert or Silvester 2. to Hildebrand or Gregory 7. inclusively) who lighted their Candle at the Devil's flame; ex∣ceeding Jannes and Jambres in Jugglery; and rising (by the black Art) in the Smoke of the bottomless Pit to the Papal Throne, if Cardinal Ben∣no have not belyed them. Nauclerus (vol. 2. generat. 31.) extends the line of this sacred (auri sacra fames) Succession to that length, as he joyns to these, 28 Popes succeeding Silvester, that were his Disciples in Necro∣mancy, and committed those Villanies, as it would make a man's hair stand on end to hear. Bellarmine himself (Chronologia Cent. 11.) confesseth, that in this Century there was more Sanctity under the Robe, than under the Gown: that we are less beholding to the Popes of this Age, for preserving a Succession of Religion, than to Secular Princes; which had gone wholly to wrack (for all St. Peter's Successors) if it had not been supported by the Piety of (Christ's Vice-gerents) the Emperour Henry and his Wife Chunagand; Ro∣manus, Emperour of Constantinople; Cute King of Denmark and England; Stephen King of Hungary, and his Son St. Emeric; St. Robert, the French King; Ferdinand the Great, King of Castile, and his Wife Sanatia. For all those greater Lights that God made to rule the Day, the Church had been benighted, if it had not been for these lesser Lights, these Secular Princes. If the Earth had not helpt the woman, and God given her the Eagles Wings of both Empires, East and West, and provided a place for her in the Courts of Secular Princes, When Satan had set up his Throne in St. Peter's Palace, the Dragon (there Rampant) had destroyed her: he that then would look for the holy Church of Rome, must have looked beyond the Court of Rome, for there sate Hell's Plenipotentiary, if Platina be to be trusted. Silvester 2. (anno—998.) who contracted with the Devil for the Papacy, at the price of Body and Soul, whereof he was to give livery and seisure at his death, (Platina Silvest. 2.) [Pontificatum postremò, majore conatu adju∣vante Diabolo consecutus est, hac tamen lege, ut post mortem totus illius esset, cujus fraudibus tantam dignitatem adeptus est.] Ophrius (in Platinam) seeks to evade the Dint of common Fame touching Silvester, by this evasion; That he was a great Mathematician, and the ignorance of that Age so great too, as the Vulgar reputed them Witches, who had any thing in them above the pitch of common Learning: but himself misdoubts the validity of this, to elude the clear and concurrent Testimonies of so many grave and sober Authors. Truly I could heartily wish (for the sake of the Christian name) that his Argument had been cogent, in that branch of it wherein he would defend Sivester against the Charge of Sorceries: for the very medium he useth will serve my present turn, and demonstrates what a thick Mist of barbarous Ignorance, covered the face of that Age, which esteemed them black Swans who exceeded the common size of Geese: And him a great Clerk, who was but the Scholar of the Saracens, the most stupid kind of men; of whom he received that Mathematical Table. which neither he nor they nor any body else understands [abacum certè primus
Saracenis rapiens, regulas dedit quae à sudantibus Abacistis vix intelliguntur (C. Malmesbur. 2. 10.) However the Devil was too cunning for him, for [Statuae capt à Saracenis Hispaniensibus edoctus in oraculum sibi conflavit Sil∣vester secundus.] but his Oracle deceived him by Equivocation, promising he should not die till he read Mass in Jerusalem, meaning a Church in Rome so called, wherein he was singing Mass, he died miserably; (C. Malmeburiensis 2. 10. referente Seldeno de ds Syriis, in Teraphim.) But of all these Mathematicians none came near Benet 8. The rest rode the Devil during life, but he after his death; they curvetted upon that Beast in this World, he in Purgatory. The Prince of that bottomless Pit (whereof they were the Clavigers) held their Bridles while they rode in Procession; but the gentle Elephant takes up this spiritual Porus upon his own back, when death had dismounted him from his Papal Mule. Some report (saith Platina, in en. 8.) that his ghost sitting upon a black Horse ap∣peared to a certain Bishop, who asking the reason of his being in that equippage, is told, that all the alms he had given before proved inavailable, because they were given of goods got by Rapine; and is therefore intreated, by this Knight of Silvester's Order, to bestow in alms (in his name) certain sums of money; directing him to the place where he had bid them, The Bishop did as he was bid; dismounts from his Episcopal Throne, and turns Monk. One part of this Story, that Benet was relieved in Purgatory by Alms, is prest by the Papists, as one of their best Arguments for Purgatory, and the benefit of Suffrages: have they any reason then to deny the rest of it? Must they alledge it in defence of their Service for the Dead; and may we not alledge it in con∣demnation of that Service, as being instituted not by the Pope sitting in St. Peter's Chair, but on the back of a Fiend? let them forethink how they shall escape the Curse, if they will buy and sell by different weights; de∣liver out by strik'd and take in by heap'd measure. (How great was the Darkness, when the great Lights that rule the day thus gave the Candle to one another, which they had lighted at the Devil's fire!) But I must laquey it no longer, at the side of this rank Rider. Baronius calls me to attend on John 21. whom he affirms to be in the lowest Purgatory, to have been unworthy of the Papal Dignity, into which he entered by unworthy means, and managed with Tyranny. Of whom some reported (saith Platina) that he was a mere Laick before he was created Pope. In whose time all affairs at Rome were managed by Enchanters and Necromancers (if we may credit Gratian.) But horror surprizeth me while I walk thus far after these Triple-crown'd Magicians; those damps of the Infernal Pit threaten to stifle my spirits: I will therefore withdraw my thoughts from these Sulphureous streams, and retire to those Histories, from whence we may take a less offensive prospect of that Cloud, which, from an handful at first, did by degrees overspread the Western Hemisphere, with such blackness of Darkness, as the sight of it extorted from Alphonsus de Castro (cont. haereses lib. 1. cap. 4. edit. Colonens.) this Confession; That some Popes were such great Clerks as they had no skill at all in Grammar, A Confession the Modern Papists are so asham∣ed of, as they have expunged that Clause out of later Copies, and gelt that Colen-edition, anno 1541, of that sentence. And from Matthew Paris, in the Life of our William the Conquerour, this, That he was then esteemed a wondrous great Scholar that had but learn'd his Grammar, [stupori erat caeteris qui Grammaticam didicerat.] And from Theoderique Niem. this, [That Pope Boniface could neither write, nor read Mass, hardly understanding the Propositions of Advocates in the Consisto∣ry: in so much as ignorance did then bear away the prize in the Roman Court. And from Lupus Abbot of Ferrara, this (in his Letter to King Lewis) [That they were accounted troublesom who were desirous of knowledge; and that illiterate Age gazed upon such as wonders.]
And from Agobard (in his Works of the Paris Edition, anno 1605. pag. 128.) this; [That God had made the Priests of that Age so vile, as Gentlemen retain'd them not s their instructors, but as Trencher-chaplains, to wait at Table, to lead Doggs, to feed Horses, &c.] In the midst of which great and mischievous ignorance (saith Platina) (Bonifac. 9. circa finem an. 1389.) one happiness befel Italy, by Chry∣solitus Byzantius his bringing thither the Greek Letters, which had not sound∣ed there for 500 years before. So childish in understanding was that Age wherein the Blasphemies of Mahomet and Popish Innovations (for they commenc'd and took their de∣grees together like Twins) were presented to the World; so dark that night wherein those Tares were sown; in so dead a sleep were the Centinels, when the Cackling of these Geese about the Capitl was esteemed merito∣rious. So barbarous was was that World upon which Rome imposed her unsociable Paradoxes, of the Pope's Supremacy over Bishops, over Kings, &c. as that of Bernard (Serm. in Concil. Rhemensi) may fitly be applied to this Subject; I will set my seat in the North, that is, far from the Sun of know∣ledge, far from the warmth of Vertue; in the midst of Boreal storms, of blustering winds of war and tumults. Pliny did not with more hazardous difficulty travel, in obtaining the knowledge of the burning of Vesuvius, by ocular demonstration and approach to it, while the flames flew about his ears, than men could (in that boysterous Age when this two-fac'd Antichrist ap∣peared) in obtaining the knowledge of worldly Affairs, in informing them∣selves in the Natural History of those blazing Stars, those burning Moun∣tains, which chose a time to break out, and draw the Ages of the World after them, when the smoak and sparks of War did every where fly about and threaten to stifle the approachers. Whereas Christ's Star arose in the still Calm of Peace, when, without interruption of their course, men might go or send to the place over which it stood, from all parts of the World. Never was the Air more clear from foggs, more free feom winds, than when the Gospel came flying in the midst of Heaven. But I shall speak of the latter Branch of this Position, after I have taken a view of the World's Complexion in point of Knowledge, when Pagan Theology obtained footing. §. 5. If we trace the Original of Pagan Theology, the Stories of those many Gods Incarnate, those Thieves and Robbers (as our Saviour calls them) that came before him, we shall find, they had their Births in that rude and obscure time, when by reason of the late Confounding of Languages, the World was in the greatest incapacity of mutual Commerce: when every Nation (retaining some rough draught of the promised Seed) growing so numerons, as it was not possible men should be kept in order without Laws, and no Laws likely to awe them so much, as those that claim'd an heavenly Original. [] All Nations did cry up their own Laws as of a divine Original. (Aelian. Var. hist. 14. 34.) the Serpent put it into the heads of the Founders of Commonwealths, to sub∣orn their familiars and favorites to cry themselves up, as the promised Seed, as Gods born of Womans seed. The Multitude, partly out of Am∣bition to be accounted the Favorites of Heaven; partly out of State Policy, to keep their Posterities in awe with the Notion of a Deity, partly through the Legerdemain of cunning Impostors, readily either imbrac'd or seem'd to imbrace those Fables. Thus every Nation, while none of any other Language had dealings with them, or could observe their shuffling, agreed among themselves to take him for a Virgin-born Theanthropos, who seemed most worthy of that honour, by his publick spiritedness and success in doing Common Good. And by this means the World had the unhappy opportunity of inventing what fictions the Inhabitants of every corner of it pleased, without fear (or indeed possibility) of being detected, and of licking them into that
shape, by that time their nearest Neighbours could come to the knowledge of them, as might render their Stories plausible to that rude Embrio of Mankind. From which Consideration, Josephus (Antiq. 1. 1.) commends Moses's his Ingenuity, in that, when he had the start and advantage of all Writers in the opportunity of feigning (both in respect of the Date of his Writings and their Subject) impunè and without fear of detection; (none of the Pagan Writers daring to refer either the Pedigrees of their Gods, or the Institution of Laws, or the History of Humane Affairs, to so old a Date as he pitcheth upon, by above three thousand years) yet he carrieth on his History without the least mixture of Forgeries, abuseth not the World by improving the opportunity of being as fabulous as the vainest Poets: the Secundine of whose fabulous God-incarnations wherein they were se∣cretly formed, was the advantage which the ignorance of the World, and its wanting light to discover the fraudulency of their Traditions, administred to them. That this is the true state of this Case; appears, First from the industrious Care which their Inventors and Nurses took to conceal the Conceptions of those monstrous Issues of their brain: well ex∣prest by Clemens Alexandrinus, interpreting Midas his fostering Silenus, his concealing his own ears, &c. to devote his care to keep secret what Silenus imparted to him concerning his Foster-child Bacchus (Protreptic. 3. pag.) And more fully by a more authentick Author, as to this case, Macrobius (in his Saturnalibus 1. 7.) where Praetextatus tells Evangelius (who I conceive in that Conference personates the Christian) requesting him to declare the O∣riginal of the Saturnalia [Saturnalium originem il'am mihi in medium profer∣re fas est: non quae ad arcanam Divinitatis naturam refertur, sed quae aut fa∣bulis admixta disseritur, aut à physicis in vulgus aperitur. Nam occultas & manantes ex meri veri fonte rationes nè in ipsis quidem sacris enarrari permitti∣tur, sed si quis illas assequitur, continere inter conscientiam tectas jubetur.] I may reveal that Original of the Saturnalia, which is either fabulous or physical, not that which relates to the secret nature of Divinity: for the secret reasons which flow from the fountain of pure Truth may not be declared, no not in the administration of the sacred Rites themselves, but whoso knows them, is bound to conceal them in his own conscience, Numa (the parent of the Roman Re∣ligion) buried under ground the Books wherein he had laid down the Cir∣cumstances of his Traditions, and by what means he came to the know∣ledge of them, and of their acceptableness to the Gods. Five hundred years after their interring, these Writings obtain a resurrection, being turn∣ed up before the Plough of Terentius (say Cassus Hemina and Pliny (lib. 13. cap. 13.) of Paetilius (say Livy and Valerius.) The finder conveighs them to the Pretor; he communicates them to the Senate; the Senate, upon this ground that the divulging of them would not make for Credit of that Re∣ligion they communicated the grounds of, takes order that the like tempta∣tion to Athism should never come in the way of, never be laid before their successors, and therefore adjudgeth them to the flames. So fearful were they of having Numa's secret Congresses with his Aegeria come to the knowledge of the Vulgar, of having the Sheets shown, which bare the tokens of their Bed-converse, while he begat on her that Nymph the issue of his Religious Rites; lest upon that inspection she might be found no Virgin, but a Suc∣cuba: of which Numa himself was so not only jealous but conscious, as, though he durst not burn (for fear the Goddess should turn a Vixon (as St. Austin noteth) yet he thought it fit to bury those sheets; thinking length of time would take out the stains, or hoping they would never come out of their grave. (Austin. de civit. 7. 34.) The Athenian Goddess banish'd from her Service the tattling Crow, pro∣claiming her self thereby to be a Deity that loved not to be brought to light, liked not to have all that said of her Mysteries, which that tell-truth Bird would prate; and upon that account prefers the Owle, the Bird of night, before her. Servius upon Virgil conceives Virgil, from the Custom at her
Rites, to have borrowed his [procul hinc profani—] and so fearful was that Goddess of being discovered, as she would be conjured to do anything with that form of charming [Esse I will reveal thy mysteries;] and sadly complains against Numerius the Philosopher, the first that did divulge them, that he had spoiled the repute of her Chastity. The Eleusine Mysteries grew into a Proverb for their Secretness, that be∣ing the only thing in them that had any form of Religion; and therefore accounted so sacred, as Wine was interdicted those solemnities, for fear Truth should go out, if that Tongue-loosing Liquor went in. It was the Egyptians care to keep the Original of their Deities as obscure as the head of their Nilus: of which they gave a digital Demonstration, in their painting their Mercury with his hand laid upon his mouth; thereby teaching his Priests to seal up their lips, (Plut. de Iside.) A Lesson they had got so by heart, as it is reported for one of the most renowned Conquests which Alexander made, that he extorted from one of them, by the rack of the fear of inevitable death, the confession of this secret, That their reputed Gods were nothing else but Men, famous in, and useful to their Generations. A My∣stery which he intreates Alexander might not be divulged, but that after he had communicated the secret to Olympia, he would strictly injoyn her to burn the Letter; that what tended so much to the defamation of Reli∣gion, might not come to publick knowledge. The Poets paint to the life this sedulity of the old World to conceal their God-births, in their Fable of Pallases committing the new-born Ericthonius to the custody of Cecrops Daughters; with a severe charge not to prie into the Ark wherein he was lock'd up. And the Carvers by the Tritons that were set upon the Temple of Saturn, who had their Tayles immers'd and buried in the earth; to denote that the Religions of the former Ages were concealed: (Macrob. Saturn. 1. 8.) Whereto Orpheus had respect in that Proverbial form, [, Let prophane ears be sealed up, I am going to sing of the Gods: Horace in his [Odi prophanum vulgus, & arceo—favete linguis, carmina non priùs audita musarum sacerdos, virginibus puerisque, can∣to.] And that Prose-Poet Petronius, [Major enim in praecordiis dolor saevit, qui me usque ad necessitatem mortis deducit,  scilicet juvenili impulsi licentiâ, quod in sacello Priapi vidistis, vulgetis, Deorúmque consilia proferatis in populum: pro∣tendo igitur ad genua vestra supinas manus, petóque & oro, nè nocturnas religio∣nes jocum isúmque faciatis, néve traducere velitis tot annorum secreta, quae vix mille homines noverunt.] (Petronii Arbitri Satiricon.) But my greatest trouble is my fear, that by the impulse of venile licentiousness, you should tell what you have seen, and blab abroad the secrets of the Gods: I therefore stretch out my supine hands to your knees, begging and beseeching that you would not make a mock of our night religions, and that you would not traduce the secrets of so many years, which scarce one thousand men do know. Secondly, as Trafficking of one Nation with another increas'd, the World grew past this kind of Child-bearing, gave over teeming with these fictiti∣ous God-men. If any had the face to show a big Belly with such Conceptions, in that Age wherein they could not lay it, but be observed of others, their Births proved abortive. Alexander bid as fair for the repute of a Divine Ori∣ginal from Jupiter, as Hercules had done, his Mother fathering him with as much probability as Alomena had fathered Hercules upon that God, if we nakedly compare the Gossips stories, and the Fiction of Dianas assisting her in her labour, while her Temple at Ephesus was burnt down; which gave occasion to Egesias Magnesius to say, she was imployed about a work of more concern than the saving of her own Temple, (Plut. Alexand.) The admirers of Plato (Guarin. vitâ Platonis) told as streight a Tale of his be∣ing Apollo's Son, as Antiquity had told of Aesculapius, and without that self-contradiction of a bearded Son and beardless Father, (for which the Sicilian Tyrant (Valerius Max. 1. 1.) pull'd the Father by the Chin and the Son by the Beard.) Caesar's Star was as valid an Indication of his Deifica∣tion,
as Romulus his Thunder and Lightning was of Quirinus's; yea the Senate's Decree for Caesar was past with a more Rational Vote among the Vulgar, (Sueton. Julius 88.) who by seeing a Comet during the seven days of his Funeral Solemnities, were brought into the opinion of his Assumpti∣on into the Chorus of the Gods, upon better grounds than the old Senate could or did lay before the then Vulgar, to bring them into a belief that Ro∣mulus was translated into their number; they offering no other argument but the single word of Proeulus. Those later Tales which the Procounesians, Cyzicens and Metapontines told of Aristaeus being turned into a God-crow, are no more unlikely, than the Elder Latins Stories of Picus being metamorphosed into a God-jay; yet as Celsus (that great Patron of Pagan Theology) confesseth (Orig. cont. Cels. lib. 3. calum. 8.) No man now esteems Aristaeus a God; no not after Apollo's Oracle had charged the Metapentines to erect him Altars. Why were not those of a younger house, of a later Edition, embraced with an equal Credulty? but because the ancient Figments could not be traced up to their obscure Springs, nor impartially examined, till by a prolix Series of Ages the be∣lief of them had been rivetted in mens minds; but these After-broods were brought forth in a season, when the knowledge of Contingencies was com∣municable from Sea to Sea, and By-standers pried into the Actions of their Neighbours. An ingenious Hint of which Truth the close of that foremention∣ed Fiction administers of Cadmus's Daughters, whom Pallas could not charm from prying into her Depositum. The Off-spring of the many-tongued Cecrops, of that Age wherein men of several Languages were no longer Barbarians to one another, cannot keep Minerva's Counsel, but will be peeping into the Cradle, where the new-born Deity is laid to nurse, till (infantémque vident apporrectúmque draconem) they see the serpentine feet, the fraud upon which the fiction is framed. Thirdly, as the Theology of those obscure Times came to be enquired into by Foreigners, traversing the several Climates, on purpose to find out the Originals of things, it grew by degrees into that discredit, as at last it was wholly exploded for fabulous, and its Gods detected to have been but Men. Diodorus Graecus, Thallus, Cass. Severus, Cornelius Nepos, yea all that write upon that subject, have openly published Saturn to have been no o∣ther than a Mortal (saith Tertullian, Apol. 10.) And if you look for Argu∣ments to prove it, where can you find more convincing ones than in Italy it self, whither he retired in flight from the pursuit of his rebellious Son; from whose lurking there it derived its name Latium. St. Austin (de civi∣tate 8. 5.) hath this Note upon the Story of the Egyptian Priest's revealing to Alexander, the nakedness of the Heathen Gods, not only Picus and Romulus, the Gods of the lesser & later Nations; but Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and all the rest of the 12 Deities majorum Gentium, of the greatest Antiquity, are found by search to have been sometimes men, & creatures of his making that is the great God & Creator of all things, as Plato & Cicero speak, (de leg. l. 2.) (Tusc. qu.) (in Timaeo.) And, indeed, what do they hint to us, or rather speak fully out, of Jupiter himself (the Parent of all their Gods) that placed the Image of his Nurse besides him in the Capitol. Do not they assent to Euemerus, who, not as a fabulous Tattler, but as a diligent Enquirer, hath drawn the Natural and Moral History of all those Gods, (de Civitate 6. 7.) But we will hear the Heathens tell their own Tales of what they had found concerning their Gods. Trismegistus, in his Aesclapius, (cap. 9. & 13.) translated by Porphyry (that grand Pagan Adversary to the Christian Name) affirms, that men made all those Gods who are worshipt in Temples: a thing, saith he, that passeth all admiration, and argueth our Ancestors to have erred exceedingly, touch∣ing the Nature of the Deity. Yea, he proves this by Induction of particu∣lars. (Aug. de civ. l. 8. c. 26.) Thy Grandfather, O Asclepius, the first Inventor of Physick, hath a Temple erected to him in a Mountain of Lybia, near the Croco∣diles shore, wherein his Mundane man, his Body, lies interr'd. And Hermes, after
whom I am named, hath his Tomb in Hermopolis, a City in Aegypt of his founding. Varro in his Antiquities, dedicated to Julius Caesar the great Pon∣tiff, gave so plain demonstration of this, from the Rites and Solemnities used in their Divine Worship, as the Senate decreed his Book to be burnt (August. de civit. 8. 25.) Valerius Maximus, in his Epistle Dedicatory to Tiberius, saith, that all our Gods we have received of our Ancestors, but the Caesars we have handed down to Posterity, [reliquos accepimus, Caesares dedimus.] A ma∣nifest Confession of a Pagan, and that to the face of a Pagan Emperour, that the Gods they had received were of the same kind with those they gave, i. e. Mortals. The Roman Demosthenes in his Tusculane Questions concludes thus; If I listed to ransack the Antiquities of the Greeks, I should find that the same Gods whom we esteem greatest, have had their Original among us Mortals: For the verifying hereof, do but enquire whose the Tombs are that are shewed in Greece, and consider with thy self what their Ceremonies and Mysteries are; for having access to them thou wilt without doubt understand far more than I averr. By this means Euemerus fram'd that History which the Grecians abusive∣ly called sacred, for which himself was tearmed Atheist, numbred by Theodori∣cus Cyrenensis and Aelian, with Diagoras and Theodorus, and stiled by Timon (in his Syllis) , insolent old Knave; consisting of the Collections of the Titles and Monuments of the most ancient Temples, and thereby prov∣ing Tully's Assertion, wherein he had the suffrage of Pythagoras, Plato, Socrates, and the most eminent of their Scholars; yea of all persons but doting old Wives, not only in that, but in other points of Theology, [quae verò anus tam excors inveniri potest, quae illa, quae quondam credebantur portenta, extimescat; o∣pinionum enim commenta delet dies, naturae judicia confirmat.] Cirero de nat. Deor. l. 2. p. 54.) What old wife is to be found so witless, as to fear such things as af anci∣ent time were accounted portents? For time (saith he) obliterates the devices of o∣pinions, but confirms the sentiments of Nature. But the Testimonies already alledged are abundantly sufficient to evince what reason the Romans had to stile Saturn (whom the Greeks called , i. e. Time, the father of Truth: even for this cause (saith Plutarch) because time reveals all things. To be sure, in this case he brought to light those things touching the birth of Heathen Gods, as gave ground enough to the Poetical Fiction, of Saturn's devouring his Off-spring: and to that Proverb of the Gre∣cians, ▪ the Grow sings another note than the Owl; for, if I may hold up my Candle to that Sun of restored Learning, the great Erasmus; I conceive this to be the importance of it, that the after-times of mutual commerce among the Nations of the World, taught the Crow to prate other stories of their feigned Gods, than the Owl had whooted in that obscure and independent Age wherein those Fables were hatched: when men had never gone out of sight of the Smoak of their own Chimneys, and mea∣sured themselves by themselves. Gorgias and Protagoras, saith Aelian, were the most famous men of all Greece, though as far from Wisdom as Boys are from men. It was only while they were caged up in their Countrey's Know∣ledge, that they retain'd the Note they were taught to sing, Jove is a God, Juno is a Goddess, &c. which they forgat as soon as they are turn'd loose, like Annon's Birds in the same Author. Briefly, the day hath revealed all false Religions to be mere Impostures; but that of Divine Institution, pro∣fessed by the Patriarchs, out-lasted the old World, exerted its head above that Flood, which over-top'd the highest Mountains, and shewed its face more bright as it grew in Years. Noah illustrated Enoch, Moses Noah, the Prophets Moses. All whose Commentaries upon that Evangelical Grain of Mustard-seed, sowen by God's hand in Paradise, as Science (truly so called,) came to per∣fection in the Apostatized World, gained repute amongst the most rational, inquisitive, and civilized Nations. And when that Religion had attain'd its ultimate perfection by Christ's filling up the Law and Prophets though the
Judaick, which virtually contains the Christian, hath not, in its letter, with the Vail upon Moses his face, obtain'd one Proselyte: yet the Christian, which is the explanation of that; and presents the Old Testament so bare-fac'd, as the way-faring man, though a fool, cannot err in expounding Moses; hath procured acceptance every where, (where it hath come among Men, and not Brutes) hath at no time, in no place, been under a Cloud, since its first ris∣ing; but when or where a Cloud hath been drawn over Mens Minds, and their foolish Hearts benighted in blackness of Darkness. This Wisdom hath been justifyed of Wisdom's Children, and the more Trials upon the Test of right Reason it has undergon, the greater Approbation it hath obtained. CHAP. VIII. The Apostolical Age was fortified against Surprisal by the Exter∣nal Advantages of Posts and Peace. § 1. They find as speedy a way for conveyance of News, as we: Vibullius, Cae∣sar, Sempronius, Tiberius, their incredible Posting. Intelligence flew in Persia as fast as Cranes. The Roman Eagle as swift of Wing as the English Unicorn is of foot. § 2. That Age enjoyed so long a Peace, as Intelligence might pass without Interruption: Janu's Temple shut by Augustus, a rare thing in the Roman Annals. § 3. Tiberius had a peaceable Reign, so had Caligula; all the Warlike Marches that he made was in pursuit of the Cowardly Ocean, running from him at the Tide; and in lopping down the Bows of a Coppice. Palsey-headed Claudius felt no shakings in his Em∣pire, no Trumpet of War then sounded, but that of the Silver Triton in the Ficine Lake. In Nero's third Year they had much ado to draw the Sword, it had layen so long rusting in the Scabbard. § 4. This peaceable Season was the Seed-time of Christ's Labourers, wherein they dispenc'd the Gospel through the Empire. § 1. WE have taken A Prospect of that Age, wherein the Gospel was first brought to light; and found it so well fortifyed by the in∣ner Works of improved Reason, as would have made the most daring At∣tempters despair to subdue it to the belief of most cunningly devised Fables: and therefore, that the Apostles should be so fool-hardy, as to assault it with feigned Tales, as to think to outvye that Sun of Knowledg, then shining in the greatest Lustre: by holding a Farthing Candle of Old Wive's Stories be∣fore it, is a conceipt so gross as can hardly seise upon minds that are not ex∣ceedingly byassed with Partiality. Let us now take a view of the Out-works, the External Fortifications which that Age had to secure it from the Surprisals of Impostors: And that, first, in respect of the Dexterity of that Age in point of quick dispatch of Intelligence; in which Art, it lagg'd not behind; but rather out-stripp'd ours. The Eng∣lish Unicorn is not more swift of foot now, than the Roman Eagle was of Wing then; as appears from Caesar's reporting Vibullius to have posted Night and Day, taking at every Stage a fresh Horse, that he might certify Pompy that Caesar was at hand, (Caesar's Comment. 3. 3.) By Suetonius writing of Caesar, that he used to run an hundred Miles a day on an hired Chariot; by the help of blowen Bladders making his way over Rivers; and by that means per∣forming long Journeys with that incredible Celerity, as he oftentimes arrived at his Journeys end, before the News of his setting forth had come thither, (Suet. Jul. 57▪) [longissimas vias incredibili celeritate fecit, expeditus meritoria rheda centena passuum millia per singulos dies, &c.] By what Livie relates of Sempronius Graccus, that in the Roman Wars against Antiochus, he went
by Post from Amphiss'a to Pella in three Days, Pliny Hist. 37. pag. 759. [Per dispositos equs prope incredibili celeritate.] By what Val. Maximus has re∣corded of Tiberius his posting to visit his Brother Drusus, (why lay sick in Germany,) with that Rapid and Precipitate Haste, as he hurried over the Alps, and that rugged Region bounding upon them, at the rate of two hun∣dred Miles in the space of twenty four Hours, (Val Max. 5. 5. 3.) [Iter quam rapidum & preceps corripuerit eo patet quod Alpes Rhenumque transgressus, Die & Nocte, mutato subinde Equo, ducenta Millia passuum evasit.] By what Philo Judaeus, (de legatione ad Caium. pag. 639.) reports of Petronius his not dar∣ing to proceed to the fulfilling of Caligula's command to erect his Image in the Temple, for fear the Jews should from all parts of the World presently be about his Ears, by reason of that incredible quick way of dispatch of News they had inured themselves to. Indeed those parts of the Empire that bor∣dered upon Judaea, and wherein the Apostles of the Circumcision chiefly conversed, and spread the Gospel, were, long before that time, put into a posture for the most speedy conveyance of Advertisements, by Cyrus: who that he might have News brought him of all Emergencies from all the parts of his vast Empire, would have trial made how far an Horse could go out-right at full speed without bating: at which distance he caused Stages to be set, and fresh Horses to stand: which kind of posting, some (as Xenophon saith) affirm to be equivalent for swiftness to the flying of Cranes (Xenophon. Cyrus. 8. 43.) [.] And sure the Eagle had an Eye to see, what advantage it would be to her, to imp her wings with the Cranes Feathers; to improve the Roman Art of posting, by the accession of this of the Persian. An Art perhaps conveighed thither out of Judaea, and communicated by Daniel, at what time he was set over the Presidents of the Provinces: how∣ever, 'tis certain, it was of old in use among them, for we read of Hezechiah's sending his Proclamations by Post; and hear Deborah bewail the days of Shamgar, for that in them the Courriers were forced to take▪ By-ways: so that the Apostles could not be ignorant of that ready way of communicating In∣telligence, which the Empire had then learnt. Palladius was able to ride post unto the furthest Bounds of the Roman and Persian Dominions, and back a∣gain in thirty days to Theodosius the Emperour at Constantinople, [Socrat. Scol. Eccl. Hist. 7. 19.] And (which comes nearer the times of the Apostles) Cice∣ro reports that Caesar writ to him out of Britain the 1. day of September, and the Letters came to his hands the 28. day of the same Month, [Sleidan clavis Hist. lib. 1.] And therefore, for them to have gone up and down with pom∣pous stories of things done in Judaea, when they could not but know, that who so pleased, might in a Months time, or less, have detected the forgery, would have been such a piece of Temerarious Madness, as 'tis scarce imagi∣nable, how twelve men's heads at once could be intoxicated with it. § 2. That Age was externally fortified against the assaults of Impostors, by reason of that universal Peace through the World, that ushered the Prince of Peace into the World; so as Intelligence might pass from Nation to Na∣tion through the Universe (as Blood by Circulation, through the Veins of an healthful Body) without the least Obstruction. Times of Distraction are the most promising Seed-times of Lyes: he who in fishing for men, dubbs his Hook with a counterfeit Fly, will chuse to fish in troubled Waters: he that has learn'd the black Art of inventing News, will chuse a Season to practise in, when an Embargo is laid upon the Packet-boats: when the Bridges are broken down, the High-ways unoccupied, when through the noise of Arms, men cannot hear, nor are at leisure to listen after, what falls out in the re∣moter parts of the World: as in the Battel betwixt Flaminius and Hannibal; at which, they that were present by reason of the Hurly-burly among them∣selves,
perceived not the most clamorous Effects of the then prodigious Earth-quake, that demolished the best parts of the chiefest Cities, diverted Rivers from their wonted Channels, and tumbled down with a hideous Fragor the tops of Mountains, (Plutarc. Fab. Maximus, 72.) Such Confusions are the fittest Seasons for the Father of Lyes to cast his Spawn, for Satan to throw a∣broad his poysoned Arrows: that before time, (the Mother of Truth) can give them a check, his fry may be of Age to shift for themselves; his stories may stick so fast in Mens Minds, as the hand of Truth, afterwards, will have much ado to pull them out, and not leave some Splinters, if not the pile head behind. The Apostles of the blessed Jesus used not this craft, his Fisher-men angled in calm Waters, his Seedsmen scattered the Gospel in those pacate days, as gave men leisure to ponderate every Circumstance of the News they brought: Men might then sit peaceably under their own Vines, and ruminate upon the fruit of our Royal Vine, that chears the Heart of God and Man. The whole Empire, at Christ's Birth, (brooding under the Dove-like Wings of the Ro∣man Eagle) enjoyed that Halcionian Calm, as she had not been blessed with the like, but once, in that large Tract of time betwixt Numa and Augustus; and that but for a piece of a Year; and yet that short breathing time from War reported as a Miracle: Numa (saith Livy) that erected Janus s Temple was the first, who, in token if Peace universally obtained through the Roman Territo∣ries, shut up the Gates of that Temple; Manlius the second, and Augustus the third: Providence having bestowed this gift upon our Age, that we should see Peace setled, (after the Conquest of Mark. Anthony at Actium) by the Emperour Au∣gustus, both by Land and Sea (Livius lib. 1. pag. 12. 6.) [Bis post Numae regnum Janus clausus fuit, semel T. Manlio consule post Punicum primum Bellum perfe∣ctum. Iterum quod nostrae aetati Dii dederunt ut videremus, post bellum Actiacum ab imperatore Caesare Augusto, pace terra marique parta.] How short liv'd that Peace was in the Consulship of Manlius, Vives informs us out of Eutropi∣us (if I mistake him not) for I no where, in Eutropius, meet with a passage, looking that way, but rather the contrary) saying that after Manlius and At∣tilius had, upon their Triumph for the Conquest of Sardis, shut the Gates of Ja∣nus; they were some Months after opened again, in token of the Illyrick War. But however I mistake Vives, or he Eutropius; the thing it self is manifest enough, from that place of St. Austin, upon which he comments; for (saith he) one (and not all out one) Year of Peace (among those many that intervened betwixt Numa and Augustus) wherein, after the first Punick War, the Ro∣mans had lieve to shut up the Gates of War, is recorded as a Wonder, (August. de civitate 3. 9.) [Vix, post tam multos annos ab urbe condita usque Augustum, unus post primum Punicum bellum pro magno miraculo commemoratur annus, quo belli portas Romani claudere potuerunt:] An Assertion, which St. Austin had ground enough for, (that the Atheist may not object that these are the Piae fraudes of Christians,) out of Plutarch, who writes, that the Temple of Ja∣nus did not continue long shut in the Consulship of Manlius and Attilius: for forthwith, immediately after that it was opened again; a new War rolling in upon, and assaulting the Empire, (Plut. Numa.) [M. Attilio & T. Manlio Coss. haud multum temporis clausum, deinde Continuo ingruente irrumpenteque bello apertum est.] Upon which, he there gives this Note: 'Tis seldom, but that the Roman Empire is ensnarl'd in some or other War; It being so vast a body, and on all sides incircled with restless Barbarians, (Id. Ib.) [Quod certe difficile aut etiam rao factum quàm aliquo bello semper suspensum imperium teneatur: nam cum propter ejus mgnitudinem, barbaris nationibus undique circumfusum ac septum esset: iis repugnare cogebatur.] And yet it was a time of the singing of this rare Bird, when our Prince of Peace exhibited himself to the World. This is that Caesar (saith Philo Ju∣daeus, speaking of Augustus) who, finding the World as a boisterious Sea, tos∣sed every way with tempestuous Winds; charmed its Waves asleep, and restored to it such Serenity, as not only open Wars were every where exiled, but private
Robberies: this is he, who reduc'd that Chaos of Confusion, that the World had been buried under in former Ages, unto that well setled and comely order, which we see it in in ours: this is he that has moulded the most savage Nations into Mansuetude and humane Societies, (Phil. de legat. ad Caium.) [Hic est ille Caesar qui depul∣sis undiquaque ruentibus procellis serenitatem orbi restituit: qui & aperta bella sustulit, &c.] But Philo perhaps plays the Orator, and describes with Re∣torical Flourishes the flourishing of the Imperial Olive; let us therefore en∣quire of Suetonius that uncorrupted Oracle of Pagan History; from whom we have this Respond. Janus Quirinus that had not been shut in but once and again from the first founding of Rome unto this Age, was in a far shorter space shut in three times By Augustus, peace being setled by Land and Sea, (Suet. O∣ctav. 22.) [Janum Quirinum, semel atque iterum a Condita Urbe, memoriam ante suam clausum, in multo breviore temporis spatio, Terra Marique pace parta, ter clausit.] (for that is the true reading (not as Beroaldus would have it, the third time) as both Jasenius observes out of Lipsius, and the Context imports.) Augustus was Christ's Cryer, to proclaim silence in the World, before the publication of the Gospel: that men might without distraction weigh what was told them. The worst Juncture that an impostor could have pitched upon to shew his Pranks in: when as Bullenger observes, Rust had riveted the Sword to the Scabbard. [Ipsa etiam rubigo obsignavit.] (Bulleng. In Daniel. par. 2. tab. 5.) § 3. If exception be made against the Cogency of this Argument; that Christ indeed was born under Augustus, but what is that to the publication of the Gospel: seeing that began in the Baptist's preaching under Tiberius, till when, and some time after, Christ walk'd incognito. And therefore, the times might be grown turbulent enough for a Legerdemain's passing without discovery by that time the Apostles began to preach. I shall put by this Bar to Faith by making good this Assertion, That the Peace setled by Augustus, was continued under Tiberius, Caligu∣la, Claudius, and so much of Nero's Reign: as for thirty Years after the Go∣spel began to be preach'd, the World enjoyed Peace, so as any, who had a mind to enquire, might have informed himself of the truth of what had past in Judaea: the passage of Intelligence being no where interrupted. 1. For the peaceableness of Tiberius his Reign, (Anno Christi 17.) let Philo Judaeus speak (Philo de legatione ad Caium) who accusing the Alexandrians of extream madness, in giving that Divine Honour to Caligula, which they neglected to give to Tiberius: presents his happy Reign in these Words. In the three and twenty Years of his Reign he left no Seed, no not so much as a Spark of War, by Sea or Land among Greeks or Barbarians; but nourish'd Peace and the fruits of Peace to his dying day. And a little before, during his Em∣pire, the East, West, North, South-Provinces consented together in that calmness of Peace, that there was nothing to be seen in City or Countrey, but Festivities, Altars, Victims, chearful and pleasant Countenances, &c. 2. In what state of Tranquility the Empire stood under Caligula (Anno Christi, 40.) Suetonius will inform us (Suet. Calig. 43.) [Militiam resque bel∣licas semel attigit adeo delicate ut verri sibi vias & conspergi &c.] who affirms that he never made Warlike Expedition but once, and that undertaken merely out of Curiosity, (not need,) and managed with that Leisure and Delicacy, as he commands the Countrey (as he marches) to sweep the Ways, and sprinkle them with Water, to allay the Pride of the Dust, and teach it (better manners than to fly in his face) quietly to crouch at his and his Army's feet. In which E∣quipage, marching as far as Belgium, the first Enemy he encounters is a Cop∣pice: against which he furiously leads on his Army, and (as if his eyes were set counter to his that was born blind) taking Trees for men, and perswad∣ing his followers into the same Faith (so ancient is that Roman Maxim of im∣plicite Faith: The Pope carries Men's Eyes in his Pocket, and must be believ∣ed, even in the point of Transubstantiation, contrary to ocular Demonstra∣tion)
by the help of native Ladders, they scale the living wooden Walls, lop off the Arms of their resolute Foes (that like Pompey's Souldiers in Thessa∣ly, scorn'd to give ground (Caesar comment. 3. 33.) and returns in Tri∣umph to the Camp; each Souldier carrying the Spoil he had taken, the Branch he had cut down, in his hand: (Suet. Calig. 45.) an Argument, they had, through long Peace, forgot the Formalities of Warlike Ovations: for (if the Masters of those Ceremonies be to be believed) they ought to have worn them as Civick Crowns on their heads, seeing that never Field was won with so little expence of Citizen-blood, except the second and last he fought against the Sea; which proud Enemy (partaking of the quality of the neighbouring French Shore,) coming on, in its Flow, with a more than mas∣culine, but falling back, in its Ebb, with a less than woman-like Spirit; gave ground, and yielded the Field to the Romans: who, falling upon the Spoil that the cowardly Ocean had scattered in her retreat, turn their Swords into Plough-Shares, to furrow up the Sands for the gathering of Cockle-shells; and their Helmets into Fish-Panniers, to carry them away. (Suet. Calig. 46.) So far did Providence here over-do the Prophecy of the peaceableness of the Kingdom of the Messiah; of which, that one tittle might not fall to the ground, God permitted those Diabolical and Damnable Traytors (for such perswasions come of Satanical Injections, and they that resist shall receive Damnation) Bessus, Sabinus, and their Confederates, to turn their Bodkins into Pruning-hooks, to pluck up this Cumber-ground-weed Caligula; when he was but intending to break the Peace, and deluge the Empire in Blood: having no other quarrel against the World, but its being over-happy through its abundance of Peace; looking on the Tranquillity of that Age with an e∣vil eye, as not made famous by any signal Calamity, and threatning to burn the Memory of this turbulent-spirited Monster in Oblivion, under that pile of Prosperities, which Peace had heaped upon it: the only thing he had to complain of, and ground his wish upon (that some such slaughter of Armies, Famine, Pestilence, Conflagrations, Earth-quakes, &c. might infest the World in his days, as might render them famous to Posterity) the only thing he be∣wailed, was his seeing nothing to be bewailed. (Suet. Calig. 31.) Claudius his Successor (Anno Christi, 44.) was none of the wisest Princes, no more dexterous in the management of publick Affairs, than suted Seneca's conceit of him, ( Claudii:) that Agrippinas poysoned Mushromes precipitated his Birth into the Rank of Immortals, so long before his head (though paralytical with Age) was ballasted with Wit, as the Gods would not admit him into their Colledge; ingeniously expressed in that of the Satyrist, (Juven. sat. 6.) Tremulúmque caput descendere fecit In caelos— Or Nero's Sarcasm, who used, when he spake of his departing this life, to pronounce [Morari] the first Syllable long; making that ambiguous word give out this to be his Sence: Nero has ceast to play the fool among Men. [Morari inter homines desiit.] (Suet. Nero, 33.) Or the Sence of all Romans: who, when Nero, in his Funeral Sermon, in praise of Claudius; began to praise his discretion, were not able to refrain themselves from bursting out into open laugh∣ter, (Tacitus annal. 13. 176.) [Postquam ad providentiam sapientiamque defle∣xit, nemo risui temperare, quanquam oratio a Seneca composita multum cultus prae∣ferret, &c.] Or those ominous Prognostications his own Relations made of him: Augustus not daring to allow him to be seen at publick Sports, with∣out a Tutor to admonish him, touching his behaviour; for fear, lest by his rude Deportment, he should render himself and his Family, the Vulgar Laugh∣ing-stock. (Suet. Claud. 4.) [Fraebenda materia deridendi & illum & nos non est, &c.] Angusta esteeming him a most despicable Changling; his Mother using, when she had a mind to impute to any one the height of Folly, to
call him as very a Fool as her Son Claudius; and his Sister Livilla replying, to one that told her, her Brother Claudius would in time become Emperour, God forbid, so great a Plague should befall the Roman People. (Suet. Claud. 3.) Yet the Reign of Claudius (of this so very a—as the only wise Act he did (if Patience may be call'd an Act) was the suffering himself to be called to his face old fool (Suet. Claud. 15.) was so wisely ordered, by the Wisdom of him by whom he Reigned; as there were no Commotions in the Empire; but what the Jews caused through their violent opposing of the Gospel; and that short-breathed Civil War, raised by Furius Camillus, and allayed by Miracle in five days: for after the Vote was past in the Rebels Council of War, that they should forthwith march to their new Elect mock-Emperour; The Anci∣ents not being able, with all their strength, to remove their Colours from the ground wherein they were stuck, was interpreted by the Army, as a Word of Command from Heaven, to return to their Allegeance unto that Power that was of God, (Suet. Claud. 13.) And that Bloodless Expedition Claudius undertook in his own Person into Britain (Suet Claud. 17.) [Expeditionem unam omninò suscepit, eámque modi∣cam,] (not then a Roman Province: and by that Age, reputed a new World, and no part of the old (divisos orbe Britannos) then in Arms against the Ro∣man Legions, as disgusting that Caligula should first give protection to the Rebel-Son of the King of Britain, and the Fugitives that came over with him to the Roman Camp in Belgium: and afterwards lead them in Triumphs as Captives, and detain them as Hostages in Rome: (the way of Belgium has, of old, been the Road to Rome for British Fugitives: too much trodden by our Modern Church-Fugitives, whose doting upon the too too homeliness (I had almost said Sluttishness) of the Church in the Vale, proves their first step towards their admiring the over-curious Attire of her on the Hills: (Herbert: British Church, 102.) she in the Valley is so shy of dressing, that her Hair doth lie about her Ears. But to return (from following these Straglers) to Claudius his Colours displayed in Brittain: he so quickly folded them up (be∣fore they had been stain'd in Blood) as within six Months after his marching thence, he returns in Triumph to Rome. These are all the Commotions that fell out in his Reign by Land, and by Sea they had none, save that Scenical Naumachy in the Ficine Lake, where no Trumpet, but that of the Silver Triton, sounded to the Fight. Tacitus commends Cassius, the Deputy of Syria, under Claudius; for keeping up, and restoring Martial Discipline, as far as the peaceableness of that Age would permit; wherein, [militares artes per otium ignotae erant,] by long continued Peace the Art Military was grown out of knowledg, (Annal. 12. 157.) This Peace, and its Daughter, Plenty, gave him both Opportunity and Ability to perfect those magnificent Works of the Aqueduct, begun by Caligula; the draining of the Ficine Lake, and building the Ostian Haven; Works so stu∣pendious as neither Augustus nor Tiberius durst attempt them: hence that Encomium Nero gave him in his Funeral Speech; that during his Reign, no∣thing sad befel the Empire from Foreigners, past with the general Vote (Tacit. ann. 13.) [Nihil regente eo reipublicae triste ab externis accidisse pronis animis ad auditum.] Search we the Annals of Nero, (Anno Christi, 57.) and in the first, and best part of his Reign, we hear no noise of War, In his first indeed the Parthians make a flourishing of their Ensigns, and a brandishing of their Swords against Armenia. But, first, this was out of the Confines of the Empire; for Armenia was not reduc'd into the form of a Pro∣vince, till Trajan's Reign, (Heylin. Geograph. 799.) And, secondly, the Par∣thian was perswaded to fold up his Colours, and put up his Sword, before they had been rowled and bathed in Blood: (Tacit annal. 13. 179.) [Datis∣que obsidibus solitam prioribus reverentiam in R. Populum continuare:] chusing rather to give Sureties for their future good Behaviour towards the State, and her Confederates, than try the Roman Mettle.
In his next Year there was [Pax foris.] Peace every where abroad; no Brawls, but what Nero procured by his Night-walks among the Stews: no Blood-shed in any but those obscene Quarrels (Tacitus ibid pag. 184.) [Pax foris, faeda domi lascivia, qua Nero lupanaria veste servili in dissimulationem sui, frequentavit comitantibus qui vulnera obviis inferrent—adeo ut ipse quoque acci∣peret ictus. His third was so barren of Action, had so little wind stirring▪ as Tacitus complains his storifying Vein is becalm'd, his Pen can find no Pasturage in that Years Occurrences; except he should, instead of Annals, write Diurnals, and go about to commend the Foundations, Beams and Bulk of that Amphithea∣ter which the Emperour erected in Campo Martio; or in a Tragick Strain record the Wounds of Fencers, and Slaughters of wild Beasts, there received and perpetra∣ted; that being the only Martial Camp for that Years Wars, which that in∣quisitive Historian can give us Intelligence of, (Id. Ib. pa. 186.) [Nerone secundò L. Pisone Coss. pauca memoria digna evenere, nisi cui libeat laudandis fundamentis & tabulis quîs molem Amphitheatri apud campum Martium extruxe∣rat, volumina implere.] In this long Vacation the Roman Prowess had contracted so much Rust; as Corbulo, in his Expedition against the Parthians, making a new attempt upon Armenia, in Nero's fourth, found the laziness of the Roman Soldiery, a greater prejudice to him than either the boysterous Strength or perfidious wi∣liness of the Enemy, (Id. ibid. pa. 187.) [Sed Corbuloni plus molis erat adver∣sus ignaviam militis, quam contra perfidiam hostium quippe Syria transmotae legio∣nes pace longa segnes munia militum aegerrimè tolerabant.] The Legions of Sy∣ria (a Door-neighbour to, if not comprehending, Judaea, and the great Road that the Apostles of the Circumcision travell'd) had so far unlearnt War, that they could not bear the hardships, nor perform the office of Soldiers. Nay, [Satis constitit fuisse in eo exercit Veteranos qui non stationem non vigilias iniissent, vallum fossamque quasi nova & mira viserent:] (Tacit. an. 13. 187.) of a certain (saith Tacitus) there were many Veteran Soldiers that had never stood Centinel, that wondered at the sight of Trenches and Rampires, as new and strange things: that came to the Muster in quirpo; without Head-peices, Breast-plates, &c. neat and trim Carpet-knights; as having spent their lives in Garrisons and City-delicacies: as having never perform'd service in the Field. In so much as Corbulo durst not emplòy them; but is forced to send as far as Germany and Spain, to levy men for that Armenian War: who (notwithstanding, that through the Midwifery of their Native horrid Clime, they were born hardy Soldiers) yet their Nurture and Education in the soft and warm bosom of that pacifick Age, had so far temper'd the natural Steeliness of their Mettal, as it turn'd Edge; so much effeminated their innate sturdiness, as they were not able to sustain the sharpness of that War; but ran away so fast from their Co∣lours, as the General (with all the Art he can use, and the utmost severity of Martial Law) can scarce prevent the mouldring away of his Army (Tacit. an. 13.) [quia duritiam caeli militiaeque abnuebant deserebantque; remedium se∣veritatis quaesitum est—qui signa reliquerat statim capitis paenas luebat, &c.] Corbulo (saith Dion) restored Military Discipline, which had been slighted and neglected. (Ziphil. e Dione Nero, pa. 518) [Nam Corbulo restituta re militari quae antea dispersa & neglecta erat.] Is it possible to conceive a fuller accomplishment of that Prophecy (Is. 2. 4.) that when the Word went out of Sion, the Law from Jerusalem, there should be such aboundance of Peace; as the World should unlearn War? can we expect a more perfect Transcript of that Prediction, than is here drawn by the Pens of those Authentick Historians? where can we better fix the Epocha of its taking effect, than in this Age; wherein the most Warlike Nations were grown so incredibly inexpert at War, as they are here described: when, for sixty Years together, Nation did not rise up against Nation: In the last half of which (from the fifteenth of Tiberius, when the preaching of the Gospel began in the Baptist's Ministry, unto Nero's fourth) that Prophetical half hour
(reckoning Minutes for Years) wherein its preaching was fully known in all the World: there was an universal silence in the Heaven of the Roman Empire; no noise of War, no clashing of hostile Armour heard within its Precincts. (I here only allude to that passage (Revel. 8. 1.) [there was silence in Heaven about the space of half an hour,] I undertake not its Exposition.) Saving some dry blows in Judaea, where had been the Vision of Peace: nor in its Borders saving Armenia; Olive plants growing round about it, save on that Coast whither Noah's Dove brought the Olive Branch (If the Septuagint mistake not in translating Arrarat Armenia (Isa. 37. 38. 2 King. 19. 37.) A remarka∣ble Providence! that God should prepare a place of rest for the reception of the Ark and Tabernacle of his own pitching, every where, but where the Arks of Noah and Moses had rested: and a fair intimation to the Proselytes of the Gate, that rested on Noah's seven Precepts: and the Proselytes of the Cove∣nant; who trusted in Moses, that that which they had taken up with was not their true rest. § 4. It being thus evident out of the undoubted Histories of those times; that beside that thirty Years space of Peace through the whole Empire, from the birth of our Saviour unto the fifteenth of Tiberius (wherein our great High Priest was officiating in the Temple, and within the Veil of his Flesh) (It is Doctor Lightfoot's Observation, that St. John, in that half hours silence, alludes to the People waiting silently at the Door, while the Priest was offici∣ating in the holy place.) Peace was then continued for other thirty Years e∣ven unto the fourth of Nero: It remains now, that we prove, that during that last thirty Years of silence, the Line of the Gospel was drawn out, not only through all the Earth (the Land of Jury) but to the ends of the World (the utmost Bounds of the Roman Pale.) Would the Atheist, for proof of this, acquiess in sacred Testimony, I would alledge that of St. Paul, (Ro. 15. 19.) where he writes, that in his own line he had proceeded from Jerusalem, (the Center) round about unto Illyricum, fully preaching the Gospel, so as he had no place left in those parts, over which, the Line of some Apostle had not been sttretch'd. And then leave him to compute (though St. Paul labour'd more than they all, and therefore must have twelve to one reckoned to his propor∣tion) how far the lines of all the rest were stretched out before the general Peace was broke: seeing the single Line of one of them had reach'd so far in Nero's second Year (as Doctor Lightfoot dates that Epistle.) But to deal with the Atheist at his own Weapon, I shall urge him with the Testimony of Ta∣citus; who having occasion thereof ministred to him, from Nero's charging Christians with the setting Rome on fire; speaks of our Religion, as famously known, and by multitudes embrac'd at Rome, long before that bloody Edict in Nero's twelfth. The common People (saith he) call them Christians, from one Christ; who in the Reign of Tiberius was put to death by Pontius Pilate, Go∣vernour of Judaea: whose Religion, though by Edicts suppressed, presently upon its appearance, yet grew under those Weights, and brake out again, not in Judaea only, where it had its Original, (i. e. the Center whence its Line was drawn) but even in Rome it self: having reached so far, and got so many Proselytes: as though the Vulgar looked upon Christians as Persons of an execrable Religion, as Enemies to Humane Kind, and deserving the Extremities of most inhumane Affli∣ctions and Punishments; yet there was none of them so hard hearted, as not to relent, to see such huge Multitudes of them led to the Slaughter, grieving that so much humane (though as they thought Malignant) blood should be poured out. (Tacit. annal. 15. 233.) Ergo abolende rumori Nro subdidit reos, & quaesitissi∣mis paenis affecit, quos per stagitium risos vulgus Christiarios appellabat; auctor ejus nominis Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante per procuratorem Pontium Pilatum sup∣plicio affectus erat; repressaque in praesens exitiabilis superstitio rursus erumpe∣bat non modo per Judaeam originem ejus (whence their Lie went out) sed per Urbem etiam—Igitur primo correpti qui fatebantur, deinde Ingens eorum mul∣titudo haud perinde in crimine incend quam odio humani generis connicti sunt—
unde quanquam adversus sontes & novissima exempla meritos miseratio orieba∣tur.—] Nay, to that height was Christian Religion grown at Rome in the be∣ginning of Nero's Reign; as Suetonius (Sueton. Nero, 16.) reckons his mak∣ing Edicts for the suppressing of it among those Reformations he made at his coming to the Crown. It will be in vain to urge to our Scepticks, St. Paul's Testimony that the Gospel had got footing in Nero's Family: yet it may per∣haps seem to him less improbable, that that Grain of Mustard-seed should sprought up in that barren Soil and malignant Influence, if he be minded of the State of Affairs under Aurelian; and that in spight of that Juncture, our Religion so throve, even in the Court; as he suspects the Christian Party (even among his Senators) impeded the passing of the Decree for consulting the Si∣bylline Books, when the Marcomanni invaded the Empire, by that handsome Evasion, that the Emperour was so valiant as he needed not consult the Gods: which though Vopiscus interprets as a point of Flattery; yet the Emperour laid it to another Father; in that Letter he sent to the Senate, to hasten their passing that Decree, in these words (transcribed by Vopiscus.) Miror vos (san∣cti Patres) tamdiu de aperiendis Sibyllinis dubitasse libris, perinde quasi in Chri∣stianorum ecclesia, non in Templo Deorum omnium tractaretis.] I wonder, holy Fathers, that you should be so long debating the question, whether Sybill's Books, (in this Exigent) should be consulted, like as if you were handling this point in the Church of Christians, and not in (the Capitol) the Temple of all the Gods. (If he had reason to suspect there was so great a Party, in his Council, of Chri∣stians, so soon after the persecution raised by Valerianus, as they might possi∣bly impede the passing of that Decree: what reason have we to conceive it un∣likely that Christ should have his Church in Nero's House?) (Vopiscus Aurelian.) And if (notwithstanding the opposition it there found) Christianity had gained that rooting in Rome it selfe, as so huge a number dare seal the truth of it with their dearest Blood. I dare refer it to all unbiassed Minds, to think, how it must spread in those parts of the Empire that were nearer Judaea (as the main body of it was) and less under inspection: and then to pass their judg∣ment, whether Heathen History does not Eccho to that of the Apostle, where he saith, that not only the Christian Faith was known at Rome, but the Faith of the Roman Christians was famous through the World, at his writing his Epistle to them which bears date the second of Nero.
CHAP. IX. The Judean Stirs were the Empires Advantage against Surprisal. § 1. Objections from the Commotions in Judea answered and retorted: Those inconsiderable and not so great as that delicate and repining People would represent them. § 2. The Stirs that were in Judea put the Ministers of State upon a more diligent enquiry into what there fell out; whereby they got a more full information of the state of that great Controversie be∣tween the Jews and Christians. § 3. The Judean Commotions drew the Imperial Eagle to fix her eye more narrowly upon Emergencies there, as things of highest State-concern; in respect of that then famous Eastern Pro∣phecy of one to arise at that time in Judea, who should be King of the U∣niverse. § 4. At that time when the Erection of an Universal Monarchy was (according to that Prophecy) expected, appeared Persons of a more Lordly Spirit amongst the Romans than any former Age had brought forth. Caesar and Pompey's Ambition sprung from this Prophecy. The then great∣est Spirits courted the Jews favour, and used means that they might be that oriundus in Judaea. § 5. The arts which the Roman Candidates for the Universal Monarchy used, to bring the World into an opinion that they were designed by Heaven to something extraordinary. Julius his Dream; his cloven-footed Horse; his Mules; his Triton; his pressing to have the Title of King, because the Sybils had prophesied one at that time would be King of all the World. The Fathers quotations of Sybils vindicated. § 6. Augustus had his Education amongst the Velitri, who had a Tradi∣tion of the tendency with the Eastern Prophecy, that one of that City should obtain the Kingdom of the whole World. The Roman Prodigy before his Birth. His Mother Atia conceives him by Apollo. Her Snake-mole. Nero's Bracelet. Atias Dream of her Entrals. Nigidius his Prognisti∣cation. The Prediction of the Thracian Priests. His Fathers Vision. Cicero's Dream. § 7. Tiberius his Omens. Scribonius's Prediction. Livias crested Chick. The Altars of the conquering Legions. His Dye cast into Apon's Well. Galba's Mock-prophecy. § 8. Titus and Vespasian's Motto, Amor & deliciae, in English, the desire of the Nations. The Pro∣digie of Mars his Oak. The Gypsies Prediction. Dirt cast by Caligula into his Shirt. The Dog bringing a Man's hand, The Oracle of the God of Carmel. His curing the Blind and Lame, &c. § 1. I Would therefore here draw this Argument to a Conclusion, but that I am jealous, that the first Branch of it may possibly be ex∣cepted against, and that Age we are speaking of denied to have been so calm, as we have reported it to be, and that because of the frequent mention of Troubles in Judea, made by Josephus, Philo, &c. I shall therefore chuse ra∣ther to incurr the censure of being tedious, than of omitting what is ne∣cessary towards the stopping the Mouths of unruly talkers, or depriving the Atheist of all possibility of Subterfuge from the force of this Argument, while I demonstrate that this Objection does not only, not diminish from, but adds to its strength. 1. The Commotions in Jury, the uneavenness of that hilly Country, no more hinder the smoothness of the Universe, than Mountains (those Wens of the Earth) hinder the roundness of it; being no more considerable (in so vast a Body) than a few Nail-heads on the Rim of a Wheel: a point Mathematically demonstrable in the Moons Eclipse, upon whose Body the Earth (notwithstanding those Exuberances) casts the shadow of hers so ex∣actly circular, as the most piercing Eye cannot detect it of the least inequa∣lity. This is the highest account these Judean Stirs can amount to, though we cast into the sum, those (perhaps) over-weight Aggravations thrown
into the Scales; either by Philo, on purpose to heighten Caligula's Tyranny, and the Divine Indulgence to his Nation, in preserving it from ruine under his Oppressions. (Philo de legatione ad Caium) [Valeant igitur humana prae∣sidia quae nos deserunt, modò in anima spes firma maneat Deum nobis servato∣rem non defore, qui saepe gentem hanc eripuit exitio] (pag. 637.) Or by Jo∣sephus; that he might present the sufferings of that People equivalent to their sin, which he equals to Sodoms; telling us, he believes, the Land was so polluted, as, had not the Romans purged it by the fire of that deso∣lating War, God would have expiated the sins of it, by Fire and Brimstone poured down from Heaven upon it. (Joseph. de bel. Jud. 6. 16.) [Si Romani contra noxios venire tardassent, aut hiatu terrae devorandam fuisse civitatem pu∣to, aut dilio perituram, aut fulminum, ut Sodomae, incendia passuram, multo enim magis impiam progeniem tulit quàm illa pertulerat.] But if we weigh them in an equal Ballance, they will be found so short, as they could not for any considerable time, ay so slight, as they could not at all dam up the Current of Intelligence; as being rather Contusions than Wounds, no Blood almost but Christian, following those Blows; as might be evinc'd out of both these Jewish Authors, in those passages where they interweave not Passion with their History. But I shall rather call Tacitus, as one less partial and without all exception) to hold the Scales; who giv∣ing an account of the affairs of Judea, states them thus: (Tacit. lib. 5. 346.) [Sub Tiberio (Judaeis) quies: Jussi a Caesare (Caligula) effigiem ejus in Tem∣plo locare, arma potiùs sumpsere; quem motum Caesaris mors diremit. Felix per omnem sevitiam & libidinem jus regium servili ingenio exeruit, duravit tamen patientia Judeis us{que} ad Gessium Florum.] The Jews had peace during the Empire of Tiberius; under Caligula, his command to erect his Image in the Temple caused no small stirs; but by his timely death, they were allayed before they came to blows. Towards the latter end of Claudius, and the begin∣ning of Nero's Reign, Felix indeed with a servile Genius (as a beggar on horse-back) vapoured over them in all kind of licentiousness and cruelty; yet the patience of the Jews held out, and they did not make insurrection, until Florus became Governour of Judea in Nero's 11. year. § 2. This blustering in Jewry was so far from being an Euroclydon to overturn to the Packet-boats, or a cross Wind to stop Intelligence; as it proved as fair a gale as could blow, to wast over the knowledge of what fell out there touching our Saviour, into the rest of the Empire, and render∣ed it still less possible to the Apostles to delude the World; to whose Do∣ctrine, had it been the wild Oats of their own Invention, these blasts would have proved a fanning Wind, and have scatter'd it as chaff before them. 1. For these Stirs, being about Religion, (Christo impulsore) as Suetonius states them, (Sueton. Claud. 25.) [Judaeos, impulsore Christo, assiduè tumultu∣antes Roma expulit,] the blind man stumbling upon the true sence of Christ's Menace (I am come to send fire on the Land;) or as Lysias states them to A∣grippa, Questions, Altercations, Debates touching their own Superstition, and one Jesus; administred occasion, to those that were interested in taking cognizance of these Debates, to bring those matters to the severest Test. While the Jew clamoured against the Christian, as unworthy to live, and impleaded him at the Bar of the Roman Ministers of State; and the Impe∣rial Law prohibited the proceding against the accused (indictâ causâ) [Lex Sempronia; nè quis indictâ causâ] (Cicero pro Cluentio) till he had been heard what he could say for himself: the Roman Magistrates, before whom these Contests were determinable, are necessitated to bring the Antagonists face to face, and to hear the Business in question disputed pro & con. by Plaintiff and Defendant, by Jew and Christian. (Act. 25. 16.) It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die (to grant this favour to the Plain∣tiff, that the Defendant should be be given up to ruin; )
before he be permitted to speak for himself, having his ad∣versaries face to face. Thus Lysias the chief Captain finding all Jerusalem in an uproar about St. Paul. though (in a prejudicate Passion) he had examin'd him at first by scourging; yet repenting of that way of process to find out what the matter was , (Act. 22. 30.) for which the Jews cried so against him, as not justifiable by the Imperial Law; the morrow af∣ter, that he might know the certainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he commanded his accusers, the chief Priests and all their Council, to appear and draw their accusation against him: And brought St. Paul down, and set him before them to make his defence. By which way of hearing, both he and Festus came to know the state of the Question controverted betwixt the Jew and Christian to have been about Jesus, whom the Jews affirmed to be dead, but St. Paul maintained to be risen from the dead, and to be alive, (Act. 23. 29. 25, 20.) Thus Felix, though he had a mind to do the Jews a pleasure, and make St. Paul pay his old scores he had run himself into, by his pillaging that Nation, and cast him, as a bolus, into the mouth of that Cerberus which was open'd against him in complaints to the Court of Rome, yet so well does St. Paul manage his Cause before him, as he durst not deliver him up to their fury, having, by hearing St. Paul defend himself and his Religion in the presence of his Adversaries, attain'd to a more perfect knowledge of the Chri∣stian way than he had before; (Act. 22. 24.) Thus Agrippa, though so passionate an affector of Judaism, as he fell down in a dead swoon at the feet of Caligula, while he was venting his Choler a∣gainst it: and when he came again to himself, protested to his Physicians, standing about him and officiating about his recovery, that nothing made him content to live, but some faint hopes that his life might be serviceable to that poor Nation; and (to make those words good) as soon as his trembl∣ing hand could hold a Pen, he writ an Apology for them unto Caesar. (Philo Jud. de legatione ad Caium.) Yet this Agrippa (bribed for the Plaintiff by so violent a zeal) upon hearing Festus make report of the issue of the Trial before him, and St. Paul's allegations in his own defence, had like to have given Sentence for Christian Religion against the Jewish, being almost perswaded to become a Christian, and did give Sentence for St. Paul against his Adversaries: This man hath done nothing worthy of bonds, much less of death: but might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed to Caesar. (Act. 26. 28, 32.) The further we pursue this Instance, the clearer footsteps we see it leave of this Truth, that the Broils in Judea made the Gospel more conspicuons. For if we trace St. Paul's Cause to the Gates of Rome, and thence to Caesar's Tri∣bunal; the ratling of his Chain there makes the Gospel more famous, (Phil. 2▪ 12, 13.) alarms the Court to make more dilgent enquiry into those con∣tingencies in Judea concerning Christ; for maintaining the Truth whereof St. Paul was accused of the Jews and had appealed unto Caesar; before whom for St. Paul to have stood in defence of what he had taught, had been an Act of most temerarious madness, if it had been in the power of the most viru∣lent and vigilant Adversaries, by bringing his Doctrine to a scrutiny, (and that before Judges disaffected to it) to have fastened upon it the least imputa∣tion, or but suspicion, of Forgery. § 3. The Judean Commotions drew the Imperial Eagle to fix her pierce∣ing Eye more narrowly upon Emergencies there, as things of highest concern to the interest of the Roman State. That famous Eastern Prophecy, That some about that time should appear in Judea, who, with that Crown on his head, should trample all others under his feet, gave so lowd a Report, as the sound of it awaken'd both East and West to an expectation of its accomplishment. Though Josephus, Tacitus, Sueta∣nius,
and that nameless Interpreter of the Sybilline Oracles (in Tully's second Book de Divinatione) mist it as well as Virgil in the Application of that Pro∣phecy; Tully's Interpreter applying it to Caesar, to whom he advised the Senate to give the Title of King, if they consulted the good of the Roman State and of themselves, (Cicer. Divin. l. 2. pag. 250. 251.) [quorum inter∣pres dicturus in Senatu putabatur, eum quem revera regem habebamus, appel∣landum quoque esse regem, si salvi esse vellemus;—ut quidvis potiùs ex illis libris proferant quàm regem; quem Romae posthac nec dii, nec homines esse pati∣entur.] Virgil to Asinius Pollio; Suetonius to the Emperour of Rome indefi∣nitely (Sueton. Vespas. 4.) [quantum eventu patuit id de Imperatore Romane praedictum.] Tacitus and Josephus to Vespasian and Titus (Joseph. Bell. Jud. 7. 12.) (Tacit. hist. 5.) [antiquis sacerdotum literis contineri eo ipso tempore—quae ambages Vespasianum & Titum praedixerunt.] Yet this Triumvirate of judicious Historians mentioning it, as an ancient, universal, and and unin∣terrupted Tradition, argues it to have been famously known at Rome (Su∣ton. Vesp. 4. [percrebuit vetus & constans opinio toto Oriente esse in fatis—] where if the repute of it had not been as great as its sound, they would not have ventur'd to fasten the accomplishment of it upon such eminent Persons: Nor durst those Fortune-tellers in Suetonius have attempted to corroborate Nero's heart, against those cold Qualms came over it, through fear of his loss of Empire (threatned by the Calculaters of his Nativity) with the hope of obtaining Judeas Crown, and, with it, the Sovereignty of the World: Nor would Nero have been inclin'd to those hopes of advancement to the sole and absolute Supremacy, not only over the Earth, but Sea; which he was wont to express, in telling his most intimate friends, that he expected to have that Homage paid him by the Finny Inhabitants of the Ocean, as the Fish would bring to shore those precious treasures he had lost by ship∣wrack. (Sueton. Nero 40.) [Sposponderunt tamen ei destituto ordinationem O∣rientis: nounulli nominatim Regnum Hierosolymorum:—cui spei pro∣nior.—] Weekly Intelligencers, Monthly Prognosticators, that write to the capa∣cities of the easily-seduced Vulgar, (Plebeium in circo positum est, at{que} aggere fatum) may quote Merlin or Mother-Shiptons Prophecies; may, for the incourage∣ment of that Party they are bribed to induce into vain hopes, urge the be∣lief of that German Oracle with the stinging Tail, —Vulpes, Leo, Nullus— May apply the Vulpes to a Prince of the most candid Open-heartedness that ever liv'd; the Leo, to the Meekest Lamb that ever was led to slaughter, save that Lamb of God, whose steps he followed: and yet obtain that be∣lief at the Rabbles hand, as shall put them upon venturing Life and Limb, Estate, Body and Soul, in being instrumental towards the fulfilling of them. The Bull-ringle Astrologer (if I may not be thought to tread heavy on Eu∣nius his Grave in that Translation of his (de Circo Astrologus) may transcribe the Millenary Prophecy (out of Alsted) [quum Deus constituet in Septentrione, per Leonem septentrionalem magna cum admiratione illorum qui divinam Apo∣calypsin & harmoniam illam quam hîc exserto digito monstramus nihili faciunt:] (Alsted. Chron. 88. axiom. 6.) of a Lion of the North that should do wonders and bring to full effect, whatsoever our whimsical Commenters dream of: (who if they fall asleep with the Apocalypse in their hand, or but under their Pillow, they awake Prophets, inspired with ten times more Visions than ever St. John saw) and apply that Lion to him, that proves a dead Lion before that years Almanack be out of Date (as Lilly did to the then King of Sweden.) Yet in the mean while, he shall so lord it over the faith of the
ductil people, as in the expecting the blessings of Heaven, they will nei∣ther set their faces with the Persian, to the warm mid-day-sun; nor with the Jew, to the West; nor with the Christian, to the East; but with the Loadstone, to the North: being in this (as in all things else) singular and cross to all men, looking that ab Aquilone should come their chief good, whence all others expect nothing but cold Blasts and the worst of Evils. But what legitimate Historian did ever apply, to well-settled Princes, Prophecies that were not of undoubted Credit? (It could not but add to the esteem of Daniel's Prophecy, that Jaddus should tell Alexander the Great, out of Daniel, that a Grecian Prince should subdue the Persian Mo∣narchy; which Alexander interpreting of himself, it fell out accordingly; (Joseph. Ant, 11. 8.) Or what Prince, that had a just Title to his own, was ever induc'd to grasp at a foreign Crown, upon suggestions taken up out of the high way. That Oracle, therefore, which this Pair-royal of incompa∣rable Historians (both for Prudence and Sincerity) do with joynt consent apply to such Royal Persons, the application of which to themselves those Persons shew no disgust against, but a relishing of; must have been a Nail fastened by Masters of Assemblies so deep in Roman minds, as rendred it a sure Nail, and able to bear all the weight they hang upon it; and of such repute and esteem, as to engage the Empire to cast a watchful Eye over the Occurrences in Judea (the place assigned for the appearance of this great King of Kings) even from the first dawning of of that time which they conceived the Oracle pointed at: and an evil and envious Eye upon the Preachers of the Gospel, from that time they began to publish the accom∣plishment of it in our Jesus. Of both which points we have sufficient Evi∣dence in those historical Tables, wherein we have the Complexion of that Age drawn by the Pagans Pencils. § 4. First, That the Roman State had a strict Eye upon that Prophecy and (upon its account) on the Judean Affairs, from the time that the Commence∣ment of it was suspected to bear Date, and its Effects to take place, may be gathered from the appearance of those great Spirits, in that nick of time, the like of whom the Roman Earth had not produc'd in that long Tract of preceding Ages, as to their Ambitions of settling an Universal Monarchy in their own persons. Is it not strange that the juvenile Age (as Florus calls it) of that State, which teemed with far braver Spirits in all other respects, brought not forth a Caesar or a Pompey, who could not brook either Superiour or Equal? but that Persons of that temper must be reserved for the confines of that season, wherein one was to be born who should Lord it over the World? Was it through the defect of favourable Constellations, or not rather through the Influence of the Prophecy concerning the the Star of Jacob, that the Blood of Ancus Martius ran down so many Generations, before it could make so happy a Conjunction with the Blood of Venus (running from Aene∣as, in the Veins of the Julian Family) as to produce a Caesar; one whom no∣thing could content but to be (in Martial's phrase) omnia solus, in plain English, King of the Company? Let the Star-gazer try his skill here, in Calculating the Nativities of Caesar and his Progenitors: and if, in compar∣ing their Schemes, he find any so material Difference as this, that they were born before, but he after the divulging of this Propheey, he shall be my great Apollo. In the interim I shall take the boldness to opine, that that famous Oracle was the Soul of their Courage, the Mark of their Ambition. 2. In which Opinion I am no little confirm'd, when I observe how these Candidates for the Universal Monarchy, Pompey, Caesar, Augustus, M. Anthony, &c. courted the Jews good will (just as they did the Peoples of Rome when they stood in Competition for Offices at their disposal) with Indulgences un∣usual to be conferr'd upon Nations far better deserving (for all that fidelity
and service of theirs to the Romans, upon which Josephus grounds those favours, being in that more partial to his Country-men, than in any other passage of his History; for of all Nations they bare the Roman Yoak with most Impatience:) and with such fawning obsequiousness, as was scarce be∣coming either the Majesty of the Roman State, or the loftinefs of those Mens Minds, whom the ambitious hopes of obtaining the Penelope of an U∣niversal Monarchy spur'd on to those daring engagements against the whole World; and when their united force had conquer'd that, against one another: had they not conceived that the readiest Expedient to gain the Mistress, was to obtain the good Will of the Handmaid; that he who was to be King of Clubs in the World (to rule it with a Rod of Iron) must first be King of Hearts in Jewry, and sit upon the Hill of Sion, with a golden Sceptre of Benevolence reached out as a Lure to their Affections, as a mean to obtain from the Jews an Opinion that he loved their Nation, and was therefore wor∣thy of the highest honours that could be heap'd upon him. And had not this Conceit been taken up and cherished, partly by their misinterpreting [Oriundus] in the Prophecy, as not importing that that King of Kings was to have in Judea a Natural Birth, as a man, but a Civil one, as a Monarch: This is manifest from their applying this Prophecie to Vespasian, who was not born Man in Judea, but only there proclaim'd, or (as Josephus more sutably to the Roman Notion stiles it) created Emperour. By this Oracle (saith he) was manifestly portended the Empire of Vespasian, who was Creat∣ed Emperour in Judea. (Bel. Jud. 7. 12.) For in very deed he was proclaim∣ed Empercur before, by the Legion of Maesia which was sent to aid Otho: who hearing he had lost the day, and kill'd himself, march'd on neverthe∣less, plundering and spoiling, as far as Apuleia: and fearing at their return they should be called to an account, they elect Vespasian Emperour; but this, saith Suetonius was not reputed legal: and therefore Vespasian would not date the beginning of his Reign from that, but from Tiberius Alexander his proclaiming him, and making the Legions take the Oath of Allegiance. (Sue∣ton, Vespasian. 6.) But this was in Egypt; how can he then be said to be cre∣ated Emperour in Judea? Suetonius helps us to unty this Knot, with a two-fold Note: First, his proclaiming in Egypt and Judea were so near con∣temporaries, as the difference was indiscernable; that in Egypt being on the Calends of July; that in Judea the 5. of the Ides: or as Tacitus dates it, the Nones of the same Month (Histor. 2.) that is, but one day betwixt them; however, Aegypt got the start of Judea by so much. Yea, but secondly, the Egyptian Legions proclaimed him his absence; he was present and in the Head of the Judean Regiments, when he was proclaimed by them. (Suet. Vespas. 6.) Observe here what shifts the Writers of that Age were put to, that they might make the Prophecy fit Vespasian, as one that was born, not Man, but Monarch, in that place which the Oracle assigned for him, that was to be sole Lord of the World. The wresting of the Prophecy to this sence was one of those Wings which bore up the contenders for the Universal Monarchy, in their pursuit after the favour of the Jews and Jewish Legions. The other was the art the Jews had to dub any one a Jew, whom they pleased; to adopt into Abraham's Line, those that came not from the Loyns of Abraham, and by that means to quali∣fie him for the Rule of the Universe, who could creep into their favour. [Other men who are not Jews born, if they live after their Law, are called Jews:] saith Dion, an Historian, so far from favouring either Jew or Chri∣stian, as on the same page (speaking of our God) he saith, whatsoever God he be, (Dion. l. 37.) Of which Art they gave a notable Experiment upon Herod Agrippa; who bursting out into tears, at his hearing that passage of the Law read, [Thou shalt set one of thy brethren King over thee, and not a stran∣ger] (Deuteron. 17. 15.) was cheared by this general Acclamation of the Synagogue, Be of good chear, King Agrippa, thou art our Brother; (Light∣foot harm. 130.) our Brother on the surer side, by Religion, though not by
Blood. A Brother of this Make was Herod the Great, whom some Jews took for the Messiah (Euseb. chronic. ex Epiphanio, lib. 1. tom. har. 20.) conceiv∣ing that his being a Proselyte in Religion (though an Edomite by birth) did sufficiently qualifie him; and concluding that the Sceptre being now departed (as indeed it was in the Vulgar sence) from Juda, the full time of Messiah's Exhibition was come, according to Jacob's Prophecy: a Conclusion cannot be avoided, except we take the two Clauses of that Prophecy conjunctim, and interpret the departure of the Sceptre, to denote the final Extirpation and Unpeopling of that Nation; that is Judah shall not cease to be a Com∣monwealth, till Messiah come and the Gentiles be gathered to him. (But of this elsewhere.) Upon these two Principles, [It is enough to qualifie a person for the U∣niversal Monarchy, that he be created Emperour in Judea; or the utmost which the Prophecy requires is, that he who gains that prize be a Jewish Proselyte:] they that ran in this Race strain'd hard to obtain the good will of the Jews, andto be esteemed favourers of them and their Religion. To the obtaining whereof, how far those Roman Competitors proceded, Jose∣phus expresseth at large, in that whole Chapter, whose Title is, Of the Ho∣nours confer'd upon the Jews by the Romans (Antiq. 14. 17.) And how far Julius Caesar, by name, had obliged that Nation, appears from Suetonius (Julius 84.) his ranking the Jews as chief Mourners, of all Foreigners, at his Obsequies, continuing many nights and days to frequent his Sepulchre, with grievous lamentations, as if the anointed of the Lord (shall I say) or their anointed Lord, the breath of their Nostrils; of whom they said, under his shadow we shall grow up into the promised Kingdom, had been snatch'd away from them. Augustus came not much behind him in this Race, nor Tiberius; witness Philo [Augustus jussit è suis ipsius reditibus offerri quotidie victimas, viz. tuurum & agnos duos; sinebat Judaeos solos coetus facere, &c.] Augustus com∣manded that the daily sacrifices should be offer'd, to wit, an Oxe and two Lambs at his own charge; he permitted the Jews alone liberty of publick assembling, &c. Tiberius at the Jews intreaty caused Pilate to remove the consecrated Shields out of his Palace; and during his whole Reign protected the Religion of the Jews. [Julia Augusta ornavit Templum hoc aureis phialis, calicibus & aliis donis plurimis & pretiosissimis: cùm habeas tot exempla domestica optimae erga nos voluntatis—serva quae illi omnes ad unum conservarunt (Agrippae apologia:) (Philo Jud. legatione, pag. 647.) And Julia Augusta, adorn'd the Temple of Jerusalem with golden Vials, Cups, and many other most precious gifts seing therefore (saith Agrippa in his Apology) you have so many home examples of good will to the Jews, be you also benevolent to them, as every one of your pre∣decessors were. § 5. That those Competitors had in their Eye, and were animated to those stupendious Undertakings by, the Eastern Oracle; at least made use of the Worlds Credulity in that point, towards the establishing themselves in the Empire: grows upon me almost into an Article of Humane Faith, when I ponderate the Arts they used to bring the World into a perswasion, that they were men pointed at from Heaven, as more than men, and destined to Honours beyond humane Capacity. Such was Julius his deriving his Pedigree, on his Mothers side, from Ancus Martius; on his Father's side, from the Immortal Gods. (Suet. Jul. 6.) [est ergo in genere & sanctitas Regum & ceremonia Deorum. Such was the Dream he had (the night after he had bedewed Alexander's Image, in the Temple of Hercules, with tears, for that he was arrived at those years at which Alexander had conquer'd the World, and had done no∣thing worthy of memory) of committing Incest with his Mother: which the Fortune-tellers interpreted to prognosticate his obtaining Dominion o∣ver the whole Globe of the Earth, our common Mother, (Id. ib. 7.) [Con∣jectores ad amplissimam spem iucitaverunt, arbitrium Orbis terrarum portendi in∣terpretantes.]
Such was his teaching his Horse to endure no Rider but himself, and his erecting his Statue before the Temple of his Great-great grandmother Venus; that from thence he might make a publick show of his Hoof, which, being cleft like a man's into Toes, the Southsayers affirmed to point out (I was almost saying with the finger) his Master to be that person to whom the Empire of Mankind was destined, (Id. ibid. 61.) [eùm haruspices imperium orbis terratum significare pronunciassent, ejus instar pro aede Veneris genetricis dedicavit.] He had seen, belike, the Septuagint, which translates that Passage of the Eastern Prophecy (Zech, 9. 9.) Thy king comes riding upon () the son of an Ass, and therefore thought that Beast upon which the King of Sion was to ride, was to be some strange Monster, and in some of his Limbs to resemble a Man: and his mistaking [,] an Ass for a Horse, was but a taking of that word in its largesence, wherein, according to its Etymon () it signifies any Beast that's serviceable for Man's use, (jumentum qùa∣si juvamentum:) not near so hard a Translation, as the Syriack gives the Verb in the same sentence (if Scultetus have rendred it right) equitavit su∣per asinum, he sat on horse-back upon an Ass. And yet (as if he would be sure not to miss the sence of that Oracle) the first days journey he made in his expedition to conquer the World, he performed on Mules (Asses Colts on the surer side.) (Suit. Jul. 31.) [dein, post solis occasum, Mulis è proximo pistrino ad vehiculum junctis iter ingressus.] Such was (that I may follow him to Rubicon, whither he's hastning, as fast as his slow-pac'd Mules can carry him) the Story of a Triton appearing there to him, who snatching a Trumpet from one of his Soldiers, sounded a March over that River; while Caesar stoo'd musing on its Banks, and disput∣ing with himself whether he had best procede or retire, (as if he had been waiting for a messenger's voice to prepare his way) (Id. ibid. 32.) [cunctanti tale ostentum factum—tunc Caesar, eatur, inquit, quò Deorum ostenta vocant: jacta est alea. While he demurr'd the Vision appeared; whereupon Caesar gives this word to his Army, let us go whither the Gods call us, by this strange messen∣ger: the Die is now cast. Such was his procuring the Interpreter of the Sybilline Oracles to make a Motion in the Senate, that, if they wish'd well to themselves, they would confer upon Caesar the Title of King: for that Sybil had sung, that he, who was to bring the whole World to his obedience, was to be a King, (de divin. 2. 251. [eum quem revera regem habebamus, appellandum quoque esse regem, si salvi esse vellemus.] upon which Tully makes this reflexion, [quidvis potiùs ex iis libris proferant quàm regem, quem Romae posthac nec dii nec homines esse pati∣entur;] let them alledge those Oracles for any thing they will, rather than for a King; for though Caesar was indeed our King, and did really play the Rex o∣ver us, yet the name of King is grown so odious since the Tarquins, as neither Gods nor men will permit it to take place at Rome. This Sibylline Interpre∣ter could beno other but either Anthony (the Flamen Dialis Caesaris) who saluted him King, and set a Diadem on his head, in the name of S. P. Q. R. which Caesar commanded to be set on Jupiter's head: this was a made busi∣ness between him and his Flamen (Dion, hist. lib. 44.) Or L. Cotta. [pro∣ximo autem Senatu L. Cottam quindecim-virum, sententiam dicturum; ut, quo∣niam libris fatalibus continetur, Parthos, nisi à rege non posse vinci, Caesar rex appellaretur:] (Sueton. Julius 29,). Upon which Passages, both because I have not (in my small reading) ob∣served them to have been taken notice of by any; and yet (in my weak judg∣ment) they give in the most clear and full proof of that point I am now handling, and serve to the justifying of the Ancients, against the Exceptions of over-wise Modern Criticks, in many things of good use; I shall make bold to make these Animadversions. 1. This place of Tully vindicates the Fathers from the calumny of using pi∣os fraud in their quoting of Sibyls Verses concurrence with Scripture-prophecy touching the Messiah; for that the Acrosticks which the Fathers urged were
in being before Christ's Incarnation, and therefore not forged by the Chri∣stian Church, is manifest, from Tully's excepting against that kind of Verse, (wherein the Prophecy of one to arise that should be King of Kings, was writ) as savouring more of humane Industry than of Divine Inspiration. [Ea, quae  dicitur, mags est attenti animi quàm furentis. Atqui in Sibyllinis cu∣jus{que} sententiae primis literis illius sententiae carmen omne praetexitur; hoc scripto∣ris est non furentis; adhibentis diligentiam, non nisum.] Those Acrosticks St. Austin translates (tom. 6. contr. Judae. pag. orat. page 27.) whose first letters of every Verse make [.] 2. Here we have the Imperfection of the most sacred Oracles that were committed to the Heathen-world, in comparison of those God concredited to the Jews; even there where they handle the same Subject: For our Scri∣pture Oracles not only foretel of one to be King of Kings (as an individuum vagum) but express the Place, the Time of his Appearance, the Line he is to come of, &c. But these of Sibyl neither describe Time nor Place nor Stock, saith Lactantius, (de vera sapient. l. 4. c. 15.) [denunciabant enim monstrosa quaedam miracula quorum nec ratio nec author nec tempus designaba∣tur.] And Tully in the place forequoted, [Hoc si est in libris, in quem hominem, & in quod tempus est? callidè enim qui illa composuit, perfecit, ut quodcunque accidisset, praedictum videretur, hominum & temporum definitione sublatâ:] If there be such a Prophecy, of what man or what time is it spoken? for the com∣poser hath subtilly left out the mention of such circumstances. And therefore that Circumstance [that he should arise in Judea] the Romans had not out of Sibyls Books, which had been many hundred years in their custody, but out of the Oriental Tradition (fama per Orientem;) from whence also they had the Description of the time, when or when abouts this King was to ap∣pear, (circa id tempus.) 3. Hence I observe, that that Interpreter of Sybil, expounded her Oracles by the help of the Eastern; for thus Cicero writes: [Quorum interpres nuper falsa quaedam hominum fama dicturus in Senatu, &c.] that is, he misinterpreted Sibyl, by expounding her Oracles according to that common fame which was noised in the East; and so ratified the Eastern Oracle, that is the Jewish, and a strange Religion; which he taxeth those kind of Expositors for, in these words: [Valeántque ad deponendas potiùs quàm ad suscipiendas Religiones:] they should rather be interpreted to the abandoning than the advantage of strange Religions; or rather not be read at all, but kept hid, except when the Senate commands them to be search'd, in order to the diversion of the divine displea∣sure; which was the only use our forefathers made of them: as his next words import; [Sibyllam quidem sepositam & conditam habeamus, ut id quod prodi∣tum est à majoribus; ni jussu Senatus, nè legantur quidem libri.] 4. That Caesar's using this stratagem to procure to himself the Title of King, by an Argument drawn from the danger would otherwise accrew to the Ro∣mans (si salvi esse vellemus) that is, by threatning them with an expectation, that some Nation or other would have the wit to take hold of the opportunity; and, now that the whole World was expecting the accomplishment of that Prophe∣cy, would tender a Person to the Romans themselves to be their King, if they did not in this particular get the start of other States, and therefore it would be their wisest course to change the name of Dictator into that of King; this strate∣gem (I say) of Caesar, was looked upon by Cicero to be of that consequence & ten∣dency, to the over-turning of that Form of Government, under which that City had grown up to those dimensions of Greatness; and to the Introducti∣on of Monarchy, as that Commonwealths-man thinks it worth the while to obviate those Pretences, by invalidating the Authority of all Oracles, and by charging the Antistites, to whose custody those Oracles were commit∣ted, that they would (as the better Ages before them had done) still keep them still secret, and not permit the People of Rome to be sollicited, by Arguments drawn from thence, to think of changing the Government, and bringing in a new Form. To dispatch at once this Point of the Sibylline
Oracles; I find a great deal of pudder about them, both under Augustus and Tiberius, which (I think) must be imputed to Julius his troubling those wa∣ters, in his fishing for the Title of King out of them: (Tacitus. annal. lib. 6. 125.) which in effect he obtained; for he came into the Senate in Scarlet, after the guise of the Alban Kings. The Senate gave him the Title of Re∣deemer, and ordered a temple to be built and dedicated to Liberty, with this Inscription on his Ivory Statue [The Unconquerable God] and that his Image should be erected in the Capitol by the ancient K. standing upon the Globe of the World, with this Inscription; Semideus est. (Dion. 43.) Hinc illae lacrymae in Tully. And truly, when I diligently read through his two Books of Divination, he seems to have had no other Scope in his whole Treatise, than to prevent those destructive (as he thought) Alterati∣ons of Polity, which the belief of Sibyls Prophecy and the Eastern Fame, would incline the City to, if their great Commanders were suffered to tread in Caesar's steps, and to urge the belief of them (upon the Senate) and their Authority, in order to the restoring of the so long-since exploded Kingly Government. § 6. But Tully washeth the Ethiopian, while he seeks to eradicate the belief of this Prophecy out of the minds of the People; or to disswade the Great Ones from giving out themselves for the persons pointed at in this Oracle. For though Augustus rejected the Title of Lord (as also that of Emperour) and made shew, once, of deposing the Imperial Crown; yet in those pretensions to humility, this Politick Prince set his face counter to the Stairs towards which he rowed, and as to his ambition of the Universal Crown, his History is far more fertile of such like stratagems than Julius's. Sue∣tonius reckons no less than 17 Prodigies, which spoke Augustus to be a person de∣sign'd by Heaven for that Universal Monarchy, or something equivalent to it. I shall name those only which bear manifest prints of the Oriental Prophecy. The Velitri had an old Tradition, that a Citizen of theirs should, in pro∣cess of time, gain the possession of the whole World: (quandóque rerum po∣titurum) the very words whereby both Suetonius and Tacitus express the sence of the Eastern Oracle;) the Devil being in this God's Ape, and by this animating them to wage War with the Romans, till their striving for a dead Horse (as the Jews in Vespasians Wars) had brought them to the brink of ruin, and would utterly have destroyed them, if they had not at last been perswad∣ed, that that Respond portended the Sovereignty of Augustus, who was educated though not born amongst them, (Suet. Octav, 94,) [Penè ad exi∣tium suicum populo R. belligeraverant: serô tandem documentis apparuit, osten∣tum illud Augusti potentiam portendisse.] Observe, still, how the Roman writers stretch the Sence of [Oriundus.] Julius Marathus relates (and Suetonius from him) that, some Months be∣fore the Birth of Augustus, a Prodigy was seen at Rome, and heard to de∣clare, that Nature was teeming with one who should be King of the Ro∣mans: [Prodigium Romae factum publicè, quo denunciabatur Regem pop. R. naturam parturire, &c.] at which the Senators were so dismaid, as a Vote had like to have past (upon the same score that Herod slew the Bethlemitish Children) to put to death all the Males that should be born that year: but that the Senators, whose Wives were big bellied, in hope that their Issue might attain that honour, hindred the promulgation of it. His Mother Atia made report (which Suetonius saith he read in Asclepia∣des Mendetes his ) how Apollo cuckolded her Husband Octa∣vius, by his Proxie, a Dragon (sacred to him) creeping into her bed, and committing with her, while she was celebrating his, nightly Rites. (Augustum natum mens decimo, & ob id Apollinis filium existimatum, &c.) Of the truth whereof she produced this Evidence, that from that time she had a Mole, in form of a Dragon, imprest so in grain upon her Body, as it could not by any art be obliterated: in remembrance of which, and in token that
Nero was of Apollo's Line, his Mother Agrippina made him wear a Bracelet of Snake-Skin on his Right Arm; which those whom Messalina sent to murther him in his Bed, thinking to be a Snake indeed, they ran away affrighted, not daring to lay violent hands upon him whom they deemed, by that sight, to be under Apollo's Protection. (Sueton. Nero 6.) An exact Transcript of those Lines in the Oriental Prophecy, that describe him that was to be King of Na∣tions, to be the Son of God: only we may observe here the prints of his cloven Foot, whose Interest it is to disturb the right order of Sacred Prophe∣cies, by jumbling together into one Mass its most Heterogeneal Parts; by joyning, in this Omen, in one Person, the Womans and the Serpents Seed. The same Atia, while she was with Child of Augustus, dreamt that she saw her Entrails trailing round about the Earth, and the whole Circumference of Heaven: and her Husband, that he saw a Sun-beam dart out of her Womb (Suetonius Octav. 94.) [Explicari per omnem terrarum caelique ambitum.] Fan∣cies injected into them from those Passages in the Eastern Prophecy, that deli∣neate the King of the Jews in Colours borrowed from the Sun, sending forth his Light, drawing out his Line to the ends of the World. P. Nigidius, (on that Day wherein Catiline's Conspiracy was discust,) ob∣serving his Father Octavius to come tardy to the Senate (as having been de∣tained at home till his Wife was brought a Bed of Augustus) enquiring the Hour, and Calculating his Nativity, affirmed with much Vehemency, [Do∣minum terrarum orbi natum.] (Sueton. ibid) that a Child born that hour would become Lord of the Universe (Nigidius, in Calculating the time of King Messiah's Birth, shot not so wide of the Mark set by Daniel, as many of our commentators do, who have the Accomplishment of his Prophecy to give them aim: (Vide Meed, Daniels Weeks.) A like Prediction Octavius received from the Thracian Priests, of whom he asked the Fortune of his Son; and was confirmed in the Beleif of it when the Day following his Son (or the Devil in his shape) appeared to him, in a Form more August than that of a Mortal, with a Scepter, a Thunder-bolt, and o∣ther of Jove's Accoutrements, as if he had been his express Image. I shall shut up the Legend of Augustus with the Dreams of Cicero, (an Ene∣my both to Dreams and Monarchy) yet he, the first time he took Notice of Augustus, (but then a Youth) affirmed he had, the Night before, seen such a Boy as that standing at the Gate of the Capitol, to whom Jupiter gave a Whip: And of Quintus Catulus, who saw Jove deliver to him the Seal of the Common-wealth, take him into his Bosom, present him to the Noble Youths as the Umpirer of all Controversies, and lifting his own hand up to his Mouth after Augustus had kissed it, Manifest Transcripts of those Texts, wherein the Messiah is presented as one whom we must hear, whom we must kiss; as one in the bosom of the Father, and to whom is committed the Key of the House of David, &c. wherewith, if those Persons had not been preoccupated, and either read, or heard them in the Day, it could never have come into Mens Minds, in the Night, to dream at this rate: Neither can there be a better Reason given, why the Romans should feign, fancy, and fasten such things as these upon their Emperours; than that they might, by these Lures, draw the Eyes of the World to expect the fulfilling of the Eastern Prophecy in these Persons. § 7. But of the same Mint came those Presages which were coyned con∣cerning Tiberius. Such as that of the famous Mathematician Scribonius, who while Tiberius was yet a Child, promised great things of him; and amongst others, this, that he should be a King without Kingly Ensigns or Badges of Royalty. Suetonius (Tiberius, 8.) imputes the later part of this Prediction to the Author's not being acquainted with the Grandeur of the Caesars: but in reason it should be father'd upon his acquaintance with the Oriental Pro∣phecy, which presents the King of Kings his coming without external Pomp.
And that of Livia, who casting many Figures to find out whether she was with Child of a Boy or Girl, among the rest, took an Egge from under an Hen, which in her own and Maids bosome she hatch'd, till there came forth a cristed Bird, a young Cock, that must teach the old ones to crow up Ti∣berius to be that white one, that Darling of Fortune, to whom the Fates had decreed the universal Crown: A Crown which the East held in her hand for him; of which he received an assurance, when the sacred Fire kindl∣ed of its own accord upon the Altars at Philippi (dedicated to the memory of the conquering Legions) as he passed by them in his Eastern Expedition into Syria. (Suetonius ibid.) The likeliest piece of Leger-de-main the Serpent could possibly play, to fascinate that Region into a belief that he was their promised King; among whom, answering by Fire had formerly been reput∣ed a final Determination of the Contest betwixt God and Baal; and in whose Records, Fire is frequently mention'd as a Precursor to the Exhibition of their Messias. To this that story is akin, of the appearance of Fire issuing out of his Tu∣nick while he lay at Rhodes: an Omen far before the Eagles liting upon the top of his House, and not inferiour to the lucky chance he had at Passage, for the umpiring of that grand Question then in the World, which of the Pretenders was the true Heir to the Universal Crown? saving that those flash∣es were transient; but the Golden Die, which he cast into Apon's Well, by the advice of Gerious Oracle, was in the days of Suetonius (as himself testifies) to be seen in the bottom of the Water, presenting uppermost the highest number. What needed all this ado to render these persons, in the repute of the World, fit to wear the Diadem, as being more than men; but that the World had learn'd, by the Eastern Prophecy, that he whose due it was, was to be God-man: or, in the Roman Phrase,—Chara Deum soboles: what need was there to draw the Lions Skin upon these Emperours, but to make them look like the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to make the Pagan Emperour, that mock Christ; the eldest Son of Perdition, be taken for the Christ, the King of Kings. Let me here observe the policy of this Vafrous wit Tiberius to se∣cure the Judaean Crown from the surprisal of others, but especially of the Jews themselves; after the History of our Saviour was come to light (for Jo∣sephus hints that Stratagem as laid after Christs passion) from whom, and Sue∣tonius (his Tiberius 36.) we learn, that Tiberius (notwithstanding the love he pretended to that Nation, commended upon that account by Philo,) practised to weaken the Strength, and abate the courage of the Jews, by distributing their Youth, under pretence of training them up in Martial Discipline, into Provinces far distant from Judaea, and colder Climates; four Thousand of which, for instance, were sent into Sardis: why this pretence? but to cloak his drift from the Jews Eyes, whose Favour he thought was necessary, in or∣der to his being born King of the Jews when time serv'd: and why must that Nations strength be thus weaken'd by dispersing their Youth through the Provinces? but to prevent their snatching at the Eastern Monarchy. Galba (for to produce the Arts which every Emperour used, of this tenden∣cy, would be an abuse of my Readers Patience) was invited by Vindex to the accepting of the Empire, in words as fully expressing the Eastern Prophecy, as the Tongue of man can utter: Ut humano generi assertorem ducemque se accommodaret (Sueton. Galba, 9.) that he would lend himself to Man-kind as its Saviour and Leader: And encouraged to undertake it, by an Oracle as like that of God's, touching his Christ, as if they both had come out of the same Mouth, but that the Drivel of the Serpent bewrays its Original in alter∣ing the Scene, in putting Spain in the room of Jury. The sence of the O∣racle (saith Suetonius) was this: That one was to arise out of Spain who was to be Prince and Lord over all. Observe, by the way, the Roman Sence of Oriundus, (of which before) for Galba came not out of Spain as a Native; but that being his Province, there he first erected his Emperial Standard: and
withal, the Craft of Galba, in taking the advantage of this utmost Western Province its distance from the East, to impose upon the Legions there resid∣ing this gloss of the Oriental Oracle; that that Person, whose coming the whole World was expecting, was to come out of Spain. But to return to our Spanish Oracle; this was brought to him by an honest Maid, who came fortified with this Story; that a Priest of Jupiter of Cleve, admonish'd by a Dream, had haled it out of the Repository of that God's Temple, having been uttered two hundred Years ago by a Woman Prophetess. Perhaps Ma∣rius attempted to redeem Gallia with the aid of those ten Thousand Fanaticks, who esteemed that sordid Peasant a God: upon the Encouragement of the Fame of this Prophecy; his Story Tacitus relates (Histor. l. 2. pag. 310. But what need of Conjectures, when I am oppressed with Numbers of cer∣tain and manifest Instances; § 8. From amongst which I shall singleout Vespasian to conclude with; because he and his Son Titus actually estated themselves in the possession of that which their Predecessors sued for, (viz.) the repute of being amor & de∣liciae humani generis (that is, in the Prophets Language) the desire of all Na∣tions; of being that King of Kings mentioned in the Prophecy: A Title con∣ferred upon them, not only by the Gentile Chronologers of that Age, but by Josephus himself, a Jew and a Priest (such wonderful Delusions was the most sober and discreet Party of the unbelieving Jews given unto) and that upon the account of those Impresses which, they conceived, Heaven had stamp'd upon them, and pointed them out by, for that Universal Monarchy. Such was that Prodigy of the Oak sacred to Mars, and standing in the Fa∣vian Suburb, which, when it was sere, on a suddain put forth three branch∣es, at the three Births of his Mother Vespasia: the first a slender one at the Birth of her eldest Child, a Girl, who died within a Year: but the last at the Birth of Vespasian as big as a Tree; upon which, his Father Sainus, hav∣ing consulted the Fortune-tellers, told his Mother that she had a Grand-child born that would be Emperour: at which she nothing but laugh'd, wonder∣ing that she being, for all her Age, in perfect Memory, should have a Son grown already into his dotage (Suetonius Vespasian, 5.) Such was the Interpretation that was made of Caligula's throwing Dirt in∣to the Lap of his Soldier's Coat: (a Punishment inflicted upon him, for his not taking Care enough, to have the Way watered and swept before him and his Army, in his Belgick Expedition) that, in process, of Time, the Earth should be cast into his Lap. Such was the Dog's bringing to him a man's hand, the Oxe's crouching down at his feet; Cypress's rising up again, of its own accord, and flourish∣ing the next Day, after it had by the Violence of a Tempest been blow'n down, and by its own weight (in that fall) pull'd up by the Roots: they who report∣ed these things, had a mind to perswade the World, that he was the Branch growing from the withered Root of Jesse, the man, under whose Feet, God had put even Sheep and Oxen, &c. Of the same tendency was the Respond he received in Judea from the O∣racle of God Carmelus; that whatsoever he undertook should succeed well, (Suet. Vespas. 5.) that is, in the Prophets Language; the Pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand: Heylin (Cosmography Syria, Phaenicia, 689.) thinks the Heathen called the Jews God Carmelus, from that Familiarity that Elias had with him on the Mount Carmel; and that miraculous Experiment by which he confuted Baal's Prophets there, gave them the ground of that o∣pinion, that Oracles were given there by God: If this was a Respond of the God of Israel's; he answered Vespasian, and those Jewish Priests that consult∣ed the Oracle, after their own Heart, and according to that Idol of the Mes∣siah they had set up, having rejected the substance. But I conceive, Suetonius here hath respect to Josephus his assuring him, that he should be Emperour, and prosper in all his Undertakings, &c. (Bel.
Jud. 5. 12.) which Presages he (being a Priest) father'd upon the spirit of God's Revelation to him: of these Predictions of Josephus Suetonius (in the same place) makes mention. As also of an Eagle coming from the East, and chasing away that, which had (in the sight of the Armies) conquered ano∣ther Eagle in the Battel of Betrick; where Otho's Army was discomfited by Vitellius, and a while after Vitellius by Vespasian. Such was his curing the blind and lame after the Physicians had in vain tryed their Skill upon them; the one with his Spittle, the other with tread∣ing upon his hand (Tacit. hist. 4. 390.) so perfect an Ape was Vespasian of our Jesus in these things, as I wonder not that he should train up his Son Titus to that exactness in the Act of Counterfeiting; as he was wont to boast, he could resemble any man's hand, and could be, if he had a mind to it, the ve∣riest Falsifyer in the World: (Suet. Tit. 3.) the true Son of such a Father, as could not only counterfeit Mens Hands, but God's Arm, that Arm that rules for him! Whether these Stories were feigned, or true, as most of them, and those the unlikeliest, doubtless were; there being many Eye Witnesses of them alive and testifying the Truth of them long after his Death, when they had no tem∣ptation to lye, as Tacitus affirms (Histor. lib. 4.) and Suetonius his Father then serving in the Wars, as Tribune of the tenth Legion. Whether those strange things were the Effects of Satanical Power, or the Gifts of God to that Em∣perour, marking him out for that signal Service he performed against Jeru∣salem (as the excellent Doctor Juxon, if my memory fails me not, hath somewhere expressed) is not here to be discust: for it comes all to one, as to the use I make of these Relations: which I produce to prove, that by these means Vespasian came to be look'd upon as the Person pointed at in the orien∣tal Prophecy: and this is no more than is with one Mouth asserted by all those three Historians, who, in a manner, were upon the place where these things were done. That Authority and Majesty (saith Suetonius) (Vespasian, 7.) that was wanting to Vespasian, in respect of the obscurity of his Family; was by such Omens and Prodigies made up: Authoritas, & quasi majestas quaedam, ut in∣opinato & adhuc novo principi deerat, accessit haec quoque, &c. Upon considera∣tion of the many Signs fore-shewing his Reign (saith Josephus) (Bel. Jud. 5. 12.) it was thought that Vespasian came to the Empire by God's special Provi∣dence, and that a certain just order of Fate had brought about the whole World to his Obedience. And Tacitus (Ibid. lib. 4.) writes, that by those Miracu∣lous Contingencies, the Favour of Heaven, and the Inclination of the Gods towards him was manifestly declared; and by them Vespasian was so animated, as he thought nothing impossible to him, or without the Verge of his For∣tune: Multa miracula evenere queis coelestis favor & quaedam in Vespasianum in∣clinatio numinum ostenderetur—Igitur cuncta fortunae suae patere ratus: nec quicquam últro incredibile.
CHAP. X. The more open Practices of soaring Spirits in grasping at the Judean Crown; their hopes to obtain it, and (as to some of them) their Conceit of possessing it. § 1. Cleopatra's Boon begg'd of M. Antony denyed. Herod's Eye blood-shot with looking at the Eastern Prophecy. § 2. Vespasian jealous of Titus. The Eastern Monarchy the Prize contended for by both Parties in the Jewish Wars. Mild Vespasian cruel to David's Line. § 3. Domitian jealous of David's Progeny. (Genealogies. Metius Pomposianus his Genesis and Globe;) his Discourse with Christ's Kindred about Christ's Kingdom. Clan∣cular Jews brought to light. Trajan puts to death, Simeon Bishop of Jeru∣salem for being of the Royal Line. § 4. Glosses upon the Eastern Prophecy under Adrian involve the Empire in Blood, Jewry in Desolation, Fronto taxeth benumm'd Nerva for conniving at the Jew. § 1. THese were their secret Practices to wind themselves into the possessi∣on of the Eastern Kingdom; in all which they cast a corner of the eye, (and that which they took aim with) upon the Oriental Prophecy, and upon its account on the concern of Judea. We shall now give such Instances of their open and over-board Practices, as speak those great ones, who tra∣vell'd with the hopes of the Universal Monarchy, to have had their Eye and Ear open to every Leaf that fell there, where the Throne was to be erected. Cleopatra expressed her extream desire of the Kingdom of Judea, in her seeking to undermine Herod's Interest in M. Antony's Affections: which when she could not effect, she attempts to ensnare Herod in the Cords of Love, sol∣liciting him to the use of her body, by all the Allurements which her Craft or Wantonness could suggest (Joseph. Ant. lib. 15. cap. 4.) But the old Fox smelt the Train, and escap'd the Trap, (though baited with that Flesh, for the enjoyment whereof, his Master Antony lost both Crown and Life) and withal so well perceived what thirst the Queen of Egypt had after the Waters of Israel, as he was once minded to have quench'd it in her Blood, being con∣fident that nothing else, save the enjoyment of Judea's Crown, could satiate her Longings; (Id. ib. cap. 5.) towards the obtaining whereof, when these Methods proved ineffectual, she betakes her self to the all conquering Wea∣pons of Tears and Prayers, beleaguering Antony with dayly Requests, and endearing Arguments that Wit or Love could invent to assault his Mind with, whose heart, she knew, lay already at her Feet. But Antony turns a deaf Ear to his Cleopatra's Suit, bribes her to hold her Peace by giving her Coelo-Syria, but will by no means hear of parting with Judea's Crown, no not to her that is dearer to him than his Life. (Id. Ibid cap. 4.) What makes him, in this Case, thus inexorable? had it been his Respects to Herod, his Affection to Cleopatra would more than have counter-ballanc'd that; was it the largeness of that Kingdoms Bounds? for Bulk it was the wreckling of all Kingdoms; too mean a Gift for Antony to bestow on Cleopatra, if in his Surveigh of it he had not taken in the Eastern Prophecy, and valued it according to the rate which that had set upon it. Whose Crown, while Herod held, he only held the Stakes, till the Game was up that Augustus and Antony were a playing: had the Emperial fallen to his Lot, Herod's Diadem would have been at his Devotion: he might, when he saw an Opportunity have taken it off his Head (who was but a Deputy King) and set it upon his own with a wet Fin∣ger; but not from Cleopatra's with dry Cheeks. But Antony, as a Man ef∣feminated, doth but lisp out his Emulation of this Crown, his envying that any head should wear it as absolutely his, but his own.
Herod's Eye, by looking at this Oracle, grew apparently Blood-shot▪ he writes his jealousie of the accomplishment of this Prophecy so plain, as a man may run and read it in the Blood of the Innocents, Sanhedrim and Royal Line, thinking (Joseph. ant. 14. 17.) by these means, to frustrate its Effects, and to secure to himself and his Masters at Rome the Ground they hold: and yet fearing some of that Race might escape his evil Eye; to make all sure, he caus∣eth all the Genealogies he could lay Hands on to be burned: that by disturb∣ing the Succession he might make the Title disputable, and bring it to be de∣termined by the longest Sword, while Tongues and Pens were contending a∣bout endless and headless Genealogies (Euseb. Eccl. hist. 1. 9.) A Design had taken sad effect, had not St. Paul by his Apostolical Prohibition timously pre∣vented it, and had not merciful Providence snatch'd some Authentick Re∣cords, as Brands, out of the Fire; out of which the Evangelist drew the double Line of our Saviour; for that some Draughts of David's Posterity did escape, the Talmudists assure us, when they tell us, that by the Tract of such Records R. Levi derived Hillel (our Saviours Contemporary) from the Family of David. (Lightfoot har. § 10. § 2. The Fear that his Son Titus, (after this Conquest of Judea) would as∣sume the so much spoken of Kingdom of the East, made Vespasian look askew upon his staying there so long, and upon the Honours there conferr'd upon him by the Legions. (Suet. Titus 5.) [Unde nata suspicio est quasi descisseret a patre Orientisque regnum sibi vindicare tentasset.—] Insomuch as Titus, for the Removal of that Jealousie, hastens upon the first Rumour of it to Rome, and pithily confutes it in three Words: veni, Pater, veni; I am come, Father, I am come. And indeed he had reason to think his Father must needs be ten∣der of that Point, the securing of that Kingdom to himself being the Errand upon which he sent his Son into Judea: for it was for the Decision of the Controversie about Title to the Universal Monarchy that those Fatal Wars were commenc'd: that that Combat was undertaken, which (in the Judgment of Josephus) was the bloodiest that ever was sought; each Party drawing in for Seconds all the force they could raise; and selling their Lives to one another, at the highest Price that the utmost Spight of Foes. Contempt of Death, and Gallantry of Spirit could set them at: A War managed with a greater Fierce∣ness of Spirit than the Pregnant Wit of Homer could fancy in his describing the Wars of Troy: and (to say all in Word) answerable to the esteem which both Parties had of that Helena for whom they contended; (Joseph. Prefa. Bel. Jud.) while the Jew (saith Josephus (Id. Ib. Preface to Jewish War:) pro∣mised to himself the Universal Sovereignty, and the Roman was loth to let go his hold: they came to try the Title by the Sword. Particularly, that this was the Prize which the Jew ran for in that Race is manifest from the clear Testimonies of Josephus, (Bel. Jud. 7. 12.) saying, That which chiefly excited the Jews to this War was an Ambiguous Oracle found in their Sacred Books, that about that time some one was to arise in their Coasts that should obtain the Empire of the Globe of the Earth. And of Suetonius (Vespasian 4.) who, speaking of the Eastern Oracle, tell us, that the Jews applying it to themselves was that which occasioned and encouraged them to rebel. Id Judaei ad se trahentes rebellarunt; for our confirma∣tion in the truth of those Evidences, beside the Credit of the Authors, we have the Qualifications of the Persons who fomented this Rebellion, of the Ring-leaders of this Defection; who were those Impostors, that by Magical Tricks perswaded the unwary Multitude, that they were either the Christ or his Fore-runners: in this second Rank I martial them, who drew Disciples into the Wilderness; the Stage erected by the Prophets, for that Cryer that was to prepare the way for the Messiah; before whom these Anti-baptists plain the Way by levelling the Roman Power set over them by God, by with-hold∣ing Tribute, and surprising Castles, by excluding Caesar out of their Prayers and Sacrifices; which was, saith Josephus, the Seminary and Fomes of the
war (Bel. Jud. 2. 17. initio.) Under the first Rank I place (by name) Me∣nahem the Son of Judas of Galilee, (Id. Ib. fine.) that cunning Sophister, who after the time of Christs Birth, about ten or eleven Years (when Arche∣laus his Goods being confiscated, Cyrenius was sent to take an Account there∣of; and also to tax Syria (to which Provence Judea was then annext) this occasioned Judas his Insurrection, and not that first taxing of all the World at our Saviour's Birth) drew the Jews into Rebellion upon occasion of the taxing under Cyrenius, and had so well train'd up his Sons in this bad Art; that two of them start up false Christs under Tiberius Alexander, to wit, James and Simeon, (Joseph. Ant. Jud. 10. 3.) The last of this Galilean's Sons that trod in his Father's Steps was this Menahem (of whom that Story may very well be intended that Doctor Lightfoot (Harmony § 9.) quotes out of the Gomarists) who, taking with him certain of the Nobility, went to Massada Castle, where was Herod's Armory; and arming himself and his Company, marches to Jerusalem as a King, &c. But to this Point Josephus speaks home (Jud. Bel. 7. 12.) [Sed quod maxime eos (Judaeos) ad bellum excitaverat, re∣sponsum erat ambiguum in sacris libris inventum, quod eo tempore quidam esset ex eorum sinibus orbis terrae habiturus imperium, id enim illi quidem quasi proprium acceperant multique sapientes interpretatione decepti.] But that which chiefly in∣cited the Jews to this was an Ambiguous Oracle found in the Sacred Books, that a∣bout that time one was to arise in their Coasts who was to have the Empire of the whole World, which they appropriated to themselves: &c. 2. That the Romans aimed at the same Mark, though we need no other E∣vidence than the Emperour's taking upon himself the honour of being reput∣ed that King, (of which before) for his bearing away that Title, as the Spoils of conquered Judea, argues that to have been the Golden Ball he contended for; quod primum in intentione ultimum in executione; yet I shall back this with one other historical observation, viz. Vespasian's enquiring out, and put∣ting to death all he could find of David's Off-spring (Euseb. ec. hist. 3. 12. 44.) whom, after so long a deprivation of the exercise of Royal Power, as had by Prescription rendered them, in all other Capacities, inconsiderable and mere private men, nothing could make so formidable, as to put that mild Prince (who wept over the Fall of Jerusalem, and Slaughter of obstinate Re∣bels) upon that Bloody Design of murdering so many Innocents, whose only Crime was, that they were his Posterity, out of whose Loins was to come, he that was to be Lord of the Universe; nothing (I say) could have forced Ve∣spasian (contrary to the strong Bias of his natural Inclination) to so inhumane an Undertaking, had not that Maxim (which led Julius Caesar to the viola∣tion of common Equity) led Vespasian (the first good Natur'd man that ever imbrewed his Hands in so savage an Act) to the Violation of the Law, not only of common Humanity, but of his own Benign and more than Humane Nature, [.] If the Law of Equity be to be waved at all, it is to be waved for an Empire. Nothing, but a Design to obtain and secure to himself this Universal Monarchy, could have been a Prize worthy Vespasi∣an's running for, through this Way of Blood, where he drives his victorious Chariot, not (as Tullia) over the insensate Corps of a dead Father, but over his own tenderly yearning Bowels, that he might with more Security hug the Penelope he had been courting in the Wars; of whose Embraces he could not promise himself the quiet Possession, as long as any of that Rival Line sur∣vived. He had learned by Experience, that the Jews were so confident that their Messiah must spring from the Root of Jessee, as while there was any Branch sprouting thence, they would gather to it, and put their Confidence in the Shadow of it; and many of their Wise Men were thereby deceived; while the Factious Impostors had any of that Linage left, to throw out as a Ball of Contention, they would never leave camping and striving with the Romans for the Goal; and therefore he thought it his wisest Course, by the Extirpa∣tion of that Family, to take up the Ball. He had seen that writ, in the Rub∣rick of Roman and Jewish Blood, which Tacitus hath transcribed; that the
Jews were so pertinacious in applying to themselves the Grandure promised in the Eastern Prophecy, as all the Misery they endured, all the Desolations brought upon them by that War, could not make them despond, and give up their Hapes of the arising of that Phoenix out of their very Ashes: (Ta∣cit. hist. 5. pa. 398.) Ne adversis quidem ad vera mutabantur:] and therefore concluded, they would never leave scraping in the Embers for Sparks, (to set the Empire on Fire by renewed Commotions,) till they were quenched with the last drop of Blood he could find in the Veins of any of David's Loins. Jo∣sephus tells a Story of the Jews Obstinacy, which he himself wonders at; that they had taught their Children a kind of Apathy; insomuch as they could not by any Torments be forc'd to acknowledg Caesar Lord, no not after the razing of their City and Dispersion of their Nation. He proceeded therefore to the Extirpation of David's Issue upon the same Account that Ulisses did to the slaying of Astianax, elegantly expressed by the Tragick Poet; ex Hectoris na∣to superstite possit alter oriri Hector paterni vindex sanguine—sic parvus ille armenti comes primisque nondum cornibus findens cutem cervice subito celsus & fronte arduus gregem paternam ducit. From David's Off-spring may arise a David that may repair the Ruines of the Kingdom. These yet Lambs, whose budding Horns have not yet cut the Skin, may in time grow Rams, and in the Front of their deluded Followers batter down the Walls of Rome. An a∣dorable depth of Providence! in the Net which the Jews laid for Christ, was their own Feet taken: their [whosoever makes himself a King is no Friend to Caesar] was a manifest Reflection upon the Oriental Prophecy of a King to a∣rise in Judea; their Gloss upon it betrayed the Holy Jesus into the hands of the Roman Power: their Plea against King Jesus was, they for their part had (Bel. Jud. 7. 29.) no King but Caesar; and if Pilate would not condemn him, as an Enemy to Caesar, who gave out himself to be the King of the Jews, let him look how he would answer it before Caesar: their refusing Jesus of Naza∣reth for their Lord was the Meritorious Cause of their Ruine, the Offence they gave God. And their refusing Caesar for their Lord, for that King mentioned in that Prophecy, was the occasion of their Ruine; and the unpar∣donable Offence which Caesar took at them. § 3. A State-Maxim communicated by Vespasian to his Successors, whom we find so vigilant over Occurrences in Judea, as they seem to be startled at e∣very Blast blustering in Lebanon's Forrest, no less than if it had portended the casting down of the Cedar of the Empire, and the exalting of the then low Shrub and Sear-Stem of David. Domitian, before he came to the Emperial Crown, had upon reading that of Virgil, Impia quam caesis gens est epulata Juvencis. conceived so great an Abhorrency of Blood-shed: as he was about making a Decree (in the beginning of his Reign against sacrificing of Oxen to the im∣mortal Gods; (Suet. Domit. 9.) but by that time he had learn'd Arcana Im∣perii, he can, (without Regret) sacrifice to his own Jealousie, and the safety of Goddess Rome, not only the Blood of innocent Lambs reputed to be of the Royal Line of Judah, but even of those that attempted to communicate their Genealogies to the Knowledg of the World; whereof we have an ac∣count in Suetonius (Domit. 10.) (if I mistake him not) where he writes of Domitian's crucifying Hermogenes Tarsensis, and the Transcribers of his Hi∣story, because of some Figures or Schemes he had drawn up in it: for I take this Hermogenes to be that Countrey-man of St. Paul, whom he (2 Tim. 1. 15.) mentions among those that had forsaken him, and departed from him (I suppose to Judaism) and whom Dorothens reckons for an Heretick; and his Heresie to have been the abetting of Jewish Fables and Genealogies relating to the Messias. This starting of new Game, and raising of new Hydra's
Heads (as Domitian conceived it) the Empire could not but look upon with an evil Eye, as that which would find their Hatchet as endless Work as those Genealogies were. Perhaps Metius Pomposianus his [imperatoria genesis] and [depictus orbis terrae,] for which he was banished, were judged to be of the same Tendency. [Suet. Domit. 10.) [Quod habere imperatoriam genesin & de∣pictum terrarum orbem vulgo ferebatur.] To be sure, the Story which Eusebi∣us relates, paints him as casting a jealous Eye upon David's Stock. He com∣manded (saith he) (Eccles. hist. 3. 17.) such as lineally descended of David to be put to Death; among whom some Christians were brought before him, and accus∣ed to have come from the Ancestors of Jude, our Lord's Brother; and therefore of David's Line: of whom the Emperour (fearing the coming of the King of the Jews as Herod had done) demanded whether they were of the Stock of David: which they acknowledging, he enquires what Moneys and Land they had; and finding by their Answer that they had no Moneys, and but thirty nine Acres of Land apiece; out of which, by the Sweat of their Brows, they earned their dayly Bread (of the Truth of which Answer the Brawniness of their Hands, contracted by hard Labour, was Demonstration sufficient.) He question'd them about Christs Kingdom; where, and when, and in what manner it should come: to which they answering, It was not Earthly, but Coelestial, that it should be at the End of the World, when he would come to Judg the Quick and the Dead: he not only dis∣mist them, as too mean Persons to be his Rivals, but stayed the Persecution formerly raised against the Church; perceiving he had no Ground to fear that the Christians would raise any Commotions in the Empire upon the Account of the Eastern Kingdom. Which yet he so much feared from the Circumcision, as when he was in∣form'd that some of them lived incognito in Rome, he caused a privy Search to be made of all suspected Persons; among whom Suetonius reports, that when he was a Youth, he saw the Emperour's Attourney in open Court search one Old Man of Ninety Years. (Suet. Domit. 12.) [Judaicus siscus acerbissime actus ad quem deferebantur qui dissimulata origine—interfuisse me adolescentulum memini cum a procuratore frequentissimoque concilio inspiceretur nonagenarius senex an cir∣cumcisus esset.] So vigilant was he over the Affairs of that Nation, as he will not suffer so much as one decrepit Jew to live from under the Observation of his Eye: fearing that the least Spark, if it were raked up under the Ashes of Obscurity, might live to an Opportunity of setting the Empire on Fire. Under Trajan, Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem was put to Death for no other Crime, but that he was accused to have been of the Blood Royal, and lineal∣ly descended from David's Loins: (Euseb. ec. hist. 3. 29.) an Argument that Trajan cast as envious an Eye as his Predecessors had done upon the Eastern Oracle; and upon that Account on Christians, but unjustly: Though he had Reason enough to be jealous of the Jews, who blustered in his eighteenth Year, (Dionis, Nerva, Trajanus) as if they had been possessed of a Raging, Seditious, and Fanatick Spirit, and kindled so Firie a Sedition at Alexandria and Cyrene, under their upstart Kings Lucas and Andrew, as could not be quench'd, but by the Blood of many Myriads of them: with what more than Anabaptistical Cruelty the Cyrenians sought to establish their Mock-Christ King; Dion in the Life of Trajan declares, telling us that their Sword made no difference betwixt Romans and Grecians, that not content with their Swords drinking of Blood, themselves eat the Flesh of the Slain; with whose Skins apparell'd, and Entrails (yet bleeding) girt, they ran up and down like Furies, and birkened those whom they met with from the Rump to the Crown of the Head; putting to Death above twenty Thousand. The Cyprian Jews (as the same Author relates) at the same time, and upon the same occasion, used that more than Savage Cruelty in Butchering twenty five Thousand in that Island, as produc'd the enacting of a Law, that whatever Jew should thence-forward touch upon their Coast should presently be put to Death. This made Trajan jealous of the Jews of Mesopotamia, lest they should joyn Forces with their Brethren; as they of Aegypt had done, in defence of their home-spun
King: for the Prevention of which, he sent Lucius Quincius to banish them the Province. These things saith Eusehius (Eccles. hist. 4. 2.) were re∣corded by Heathen Historiographers then living. Now what but the Impor∣tance of the Case, (as that wherein the Emperial Crown lay at Stake) could have made Trajan thus jealous, being a Prince naturally averse to that Passion; of which he gave sufficient Proof in his Carriage to Sura; who, though he was vehemently accused to him of Treason, yet inviting the Emperour to Supper; he not only came, but came without Guard, and committed his Throat to Sura's Barber. (Dionis, Nerva, Trajan.) § 4. In the eighteenth Year of his Successor Adrian, the Eastern Prophe∣cy ripens the Jews into another Rebellion, under the Conduct of another Changling-Messiah, Barchochebas; that Son of the Star (as his Name im∣ports,) who gave out himself to be that Star of Jacob who was come from Heaven, as a Light to shine comfortably upon the Jews, and conduct them out of the Roman Bondage. It is not unworthy of Observation that this Antichrist was as virulent an Enemy to the Christians as Romans, and that up∣on the same Quarrel, viz. their affirming that the Oriental Prophecy had al∣ready received its Accomplishment. For in that general Point they agreed a∣gainst the Jew, to the utter vacating of Barchochebas his Claim: though they vastly dissented in their applying of it, the one to our Jesus, the other to the Roman Emperour (Spartian. Adrian.) The occasion of this Rebellion (saith Spartianus) was Adrian's prohibiting them Circumcision; fearing, be like, that Nation would never suffer the Romans quietly to enjoy the Possession of the Universal Monarchy as long as the Seal of the Covenant of the Messiah re∣mained with them; as long as they were permitted to bear that mark in their Flesh, which was instituted as a Sign that the King of Nations was to come from Abraham's Loins: For why else should he forbid it to them, and not o∣ther Nations, but because other Nations used it only as a Religious Mundi∣fying Rite; but the Jews over and beside that, as a Political Badg, to distin∣guish them from all others, as that Nation which God had singled out to this peculiar Privilege, that he who was to reduce the whole World to his Obedi∣ence, was to come out of that Stock, [Oriundus esset ex Judaea.] From hope of which that he might force them to an absolute Despondency; he erected a Temple to Jupiter, affronting the Ruines of that which had been the Temple of the God of Abraham; upbraiding them with the Imbecillity of that God whereon they depended, as not able to preserve his own Sacrifices from be∣coming a Prey to the Roman Eagle. This Insurrection (saith Dion) caused a Concussion in the whole World: indeed, as the contending Parties stated the Case, the whole World was concern'd in it, the Question being whether Barchochab, or the Roman Emperour, was the Per∣son specified in the Eastern Tradition? which Question, though it was in the Effect and Issue of that War, determin'd against the Jew; who was not only routed in that Fight, but had five Hundred of his most eminent strong Holds dismantled, nine Hundred eighty and five of his most Populous and Famous Towns sack'd and burn'd down to the Ground, and fifty Thousand of men of Arms slain, and a very great Multitude consum'd with Famine, Fire, and raging Maladies; insomuch as almost all Judea was turn'd into a Forrest (a Desolation answerable to the Presages of it: Solomon's Sepulchre fell flat to the Ground without hands: Wolves and Hyenas were heard howling up and down their Cities, &c.) Yet for all this Adrian thought not himself suffici∣ently secured against his Fears of a new King arising in Judea, that might dis∣possess him of his Empire, till he had buried the Memorial of their Metropo∣lis in its own Ruines, and out of them built a new City hard by the place where that had stood, calling it after his own name, Aelia: and wiped the whole Land of its Natives as a Man wipeth a Dish, making it capital for any of them so much as to look back upon their Native Soyl, no not afar off, from the Tops of Hills, as if he had been jealous that their Eye might glance and
inject the Spawn of Rebellion into that King-teeming Soil, except it were pitch'd with the foot of Strangers. Nerva was the only Emperour from Julius to Trajan, whom Pagan Histo∣ry paints not looking asquint on Judea: the reason of that may be; either the shortness of his Reign, wherein he had scarce room to look about him, and learn the Concerns of the Empire: or the Fearless Habit of his Soul, and his Contempt of the most formidable Pretensions: having that Confidence in his own Integrity, as to assume Virginius Rufus to be his Colleague in the Con∣sulship, whom the Roman Legions had proclaimed Emperour; to cause Crassus Calphurnius, with the rest of his Fellow-Conspirators, to sit down by him on the Stage, and put Swords into their Hands, bidding them try whether they were sharp enough; signifying (saith my Author) he had not much cared if they had slain him upon the Place: And as to offer his naked Throat to the drawn Sword of Aelianus Casperius, accused to him of Treason, (Dion. Cos. Nerva.) How be it there is one Passage in his Story may confirm us in this Opinion; that it was a Maxim of Roman Policy, to keep a Jealous Eye over Judea: to wit, Dion's reporting his prohibiting any of the Jewish Sect to be medled with, as the chief ground of Fronto's Speech, that it was of evil Consequence to the Commonwealth, to have him to Reign, under whom nothing is indulged to any; but of far worse to live under him, under whom all men were wink∣ed at: in which Sarcasm Fronto reckons his Connivance at the Jews, as an un∣politick Act, and the Effect of his Natural Oscitancy, aggravated with dull Old Age. The Consul is the Eye of the Republick; his Eye, we see, is up∣on Judea though the Emperour's be not. We have seen the Emperours for almost, two Hundred Years, handing down to their Successors this Principle of State. Every Motion in Judea is narrowly to be observed; for from thence the East does, with the highest Confidence, expect the arising of one that shall Lord it over all States; dur∣ing which Time the Gospel was dayly brought under Examination before the Roman Tribunals; where the Church asserts, the Synagogue denies Jesus of Nazareth to be that King: Is it possible then that in discussing that Question, and those Contingencies in Judea, which the Church alleadged in Proof of her Assertion, Interest of State should not sollicit the Agents of the Empire to the Exercise of so much more Diligence in this than other Cases brought be∣fore them, as they apprehended the great Interest of the Empire to be more concern'd in this than in others: (the Trial of the Title to that Crown which the Eastern Prophecy made promise of, cost more Blood than has been shed in umpiring the Titles of all other Crowns:) So that upon this Account the Tu∣mults in Judea occasioned that severe Scrutiny of what the Church reported, as would have dash'd her out of Countenance, had those Reports been false; and have render'd it impossible for her, to shuffle any thing into the Story of Christ, which would not abide the severest Test. This Medium we have seen attest∣ed under the Hands of Secular Historians, of that Disaffection to Christian Religion, as it could not but be far from their thoughts, wittingly to let any thing fall from their Pens, that might be interpreted or applied to the advan∣tage of the Christian Cause: yet he that guided the Asse's Mouth to rebuke the madness of the Prophet, hath order'd the Pagan's Pen to draw that Image of those Times, as it will puzzle the most daring Atheist to invent any proba∣ble Salve for his absurd Hypothesis, that possibly the Apostles (as well as the Promoters of other Religions) might impose upon the World; a Conceipt grounded merely upon his Ignorance of those Times, and especiall the then great Interest of the Empire: which that it put the Empire upon a strict Enqui∣ry into what the Evangelists preached: if what hath been observed be not suffi∣cient to convince his Reason, I shall demonstrate it to the Atheists Sense, from matter of Fact, in the Instance of St. Paul's Appearance and Apology before Nero; the only Emperour (except that short liv'd Beast Calignla, and that ne∣ver-living Fool Claudius) whom I have omitted in my Discourse of the Em∣perours Jealousie the over Judean Assairs relating to the Eastern Prophecy; and
that purposely, that I might, in a peculiar Tractate, handle St. Paul's appearing before him; and therein clear this Hypothesis. CHAP. XI. St. Paul's Apology before Nero was in Answer to some Interroga∣tories put to him, through the Suggestion of his Adversaries, touching the matter of the Eastern Prophecy. Ex. gr. Is not this Jesus, whom thou preachest to be risen again from the Dead, that Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye call King of the Jews. § 1. Tertullus his Charge against St. Paul, a Ring-leader of Nazarites. Ly∣sias his Interrogatory, art not thou that (Alexandrian) Egyptian? Nero put in hopes of that Kingdom which St. Paul preach'd Christ to have obtain∣ed. Poppaea Nero's Minion. Disciples slink away. § 2. Why St. Paul stiles Nero a Lion of the Kingdom of God. The Lions Courage quails at St. Paul's Apology. Nero, after that, trusts more to his Art, than Gypsies Prophecies. § 3. St Paul's Appearance within Nero's Quinquennium. Pallas, Foelix his Brother and Advocate out of Favour in Nero's third. Festus hastens St. Paul's Mission to Rome; the Jews, his Trial. § 4. Ne∣ro, not yet a Lion in Cruelty, but in Opinion, Judah's Lion. St. Paul's Doctrine tryed to the bottom, before Nero desponds. An Apology for this Pil∣grimage through the Holy Age: its Use, § 1. FEstus who sent St. Paul bound to Rome; and to whom it seemed un∣reasonable to send a Prisoner, and not withal to signifie the Crimes laid against him (Act. 25. 27.) thus states it to Agrippa; Paul affirmed Jesus, whom the Jews said was dead, to be alive. Now Christ's Resurrection necessa∣rily implies, that he was that Son of God, whom God had decreed, should have the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for his Possession. Besides, Festus could not be ignorant that Tertullus the Jews Advocate, had laid this to St. Paul's Charge in open Court, that he was a Ring-leader of the Sect of the Nazarens; that is, them that held Jesus of Nazareth to be the promised King of the Jews. Now this having been the declared Sence of the Jewish Antagonists before Pilat, and the urging of that upon him, the thing that forc'd him, against his Conscience, to give Sen∣tence against our Saviour: and Festus having had so fair a Warning of the Jews watching Opportunities of accusing the Roman Deputies to Caesar, by their accusing his immediate Predecessor, Foelix; would not, sure, give them that Advantage against himself, which his concealing so main a point of their Accusation, and an Article so nearly concerning Caesar's Crown, would have administred. 2. Lysias, at St. Paul's Apprehension, perceiving he could speak Greek, that is, was of the Grecizing or Alexandrian Sect, questions him whether he were not that Egyptian (that is, Alexandrian Jew) who the other Day made an Uproar: For under Foelix, this Egyptian among many others) by Pretext of Miracles and Inchantments, did seduce the unwary Multitude into an Opini∣on that he was the Christ. Now this Question, [art not thou that Fellow who the other Day gave himself out to be the promised Messiah the King of the Jews?] coming first out of the Captains Mouth, argues what lay uppermost on his Heart, as to the faithful Discharge of his Service to Caesar: this being either particularly given in Charge, or concluded on by his own Rational Deducti∣ons (from that Juncture of Affairs) that the Roman Ministers of State should chiefly fix their Eyes upon such like Emergencies as boaded the fulfil∣ling
of the Eastern Prophecy: We may therefore, without offering Violence to our Reason, from the Method of Lysias his proceeding, in the Examinati∣on of St. Paul, at his Attachment; calculate the Order of Nero's Process, at his Argument; and draw this Conclusion. That Nero (as we say) Christned his own Child first, first inform'd himself of what most nearly concern'd his own Interest, by propounding Interrogatories of the same Importance with that Question of Lycias. 3. Those Expressions in the Predictions of the Fortune-tellers in Suetonius [ut destitueretur & destituto ei &c.] (they told Nero, that after he had been deserted of his own Subjects, and deprived of the Emperial Crown, the Crown of Judea should be set upon his Head, and with that the Sovereignty of the World.) are so exactly like the Language of the Prophets, fore-telling that the great Shepherd must first be smitten, and his Flock scattered from him, before he was to gather all Nations into his Fold; that the great King must first suffer, before he was to enter into his Glory. As the Suggestion of such like hopes to Nero could hardly proceed from any but a Jew: and a Jew well read in their own Prophets (or in the Satyrist Phrase.) —Interpres Legum Solimarum. For in those Writings only is declared the two-fold Estate of Messiah, his Examination, and his Exaltation: and both of them in such seeming Hyper∣boles, as the Jew (to this Day) cannot imagine how they can possibly meet in one and the same Person. From which Consideration, I am induc'd to think that the [quidam] those Individuums Vagmus in Suetonius, who promis'd to Nero those Golden Mountains, after he had been over Head and Ears in the Mire and Clay, were Jewish Proselytes; and either the very Persons, or those who gave to those Persons a Text to preach on, whom St. Paul reports to have preach'd Christ of evil Will, of Envy, supposing to add Weights to his Bonds, (ad Philip. cap. 1.) And I am the rather enclin'd to this Opinion when I observe; 1. How famously infamous the Jewish Religion was at Rome, and in Ne∣ro's Reign too; for being abetted by Persons who drive the Gypsie-Trade there, and got their Maintenance by telling favourable Fortunes. (Juvenal Sat. 6.) Qualiacunque voles Judaei somnia vendunt. The Jew will tell you what Fortune you please. 2. How wide a Door to the Emperour's Ear was then opened for these Ear∣tickling Prophets, by means of that Love Nero bore to Poppaea, A zealous Jewish Proselytess, with whom it was but yet Honey-Month; Nero being but newly fallen into acquaintance with her; who would, no doubt, improve the Interest she had in Caesar's Affections, to the advantage of her Religion, some (at least) pleasing Principles whereof ('tis probable) that Night-Raven would croak into his Ears, and gain Access to him for those that professed it. Of whose Zeal for the Jews, and Influence upon the Emperour in the Motions she made in their behalf, Josephus gives Proof in two Stories. The first of himself, in these Words: (Josephi vita circa initium,) When I was twenty six Years old I went to Rome, upon this Occasion, when Foelix was Governour of Judea, he sent certain Priests my Acquaintance and very good Men, for a small Cause to Rome, to appear before Caesar; for whose Deliverance, I de∣siring to find some means, went to Rome; where (by the Help of a certain Jew, great in Nero's Favour,) coming into the Acquaintance of Poppaea Caesar's Wife, [] in the general Sence [his Woman] in the Jewish Sence only [his Wife,] who reputed some kind of Concubines, Wives, for she was, as yet, not his Wife, but Minion,) by her Means I forthwith obtained their release, and return'd home with great Largesses bestowed on me by Poppaea.
The other, of some Jewish Agents, that went to Rome to obtain of Caesar, that that Counter-Wall which they had built to hinder Agrippa's Prospect in∣to the Temple, might not be demolished, as Festus had commanded; whose Suit was granted by Nero, at the Entreaty of Poppaea, a Religious Woman, and their Mediatrix (Joseph. Antiq. 20. 7.) Neither King Agrippa, nor the Noble Festus can obtain Nero's Ear, if it be prepossessed by Poppaea, 3. And as those Prophets had this Opportunity of addressing themselves to Nero, and insinuating into his Favour: so not only the sordid Love of Filthy Lucre (to be gain'd by this Man-pleasing Trade of Prophesying smooth things) (a Crime the Jewish Prognosticator was so famously guilty of, as the Satyrist brings upon the Stage the Jewish Gypsie, begging, while she infuses into the Ear, her favourable Interpretations of Solomon's Laws) [Arcanam Judaea tremens mendicat in aurem, Interpres legum Solimarum.] (Juvenal Sat. 6.) But much more, their Hatred to Christ, might prompt them to apply that Eastern Oracle to Nero, as the likeliest Champion they could single out to stand for it in Competition with our Jesus, as far as Pride and Fury could carry a Man. Now what greater Incentive of Nero's Rage against the Christian could they possibly invent? what Point of Christian Doctrine could have been more enviously wrested, more maliciousty applyed, in order to St. Paul's closer Imprisonment, to the adding Affliction to his Chain than this? [That Jesus, whom Paul affirms to be alive, is Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews; that very Person (in his Opinion) whom the Divine Oracles point at; and there∣fore it were for the behoof of Caesar to put Paul under so close a Custody as may re∣strain him from the Liberty of disseminating that Doctrine, which will not only dis∣mount Caesar from his hopes of obtaining that of Judea, but even from the Posses∣sion of the Emperial Crown.] A malicious Insinuation, and so formidable, as I wonder not to hear St. Paul complain, (2 Tim. 4. 16.) that all his Acquain∣tance shrunk from him, at his making his first Answer [,] no Man stood with me (that is persevered to stand by me as abettors of my Cause) implying that they came with him, at his giving an Appearance; but durst not stay with him, at the hearing of Nero's Charge; this Verb be∣ing of the same Importance with  (which the Apostle seems to use (Phil. 1. 25.) in Allusion to this Passage,) and fully answering to the Lords standing with him [,] which he clearly sets in opposition to their not standing with him, but forsaking him leaving him as we say) in the Suds, [in limo profundo & luto immersum] at the very Pinch; [,] a Verb of a singular Emphasis, adding to [] the signification of the Point, the Nick of Time, wherein they left him; and that Emphasis is strained here to the highest Pitch, by St. Paul's annexing it to [,] they forsook me in, in my Apology; for the Preposition wherewith the Verb is decompounded, is repeated before the Noun. In the very Interim of my Answer, as I was beginning to make my Apology to the Charge drawn up against me, they withdrew, not daring to abet me in a Point of that dangerous Consequence: for that it was through some sudden Surprisal of invincible Fear, that they gave Ground, is manifest from St. Paul's praying for them, (which he would not have done, had they wilfully, and not out of Infirmity withdrawn themselves:) but much more by Gods hearing that Prayer in behalf of one of them, most signally branded for forsaking him, and embracing the World (I mean Demas,) whom we find returned to St. Paul and himself the next Year (Colossians 4. 14.) [Luke the beloved Physician, and Demas salute you.] If that happy Improver of O∣riental Learning, Doctor Lightfoot hath rightly calculated the Date of that E∣pistle; (Harm of New Test. Nero 6. Pag. 137.) yea in behalf of many of them, as St. Paul himself hints (Ph. 1. 14.) many of the Brethren, waxing confident in the Lord by my Bonds, are much more bold to speak the Word without fear.
If it seem strange, that a Charge of this Nature could be unexpected, and not fore-thought on by them, and that they should not come armed by preme∣ditated Resolution to receive it. I answer, 1. They were under a peremptory Prohibition to premeditate (in this Case) what to answer: When ye are brought before Kings and Rulers, for my Name's sake, settle it in your Hearts not to meditate before, what ye shall answer; for I will give you a Mouth and Wisdom, which all your Adversaries shall not be able to gain-say or resist: (Luk. 21, 12, 13, 14, 15.) and (Mat. 10. 18.) You shall be brought before Governours and Kings, for my sake; but when they deliver you up, take no Thought, how or what to speak; for it shall be given you in that same Hour, what ye shall speak. And therefore, how obvious soever the Conjecture was, that Nero would object to St. Paul, his preaching of Jesus to be King of the Jews to be of dangerous Consequence to the Civil State; yet the Disciples were bound up from premeditating what Answer to give to that Charge: so that both Charge and Answer could not but be unexpected, and render them obnoxious to Surprisal. 2. The Spirit intending these Tryals for a Testimony against those before whose Tribunals they were brought, did not suggest to them those kind of Answers, which were likeliest to allay the Rigour of the Charge, to alle∣viate the supposed Crime, by informing the Adversaries in the Nature of Christs Kingdom (as those before Domitian:) but such as were of most im∣mediate Tendency, towards the convincing of their Judges, that that Jesus was indeed, (what they were accused to preach him,) the Emperours Lord. Let the Emperial Law make it Treason to proclaim any Man above Caesar, they will not mince the Matter by Distinctions, but stand upon the Proof of what they assert; that the Man Christ is higher than the highest; and are content to undergo the utmost Penalties, if they cannot make Demonstration of this, so as Nero himself shall not be able to gainsay or resist: No Wonder then that the Disciples (having, perhaps, not yet heard of that Promise of immediate Divine Assistance, (to be sure,) not yet seen an Experiment of it,) should, as soon as they heard St. Paul joyn Issue with his Adversaries in this Point, slip away from him, as not daring to abet him in this Apology. § 2. 4. That the great Crime which the Christian Doctrine was charged with, at St. Paul's Appearance before Nero, was its applying the Eastern Ora∣cle to Jesus of Nazareth, may be evinc'd from St. Paul's (2 Tim. 4. 16. 17.) stiling Nero [The Lion,] [The Lord delivered me from the Mouth of the Lion.] Which Compellation, why the Apostle should fasten upon him, I cannot, in my shallow Apprehension, fancy any other more probable Reason, than that he did it in an holy Triumphant Mockage of those Figure-flingers, by whom Nero was induc'd to hope that he should prove that Lion of the Tribe of Ju∣dah: His Hope not being able to bear up it self against the Evidence brought in by St. Paul, in open Court, that the Throne of the Kingdom of David was full already, being possessed by Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews: From which Title of Christ, the Gospel is usually stiled the Kingdom of God: for Instance (Act. 1. 3.) where our Saviour is said to instruct his Disciples, in his forty Days Converse among them betwixt his Resurrection and Ascension, (in things concerning the Kingdom of God: (Luk. 9. 11. he spake unto them of the Kingdom of God:) not touching external Rites and Modes of Discipline, (as his pretty Petit-deputy Kings, the Disciplinarians, give us in hand.) No, St. Luke flies an higher Pitch, and means the very Gospel it self; so called, because the Sum of it is comprehended in asserting Jesus to be the Christ, the anointed King of the Jews. The Truth of which, how they should demon∣strate, from the Miracles he wrought, from his Resurrection, &c. was the Subject of Christs then Conference with them; for that he did not so much as explain to them then the Nature of this Kingdom, but reserved that for his Vicar-general, the Holy Ghost, appears from their yet palpable Ignorance of it expressed in that Question which with one Mouth they propounded to him
immediately before his Assention, (Act. 1. 6, 9.) [Lord, wilt thou, at this time, restore the Kingdom to Israel?] Strange! even beyond Admiration, that he should instruct them in what external Modes, his Kingdom should be ad∣ministred, and yet leave them under such gross Darkness as to the thing it self. Of this Kingdom (I say) St. Paul, in his Answer before that self-conceited Lion makes such a Defence, gives such infallible Proofs, as he quells Nero's Courage; and so far dashes out of Countenance his hopes of Judea's Crown, as he comes (after this Trial) to these Resolves, (Suet. Nero 40.) [Praedictum à Mathematicis olim Neroni erat, fore, ut destitueretur und illa vox , &c. quo majore venia meditatur citheredicam artem, principi sibi gratum, privato necessariam.] that in Case the first part of the Predictions of the Mathema∣ticks prove true (touching his loss of the Imperial Dignity,) he would for his future Subsistence rather trust to his Skill in Musick; and, as we say in the North (pardon the homeliness of the Proverb) Fiddle for Shives among old Wives, then depend upon the later part of their Oracle, (promising him the Crown of Judea.) In despair of which, he was wont to comfort himself a∣gainst pinching Poverty, in case, of loss of Empire, with that his famous A∣phorism: [;] An Artist may live any where: which he said in reference to his Dexterity in Musick; and therefore, (in the Opinion of Suetonius,) was less Blame-worthy for his studying to excel in that Art, as that which administred Delight to him in his Good; and was in∣tended for a necessary Livelihood in his bad Fortune, it served in Prosperity for Sauce, and he hoped in Adversity it would find him Meat. [Principi sibi gratam, privato necessariam.] With which Hope the Senate ingeniously twitted him, in their offering him a Crown Laureat, after his disappointment of those African Treasures he dream'd on, at second hand, from Cesellius Bessus, whom that he might not imitate in the desperate murthering of himself, for Shame and Grief, the Senate kindly offer him this Cordial, and bid him take Heart of Grace, for though those Mountains of Gold, fancied to have been heaped up by Dido, had proved Sand; yet his warbling Voice and Fingers would be an Elixar; and charming the World into a Royal Mine, whence he might draw, out at the Pit-hole of the ravish'd Ear, Treasure enough to supply his Wants. (Ta∣cit. annal. 16.) [Intereà Senatus ut dedecus averteret offert imperatori victoriam cantùs, adjecit facundiae coronam, quo lu. &c.] And truly, this First-born of the Muses bestowed so much time upon tun∣ing his Harp, as he had not time to tune the Commonwealth; and rested so much in his Skill, as he refused the Honour of Poet Laureat, except he could deserve it, by the Worlds Equal, rather than obtain it by the Senates partial Vote. (Id. Ib.) [Sed Nero nihil ambitu nec potestate Senatus opus esse dictitans se aequum adversus aemulos & Religione Judicum meritam laudem assecuturum, &c.] In order to which, he keeps his Commencement Act in the Theatre. In his Management whereof (as if he were inuring himself to the most ser∣vile Congies and Scrapings of Mendicant Fidlers, against the time he should make use of it, to procure him a Subsistence) (Suet. Nero, 23. & 24.) [quam autem Trepidè anxiéque certaverat—Juvenes reverendissimè alloquebatur priusquam inciperet—In certando ità legi obediebat, ut nunquam excreare ausus, sudorem quoque frontis brachio detergebat, &c.] he observes all the Ceremonies that Law or Custom had prescribed to Vulgar Musicians: [Not to sit down, though never so weary of standing; not to wipe off his Sweat, but in the Garment he wore over his Tunick; not to blow his Nose, not to spit, but into his Handkerchief; to make a Leg, and kiss his hand to the Spectators: from whom, with a feigned or real Fear, he expected the Sentence of Approbation or Dislike, as if his All had laid at Stake.] (Tacit. ann. 16. 246.) The atrum ingreditur cunctis citharae legibus obtemperans, nè fessus resideret, nè sudorem nisi ea quam gerebat indutui veste de∣tergeret, ut nulla oris aut narium exerementa viserentur: postremo flexus genu & eatum illum veneratus sententias Judicum opperiebatur ficto vel vero pavore.
This Mimical Scene was acted a little before Poppea's death (in the 9. year of his Reign: [post finem ludicri Poppaea mortem obiit] (Tacit. ann. 16.) an apparent Argument, that he had not then recovered those hopes of the Ju∣dean Crown, that St. Paul had discust from him, four years ago: And that the show he made in his 7. year of his assurance that after the Brittish and Ar∣menian Wars were concluded, he had passed through that Thorny way, which the Fates had chalked out for him to his future Greatness; (exprest by his shutting up the Temple of Janus, as if he expected thenceforward there would never be any more War;) (for so Torrentius and Fenerus read that place of Suetonius [Britanniâ Armeniâ que amissâ & rursùs uâque receptâ, de∣functum se fatalibus malis existimabat—post perductum in theatrum Tirida∣tem—ob quae geminum Janum clausit, tanquam nullo residuo bello:] (Nero 40. & 13.) [tanquam nullo residuo bello] was grounded only upon that Promise which the Astronomers made to him, of his recovering the Empire, after he had lost it: but had no relation to the Promise of the Judean Crown. The hopeful Interpretation he made of his recovering Britain and Armenia a∣mounting to no more but this, that thenceforward he should quietly injoy the Imperial Diadem; at least to the 63. year of his age: according to that mistaken gloss he made of the Delphick Respond, bidding him beware of sixty three (which the Oracle meant of Galbus, but he interpreted of his own age.) [Consulto Delphis oraculo septuagessimum ac tertium annum cavendum sibi audivit.] (Id. Ib.) His very enquiring at that Oracle argues his then dis∣satisfaction in the Certainty of the Prognosticators Promise: and the words of it import, he must not look about him for another, but hold his own. Against the expiring of which good Fortune, in case that his Life should out∣last it, he providently forecasts to maintain his old and desolate age (after his loss of Empire) by the practice of Musick. At so low an Ebb are his ambitious hopes of that Crown of Judea, which the quidam, in Suetonius, pro∣mis'd him; as he who (in an expectation of being exalted to that Domini∣on as would subject under him the very Fishes of the Sea) was vaunting ere-while that that they would turn Porters to him, and conveigh his wreckt Treasures to the shore, is now forecasting to angle for necessaries with a Line made of Lute-strings. Proclus (de sacrificiis) assigns the reason of the Lion's flying and trembl∣ing at the Crowing of a Cock, to his revering that Creature of the Sun (as he himself is) as partaking more of the Genius of the Sun than himself does. Nero, that self-conceited Lion, upon hearing St. Paul to crow up our Jesus to be the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to pertake more of the Genius of that Person pointed at by the Eastern Oracle, than all the Potentates of the World were capable of; lets fall his Crest so low, as the Apostle mocks his, as Elijah had done Baal's Prophets, with this cutting Irony: Baal is a God, Nero is a Lion. A doughty God, a doughty Lion! he has now so far lost the hope of obtaining it himself, as he bewrays his fear, that Ruffinus Crispin may, upon no other account, than that (being the son of a Jewish Proselitess, Poppaea) he was observed to act the part of a King among his play-fellows; whom he therefore order'd to be thrown overboard, as he was a fishing (Sueton. Nero 35.) and upon that part of the Prophecy that described the King of the Jews to be a Jew born, perhaps, his extreme desires were grounded of hav∣ing Issue Male by Poppaea himself; as being thereby qualified so far, and by the surest side, for that Kingdom. (Tacit. ann. 16. 246.) [Quippe liberorum cupiens, &c.] §. 3. These are rational presumptions that St. Paul calls Nero a Lion under no other notion, but as one of the Fortune-tellers making, The observati∣on I shall next make upon Nero's History, compared with this compellati∣on, comes not much short of a Demonstration, viz. That Nero was not, when St. Paul gave him this name, a Lion in any other sence, but as in the anticipation of his own hopes (and Opinion of his
his flattering Claw-backs) he personated and rivall'd that Lion of Judah. Whence Teridates [Veni ut te deum meum non secus ac Mithran, i. solem cole∣rem: equidem is ero quem tu me fato quodam efficies, tu enim fatum meum es & fortuna.] (Xiphilin. è Dione, Nero pag. 521.) thus courts him: [I am come (Nero) to worship thee as my God, no otherwise than I worship Mithra, the Sun, the Persian God. I will be what you by certain fate will make me; for you are my fate and fortune.] upon Nero's giving out him himself to be that Uni∣versal K. mentioned in the Oriental Prophecy (being interpretively the mak∣ing himself God) was that Opinion perhaps grounded, which some of the Ancients, in their Discourses of the Revelation of Antichrist (upon the 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians 2. 4.) had taken up; to wit that Nero should risea∣gain and be the Antichrist (mentioned by St. Austin, de civitate Dei, lib. 20 cap. 20. pag. 1373. a.) And though Nero did not distinctly call himself the Christ, yet he did so in effect, in conceiting himself to be him, that (accord∣ing to the Eastern Prophecy) was to come: that being the common Peri∣phrasis of the Christ, one that should come. [Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another:] as that other more limited one was the Definition which the Jews gave of him, [] he that should redeem Israel, (Luk. 24. 21.) In this sence then he was (at the time of St. Paul's Apology before him) a Lion, that is, a Mock-lion. But I shall make it appear, that so early in his Reign as St. Paul's appearing before him, he was not in any other respect a Lion. The Apostle therefore must speak in a Language to whom all were then Barbarians, if he give him that Appellation, upon any account, but that. For the clearing of this, it will be necessary first to state the time of St. Paul's appearance before him; which will appear to have been at the utmost very early in Nero's fifth year: If we consider 1. That Felix (who when he went out of Office left St. Paul bound) had had an hearing before the Emperour while Pallas was so much in his favour, as by his Intercession, to procure his pardon, and remission of the punish∣ment due to those high misdemeanours, of which the Jews accused him; of which Josephus (Antiq. Jud. 20. 7.) gives full Testimony. When Festus (saith he) came into Felix room in the Government of Judea, the chief of the Jews of Cesarea went to Rome to accuse Felix: and he had been certainly punish∣for his unjust dealing with the Jews (so unjust as Tacitus cries shame of him for his cruel Tyrannicalness over them) had not Nero been very favourable to him, at the intreaty of his Brother Pallas, who was then very much in Caesar's esteem. 2. That it was early in Nero's Reign that Pallas was out of Nero's favour, and that partly by reason of his abetting Agrippinas pride, partly by Poppaeas growing into favour, who could not brook Agrippinas Party, of which Pallas was the chief; having indear'd himself to her, by making up the match betwixt Claudius and her, and by the Use of her Body: that Nero so far disgusted Pallas, for bolstring up his Mother Agrippina in her Animosities, as he dismist him from meddling in publick Affairs, at the almost beginning of his Reign, Tacitus affirms, saying, Nero being highly displeased with those, that animated his Mother, remov'd Pallas from lording it in the Court, in the first year of his Empire, Nero 1. and Antistius Vetus being Consuls. (Tacitus an. 13. 179.) [Nero offensus iis quibus Agrippinae superbia innittebatur, dimo∣vit Pallantem curâ rerum, qui à Claudio impositus velut arbitrum regni agebat.] How early Poppaea came into favour with Nero, the same Author informs us, in these words. [Nero the third time and Valerius Massella being Con∣suls, Poppea by her arts and flatteries began to obtain power over Nero's Af∣fections.] (Id. Ibid.) [Nerone tertio & Valerio Massella Coss. Poppaea pri∣mùm per artes & blandimenta valescere.] In which arts she succeeded so suc∣cesfully, in encroaching upon Nero's Affections, and made such haste; as Jo∣sephus dates the business of the Counter-wall, wherein Poppaea carried so great a stroke, at the beginning of Festus his Government, (Ant. 28. 8.) And that her rising was the fall of Agrippina and her Party, Tacitus tells
us (in his next Book of Annals) Caius Vipsanius and Fonteius being Consuls, Nero no longer forbore the parricide of his Mother; being instigated thereunto by his affection to Poppaea, growing every day more hot: she taunting him, as be∣ing his Mothers Pupil; and despairing to marry the Son, while the Mother was alive. (Tac. an. 14. 196.) [Diu meditatum scelus non ultra distulit, flagrantior indies amore Poppaeae, &c.] So as it cannot be imagin'd, but that Poppaea had (at the farthest) at the be∣ginning of Nero's fourth wrought Pallas wholly out of all favour; insomuch as his interceding for his Brother Felix would, then, have been of little a∣vail, towards the obtaining his pardon of those grievous Crimes the Jews charged him with before Nero. 3. That Festus, who came in Felix's Room, at his first arrival in Judea, did (through the Jews Importunity) hasten St. Paul's Trial. For the third' day, after his coming into the Province, he ascended from Caesarea to Jerusa∣lem: where after he had tarried (as some Copies read) no more than eight or ten days; or (according to the Vulgar) more than ten days, that is, all out ten days inclusively, he went down to Cesarea (as he promised at his first coming to Jerusalem, that he would depart thither shortly () (Act. 25. 1, 4, 6, 7.) and the very next day, sitting upon the Judgment-seat, commands Paul to be brought to his trial. 4. That after St. Paul's Appeal to Caesar, his mission to Rome was accele∣rated. For after certain days, King Agrippa comes to Cesarea, to salute the new Governour Festus; where after he had been many days, (many for a Vi∣sit) not enough for a Month, nor perhaps for a Week. In all reason, the re∣spect Agrippa bare to the Roman Emperour would invite him to give the new Governour, he had sent into Judea, a visit, as soon as his occasions would permit; which, if not very urgent, must give place to his waiting upon the mouth of his Lord Paramount, to receive Instructions from Festus, as well as to congratulate his preferment: And good manners would hardly permit him, to make a burden of a visit, by any long stay with him. However, at this visit, Festus acquainting him with St. Paul's Case, he desires to hear St. Paul himself: and on the next morrow, St. Paul is brought forth, and pleads his own Case; upon hearing of which, Agrippa and Festus consulting, it is determined that he should go to Rome, and upon that Determination he is forthwith sent: where, early in the Spring (after he had winter'd at Maltha) he arrives. 5. That his first Answer before Nero, was soon after his arrival at Rome. For first, he gives Timothy an account of it, who was then at Ephesus, desiring him to come to him before winter, (2 Tim. 4. 21.) In order to which, we must allow some time for the carriage of the Letter (it being sent not by Post, but Tychichus, (whose frequent visiting the Churches in his passage would retard the delivery of it;) some to Timothy's providing for so long a Jour∣ney; and some to his setting things in order at Ephesus, before he could possibly leave his Charge there. Now this Episte Dr. Lightfoot dates reasonable early, in the 5. year of Nero, and that was before he had initiated him∣self in open and avowed Cruelty, by his Mothers blood. For the Quinqua∣tria (at which Feast Nero, pretending a desire of reconciliation with his Mo∣ther, by his flattering Letters invited her to the Baiae, to celebrate that Feast with him) was about the latter end of March, (Sueton. Nero 34) when one half of Nero's fifth was expiring, he beginning his Reign the 13. day of October, (Sueton. Claud. 33.) And secondly, his Adversaries must have an incredible degree of Patience, more than they exprest at home, if they did not hasten his trial, that they might return home before Winter, but suffered him to stand at the Bay with them in that free custody (wherein with his Keeper he was permitted to dwell in his own hired house, and to receive all that came in unto him) (Act. 28. ult.) If those Dogs of the Circumcision gnasht their teeth at him, through the Grates of that Custody he was in, under Lysias, Felix and Festus: being so
ragingly mad, that they could not fasten their Teeth upon him, as they at∣tempt to take him, by force, out of the Guards hand, that Lysias had set upon him, to prevent their tearing him in pieces, (Act. 21. 3. and 23. 10.) set twenty Couple of Blood-hounds in lurch, to kill him, if they can but inveigle him out of the Castle-gates (Act. 23. 13, 15.) and (25. 3.) They would certainly bark at the length of his Chain, at Rome, and do their ut∣most to shorten it; and bring him to a speedy Trial, to make his Answer very early in Nero's fifth year, as Dr. Lightfoot states it. St. Jerome puts this past all doubt, when, speaking of the Acts of the Apostles, he saith, [Cujus historia usque ad biennium Romae commoranti Paulo pervenit, id est, usque ad quartum Neronis annum: ex qua intelligimus in eadem urbe librum esse compostum.] (Jeron. de viris illustribus, Lucas) [St. Luke's History reacheth to St. Paul's two years imprisonment at Rome, that is, to the fourth year of Nero: where∣by we understand that that Book of the Acts of the Apostles was writ at Rome.] § 4. Which being premised, it remains that in the Second place I show, that at that Time St. Paul appear'd before Nero, he was so far from being visibly stain'd with Acts of Cruelty, as his Quinquennium (for the Justice of it) past into a Proverb. The Emperour Titus was wont to say, that the best Princes exceeded not Nero's first five years. Seneca (in his Book de clemen∣tia) gives him, during those years, this Encomium: [Potes hoc, Caesar, prae∣dicare audacter, omnium quae in fidem tutelámque venerunt, nihil per te, neque vi, neque clam Reipublicae ereptum; & nulli adhuc principum concessam concit∣pisti innocentiam; nemo unus homo uni homini tam charus unquam fuit, quàm tu populo Romano: magnum longúmque ejus bonum.] Thou maist boldly (Caesar) publish this; that of all those things which have been committed to thy trust, thou hast not either by violence or fraud robb'd the Common-weal of the least of them; and thou hast coveted (a thing which hath not been granted to any of thy Pre∣decessors) to carry thy self innocently; neither was any one man so dearly be∣loved of one man, as thou art of all the people of Rome, being their great and lasting good; during which time, though he was a bad Man, yet he was a good Emperour. The Circean Cup of Court Delicacies had early metamorphos'd him, into a beast of Epicurus his Stie, wallowing in all manner of Bestial Sensuality: but he was not, as yet, grown up into so fierce, tearing and bloody a Beast, as to merit the name of a Lion. He was suspected indeed to enter like a Fox, to have been acces∣sorie to his Mother Agrippinas poysoning of Claudius, (in that he was wont to call Mushroms, the meat of the Gods; because by them, impoyson'd, his Predecessors had been translated into the number of the Immortals:) And he was principal in the Murther of Germanicus; but was so far from avouch∣ing that Act, as he would have the Poyson prepared in his own Closet, [Cubiculum Caesaris juxta decoquitur,] (Tacit. annal. 13. 180.) and obliged his Shee instrument to secresie, by the trible Bond of Donatives, Threats and Promises: (Suet. Nero 33.) and cast over it the Cloak of this Pretence, That the suddenness of his Brother-in-law's death was to be laid to the charge of an Apoplexy, which, to his knowledge, he had been troubled with from his Cradle, (Tacit. annal. 13. 181.) Nay, so far was Nero from reigning yet (visibly) like a Lion, as Tacitus af∣firms, that the death of Julius Silanus was procured by his Mothers craft without his knowledge; and Narcissus his, against his will: the only per∣sons (besides Germanicus) whose death, as unjustly procured, is bewail'd by the Historians of that part of his Reign: [Ignaro Nerone per dolum Agrip∣pinae.] [Ad mortem agitur invito Principe.] (Id. ibid. 176.) Yea, so tender would he then seem of shedding Blood, as he never signed the most just Condemnation of any Malefactor (till the last of his five first years was al∣most expired) without regret, and repeating his wonted Wish [Vtinam ne∣scirem literas] Would God I had never learnt to write, (Sueton. Nero 10.) So
artifically did he dissemble, or his Tutors Barrha and Seneca divert, his Na∣tural inclination to Cruelty (which they perceived would not be tamed by love of Vertue) by giving way for the more free vent of his amorous Passi∣ons; laying his bloody Mars asleep in the bosom of his bucksom Venus, (Tac. ann. 13.) [quo faciliùs, si virtutem aspernaret, voluptatibus concessis re∣tinerent;] as all men conceived good hopes of him, that after he had al∣laid the Edge of his juvenile Salacity, he would prove an excellent Prince. This was the sence which the World then had of Nero: and thus the Opi∣nion of the Primitive Church, exprest by Eusebius, (Eccles. hist. 2. 22.) that St. Paul made his first Apology before him, in that first part of his Reign, while he was milder both in Affection and Carriage, than he proved after∣wards. And St. Jerome (de viris iliustr.) is right in that Note he makes; [Sciendum autem in prima satisfactione, necdum Neronis imperio stabilito, nec in tanta scelerae irrumpente quanta de eo narrant historiae:] St. Paul's first ap∣pearance before him was, when his Empire not being establish'd, he had not run into those wickednesses which Histories tell of him, that is, it was before he grew so outragious, as to deserve the name of a Lion, for his Cruelty, or upon any other imaginable account; but for his being, in his own Conceit, an Anti-Lion to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Can we then imagine that Nero would let go his hopes, so deeply im∣printed, before he had canvast and heard, what the Jews could say against what St. Paul alledged, for proof of this, that Jesus of Nazareth is King of the Jews, Would not Poppaeas Zeal ingage her to muster up all the force she could possibly raise, of malicious Jews, to enter the lists, and confute Christ's Champion on this ground which if they let him win, and make good a∣gainst them, they must bid an eternal Vale to their admired Law and Tem∣ple, and bow their stubborn knees to that crucified God, whom they so much despised? And if that command she had over Caesar's Affections (so sovereign as Tacitus undertakes, from that Topick, to vindicate him from the Aspersion cast on him by some, that he wilfully kick'd her out of his, to make her bed in the Grave) (Tacit. an. 16. 246.) [Poppaea mortem obiit fortuitâ mariti iracundiâ, à quo gravida ictu calcis afflicta est; neque enim ve∣nenum crederem—quia amori uxoris obnoxius erat;] had not been fee enough to bribe him against St. Paul; yet sure the pleasure he took in rolling that sweet morsel of Judeas Crown under his Tongue; which he had in his hope swallowed, and must regorge, if St. Paul carry the day, would set his wits on work to seek evasions and starting-holes in every corner of his Apolo∣gy; in the whole Web of whose Discourse, upon that subject, how glad would his own dear interest have made him, could he have found one Wemb through which he might have seen the least glimmering of a possibility, that those emergencies in Judaea (then under contest before him) were not such as St. Paul reported them to be. Can we think that Christian Apologist could satisfie Nero in that point (as St. Jerome in the place forecited insinu∣ates, by his [in prima satisfactione]) which he so much desired to disbelieve, till he had throughly weighed and canvas'd all St. Paul's and his Adversa∣ries Pleas, and found the Apostle to be irrefragable? Briefly: To sum up the whole of this Argument. A man may without any violent elevation of his mind, fancy Judea (that Navel of the Earth) to have been a Stage erected for the Actors, in the midst of the Theatre of the World; and the Inhabitants of the Empire sitting in a round, as spectators and observing what was there acted, with the greatest silence imaginable. We are made, saith St. Paul, a theatre to men and Angels. What hinders but we may interpret that Text by Daniel (10. 13.) the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, and Vers. 14. Michael one of the chief Princes, and (Chap. 12. 1.) Michael the great Prince that standeth for the children of thy people: and by Angels, understand the Angel-presidents over Nations, those Eyes of the Lord (according to Mr. Mede) that run through the Earth. To be sure they might at that time have seen all the World sitting still and at rest; yea,
themselves then resting from impeding, withstanding, opposing, deteining one another, in behalf of their several Jurisdictions, and had leisure to sit down, for company, with their Pupils, and fix their running Eyes upon that strange sight was a showing in Judaea, upon that one Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands. However this Text can imply no less than A∣ction upon the Stage, Tumultuations in Judea, with silence among the Spectators, Peace in all the World about: and that Peace allowed the Em∣pire, without the least distraction, to trie to the bottom the grounds of those Commotions; and those grounds being of highest concern to the Spe∣ctators (res tua tunc agitur.) It must needs be morally impossible, that the Christian Church could, by any the handsomest Legerdemain, delude that Eagles Eye, so fixedly pitch'd on these Occurrences, and so steadily pearch'd upon that Olive-plant of an Universal Peace: an attempt to cheat the Spectators in such a Juncture would have been such an Act —quòd ipse Non sani esse hominis non sanus juret Orestes, as he that had but half an Eye would swear to be the undertaking of scarce half-witted men. I am now come to a Period of this tedious and toilsom Pilgrimage through the holy Age (if I may call the Time so, as well as the Place, which Christ separated from all other Ages, wherein to manifest himself in the flesh, and divulge his Royal Law) undertaken not out of curiosity, to see Fashions; but upon the same account which I have observed many of the Ancients to have travelled to the holy Land, to inform themselves more explicitly in the Evangelical History: to confirm themselves more feelingly by ocular De∣monstration in the truth of that History; or to delight their inamour'd Souls with the Contemplation of the places where the Blessed Jesus convers'd: here he wept, here he pray'd; here he fasted; this was the place of his Birth, this of his Baptism, this of his Transfiguration; on this Hill he gave his Royal Law, on this he foil'd the Tempter, on this his sacred Feet printed their farewel-kiss to the Earth; such Meditations could not but deeply affect & con∣firm the Religious Pilgrim. This put me upon enquiring whether the same Re∣ligious Use might not be made of travelling through the holy Age, and this En∣quiry upon making trial; aiming at the informing my self (as it were by ocu∣lar Inspection) whether it was an Age likely to be imposed upon, as our Mo∣dern Scepticks insinuate. In which travel I have been forc'd to take Secular Writers for my Guides; that I might frame my Journals in a Language which they, whose couviction I endeavour, profess themselves to understand, and to take pleasure in the sound of; entertaining my self with those hopes, that Secular History, as well as A Verse may take him whom a Sermon flies, And turn delight into a sacrifice. And that our great Criticks in Humanity may deign to peruse a Discourse that hath cost the Author so many weary steps, and not think him immo∣dest in this request, that they would, in order to their own satisfaction, with him (who for their sake hath travell'd over the Mountains of the Leo∣pards, that he might take and give them a prospect of that Age) vouch∣safe to take one view of it from Mount Sion, and mark one Bulwark more it had against treacherous surprizals, grounded upon the Candour and Inte∣grity of its Assailants; enough to have secur'd it, had it not been intrench'd and without which all the Fortifications, we have seen the remains of, would be but so many Monuments of the Subtilty and Stratagems of the Conque∣rours. It will therefore be necessary, in order to a full sail Assurance of the truth of our general Proposition, to turn our sail to this Wind, our thoughts to this Observation.
CHAP. XII. As no Age was less like to be Cheated than that wherein the Apostles flourish'd; so no Generation of Men was less like to put a Cheat upon the World than the Apostolick and Primitive Church. § 1. The Apostles and Primitive Churches Veracity evinc'd, by their chusing Death rather than an Officious Lye to save their lives: Pliny's testimony of them. § 2, 3. They hide not their imperfections; nor the Truth to please Parties, or to avoid the Worlds taking offence. The offence which Heathens took at some Gospel-passages. § 4. All false Religions make lyes their Refuge. Pagan Forgeries. § 5. Papal Innovation founded on ly∣ing Legends. Sr. Thomas Moor upon St. Austin. Gregory Turonen∣sis and Simeon Metaphrastes devout Lyars. The Story of the Baptist's Heod. § 1. 1. THeir avowed Principles touching making a Lye (though with an intention to serve God by it) were, That the Devil is the Father of it (Joh. 8. 44.) That whoso love or make a Lye shall be exclud∣ed Heaven, and detruded into the society and torments of Devils, (Apocal. 22. 15.) Now, had Men of this Profession abused the World, with false Stories in a matter of so high a concern as Religion, it would have render'd them, in the opinion of all men, the veriest miscreants that ever liv'd; would certainly have allayd that confidence they used in justifying the truth of their Reports to the faces of men, who were upon the place where the things reported were done. If you say this was but a colour and mere pretence, to gain the repute, of men hating a lye, that so they might more easily insinuate the belief of their Stories into their credulous and prepos∣sess'd Hearers; that surmise will be answer'd, beyond all possibility of a ra∣tional Reply, by producing clear Evidences of their actual conforming and pertinacious adhering to those Principles, against the strongest Temptations to wave them, that could possibly be laid in their way. [Vide quàm sollicitè Paulus distinguat quae à se sunt, & quae à Domino, 1 Cor. 7. 10, 11. quàm for∣midet dicere, quae vidit, in corpore an extrà corpus viderit!] (2 Cor. 12. 2.) Grotius.) [Quam probabilitatem habet, talium documentorum auditores suspi∣cari mentitos, quaecunque suum praeceptorem effecisse testificati sunt? aut quàm credibile faciant si putent illos omnes sibi inter se consensisse in mendacium, &c.] (Euseb. demonst. Evang. 3. 7.) Observe, saith Grotius, how carefully the Apostle distinguisheth betwixt what he saith and what the Lord saith; how fearful he is to determine whether he was in the body or out of the body when he was rapt up. Have we the least reason (saith Eusebius) to suspect that the hearers of such instructions did feign whatsoever they testifie their Master to have done; or is it in the least probable that they should all conspire together to lye. But let us here what Pagan Writers give in evidence here. Pliny, being appointed by the Emperour Trajan to take special cognizance of the Causes of Christians, and to give him the best information there∣about, which his utmost diligence in enquiring could arrive to, gives him this account of them; That in their Assemblies for Divine Worship they used so solemnly to bind themselves (at the receiving of the holy Sacrament) not to falsifie their word, but to speak the truth; as he could not induce any of them (by any methods of either cruelty or flattery that he could invent) to say they were not Christians, (Plinii Epist. lib. 10. ep. 103.) In so much that Tra∣jan gave order, that from his Ministers of State should procede in examin∣ing the Causes of Christians upon this , That if any of them that
were accused, being ask'd whether he were a Christian, should say he was not, he should forthwith be dismist, as not guilty of the charge laid against him, (Trajanus Plinio, epist. 104.) And this grounded upon Pliny's Observation, [Nam ad hoc cogi non possunt qui sunt reverà Christiani;] for they that are so indeed cannot be forced to deny themselves to be Christians: but would persevere to the last gasp in the midst of the greatest torments to roar out, this good Confession; I am a Christian; I tell thee (bloody tormentor) who I am; thou wouldst, by the rack, force me to deny my self to be what I am: I cannot, I dare not lye, I am a Christian. Tear off my flesh with hooks, break my bones with strappadoes, pull asunder my joynts with skrews; while thou leaves me a tongue in my head, I must speak the truth, I cannot but tell thee to thy face, I am a Christian, I worship God through Jesus Christ, (Tertul. apol. 21.) [dicimus & palàm dicimus, & vobis tormentibus dicimus, lacerati & cruentati vociferamus, Deum colimus per Christum, &c.] Could a more feeling proof be given of their abominating a lye than this? They who would rend their Garments, at Acclamations made to themselves, as Gods; that would not take to, but spurn at divine honours laid at their feet; will rather have the skin torn off their flesh, their flesh off their bones, their bones by continued and lingring pains drain'd of marrow, than suffer the most exquisite tortures to rack from them that self-officious Lye, (or so much as a consent by silence, to them who would have them say) that they were not Christians. The great∣est testimony of a tenacious love to Truth that ever was exhibited; what could tempt them to recede from it, whom assurance of Life, exemption from the torturing Rack, and the horror of the most grim-fac'd Death that wittiest malice could contrive, could not tempt? Balaam put in a good Caution for his speaking truth, when (for all his love to the wages of un∣righteousness) he assured Balak, That if he would give him an house-full of Silver and Gold he durst not speak more or less than what God should put into his mouth: But the Primitive Church put in a far greater pledge, limb and life it self, for her Veracity. And yet this was all the inducement they can possibly be imagin'd to have, to persist in their Lye (if the Gospel be a Lye) as Eusebius excellently (Demonst. Evang. 3. 7.) [Non enim exiguum erit hujus audaciae proemium; siquidem non vulgares nos pro tantis certaminibus manent coronae, sed quae supplicia videlicet à legibus omnium hominum, ut par est, contradicentibus injuncta est, vincula, tormenta, carceres, ignis, ferrum, cruces & boluae, ad quae omnia promptissimo animo est accedendum: iisque malis eun∣dum obviàm intrepidè quae praeceptorem nostrum nobis pro exemplo ostentant: quid enim pulchrius quàm nulla ratione, & diis & hominibus fieri inimicos, &c.] We have reason sure to persist thus inflexibly in asserting this truth of the Gospel; for we know we are to reap no small reward of this boldness, to receive no vulgar Crowns for such strivings; but those punishments (to speak plainly) which by the Laws of all men are adjudged meet to be inflicted upon those that contradict them, bonds, racks, goals, fire, sword, crosses and wild beasts: To all which we come with a most ready mind, and without all fear go to meet those evils that present our Master to us for an example; you must think sure we take a great deal of de∣light in making our selves without all reason enemies to the Gods and men, &c. If we had not assurance of the Truth which we profess, and did not so far abhorr to conceal, much more to deny, what we know is Truth, as, rather than do so to save our lives, we persevere to our last breath in bearing witness to it. It was a truly Christian and Heroick Answer (well beseeming the Roy∣al Champion and Defender of the Apostolick Faith) which our late King of blessed Memory, Charles the First, gave to a person who counsell'd him to temporize with his Rebels, in a dissembling compliance with those their not only unjust but impious Proposals, which his truly tender and rightly informed Conscience disgusted; telling his Majesty, he might, after he had reestablish'd himself in the possession of his just Rights, and the Affections of his then abused Subjects, watch an opportunity of retracting those ex∣torted Concessions. Oh Friend, replies the King (laying his hand upon his
pious heart) there is that here which forbids me to dissemble; I am a Chri∣stian, I cannot dissemble. Cursed Sectarian Rebels! the stain of the Chri∣stian Name! You made Lyes your Refuge, and were made up of nothing from Head to Heel, but dissimulation, steering your course by that more than Machiavilian Maxim [Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare.] Blessed Charles, the Glory of the truly Christian Religion! Thou writes after the Copy which thy Master set thee in his own Blood, who rather than he would dissemble, or not bear witness to the Truth before Pilat, would incurr the Rabbles clamorous Cry, to have that holy and just One crucified: Such, such were thy Mothers Children, among whom thou now triumphs: Such assurance did the Apostolical Church, the glorious Company of Martyrs, give of their prizing Truth (at that rate, as they thought that it was to be bought, but not sold upon any terms) in their refusing to accept of deliver∣ance from the the most tormenting pains, that humane strength could in∣flict, or devillish subtilty invent, at the price of a Monasyllable-lye. What reason then to suspect the Truth of that Testimony, which men of such Principles and inconquerable Veracity have given to the Truth of Go∣spel-history, or that they should put their heads together to compact a Fable so long-winded? § 2. The Apostles Impartiality. How groundless such a Suspicion is, will more appear, if we cast into the Scales the Consideration of the Apostles and Evangelists Impartiality, in their delivering the whole Truth; even those Passages in Christ's and the Churches Stories, which they could not but foresee, would be a derision and stumbling-block to inquisitive Adversaries, and a disparagement in the opinion of the Vulgar, to Christ and themselves. Such as concern their own mean Extract; their sordid and scandalous imployments before their Call: St. Matthew a Publican, a Trade filthy and sordid even in the repute of Gentiles [] (saith Artimedorus.) An honest Pub∣lican was so rare, even at Rome it self, as Sabinus, for managing that Office uncorruptly, had Statues erected to him with this Inscription [] for the honest Publican, (Sueton. Vespas. 1.) [,] So many Publcans, so many Harpies. Theocritus being demanded what was the cruellest Beast? answered, of those on the Moun∣tains, the Bear and Lion; of those in Cities, Publicans and Sycophants: But much more infamous among the Jews, especially if those that under∣took that Office were Jews: insomuch as Tertullian (de pudicitia cap. 9.) to take off that aggravation of infamy from St. Matthew will by no means have him to have been a Jew. But he is more tender of St. Matthew's credi, than St. Matthew himself is, who writes himself a Jew-publican, as St. Je∣rome proveth, (Ep. ad Damasum, part. 2. tract. 1. epist. 15.) Accusing him∣self, saith Eusebius: [Hoc quidem nullus Evangelistarum indicavit, non Coa∣postolus Johannes, non Marcus, non Lucas; sed ipse Matthaeus suam ipsius vi∣tam non dissimulans planéque ipse seipsum accusans, Euseb. Evang. demon. 3. 7.] St. Peter, James and John (our Saviour's select Confidents, and as it were the Squires of his Body) were called from their Fisher-boats to be Fishers of men. They stick'd not to repeat their own weaknesses and failings, their presumptions, diffidences, forsaking, forswearing their Master. Their Am∣bition, their carnal Conceptions of the Kingdom of the Messiah, their dul∣ness of mind to believe the Resurrection; with all the aggravating Cir∣cumstances of their Lapses. From all which the malicious and vafrous Cel∣sus (Orig. contrà Celsum, lib. 2. calum. 18, 19. & passim) takes occasion to deride them, to calumniate the blessed Jesus, and to disparage the Christian Cause: which (as Origen replies) they would never have administred occasion to the busie enemy to object, had not love to Truth constrained them to communicate to the World the whole Truth; even that that made towards the proving of Christ
to be perfect Man, as well as what demonstrated him to be God, and that which spake themselves to be what they were by Grace, and to do what they did not in their own Name, or Strength of their own Vertues, but in the Merits and Power of the Name of Christ: a Conceit walked among the Jews; that extraordinary Holiness might attain to Miraculous Workings: Industry bringeth to Purity, Purity to Cleanness, Cleanness to Holiness, Holiness to Humbleness, Hum∣bleness to Fear of Sin, Fear of Sin to partaking of the Holy Ghost, say their Rabbies (Lightfoot harm. an. Christ. 33.) But the Apostles derive not their Power of working Miracles by any such Pedigree; they make themselves no∣thing, that Christ might be all in all to them. § 3. No partial Compliance. Yea, whereas in Cases of Fact and Practice (as private men) they might warp aside from the Truth of the Gospel: and it would have been, in such Cases, a promoting of their private Interests, either to have said nothing, or to have divertised their Reports so, as might have rendered the Business most plausi∣ble on their own Partie's side. Yet we find that even where their particular Interests clash and interfere, their Reports agree, and are as full in what makes against, as for that Party, with whom themselves sided in that Case of Fact. To instance in the Case of St. Peter and Paul (mentioned, Gal. 2.) That E∣vangelist, who convers'd with St. Peter, and was appointed to be his Com∣panion to the Circumcision (Gal. 2. 9.) St. John writes his Gospel so, as it favours St. Paul's Case more than St. Peter's; commemorating more at large than St. Luke, Christs Intensions to cast off the Jewish Nation, to abrogate the Ceremonial Law; describing that Nation as a People not to be temporiz∣ed with, opening their Malice, Pertinacy, and insatiable Thirst after Christ's Blood; extenuating the Sin of the Romans in putting him to Death, in com∣parison of the Crime of the Jews in rejecting, betraying, delivering up, and bartering away the Lord of Glory. St. Matthew (who wrote by St. Peter's Direction to the Hebraizing Jews) writes as much in dis-favour of that Nation which St. Peter favour'd and sid∣ed with in his Contest with St. Paul, as any other Evangelist: reporting that John the Baptist warned them, not to claim Propriety in, nor Privilege from Abraham. That Christ preferr'd believing Gentiles before mis-believing Jews to the Honour of being related to him in Consanguinity. That Christ found more Faith in some Gentiles, than he did in Israel. That Christ should say that many should come, from East and West, and sit down with Abraham in the Kingdom of God, and the Children of the Kingdom be thrust out. That Christ urged the Law of Charity, as vacating the Law of Cermonies, (even of Old, in the case of David, eating the Shew-bread.) And lastly, Christs Doom upon such like as St. Peter temporized with, to the scandalizing of believing Gentiles, (that is, they that had swept the House, and emitted the unclean Spirit by an accepting of Christ for a Messiah,) but did afterwards suffer him (by their Judaizing) to return, and bring them into a worse Bon∣dage to the Ceremonial Law than they were in before;) that their last E∣state, that of Judaick Christians, should be worse than their first, of Juda∣ism. It were easie to multiply Instances, and to point to those Passages in St. Mark, (who wrote his Gospel to the Grecizing or Alexandrian Jews (whose Bishop he was) from St. Peter's Mouth;) that make clearly for St. Paul, and against St. Peter: but for Brevities sake I wave that, and come to shew, that on the other Hand, St. Luke, who was St. Paul's Amanuensis in that Go∣spel (of his writing but St. Paul's inditing) challenging therefore a Propriety in it, and calling it his Gospel, (Rom. 2. 16.) does no more favour St. Paul's than St. Peter's Cause; presenting St. Peter as the Mouth of the whole Col∣ledg of Apostles, in confessing Christ to be the Son of God, the King of the
Jews: and receiving from Christ, upon that Confession, the Privilege of be∣ing the first-laid Stone in the new Jerusalem; upon which, Christ would build his Church. And in his History of the Acts of the Apostles, demon∣strating how Christ made good that Promise to him. For though all the Twelve were so many Pearly Foundation-Stones, upon whose Persons and Preaching the Gospel-Church was built; and though all of them were Doors in the City of God, and had the Keys given them to open the Door of Faith to the Jew and Gentile: Yet St. Luke gives the Preheminence to St. Peter, in order of Time; reporting him, with his Brother Andrew, to have had the first explicit call to Christianity, and after that to the Apostolical Office; and and so his Person to have been laid as the first Stone in the House of God, and in the Foundation of the Apostles: and informing us how his Key of Do∣ctrine, after Christ's Assension and assuming of his Kingdom, did at Jerusa∣lem on the Day of Penticost; and some while after, at the House of Corneli∣us, first open the Door of Faith both to Jews and Gentiles: how his Sermons were the first Pearly Foundation-Stone, upon which the Catholick Church of Jew and Gentile was built. Nay, St. Luke relates those Passages with such Circumstances as are of greatest Tendency towards the heaping of Honour upon St. Peter's Person; presenting him, not only as the Stone, upon which those individual Converts were laid, but in their Persons (as their Represen∣tatives) the whole Church of believing Jews gathered from every Nation un∣der Heaven to his Sermon on the Day of Pentecost: and of Gentiles, repre∣sented by Cornelius, a Roman: a Name (in the Idiom of that Age) equipol∣lent to a Citizen of the World: God, the King of the Jews (his peculiar He∣ritage) and Caesar, the Emperour of the Romans, sharing the World betwixt them. The Poet came nearer the Truth (in the Evangelical Sence of [all the World] then he was aware of in his— [Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.] If any of our own Furiosi fasten his Canine Teeth upon this Interpretation of the Rock and Keys, and cast up his Snout in the Air, as if he smelt Pope∣ry in't: he may know (if he have not confin'd himself to the Circle of Mo∣dern Systems, or be not too proud to learn of his Betters) that I yield St. Pe∣ter no more than the greatest Champions of the Christian of Old, and of the Reformed Religion of late, have granted him; and yet upon such clear Scri∣pture-Grounds as speak it to be no more than his just Due: they that think the Papal Church and Cause advantaged by this Concession, may do well to joyn Heads with the Jesuits (to whom they are already joyn'd by the Tail) and try if, with his Ram, they can batter down the Walls of our Jerusalem about the ears of them, who (through God's Grace) have hitherto defended her upon this Ground; and amongst them by Name that Bl. Martyr Arch-Bi∣shop Laud (against Fisher, pag. 237. &c.) For my own part, I shall rather be of none, than of that Religion which stands in need either of a Lye, or the Dissimulation of Truth to support it.—But to return to St. Luke, who (though St. Paul's Scribe) makes the most honourable mention of St. Peter of any of the Evangelists: reciting his being with Christ at his Trans∣figuration (a Privilege which St. Peter himself glories in (2 Pet. 1. 18.) Christs praying for him that his Faith should not fail; and Injunction to him when himself was converted to strengthen his Brethren: Reporting the History of his Denial of his Master more favourably than any of the rest; therein omit∣ting the Aggravations of his denying Christ the second time with an Oath, the third time with cursing and swearing; both which are recorded by St. Matthew's Pen: describing St. Peter every way as well instructed as St. Paul in the State of the Controversie betwixt them, touching God's accounting the Gentiles holy as well as the Jews, touching God's antiquating the Law that put difference of clean and unclean upon Meats, and his freeing both Jew and Gentile from the insupportable Yoke of Legal Ceremonies. In all which
St. Luke reports St. Peter to have been so well instructed, as the Synod ground∣ed its Decree touching those things upon the Evidence which St. Peter gave (Act. 15.) And lastly introducing St. Paul, doing the same thing in Effect which he rehuked St. Peter for, [shaving his Head, purifying himself, circum∣cising of Timothy, &c.] and that upon the same Ground that St. Peter plead∣ed, [That he might not offend those weak believing Jews, who were, as yet, zealous of the Law, and had not learn'd that Liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free.] A thing which, not only, scandalized the Pagan Madaurenses, and opened the Blasphemous Mouth of Porphyry to accuse St. Paul of Procacity and Partiality; but put St. Origen and Chrisostome to their Wits End to answer his Calumnies: And occasion'd those sharp bickerings betwixt St. Austin and Jerome as have been a Bone of Contention among the School-men to this Day, and like to be till the Last Day: [Vide August. tom. 2. Epist. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19.] This is such an Argument of Impartiality in the Evangelists as hath no Peer. Alexander laid his Finger upon his Scar while Apelles was drawing his Picture. Aelian (Var Histor. 2. 23.) would not give Nicodorus the Mantinean his full Praise, because he was affraid, thereby, to honour the Memory of Diogoras (a reputed Atheist) who help'd Nicodorus to frame his excellent Laws: and Virgil because the Nolanes would not permit him to draw their River over his Grounds expung'd the Name of this City out of his Verses, placing instead of that Ora: (A. Gelii noct. attic. 7. 20.) Talem dives erat Capua, & vicina Veseno [Ora] jugo.— When, before that, it was [Nola] jugo. Compare the History of the Guelfs and Gibellines, the Papal and Imperial Parties, the Roman and the Car∣thaginian Writers, the Netherlands and the King of Spain's Favourites: Or (to come nearer home) the London and Oxford-Diurnals; and you will find the same Occurrencies, the same Exploits, so interchangeably chequer'd with Black and White, so variously drawn in Chalk or Charcoal (according to the different Interests of the Pen, and the Respect is born to Parties) as the same Person shall be painted, here a Saint, there a Devil: the same exploit pre∣sented, by one, in fair and lovely Tables; by another, ill-favoured, dis∣torted, and with Heels turn'd upwards: the same Action writ by one in Oyl, by another in Gall. But the Holy Apostles of the blessed Jesus, mov∣ed out of the Magnetick Sphere of all Carnal and Selfish Respects; were not in their Writings, led by any Byass, beside the streight Line of Truth. [A∣micus Socrates, Amicus Plato, &c.] St. Peter is my Friend, St. Paul my Friend, but only for the Truth's sake, and therefore I respect the Truth before their Per∣sons, was their common Apothegm. § 4. All false Religions make Lyes their Refuge. It will add Strength to this Argument, to observe that all other Religions do professedly make Lyes their Refuge. The Poetical Age of Greece, which brought forth the Gods and Religions of that Nation, was wholly fabulous and Nugatory. The first true Historian amongst them that set Pen to Paper was Diodorus Siculus, who lived in the Reign of Julius Caesar; of whom Pli∣ny writes, that he was the first Greek Author that wrote seriously; for which that Nation was grown so infamous as the Term of Ay-lyer was proverbially cast upon them by their own Prophets. For the Latin Heathenism its stand∣ing in need to have Fables support it, we have the Testimony of Schaevola the great Pontiff, who (as he is alledged by St. Austin (de Civitate, 4. 27.) though he acknowledged the Philosophical Theology to come nearer the Truth than the Urbane; yet will by no Means allow the Vulgar to have Knowledg of it, because it detects and decries many things as unbecoming the Gods, which the
Vulgar ascribes to them; and 'tis more profitable for the People (saith he) to believe our Stories, though false, than the just Consequences of Philoso∣phical Reasonings, though never so never so true. And of the incompara∣ble Varro, in whose Fragments quoted by St. Austin, and collected by Scaliger we have this Point of Doctrine, [It is expedient for the Vulgar to have Lyes imposed upon them.] (de Civitate, 3. 4.) [Varro falsa haec esse quamvis penè fatetur, tamen utile civitatibus dicit ut se viri fortes, etiamsi falsum sit, ex diis genitos esse credant; ut eo modo animus humanus velut divine stirpis fiduciam gerens res magnas aggrediendas praesumat audaciùs, agat Vehementiùs, & ob hoc impleat ipsa securitate faeliciùs,] For valiant Men to believe they are God-born, does ani∣mate and quicken their Courage. Upon this Ground Scipio cherished Men's O∣pinions of him, that he came of Divine Seed: and Alexander is told by Dioge∣nes (in Lucian) that the Lye which his Mother and the South-sayers made of him, [that he was the Son of Jupiter Hamon] was for his behoof, as making him more couragious in himself, and more formidable to others, (Lucian. dial. Diog. &c.) A brave Religion (cries that Iearned Father) for an infirm Man to fly to (for Help and Resolution in his searching after Truth to set him free,) which makes him believe 'tis more for his avail to believe Lies than to know the Truth. Enough, one would think, to startle the most Credulous Fool, and make him cautious of pinning his Faith upon those Men's Sleeves that are not ashamed to profess they think it an Act of Piety towards the Gods, and of Charity towards Men's Souls, to bring Men into a Beleif of forged Stories. And yet Philosophers use to lye for their own Gain, and for the Honour of their Countrey, saith Lucian (in Philopseuden.) [Mentiuntur quià in rem vident conducere,] [patriae suae plus majestatis ex hujusmodi figmentis conci∣liant,—&c.] And Herodotus proves Homer (in honour of the Greeks) to have feigned Helena to have been at Troy: she being detain'd in Egypt by Pro∣teus, together with the Treasure of Menelaus, till his return from the Trojan Wars, when he received both Wife and Goods untouch'd by Proteus, who had taken them from Alexander, forc'd upon that Coast by Tempests, as he fled with Helena, and discovered by his own Servants: adding to this Story of the Egyptian Priests (as a Confirmation of its Truth) how unlikely it is, that Priamus would involve himself in so dangerous a War in defence of Pa∣ris his Minion; especially, after it had cost him the Life of two of his Sons, and so many of his best Subjects: [I cannot think (saith he) but he would have delivered her to the Grecians, had she been in his own Bed-Chamber (not only in his Sons) to prevent, at least, a fatal Overthrow, &c.] but what Credit is to be given to Versijiers—farewell Homer, and the Cyprian Song. (Herodot. Eutyrpe.) The same Authour (in his Thalia) brings in Darius telling his Fellow-Confe∣derates [that Men may lye for the Common Good, and that therefore he would not scruple to invent something that he should say his Father gave him in Charge to say to Smyrdis.] Lactantius observes, this was the common Principle of the most knowing Heathen Theologies (Lact. de fals. relig. l. 1. c. 3. tit. de literato∣rum errore.) Of those many Instances he brings, I shall only alledg that of Tully; who, when he had said enough to overthrow all Pagan Religion, con∣cludes, notwithstanding, that those things were not to be disputed among the Vulgar: for Fear that such Disputation might extinguish the received Re∣ligions: with Lactantius his Note, upon which his blowing hot and cold, I shall conclude this Section: How is that Man to be discoursed with; who, when he perceives himself to be in an Errour, does wittingly stumble, that the whole Mul∣titude may dash their feet against the same Stone; who pulls out his own Eyes that other Menntay become blind? § 5. The greatest part of the Papal as well as Pagan Religion is grounded on palpable, and by themselves acknowledged, Forgeries. We may for I∣mage-Worship, Invocation of Saints departed, Adoration of the Host, Pur∣gatory, and all its Appurtenances, thank their fabulous Legends, writ (for∣sooth) out of a Religious and Charitable Intent, to beget Devotion in the
People, to catch them by this Holy Fraud of feighned Miracles and Aparati∣ons: One of the most ancient whereof and which hath a Thousand times more Authority (in Weight) to back it, than whole Thousands of the rest, Baronius (anno 250. § 5.) confesseth to be a mere Fable, and to have no better Rise than a Pretence, to make Glory redound to God and his Saints by a Religious and well-meant Lye.] This Tale is told (at second Hand) be Gregory Nazien∣zen (in his Funeral Oration for Cyprian) being a Story of Cyprian's Conversi∣on, upon Occasion of the blessed Virgins preserving a Virgins Chastity, against the Charms of his not only Courtship but Conjurations & Magical Spells. When the whole World of Antiquaries know that St. Cyprian, before his Conversi∣on, was not a Conjurer at Antioch (where the Legend brings them upon the Stage with his Wench Justina,) but a Professor of Oratory at Carthage, (Pon∣tius Diaconus de Passion. Cypriani;) and converted thereby Caecilius, far e∣nough from Antioch. Such Tares were so early sowen in the Church, as there is nothing in the Writings of the Fathers, we had need be more cauti∣ous of taking up upon their Word, than Stories of this Nature, than (tristia quaepiam & superstitiosa mendacia) certain over-serious and too Religious Lyes: which oftimes are told with that Confidence and Authority (saith a Zealous and Learned Romanist, Sir Thomas Moor: (Epist. Thomae Ruthalo. praefix. Luciani Cynico.) as some old Crafty Knave perswaded the blessed. Father St. Austin, (that most grave Man and bitter Enemy to lying) to report, for a Truth, that Fable of the two Curinas; the one returning to Life, the other depart∣ing, as a thing falling out in his time: which Lucian (in his Philopseudes) the Names only changed, (so long before St. Austin was born) derides.; (It was Demilus the Smith and Cleodemus, in Lucian; Curina the Common-council∣man, and Curina the Smith in St. August. (tom. 4. de cura pro mortuis, cap. 12.) and this Curina the Common-council-man who was restored to life upon the Instant of Curina the Smith's Death, was afterwards baptized by St. Austin, to whom, a while after, he told this strange Story (attestantibus honestis ci∣vibus suis) some honest Citizens avouching the Truth of it.) I make no great doubt but many a Godly Lye of the like Tendency has been told by the Inde∣pendent Catechills, when they gave an Account of the manner of their Con∣version. But to return to Moor's Discourse: It is (saith he) less to be won∣dered at, if those Men affect the Minds of the gross Vulgar with their Figments, who think they have done God an eminent piece of Service, and obliged Christ eternally to themselves; if they have but devised such a Tale of some Saint, or such a Tragedy concerning Hell, as will make an old doting woman cry, or tremble at the Report of it. Hence they have not suffer'd the Life scarce of one Martyr or Virgin to pass without the Intermixture of such like Lyes. Pious Lyes! As if (forsooth) there were, otherwise, danger that Truth could not support it self, and stand on her own Legs, except she were underprop'd with Lyes: neither have they been affraid to contaminate that Religion with Figments which Truth it self insti∣tuted, and intended should consist of naked Truth; nor did they see, that such Fa∣bles are so far from promoting it, as nothing can more prejudice Religion: for (as St. Austin testifies) as soon as Men smell-out the intermingled Lye, they suspect the Truth it self: whereupon I often grow jealous, that the greatest part of such Tales was devised by some Paultry Fellows and Hereticks, who had a Design to make Sport with the incautions Credulity of simple (rather than prudent) Men; and to take away Credit from true Christian Histories, by interweaving them with feigned Fables; wherefore (saith this ingenious Authour) undoubted Credit must be given to those Histories which the Divinely-inspired Scripture commends unto us; but for others, let us (having, with Judgment, applied them to the Doctrine of Christ, as unto Critolaus his Rule) receive or reject them: if we would be free from vain Credulity, and superstitious Fear. How soon would there be an end put to most of the Controversies betwixt us and the Modern Church of Rome were all of that Communion, of the truly Catholick Judgment of this Gen∣tleman, in this Particular. For I cannot call to mind any considerable Point  betwixt us, where their Opinion hath no better or other ground  Forgeries.
The declared Intent of the Latin Church Legend, is to perswade People to a devout Worshipping and Invocation of those Saints of whom those Tales are forged; the Collector of them concluding almost every Story with this Ex∣hortation; Let us pray unto him, that by his Merits and Intercession we may ob∣tain Salvation. What a Monstrous Story, without either Head or Foot, does Marcellinus Comes tell of the finding of the Baptists Head! (Cronic. Indict. 6. Vincomalo & Opilione Coss.) [The Ghost of the Baptist appeared to two Pilgrim Monks, commanding them to take up his Head, where it was buried, in Herod's Palace: they take it up, and carry it away with them in their Scrip; till they, giving the Scrip to be carried to a Potter of Emissa (who had cast himself into their Company;) He, advised by St. John in a Dream, steals away from them with the sacred Relick back again to Emissa; where at his death he commits it, seal'd up in a Box, to the Custody of his Sister: she, not knowing what it was, left it to her Successor: at last it comes into the Clutches of Eustochius (an Arrian Pres∣biter) who, by means thereof, works strange Cures; pretending he did them by his own Holiness: but his Knavery being found out, he is banished the City, and leaves the Baptists Head behind him. In the place where it was reposited some Monks happen'd to build their Cells, to whose Abbot Marcellus, (in process of time) St. John discovers where his Head was buried, and he finds it the twenty fourth Day of February in the sixth Indiction, Vin. & Op. Coss.] This Tale is well made in that Treatise, De revelatione Capitis Baptistae, wrong father'd upon Cy∣prian, as Erasmus hath well concluded, from that Story-writer's mentioning Pipin King of Aquitane, long before whose Reign St. Cyprians head lay un∣der a clod. This Marcellus (saith this Author) was commanded by the Baptist to carry his Head to Jurannus Bishop of Alexandria, that it might be there interr'd, where the rest of his Body rested. But there it rests not long; for (within a while) his Ghost appears to one Foelix a Monk; and commands him to go to Alexandria, and take his Head thence, and conveigh it to Aquitane, and there deposite it as I shall direct thee: (Had I been in this Monks place I should have concluded this had been the Ghost of Herod, again separating the Baptists Head from his Body,) The Monk, with seven Companions, gets away with the Baptists Head to Sea; where, in token that they should escape a Storm they were in, the Bap∣tist's Ghost (in the same Form that the Holy-Ghost appeared in when Christ came up out of the Water,) appears in the shape of a Dove, and sits upon the Poop, till they safely arrived in Aquitane; where, by the Grace of this Relick, King Pipin totally routs the Vandales (then invading his Countrey) with the loss only of twenty of his own Men; who, by applying the Baptists Head to their Corps, were all re∣stored to Life: and, which is the greatest Wonder of all, St. Cyprian writes all this, many Scores of Years after himself was Martyred. Of the same Stuff, and upon the same Foundation, are built the two Books De miraculis Martyrum, writ by Gregory Turonensis; who shuts up his first Book, thus. [It behoves us there∣fore, to desire the Patronage of Martyrs, &c.] and his second thus: We there∣fore, well considering those Miracles, may learn that it is not possible to be saved but by the help of Martyrs and other Friends of God. But Simeon Metaphrastes deserves the Whet-stone from all that ever professed this holy Art of Lying for the advantage of Truth: who, notwithstanding, that in his Preface to the strange Romance of Marina, he blames others for forging Stories of the Saints, and polluting their true Memorials with most evident Doctrines of Devils and Demoniacal Narratives; yet himself splits upon the same Rock, and so Shipwracks his Credit with all Intelligent Persons; as Baronius himself is ashamed of him (in notis ad martyrologium Roman. Jul. 13.) I need not mul∣tiply Instances, the World swarms with lying Legends. Their avowed Doctrine of Mental Reservation, of Equivocation to promote the Cause of Re∣ligion, casts up as wide a Gulf betwixt Gospel-Tradition and theirs, as is be∣twixt Heaven and Hell, the God of Truth and the Father of Lyes, Quomodo Deus Pater genuit filium veritatem: sic Diabolus genuit quasi filium Mendacium. (August. 42. tract. in Johan. 8. 44.) these introduc'd by Persons that account it meritorious of Heaven to forge the grossest Fables, so it be in service of the
Church (which the Apostle calls speaking Lyes in Hypocrisie) 1 Tim. 4. 2. (vide Meed in locum.) Those publish'd by Men, who less fear'd dying than lying, who chose rather to suffer the cruellest Death, to lay themselves ob∣noxious to the Calumnies of captious Adversaries, through their Parasie, their Freedom of Speech, then to tell the most innocent and officious Lye: and therefore the unlikeliest Men in the World to abuse the World with Fig∣ments and devised Stories: and Persons from whose Hand a Man might with more safety and security have taken a Cup suspected to have Poyson in it, than a Cup of Wine from the Hand of the most Divine Philosoper, as Apollodorus said of Socrates in comparison of Plato: (Athenaeus dyprosoph. l. 11. c. 22.)
Christian Religions APPEAL To the BAR of Common Reason, &c. The Second Book. The Apostles were not themselves deluded, no Crack'd-brain Enthusiasticks, but Persons of most composed Minds. CHAP. I. The Gospel's Correspondency with Vulgar Sentiments. § 1. The Testimony of the Humane Soul untaught to the Truth of the Christian Creed in the Articles touching the Unity of the Godhead; his Goodness, Ju∣stice, Mercy. The Existence of wicked Spirits. § 2. The Resurrection; and Future Judgment. Death formidable for its Consequences to evil Men, No Fence against this Fear, proved by Examples. § 3. In hope of future Good, the Soul secretly applauds her self after virtuous Acts. This makes the Flesh suffer patiently. § 1. WHat Exception can be made against so impartial a Relati∣on, of Men possessed with such a mortal Detestation of Forgery, made to an Age so well accommodated against Delusion by all internal and external Fortifications ima∣ginable, cannot (in my shallow Reason) be conjectured; except it be that of Celsus, and his Modern Epicurean Disciples. That the Apostles themselves were deluded: or (which is worse) infatuated! For who, but raving and dementate Persons, would have ven∣tured to put off Adulterate Wares to so knowing an Age? But then, how could they have framed the Doctrine and History of Christ in such a Decorum, in so exact a Symmetry of Parts, not only among themselves, but to the great World, as Lactantius argues: [Abfuit ergò ab iis fingendi voluntas, & astutia;
quià rudes fuerunt; & quis possit indoctus apta inter se & cobaerentia fingere, cùm Philosophorum doctissimi ipsi sibi repugnantia dixerint: (haec enim est mendaciorum natura, ut coherere non possint:) illorum autèm traditio (quià vera est) quadrat undique ac sibi tota consentit: & ideò persuadet, quià constanti ratione suffulta est.] (Lactant de justicia lib. 5. cap. 3.) The Apostles had neither Will to feign, nor any crafty Design upon the World, because they were plain Men; and what il∣literate Man can have the Art to make Fictions square to one another and hang to∣gether: seeing the most learned of the Philosophers have spoke things jarring a∣mongst themselves? (for this is the Nature of Untruths that they cannot be of a Piece.) But the Tradition of the Apostles, because it is true, one part falls out even with another, and it agrees perfectly with it self; and therefore gains upon Mens Minds, because it is underpropp'd with that stedfast reason; and on every side Squares with Principles of Reason. Origen useth this Argument (Cont. Cels. l. 3.) willing him to consider if it were not the Agreeableness of the Principles of Faith with common Notions. [, that prevailed most upon all candid and inge∣nuous Auditors of them.] For how can that be the Figment of deluded Fancies, the issue of shatter'd Brains, that's so well shap'd as it bears a perfect Propor∣tion to, and Correspondency with, whatsoever hath had the common Ap∣probation of Mankind: Being calculated 1. To the Meridian of common Sentiments, to the Universal Religion of the whole World, to the Testimony of every natural Soul: to whose Evi∣dence Christian Religion appeals by her Advocate Tertullian (in his admira∣ble Treatise De Testimonio Animae:) I call in (saith he) a new kind of Witness; yet more known than any Writing, more tost than all Learning, more com∣mon than any Book that's put forth, greater than whole Man (that is) the All that is of Man. Come into the Court, Oh Soul, whether thou beest Di∣vine and Eternal (as most Philosophers think) and by so much the rather, not capable of telling a Lye: Or not Divine, but Mortal (as Epicurus thinks) and so much the rather thou oughtest not to lye, for Fear of distracting thy self at present with the Guilt of so Inhumane a Vice; whether thou art receiv∣ed from Heaven, or conceived of Earth; whether thou art made up of Num∣bers or Atoms; whether thou commences a being with the Body, or art infu∣sed after the Body: from whencesoever, and howsoever thou makest Man a Rational Creature, most capable of Sense and Science. But I do not retain thee of Council for the Christian such as thou art when (after thou hast been formed in the Schools, and exercised in Libraries) thou belchest forth that Wisdom thou hast obtained in Aristotle's Walks, or the Attick Academies. No, I appeal to thee, as thou art raw, unpolish'd, and void of acquired Know∣ledge; such a one as they have that have only a bare Soul; such altogether, as thou comest from the Quarry, from the High Way, from the Looms. I have need of thy Unskilfulness: for when thou growest never so little crafty, all men suspect thee. I would have thee bring nothing with thee into this Court, but what thou bringest with thy self into Man; but what thou hast learn'd to think, of thy own teaching (or thy Author's, whoever he be.) While thou art such a one, I am sure thou art not a Christian Soul; for thou art not born, but made (and new born) a Christian Soul: And yet we Chri∣stians require thy Testimony: the Testimony of a Stranger to us, against those of thy own kin: that our Adversaries may (at least for thy sake) blush, for their hating and persecuting us, for holding those Opinions, which lead thy Judgment captive, of which thou canst not rid thy self. Articl. 1. The Pagans are displeased with us Christians, for preaching that there is one only Lord known and confessed by that only Name of God, without the Addition of any of the Names of their Idols; of whom and un∣der whom, are all things. Do thou declare what thou knowest touching this Matter. And lo, we hear thee aloud (and with that full Liberty that is de∣nied us) at home, and abroad, thus dictating (thus pronouncing Sentence in the Case) in such Proverbial Sayings as thou puttest into all Men's Mouths,
viz. God grant: If God will. By which Way of expressing thy own Senti∣ments, thou signifyest, that there is such a one; and confessest that all Power belongs to that one God, to whose Will thou lookest for all good: and with∣withal deemest all other Gods to be Gods, whom thou callest by their own proper Names; Saturn, Jove, Mars, Minerva: for him thou affirmest to be God alone, whom thou namest God only: so that if at any time thou call∣est them Gods, thou dost but borrow the only God's Name to bestow on them. Articl. 2. Neither art thou ignorant of the Nature of that God whom we preach. Deus bonus est, Deus benefacit: God is good, and God does good, are Words of thy own framing: are Phrases of Speech thou usest in their pro∣per Sense. And on the other hand thou hast taught us to say [an evil Man] thereby taxing, obliquely and figuratively, such a Man to be therefore evil, because he is departed from God that is good. Again, because it is, among us, the great Mystery of Mortification and Conversation, to believe that the Blessing of Goodness and Bounty is at God's Disposal; thou pronouncest this Prayer [God bless thee,] as plainly as a Christian need do. And when thou turnest that Blessing into a Curse, thou thereby confessest (with us) that God's Power is wholly above us; that whom he curseth, are cursed: whom he blesseth, are blessed. There are some that do not altogether deny the exi∣stence of God, but they do not think, that he either minds what Men do, or will judg them according to their Works; (in which Point, they exceedingly differ from us, who betake our selves to the Discipline of Christ, that we may escape Judgment to come,) but they think it a Dishonour to God, not to be discharged from the Care of Inspection, and the Trouble of Animad∣version, or to have Anger ascribed to him: for if God (say they) can be an∣gry; he is corruptible and passible. Yet when the same Men, elsewhere, confess the Soul to be Divine and conferr'd by God, they become obnoxious to have the Testimony of the Soul retorted against their other Opinion. For if the Soul either be Divine or Gods Gift, without doubt, she knows her Do∣nor; and if she knows him, them she also fears him, at least wise, as her Au∣thor: Doth she not fear him whom she would rather have Propitious than Angry? Whence then proceeds this natural Fear of God in the Soul, if God knows not how to be angry? how can he be feared, that cannot be offended? What in God can be feared, but his Anger? how can he be angry at Mens doing amiss, if he mind not what we do? Why does he mind, if he will not judg? How can he judg, if he want Power to execute? and who hath Su∣preme Power but God alone? Hence therefore it is, that the Soul (out of her own Conscience) is ready, within Doors and without, (without any bodie's deriding or hindering her) to cry out [God seeth all things; I appeal to God; God will requite it; God will judge betwixt us.] Whence hast thou learned these words, seeing thou art not a Christian? How comest thou to use such expressions, oftentimes, even while thou art impaled with Ceres her Hair-lace, clad in Saturn's Scarlet Pall, or Isis her Linnen Garment? Who taught thee to implore the Judgment of God, in the very Temples of Idols; stand∣ing at Esculapius his Feet, trimming Juno in the Air, and putting a black Case upon Minerva's Helmet, thou in vocatest none of the Gods there present: In thy own Court, thou appeal'st to a Forreign Judg: in thy own Temples thou liftest up thy Eyes to Heaven, and call'st upon the God of Heaven: how great is the Evidence of that Truth which procureth Witnesses for its self, (and in behalf of Christians) under the Noses of those Devil-Gods whom Pagans Worship. The Christian Cicero, Lactantius, (de falsa Religione, l. 2. cap. 1.) hath the same Observation: Nam & cum jurant, & cùm optant, & cùm gra∣tias agunt; non Jovem aut Deos multos, sed unum Deum nominant: ità veritas ipsa (cogente natura) etiam ab invitis pectoribus erumpit: si qua necessitas gravis presserit, tunc Deum recordantur; si belli terror infremuerit, si morborum pestifera vis incubuerit, si alimenta frugibus longa siccitas denegaverit, si saeva tempestas, si
graudo gruerit, ad Deum confugiunt, à Deo petitur auxilium, Deus ut subveniat oratur, &c. When Men swear, pray, or give Thanks, they name not Jove or many Gods, but the one God. So the Truth (by the Impulse of Nature) break∣eth out of those Breasts, which would imprison it. If any sad Calamity oppress them, then they remember God: If the Terror of War roar upon them: If Pesti∣lential Sicknesses sit upon their Skirts: if a long Drought withdraw Nourishment from the Fruits of the Earth: If raging Tempests, Hail or hot Thunder-bolts invade them, then they fly to God; then they beg Aid of God; then is he beseech'd that he would deliver them: hereby confessing, that such Punishments are inflicted upon the World by that provoked Deity; who takes notice of Mens Sins, and therefore punisheth them: of Mens Prayers and Repentance, and is therefore made propitious by their humble Addresses. Articl. 3. We are question'd for affirming there are Devils: (as though we, by casting them out of the Possession of Mens Bodies, did not prove them to be indeed.) But, besides, that the Followers of Chrysippus make them a Laughing-stock, thy Execrations, Ob Soul, give Answer, that they both are, and are to be abominated: thou callest that Man [Daemonium] a Devil that's stain'd with Filthiness, Malice, Insolency, or any other grievous Sin which we impute to Devils, or if fit to express him to be a Person deserving all Mens Hatred. Lastly, when thou hast a mind to express thy Aversation to, thy Scorning or Detestation of, any thing, or Man: thou cryest out [Satan,] and namest him, whom we call the Angel of Malice, the Crafts-master of all Er∣rour, the Defacer of the whole World; by whom Man, at first, was circum∣vented to break the Law of God, whereby he became obnoxious to Death, and drew all his Posterity into the same Condemnation. Thou knowest there∣fore thy Destroyer: and though Christians only, and those Sects that depend upon the Mouth of God, have learn'd to know the whole Story of him: yet thou, also, hast some inkling of him, for else thou wouldst not hate him. § 2. The Soul conscious of Eternal Judgment. Articl. 4. There is one Article of our Religion wherein we expect thy Determination; so much the rather, because it respects thine own state and concernment. We affirm that thou continuest in Being, after thou hast paid back the debt of Life: That thou expectest the Day of Judgment, and to be sentenc'd to Eternal Torment or Happiness, according as thy works have been in the Body; of which, that thou maist be capable, we affirm, that thou expectest the restoring, to thee, of thy pristine Substance, the same Body, the same Memory. This Faith we introduc'd not, but found in the World: for this Principle of the Soul's Existence after death, the Gallick Druides (that most uncult Tribe of Divines) retain'd, as Caesar witnesseth (in his lib. 6. de bello Gallico;) and Strabo (in his 4. Book of the Gauls) . Of the same Opinion, the same Strabo witnesseth the Indian Brachmans to be (lib. 15.) . The sentiments of the Souls Immortality Barbarism it self could not raze out of the minds of some Thracians, (saith Pompon. Mela (lib. 2. de Thracibus.) Alii redituras putant ani∣mas obeuntium: alii, etsi non redeant, non extingui tamen, sed ad beatiora transire. And as to that of the Bodies Resurrection, Tacitus (lib. 5. hist. 5.) speaking of the Jews, saith, that in hope of the Resurrection they, as also the Egyptians, used not to burn, but to interr their Corps. [Corpora condere quàm cremare, è more Aegyptio:] eadémque cura, & de inferis persuasio. These as well as we, think it not equal to pass a Doom, without the Exhibition of the whole Man, which in thy fore-past Life was at work, either to bring forth death (by sowing to the Flesh) or life (by sowing to the Spirit.) This Christian
Doctrine, though much more becoming than that of Pithagoras (for it does not translate thee into Beasts) though more full and plain than that of Pla∣to (for it restores to thee the dowry of thy Body, which point the Plato∣nicks waver'd in.) Non novi quam utilitatem ex ipsa capiamus—orum enim nulla est commemoratio, neque sensus esse posset, si simus prorsus, quae gratia hujus immortalitatis est habenda (Athengus dipnos. 11. 22.) though more acceptable than that of Epicurus; (for it defends thee against annihilation;) yet, merely for the name we give it, undergoes the Censure of being vain, stupid and temerarious. But we are not ashamed of it, if thou beest of the same Opi∣nion with us: As thou declarest thy self to be; when, making mention of a wicked man departed this Life, thou call'st him [poor wretched man] not so much for that he has lost the benefit of a temporal Life, as for that he is inroll'd for punishment: for others, when they are deceased, thou call'st [hap∣py and secure,] therein professing both the incommodity of Life and benefit of Death. Those deceased whom thou imprecatest, thou wishest to them heavy earth, and to their ashes, torment in the other World: to them to whom thou bearest good will, when they are dead, thou wishest rest to their bones and ashes. If there remain nothing for thee to be expected af∣ter death, no sense of pain or joy; nay, if thou thy self shalt not then re∣main, Why dost thou lye against thine own head? Why dost thou tell thy self that something attends thee beyond the Grave? Yea, why dost thou at all fear death, if thou hast nothing to fear after death? If thou answer'st; Not because it menaceth any thing that's evil, but because it deprives me of the benefit of Life: I reply, (yea thou wilt give answer to thy self) That sometimes Death quits thee of the intolerable inconveniences of Life: and sure, in this case, the loss of good things is not to be feared; that being recompensed with a greater good, to wit, st from inconveniences. That certainly is not to be feared, that delivers us from all that is to be feared. Whence come such amazing fears, dreadful apprehensions, sinking thoughts to attend guilty Conscience, but from the innate Notion of Judgment to come? Whence proceeds it that [se judice nemo nocens absolvitur,] a guilty Soul arraigns it self? That self-consciousness to the closest Villany binds the Malefactor over to the general Assize? that the guilt of innocent Blood, though never so secretly shed, looks so gastly in the face of the Murderer, rings so loud, speaks so articulately in the ears of Conscience; (as some have conceived the very Birds of the Air, nay, the callow Sparrows in the Nest, to reveal the matter, as it befel to Bessus) should be such a load, such a weight upon the Soul, as to make it melt in its own grease, with struggl∣ing under it? [Mentem sudoribus urget.] What makes them most stubborn and contumeliously set against entertaining the thought of Eternal Judgment, tremble at the voice of Thunder; as if in that rumbling noise they heard the sound of the Judges Charriot-wheels; and in the Lightning, saw a re∣semblance of that fire shall go before him and consume round about him? Caligula out-braved God, and Tiberius slighted him; yet [ad omnia fulgu∣ra pallent,] when they heard his voice they were afraid. Excellent is the Note that Tacitus makes upon those Passages in Tiberius his Epistle to the Senate: [Quid scribam vobis, Patres conscripti, aut quomodò soribam, aut quid omnino non scribam hoc tempore; Dii me Deeque pejùs perdant quàm perire quo∣tidiè sentio, si scio: If I can tell (Fathers) what I may write, or how I may write, or what I may not write, at this time; let the Gods (who I perceive are destroying me daily) destroy me worse. Adeò facinora & flagitia sua ipsi quoque in supplicium verterant: Neque frustrà Plato affirmare solitus est, si recludan∣tur trannorum mentes, posse aspici laniatus & ictus; quando ut corpora verberi∣bus, ità saevitia, libidine, malis consultis animus dilaceratur: So do impious men (comments Tacitus) torment themselves with the guilt of their own villanies; as Plato had reason to say, that if the Minds of Tyrants were exposed to open view, they would be seen smiting and tearing themselves: for as mens Bodies are with scourges, so are their souls torn with the guilt of cruelty, lust,
and ill-advised actions. That is, as the same Plato (de republ.) saith, when they perceive deaths approaches. Nero hath this Character given him by Suetonius [Religionum usquequaque aspernator, he perfectly contemned all Re∣ligion;] yet his Mothers Ghost dogg'd him into an acknowledgement of Judgment to come: for after his Matricide, he was scar'd with dreams, ter∣rified with visions; wherein sometimes, he hears the Apparritors voice, sum∣moning him to appear before the divine Tribunal; sometimes he thinks the Furies arrest him, and hale him into close and dismal Dungeons: those anti∣pasts of approaching vengcance drive him quite off his Stoicism, in his last Act, put him beside the Lesson his Master Seneca had taught him: he could handle his Weapon dexterously in the Artillery-garden, but he cannot find his hands in the pitch'd Field. 'Tis one thing to bark at the Lions Skin in the Hall, another thing to meet the Lion in the Wood. He cannot at his death with all his Charms (of  Age, excita teipsum, how ill do these fears become the Scholar of Seneca. Caesar where art thou, go too, stir up thy courage Nero) conjure down the terrours of death: nor keep them within the Circle of his own heart, but they break out in those gastly stareings of his Eyes, as strike the Spectators with horrour [Extantibus rigentibusque ocu∣lis usque ad horrorem visentium] (Sueton. Nero.) so true is that of St. Cyril. Je∣rus. (Catech. 18.) Thou maist deny it with thy lipps, , but thou carriest the Conscience of the Resurrection about with thee.] Epicurus made it his business to obliterate the Notions of the Souls Immortality, and the Judgment attending us in the other World; yet Cotta in Cicero (de nat. deor. lib. 1.) gives this Testimony of him, [Nec quen∣quam vidi qui magis timeret ea quae timenda esse negaret; mortem, dico, & Deos:] I never knew man that more fear'd, what he said was not to be fear'd, to wit, Death and the Deity. There is no Antidote strong enough, to repel the thought of fu∣ture Judgment, from soaking into the spirits of those men that would most glad ly quit themselves of those thoughts. The Atheist in heart cannot persevere to be an Atheist in Judgment: he may cross the Book, but the Debt is still le∣gible; he cannot make his Soul rasam tabulam, not rase out of it the native Im∣presses of a righteous Deity: he may think he has barrocado'd all the ways to his Soul, and secured it from all Assaults of Fear; that he has sufficiently im∣mur'd his Judgment, and made it impregnable: but Judgment has a Party within will betray the Fort, a self-accusing Conscience. Conscia mens ut cuique sua est, ità concipit intrà pectora, pro facto spémque metúmque suo. He may think he has extinguish'd the Fire; but the Sparks of the Fiery Day are only raked up in the Embers, and lie glowing on the bottom of the Hearth. He may beat the thoughts of Eternal Vengeance from the Out-works and base Town, the lower and bestial part of the Soul (Fancy) that's only mur'd by Sense: but they are so fortifyed in the Fort Royal, in the white Tower of the rational Faculties: as there they stand at defiance against all his Artillery: as thence they make frequent Sallies, and put all the Arguments wherewith they are beleaguered to the Rout: thence they discharge whole Vollies of mortal Shot against the Atheist's Head, if he once but dare to peep up, above those Trenches under the Covert of which his Disbelief lurks. To be sure the Dust that riseth under the Charriot Wheels of approaching Death, blown into the most refractory A theist's Eyes, will cure him of that his Pur∣blindness, of that Indisposition whereby he could not see afar off, so far off as Judgment to come. § 3. Articl. 5. The Soul's Antipasts of the Resurrection to Eternal Life. To whose Discipline we will leave him, and attend to what the Soul speaks about that other part of glad Hope after Death; whence comes that secret
Applause she gives her self, when she acts well? that Exultancy of Spirit which ariseth from her reflecting upon her vertuous Actions? Seneca speaks the Peasant's Sence, as well as the Philosopher's; when he saith, [Animum divina aeterna delectant: nec ut alienis interest, sed ut suis—distrabe hoc ine∣stimabile bonum, non èst vita tanti ut sudem, ut aestuem:] Upon the perform∣ance of Noble and Heroick Actions, the Soul contemplates those Eternal Re∣wards that attend them in the World, and delights and enjoys her self in those Rewards, not as things she hath nothing to do with, but as her own peculiar Portion: without which Fore-tasts of Eternal Retribution (which the Divine Justice will award to Pious Actions) this present Life were not worth the while, our sweating and toiling here were but lost Labour, exact∣ly to the Apostle's Sense (1 Cor. 15. 19.) If in this Life only we had Hope, we were miserable Men: If the Soul did not think that the Body shall reign with her, with what Equity does she put it upon suffering for her? Would not the Flesh grumble to be rid by her, through Brush and Brake; if she did not rest in hope of sharing with the Soul in the Reward of well doing? Would Scoevola's Hand, if it had not laid fast hold of Eternal Life, have been kept so steady in that Fire wherein he sacrificed it for his Countrey's Service (then which, as my Author saith, the immortal Gods never saw a more noble one laid upon their Altars, nor more bespeaking the Attention of their Eyes.) Could Pompei have perswaded his Finger, to have the Patience to be burnt to the stump, in the Flame of a Candle (to convince King Gentius, that no Tor∣ture could rack him to confess the Senates Counsel) if he had not pointed it to its future Reward? With what else could Theodorus charm his Tongue to hold its Peace while he tired his Tormenters, and wore out the Rack with his Patience? Or Alexander's Page, his Arm not to shrug, while it was carbona∣doing, with that live Coal that fell into his Sleeve (out of that Censer he held, while his Master was sacrificing) till the smell of his burnt Flesh exceed∣ed that of the Incense; and till Alexander had fulfill'd those Rites, which he lengthen'd out, on purpose, to delight himself with the Prospect of that in∣vincible Manhood in a Boy? With what else do the Indian Gymnosophists ob∣tain of their Bodies a Compliance with their Austere Discipline, of going na∣ked in Frost and Snow all their Life long, of hardning them with the Frosty Rigour of Caucasus one while, and another while throwing them into the Fire; under all which Burdens the poor Beast never groans nor expresseth the least Disgust against its Rider? But would a good Man be thus merciless to his Beast, were he not perswaded (with that Strippling Martyr in the Book of Maccabees 2. 7.) these I had from Heaven, and for his Laws I despise them, and from him I hope to have them again. These had not only suck'd-in the Platonick Principle of the Soul's Immortality, which he asserted with the Light of inexpugnable Reasons (in his Phaedon) as Macrobius testifies [Inexpugna∣bilium luce rationum anima in veram dignitatem suae immortalitatis asserta.] (in Som. Scip. l. 1. c. 1.) But were sure of that which Plato spoke but coldly of (in the end of his Books of the Commonwealth) to wit, the Soul's receiving again its own Body: that, with that, it might receive [Justiciae vel cultae prae∣mium, vel spretae poenam.] either the Reward of fulfilling, or the Punishment of de∣spising Justice.
CHAP. II. Reason nonplus'd, help'd by Religion, acquiesceth in her Re∣solutions. § 1. Man's Supremacy over the Creatures, the Reason of it not cognoscible by Natural Light: § 2. Yet generally challenged even over Spirits, whom men command to do what themselves disgust. §. 3. The way of Creation a Mystery; Reason puzzl'd to find it out can but conjecture. § 4. Divine Revelations touching both, acquiesc'd in as soon as communicated. Scripture-Philosophy excels the Mechanick. Plato's Commendation. § 5. Nothing but the God of Order's Grant can secure States from Anarchical Parity and Club-law. § 6. Heathens assented to the Reasons of both assigned by Scripture. §. 1. THis is a material Witness: I shall therefore examine her in some other Points of our Religion, wherein she concurrs with us (as to the Propo∣sitions) before she confers with us: and cannot but acquiesce in our Reasons, after she hears them; though till then she could not find them out: Reasons, out of the Sphere of Natural Reasons activity, till let down by supernatu∣ral Revelation: but when they are presented to her view, she is ready to say of them (as Adam of our Mother Eve, when God brought her to him) Is not this fiesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone? She then imbraceth them, falleth upon their neck and kisseth them; bids them heartily welcome when they deign to come under her roof; though she could not reach them (to hale them in) nor so much as imagine she had any such kindred in being, till they exhibit themselves openly to her. Indeed she could not sit down till they came, her Mensa Philosophica wanted her best Guests; there were set empty Chairs, at the upper end of the Table, but what personages they were reserved for, she no more knew, than the modern Jews understand, who that Elias is, for whom they set a Chair at their Festivals. She suspected there was some Elias not far from her, who when he came would resolve all her doubts; and gropes in the dark in the mean while, if happily she might stumble on the reason of these things: hence Suarez [Unde etiam fit, ut illuminati seu roborati lumine fidei, multas ex his veritatibus intelligamus ut con∣tentas in principiis naturalibus, quas fortasse non assequaremur si in pura naturali ratione philosopharemur. Ità enim acutissimis etiam philosophis lumine fidei ca∣rentibus accidisse, perspectum est,] (Metaph. l. 2. disput. 3. sect. 36.) [Upon this account, we who have the benefit of the Light of Faith, understand many of these verities as contain'd in natural Principles, which perhaps we should not attain to if we philosophized in the pure light of Nature: for it is manifest that so it happened to the most ancient Philosophers who wanted the light of Faith. For being void of the divine knowledge, and ignorant of the true Original of things, they betook themselves , to Suppositions concern∣ing Matter, and reduc'd and accommodated (as well as they could) the Cause of the Universe to the Elements of the World; so that there was not amongst them any fixt, stable or immovable Reason or Opinion, but the after-comers invalidated the Theses of their predecessors, (saith Basil the Great, Hexaemeron. homil. 1.) Let us first instance in Mans Supremacy: of which Strabo (lib. 17.) writes that Providence separated the Water from the Earth for the service of Man, and of those Animals that serve Man [.] But how comes he to be my servant? the elder to serve the younger, the strong the weak, the armed the naked, the inno∣cent the guilty? Is it the comeliness of my Person, the beauteous features of my Face? But first we our selves are not agreed what that is; for complexi∣on here red, there tawny, in another Country-black wins the prize: for pro∣portion,
here the tall, there the mean, here the slender, there the gross, here the little Ear, there the lave Ear, here the thin Lip, there the Blubber-lip, here the streight, there the die Neck are esteemed most courtly. [Nobis etiam vitia saepè jucunda: naevus in articulo pueri delectat Alcaeum: est corporis macula, ili tamen hoc lumen videbatur. Q. Catulus de Roscio—(vestra prece mihi liceat coelestes dicere) Mortalis visus pulchior esse Deo. at erat sicut hodiè perversissimis oculis (Cotta in Ciceronis de natura deor. lib. 1.) Blemishes do oftentimes seem to us to be beauty-spots. A mole on the Boys knuckle delights Alcaeus: that which is the Bodies stain, appear'd to him its gloss. Quin∣tus Catulus, in a Love-rapture, thus commends the aspect of Roscius: If I may with your lieve (O ye Celestials) speak it, this mortal hath a better face than any of you; though Roscius is the most squint-eyed fellow living. Besides, in those things we all confess to be real Beauties, how far are we out-stript by Birds of the Air, by the Flowers of the field? Indeed our borrowing their feathers to stick upon our own nakedness, argues our despondency to compare with them: and when, out of their cast Sutes, we have furnish'd our selves, and to our native Cloth added the best gloss and trimming they can afford us; we cannot make our selves half so fine as the Lily, not near so gay as the Pea∣cock. Nay, were it the amiableness of our countenances did thus charm them, they would love our presence and society; whereas few or none of them (but such as we hire to it) can endure our company, but fly from us, as we do from Serpents or Toads; not out of fear of harm, but purely out of an odium to our persons; those of them keeping a distance from our whole kind, to whom we never did nor intended hurt. If you say, that the Majesty of our looks which makes them confess us their superiours, teacheth them (that point of good manners) to know their distance. How comes it to pass that a Toad dares look at, that a Rat dares fly in our majestick face; that the most contemprible Insects will venture to pinch our skin, to pierce our flesh, & suck our blood: that a Basilisk will out-stare us into our holes, into our graves: herein quitting the scores, and equally ballancing the accounts betwixt us; making us as much Vassals to some of them, as we make others Vassals to us. Lastly, if it be the grandeur of our looks that prefers us to this Sove∣reignty over the rest of the Creatures, why is not the Ape or Baboon ho∣nour'd, as next to us, in this our Kingdom, being next to us in proportion of Face and other Members? Simia quàm similis (turpissima bestia) nobis, Ennius. How is natural invention baffled here, and non-plus'd, in seeking out the rea∣son, in assigning the ground of Mans Dominion over the meanest Creatures! § 2. Men challenge a Royalty over Spirits. And yet we will not let go our claim, though we can show no evidences, we persist in the Conclusion, though we see not the Premisses from which it is infer'd. Yea, though we cannot tell how we became Lords of the visible, we challenge a Royalty over the intellectual World. [Dii immortales ad usum hominum fabricati penè videntur:] (Cicero de natur. deor. 1. p. 9.) The im∣mortal Gods (saith Tully) that is, the Angels, seem to have been created most-what for the use of men. We will not allow Spirits to be exempt from our Jurisdiction, but account them obnoxious to our Laws. What else were Charms and Magick invented, but to extort from Spirits that service which we think they owe us? What mean we by summoning them, as it were, to our Courts, but to let them know they owe us Fealty? Why else do we amerce them for Non-appearance? Would the Furies have been by us so imperiously com∣manded to whip others, if we had not thought that Alecto her self stands in
awe of the Conjurer's Whip? Had not Mortals deemed the Inhabitants of the other World to have been at their devotion, could they have expected an observance from them of such harsh Commands, as the performance there∣of was deemed more painful, than the Infernal sufferings? Witness the groans they are conceived to utter, while they are pricked on to draw in so uneasie a Yoke as we put upon them. Abire in atrum carceris liceat mei Cubile: liceat (si parùm videor miser) Mutareripas: aleo medius tuo Phlegeton relinquar, igneo cinctus freto, [Seneca Thyestes.] To my dark Cabin in the Stygean strand Dismiss me: or, if that be too much ease, Send me to Phlegethon, where I may stand (Rather than here) chin-high in fiery seas, Cries the Ghost of Tantalus in the Magick Circle. And Thyestes his Ghost groans almost as lowd, when that is evocated to attend the pleasure of the black Artist. Incertus utras oderim sedes magis— —Libet reverti: nonne vel tristes lacus Incolere satius▪ [Sen. Agamemnon.] Haled from Styx to Thebes (my ancient seat) Had I my choice (hard choice) I would retreat. Unpleasant work and such as from the dolour that Spirits made, when they were called to it; the Art, whereby they were constrained to it, had its name Goetia; as a great proficient in that Art (Porphyry) thinketh, , from that lamentable din the Ghosts made about their Se∣pulchres, when they were evocated:] and yet it was a Vulgar Opinion, that the Spirits might be forc'd thus against the hair by the Negromancers. [, Goetia is an Art to constrain the dead by invocation:] (Suidas referente Le Vives in August. eivitat. Dei, 10. 9.) It cannot now be imagin'd, but that the Humane Soul should hunt every way, to find out the grounds of this her claim of Superiority over the whole Creation: methinks I hear her upon the quest, thus mouthing it. Oh that I could see the Charter by which we are estated in this privilege: who will shew me those Letters Patents by vertue whereof we are invested with this power; for nothing I have yet seen will stand good in Reasons Law, as a justi∣fiable Plea. § 3. Reason non plus'd in its Conceptions about the way of the Creatures existing. But why do I wonder at my blindness as to the ground of title to what I poffess, when I am a perfect stranger to the way of my own Being, and can∣not tell how it came to pass, that I am, or how the rest of Creatures first received Being? Reason taught Heathens, that the World had a Beginning. [Questio quae multorum cogitationes de ambigenda mundi aeternitate solicitat, &c. Nam quis facilè mundum semper fuisse consentiat? cùm & ipsa historia∣rum fides multarum rerum cultum, emendationémque vel inventionem ipsam recentem esse fateatur, &c. (Macrobius in som. Scipio. 2. 10.) From the grow∣ing of Arts by degrees and the obscurity of former times, the Epicurean himself concluded the World to have had a beginning (Lucretius l. 5.)
—si nulla fuit genitalis Origo Terrarum & Coeli, sempérque aeterna fuére, Cur suprà bellum Trojanum, & funera Trojae Non alias alii quo{que} res cecinere Poetae? Quà tot facia virùm toties cecidere: nec usquam Aeternis famae monumentis insita florent? —Recénsque Natura est mundi, ne{que} pridem exordia cepit. Quare etiam quaedam nunc artes expoliuntur, Nunc etiam augescunt; nunc addita navigiis sunt Multa, &c. If Heaven (the fire) and Earth the dam of things, Had been from Ever, whence is't no Poet sings Of Wars more old, than Troy; of Floods, than Noah; Of Rapes, than Jove; and thousand wonders moe? Had men nor hands to act, nor hands to write, During the seculum Prae-Adamite? Had Nile (for ages numberless) no Reed; Nor Bees, Wax; nor Trees, Bark; nor Hills, a breed of Sheep; nor Sheep, a Skin; nor Goose, a Quill; Nor Polypus his native Ink distil? Or Man, (the Goose of all) not wit to learn To make a Pen, much less to guide a Stern? Or build a Ship, or break a Horse, or bring The Oxe to th' yoke, the Hawk to lure; or string The warbling Lute, or count the Stars by name: Or other Arts, whose birth we know by fame, Whose growth we see come on with age? Reason, I say, convinc'd Heathens that the World was not eternal: but how it received its being they could not tell. How is Aristottle puzzl'd to determine whence Animals had their first beginning, whether they were ingender'd as Worms and Insects, or hatch'd of Eggs; for one of these ways, saith he, they must of necessity have beengenerated, (de Generation. animantium, lib. 3. cap. ult.) . Hear we the discourse of Cicero upon this Subject. I am told there was one before me, and I believe it: but if we shall procede in drawing up our line in infinitum, we shall at the long run unmake our selves, and annihilate all Creatures that live by succession: for if there was not in eve∣ry kind, one first, there could be no second, nor third; and (at last) we our selves, that now exist, would not be at all. Whence then had the first in each succession his beginning? in what Forge was he framed? and what pre-existent Metal? Did the Elementary Bodies beget him of Mother Earth? But who begat and brought forth them? Rowze up thy self, O Soul, rub thine Eyes, look round about thee, stand upon thy Tiptoes, lift up thy Head; see if thou canst find an Answer to these Expostulations, an Answer will sa∣tisfie thy self. By whom were the Foundations of the Earth laid? who laid the measures thereof? who stretched the Line upon it? where∣upon were the Foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the Corner-stone thereof? Quae molitio, quae ferramenta, qui vectes, quae machinae, qui ministri tanti operis fuerunt? What Grindle-stone had that Architect to sharp∣en his Tools upon, what Tools had he to work with, what Levers, what Eugins, what Journey-men, what Apprentices? In what Grove grew Tim∣ber enough for such a Fabrick? In what Mould were the Heavens cast, on what Looms were the Balancies of the Clouds wrought? Who will teach us what to say to these things; for we cannot order our speech by reason of Darkness. These were the highest flights Reason could make; it lay not in her power by Arguments or Discourse to come to any Certainty, or so much
as Probability in these matters. So that after all her boasting Prologues, uttered by such as Democritus, who in the Preface to his Writings, said he would speak of all things, she acts her part here so poorly, as she deserves to be hiss'd off the Stage, and make way for Religion. Such things as these we rather desire to know, than do know, saith Velleius (in Ciceron. de na∣tura Deorum, lib. 1.) Quae talia suxt ut optata magis quàm inventa videantur. Sciscitor cur mundi aedificatores repentè extiterint, innumerabilia ante saecula dormirent: non enim si mundus non erat, saecula nulla erant: saecula (dico) non ea quae dierum noctiúmque numero annuis cursibus conficiuntur: sed fuit quaedam ab infinito tempore aeternitas, quam nulla temporum circumscriptio metiebatur: spatio verò qualis ea fuerat intelligi non potest: quòd nè in cogitationem quidem cadit, ut fuerit tempus aliquod nullum cùm tempus esset. Isto igitur tam im∣menso spatio quaero (Balbe) cur Pronoea vestra cessaverit: (Velleius in Cicer. de nat. deor. l. 1.) that is in brief, why was the World made no earlier? Cicero's Eloquence never stammer'd so, his Inventions were never so nonplus'd, as when he would describe the Order and Method of the Creation of the World (in his Book de Universitate) where he becomes so vain in his Imagination, and plays the fool so with Philosophical Wisdom, as I wonder not that Veleius should say [à Philone didicistis nihil scire, Ye Philosophers have learn'd of your Masters to know nothing:] (in Cicer. de nat. deorum, l. 1.) Or that Cotta should tell Balbus, after his large Discourse of Providence [Non igitur ad∣huc intelligo hoc esse: credo equidem, sed nihil docent Stoici:] I am not one jot wiser for all thy reasons: I believe indeed what thou sayest is true, but the Stoicks do not teach the reason of it. Upon which Lactantiuss observes: Tullius ex∣positis horum omnium de mortalitate & immortalitate animae, &c. sentent, ha∣rum inquit sententiarum, quae vera sit, Deus aliquis viderit: (Lactan. de div. praem. 7. 8.) And hath this Note upon Anaxagoras, who affirm'd the Snow to be black. [Hic est ilie qui se idcirco natum esse dixit, ut solem & coelum videret, qui in terra nihil videbat sole lucente:] (de fals. sap. l. 3. cap. 23.) This is be that said he was born to contemplate the Sun and Heaven, and yet he could not in the clear Sun-shine see what lay at his foot. § 4. Moses a better Philosopher than Cartesius, or any of the Mechanicks. But Religion no sooner drops from her sacred Lips, the first word we read in Moses and the Eagle-wing'd Evangelist [In the beginning was the Word; all things were made by it] than she is received with general acclamations. And by that time she had utter'd [Let them have dominion over the Fish of the sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, &c.] Reason her self claps her hands, and cries plaudite: that natural Logick (that's every man's Birth-right) adores this rising Sun, whose resplendent Beams discover those latent Reasons, her self could not grope out: and welcoms these discoveries with with a thank∣ful : with as great an exuberancy of joy as Pythagoras conceiv'd, when upon his finding out some Philosophical Experiment, he sacrificed a whole Oxe to the Muses. (He had been more just, had he crown'd the Fountain whence he drew better Conclusions than the rest of Philosophers, to wit, the sacred Philosophy of Moses) (Cicero de natura deorum, l. 3. pag. 149) In∣genuously confessing, that had she not ploughed with God's Heifer, she should never have found out these Riddles of his Providence. Tatianus, a∣mongst the reasons he gives, why he embrac'd the Christian Faith, names this for one, [,] The rational account which that gives of the Creation of all things. Indeed it were to be wished that Moses his Philosophy were more studied; as that which is the only Ex∣pedient fully to satisfie inquisitive minds. For though the old and modern Mechanick Philosophy be of excellent use, to inform us of those Causes which partake most of Matter, and live next door to our Senses; yet who∣ever follows them home, will see them make doubles before they come to their seat; at a stand in their progress through intermediate to the prime
and only independent Cause; and not able to joyn the inferiour Links of the Chain, to that upper part of it that's fasten'd to Jupiter's Chair. How much more rationally is the Sun's Motion (for instance) deduced to the power of the divine, Fiat, to the force imprest upon it, by that Omnipo∣tent hand out of which it first came: than either to those intelligences which Aristotle invented to move it (as a Dog in a Wheel;) or such Jack-pullies, and Weights of (I know not what) Atoms, which our modern Wits have fancied for the Springs of his Motion. After the same manner that that, which Proclus calls the Soul of the Universe, wheels about the Primum mobile: [sta∣ret si unquam stantem animam reperiret] as he is quoted by Macrobius (in som. Scipionis, 1. 17.) Of such whimsical Philosophers well saith Lactantius, [Multò sceleratiores, qui arcana mundi & hoc coeleste templum prophanare im∣piis disputationibus quaerunt:] (de fals. sapien. l. 3. cap. 20.) If it be accounted sacrilege to profane Temples of Wood and stone; how much more impious are they, who labour to prophane the secrets of Nature and this heavenly Temple the Universe, with their godless Disputations? I wonder that the Doctrine of A∣toms blusheth not, to see that variety (and yet constancy) of the admirably disposed Colours in Birds and Flowers: that it is not overcome with smell∣ing that variety of scents issuing from Herbs of different kinds; which can with no more reason be deemed to be the Effects of the blind fortuitous Con∣course of Atoms, than the first Propunder of this Hypothesis could expect, that that Basket of Herbs, which his Wife threw up to the roof of his Hall, should fall down (in the form of a well-order'd Sallad) into a dish she set on the floor. We may believe that the Painter's Pencil, thrown in a rage at the lips of the picture of an Horse, might perchance supply the de∣fect of Art, and make the lively representation of Foam; with the same de∣gree of certainty, as we believe the blind man caught the Hair: But he that would attempt to perswade us, that the whole Horse was drawn after that manner, must first repute us more doltish than Asses. To whom can I bet∣ter resemble these Kitchin-Doctors, than to Children at a Puppet-play, who minding the various motions of the Images; and fancying a spring thereof, within themselves, independent to that hand which behind the Curtain puts them upon, and directs them in those Motions, beat their brains, and set their fancies a work to find out the Causes of such strange Effects; and after all the flu∣ctuations of their mind, produce nothing but froth: Whereas to them that ob∣serve what influence the Artificers hand within the Veil hath upon those Engins, the whole series of the Causes of those Motions are naked and bare-fac'd. Plutarch gives Plato this commendation, that finding fault with Anaxagoras, for immersing his thoughts too deep into Natural Causes, and too eagerly pursuing the necessity of those Effects which happen to Natural Bodies, he totally omitted the efficient and final, the prime and chief of all Principles: and avoiding the other Extreme (which some fell into, to wit, Poets and Divines) who only minded the Supreme Cause, the rational and voluntary Efficient; never came to the Natural and Necessary Causes of things: These first ascribing all, the second nothing, to the Perpessions, Collisions, Mutations and Mixtures of Natural Beings among themselves. Plato wave∣ing these Rocks, was the first that joyn'd together the Indagation of both thess sorts of Causes (de oracul. defect. pag. 677.) Hitherto appertains that saying of St. Austin. (De Trinitate l. 3. cap. 2.) [Itaque licuit vanitati Philoso∣phorum, etiam causis aliis ea tribuere, vel veris sed proximis (cùm omninò vi∣dere non possent superiorem caeteris omnibus causam, id est, voluntatem Dei) vel falsis, & non ipsa quidem pervestigatione corporalium rerum atque motionum, sed à sua suspicione & errore prolatis:] The vduity of Philosophers took lieve to attribute these effects to Causes, either true but next to hand (seing they could not at all discern the supreme Cause of all, the Will of God) or false, and such as were not produced by the pervestigation of Corporeal Matter or Motion, but from their own suspicion and errour. Were it not that with the Tradition of Re∣ligion, God hath communicated to Mankind general Maxims, to help us in
our search into the Nature of things: we could never attain to the certain knowledge of any thing. And therefore we see all the Grecian Philosophy that was not grounded upon Tradition, dwindled at last into Scepticism; and veil'd the Bonnet to that of Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, who travel'd for theirs, into those places where the Tradition had been best preserv'd. So true is that Oracle which the Indian Gymnosophist delivered to Socrates, in his Reply to the answer that Socrates made to this Question [By what means a man might become wise?] If he consider after what manner it becomes man to live, saith Socrates. To which the Indian, smi∣ling, gives this retort [:] No man can understand the nature of humane and mundane things, that's ignorant of divine: (Euseb. praeperat. Evang.) referente Grinaeo (in praefatione ad Irenaeum.) Upon which Point the golden Tongue'd Lactan∣tius elegantly; [Veritatem & divinae Religionis arcanum Philosophi attigerunt: sed aliis refellentibus, defendere id quod invenerant nequiverunt: quià singulis ra∣tio non quadravit: nec ea quae vera senserant, in summam redigere potuerunt:] (de divino praem. 7. 7.) The Philosophers made a shift to touch, with the fingers end, Truth and the Mystery of divine Religion, but they could not grasp them so close, as to hold them; as to defend what they had found against opposers: be∣cause Reason did not square to every one of their Placits singly, nor were they able to bring into one Sum and subordinate System their true sentiments. And it is Fernelius his observation (in his Preface, de abditis rerum causis) that the latter Platonicks, Numenius, Philo, Plotinus, Iamblicus, Proclus, [Quicquid de divinis rebus magnificum attigerunt, illud à Christianis viris, Joanne, Paulo, Hirotheo, Dionysio furtim excerpsisse; ut inde abstrusa Platonis dicta clariùs lucidiusque interpretarentur, & in verum sensum deducerent:] attain'd to the knowledge of nothing in divine things, that was magnificent, but what they stole from Christian Philosophers: by whose spoils they were enriched with ability, more clearly to interpret and deduce to a true sence the dark sayings of Plato. But I digress. How the World was produced: and how man came to be Sovereign of the rest of the Creatures, Reason was in pursuit after, but could ne∣ver attain to the knowledge of; till Religion prompts her, till sacred Writ informs her: That God made man after his own Image, gave him that Dominion, made him Lord of the Universe, as being of that Nature of which the Son of God was to assume Flesh, into a perpetual Union with himself; which being the highest preferment that the Creature is capable of, and an Estate which Angels shall never aspire unto, speaks it no wonder that God should make his Angels ministring Spirits for the good of Man. But we need not now go so far as the Reason of God's disposal: 'tis enough we have found out Gods disposal, as the ground of Man's Sovereignty. Weigh this with all besides that ever was said upon this Question, and they are light∣er than vanity: and let Reason use the utmost of her skill in descanting upon this ground, she shall never be able to find the least flaw in it. § 5. The longest Sword or over-reaching Wit conveigh no Right. Self-love prompted Reason to play the part of an Oratour handsomly, to declaim probably upon Man's Dominion over Beasts; but how he came to command Spirits she could not deem. And that his Power over inferiour Creatures should extend it self to the taking away of their Lives, (though it was practically concluded by all Nations) yet I could never see one sound na∣tural Reason produced for it: and do here solemnly challenge the profoundest Atheist, to give one irrefragable Argument, which he is not beholding to Re∣ligion for, in defence of that Dominion he daily exerciseth over his Fellow-Creatures, and for ought he knows (if he travel no farther than Athens to learn) his Betters: what Staff can he find to beat his Dog with, that his Skullion may not as well lay about his own Shoulders? what can he plead for
his Butchering a Sheep, that another may not, with as much reason, urge a∣gainst his own Throat? How will he handle the Knife with which he carves a Capon, and not cut his own Hands too; unless it be hasted with Scri∣pture Reasons? Bar these, and abstain from Flesh till Pythagoras be confuted, and thou must keep Lent all thy Life, be it as long as Metbuselah's: wave these Topicks, and where wilt thou gather Arguments to Silence Celsus, (Orig. in Celsum: lib. 4. calum. 29, 30, 31.) or Plutarch, (de solertia animali∣um.) while they make these Assertions their Theme. Some Creatures, as Bees and Ants, excel Man, in the Science of Government: others, in the Art of Divination: others, in Religion, as the Elephant; that they are dearer to the Gods, have a more sacred Converse among themselves, than Men, &c. If the Humane Soul were not better distinguish'd from the Bestial, by its O∣riginal and Fountain, by Gods breathing it into us, than by its Effects and Productions, we should be hard put to it to prove our Superiority of Reason. Except we furnish our selves with Weapons from God's Armory, from the Tower of David, from the Magazine of Sacred Writ, we shall be in as bad a case as the Israelites were when there was not one Sword nor Spear amongst them; and have nothing to defend our selves against the Imputation of Ty∣ranny: but must be forc'd, as our last and only Refuge, to betalie ourselves to the Herculean Argument of Club-Law: [We may because we can.] For a negat sibi nata, nibil non arrogat armis. When the Roman Legates demanded of Brennus what Ground he had of Quarrel with the Clustans; the same, saith he, that you had with the Albanes, Fidenates, and Ardeates; because they being fewer and weaker, will not im∣part what they have to us, who are stronger: we herein observing the old Law which Gods, and Men, and Beasts are under; that the weaker should yield to the Stronger: (Platar. Camil.) A desperate Principle of Hectorishi, which if it make Root in Men's Hearts, will turn the whole World of Mankind into a Wilderness of Savage Beasts, and deprive Prince and Peasant of all possibility of securing either Life or Fortune, any longer than these Snakes are frozen: I leave therefore these Inhumane Placits to the severe Animadver∣sion of all Republicks that are not weary of their own happiness; § 6. Religion so dexterously resolves these Questions as Reason acquiesceth in her Determinations. While I observe how aptly, how dexterously the Ladies hand of pure and undefiled Religion unties these Knots: Man had not Power so much as o∣ver the green Herb, to deprive it of its Vegetive Life; no not in Order to the Preservation of his own, but by Gods Donation, (Gen. 1. 29.) Seeing that Life of Vegetation was not given by Man, by what Right but the Indul∣gence of him that gave it, could he deprive the Creature of it? and withal in∣flict, perhaps, beside the Evil of Loss, the Evil of Pain; for that some Plants ar esensitive is manifest: and I have heard some Florists affirm it with so much Confidence, and assay to confirm it with such Arguments; as, of the two Pro∣blemes, I had rather undertake the Proof of this, That all Vegetives have Sence; than this, That any Atheist hath Reason. This Grant of the green Herb, for Meat, being made to every Fowl and Beast and creeping thing, as well as Man; as it argued the Paternal Care of that provident Housholder to∣wards every Member of his great Family: so it prohibited man from falling upon those Creatures, which were set at the same Table with himself, till God enlarged his Quarters, and mended his Commons, in the Charter granted to Noah, (Gen. 9. 2, 3.) every Beast of the Earth, every Fowl of the Air, all that moveth upon the Earth, and all the Fishes of the Sea, in∣to your Hand are they delivered: every moving thing that liveth shall be Meat for you: even as the green Herb have I given you all things. An
Account so rational, as the Stoicks had no sooner receiv'd an Inkling of it, by Oral Tradition, but they yielded assent to it, and enroll'd this a∣mong their Maxims concerning Justice, That all things that were brought forth upon Earth were made for Man's use, (Lactant. de ira Dei. cap. 13.) [Unde hoc nisi de nostris?] Whence had they this but from our Scriptures? (saith St. Ambrose: Officior. l. 1. cap. 28.) they learn'd of us, how all Creatures, by Gods subjecting them to Man, were put under our Feet: (Psal. 8.) and therefore concluded that Man might justly make use of them, as being made for him. Ovid's Pipe borrows Breath of Moses his Lips; in his— Sanctius his animal mentisque capacius altae Deerat adhuc, & quod dominari in caetera posset: Natus homo est.— Where, having, according to the Method of Scripture, described the Creation of Heaven and Earth, with its Inhabitants; he introduceth the Story of Man's Creation, with this Preface, There wanted yet a more Di∣vine Creature, that God might set over the rest of the Works of his Hands, and make Lord of the Universe: speaking of Man's Dominion, as a Vulgar Notion universally subscribed to; but of the Ground of that Dominion, viz. God's preferring him to it, as a Point of hidden Wisdom, and reveal∣ed by that Deity he invocates. It were easie to multiply Examples not only of particular Men, but of whole Nations, who have both con∣fessed the Impossibility of finding out, by light of Nature, the reason of Man's Soveraignty over the Creatures; and acquesc'd in the Reasons pro∣duc'd by Christian Religion, as soon as they have been propounded to them: but the matter is so manifest and every where obvious, as these few may serve for a Taste: Mercurius Trismeg. (in his Pimander, Dial. 1.) in∣troduceth the Divine Mind, informing him that God had that respect for Man (who bare the Image of his Creatour) as he granted to him the Lord∣ship over all his Works. Cicero (out of Chrysippus) could say, the Hog could not possibly be serviceable to Man, but at the Table, whose Soul serves only for Salt to keep their bodies from stinking, till they are fit for Slaugh∣ter: but yet confesseth that to find out the Counsel of God, and the Reason of his ordering things as we see he doth, for Man's Behoof, is not within the reach of Humane Counsel: and that no Man can in this Knowledg, as well as any thing else, be eminent, without the help of Divine Inspiration: Ne∣mo vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu divino unquam fuit (de Natura deor. lib. 2. 113.
CHAP. III. Natural Conscience ecchoes to Christian Morals. § 1. A Dispraise to dispraise Vertue, or praise Vice. The Comicks Liberty re∣strained. § 2. How the worst of Men became to be reputed Gods. § 3. Men were defied for their Virtues: Vice ungodded Gods. § 4. Stage-Gods hissed at. The Infamy of Players. The Original of Mytho∣logy. § 1. Christian Morals had the Universal Approbation of the Heathen World. NO less clearly does every Man's Conscience eccho to our Christian Morals, than we have heard it resound its assent to these our Placits and Theo∣rems. But it were an endless labour to compare every line of the Gospel, drawn by the pencil of Christ, and the holy Apostles, paralel to what is drawn by the hand of Nature upon every Soul. (There being no Language that does not eccho to the sound of their Doctrine.) I will therefore wave here the prosecution of Particulars, and confine my discourse to this Observation: That, Those men, that in all Nations and Ages, have lived nearest the Rule of Evangelical Morals, have obtained the best Memorials, and most sweet smel∣ling Names, among all these to whom their Histories have been communicat∣ed: And those men's Memories have stunk most in the Nostrils of the ge∣nerality of Man-kind, whose Lives have been most contaminated with bid∣ding defiance to Gospel Precepts. What undebauch'd Soul does not that Encomium of Chastity arride, which an Heathen could sing to Domitian. Censor maxime, principumque Princeps, Cum tot jam tibi debeat triumphos, Tot nascentia Templa, tot renata, Tot spectacula, tot deos, tot urbes: Plus debet tibi Roma quòd pudica est. (Mart. Ep. 6. 3.) We owe to thee (great Caesar) Triumphs many, More Temples built; and Temples that lay waste Repair'd: more Cities, Gods, and Shews than any: But most that thou hast taught Rome to be chaste. Or what another said in praise of Vertue. [Honestum id intelligimus quod tale est ut detracta omni utilitate, sine ullis praemiis fructibusque per seipsum jure laudari possit; quod quale sit, non tam definitione quàm communi omnium judi∣cio & optimi cujusque studiis & factis.] (Cicero de fin. lib. 2. pag. 149.) What is honest is better learn'd by common Sence than Philosophical Definition. [I∣taque Torquate cum diceres clamare Epicurum, non posse jucundè vivere, nisi honestè, sapienter, & justè viveretur: tu ipse mihi gloriari videbare: tanta vis inerat in verbis, propter earum rerum quae significabantur his verbis dignitatem; ut altior fieres, ut interdum—ut nos intuens, quasi testificarere laudari bo∣nestatem ab Epicuro. (Cicero de finibus l. 2. pag. 151.) I observed (Torquatus) how, when thou saidst, that Epicurus did openly aver, that no man could live pleasantly, who did not live honestly, wisely, and justly; though thy self seem'dst toglory: there was so much force put into the words, by the worth of the things sig∣nified by these words, that thou stintedst while thou pronounc'dist them; and looking
upon us, seemedst to testifie, that Epicurus did praise Honesty. Ransack all the Stories, and you will not find one man commended down to Posterity by the common Vote as good, but the vertuous: and nothing uni∣versally reputed vertuous, but what corresponds to Christ's royal Law. Do not Plutarch, Valerius Maximus, Xenophon, Seneca, Plautus, Terenee, and all Hu∣manists pass the same Sentence commendatory or condemnatory upon all moral Actions (that come under their Censure) that Christ and his Apostles do. Have any of them dar'd to commend to the World, as honourable, that manner of Actions or Persons which the Gospel condemns: or to con∣demn such, as the Gospel praiseth. Or if any have been so careless of their own repute, as to do so, have they not met with a check, and procured a lot to their own Names? The old Greek Comedians were licensed by the Law, to bring whom they pleased upon the Stage; how seldom did any of them abuse that liber∣ty? Or if they did, have not themselves been hissed off the Stage for it? It was not in the power of the greatest Wits of that Nation to give Laws to the world, to superceed the Law of Nations, the Canons and Rules of Vertue. Does not every man commend those Comedians, for giving a bad Chara∣cter of the seditious Cleophon, a man guilty of the same crime that the E∣vangelists badg the Thieves with, that were crucifyed on each hand of our Saviour? Are they blam'd for representing Hyperbolus as a debauch'd person, whom Pliny, Thucidides, and Lucian report to have been banish'd the City as its disgrace and opprobry: and whose like, the Gospel expels from the City of God? Whom did not (saith Affricanus in Tully cited by St. Austin) the old Comedy touch, or rather vex, whom did it spare, &c? We will allow it to bespatter Cleon, Cleophon and Hyperbolus (though it were better such like men were branded, rather by the Censor, than Poet:) But that Perocles, (after he had presided over his City, for many years, in the greatest Authority, both in Peace and War;) should be traduced in Verses, and those acted on the Scene, was as much unbecoming as if our Plautus should have rail'd upon the two Scipios, or Caecilius upon Mark Cato. (de Civitate lib. 2. cap. 9.) [Quem vetus Comedia non attigit? vel potius quem non vexavit? cui pepercit? Esto. Cleonem, Cleophontem, Hyperbolum popu∣lares homines improbos in Republica seditiosos patiamur, &c. Sed Periclem cum jam—violari versibus & eos agi in scena, non plus decuit quam si Plautus noster aut Naevius Publio & Cneo Scipioni aut Caecilius M. Catoni maledicere voluis∣sent.] Aristophanes (through love of Lucre) grew so rabid against Cleon; a man so vi∣tious as his hatred to Vertue made him spleen Nicaeus, Demosthenes, and all good men: as when none of the Actors of his Comedy (called , the Horsmen) durst undertake to personate Cleon; Aristophanes himself (rather than he would lose the wages that Cleon's Adversaries had stipulated with him for) steps up∣on the Stage, and acts Cleon's part. He is by Cleon convict of Bribery: the Senate force him to vomit up the bribe (by way of fine into the publick Trea∣sury) that he had received out of private Purses, for making that Come∣dy. (Lud. vives in Aug. de civit. 2. 9.) Has any Man undertaken to disprove the Senates sentence against Aristophanes; who was in the very same trans∣gression that the Gospel condemns Balaam for, (i. e.) speaking Truth out of love to the Hire. The mercinary Pen of the same Poet was engaged by Anitus and Melitus to traduce Socrates, and to draw a Cloud (in his Play so called) over the most resplendent Vertue that ever shone in a mere Humanist. Socrates was present at the acting of that Comedy; and exhibiting himself to publick View, af∣fronted both Actors and Spectators without change of Countenance, or shew∣ing the least Disgust, while they clapp'd their hands at the Reproaches were cast upon him. (Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 13.) It is two thousand years since this was done: has one man (in all this tract of time) had other Resent∣ments of this thing, than such as have been expressed in admiring Socrates, in
abominating the Poet, Actors and Spectators, but most of all the Judges, for proceeding (upon the information that the Vulgar, by their applauses, gave of their readiness to comply with so impious a Sentence) to his Con∣demnation? Do not all men look upon their retracting their Sentence, con∣demning his Adversaries, and decreeing him to the honour of a golden Sta∣tue, as their coming out of that Frenzie, into which that temporizing hu∣mour had cast them? An humour took Isocrates to make an Encomiastick, in praise of Helena, that Fire-brand of Troy and Greece; but he durst not commend her as vertuous: and yet with how much regret of soul he went about that attempt, him∣self witnesseth, in his large and frequent Digressions and Apologies, which take up so much of that Oration; as a great admirer of him craves lieve to say, He is mostwhat beside his Text in that Sermon: (Wolfis argument.) [.] Indeed he so manageth that business, as if he had a mind to make the boldest Sophister despair to undertake that sub∣ject; or as if himself were affraid of undergoing the Censure he passeth up∣on those Rhetoricians, that hugely applaud themselves, if they can strain their wits to speak but tolerably, upon an absurd and paradoxical Hypothesis: (Isocrat. Hel. laud. initio,) [, &c.] Poverty forc'd Polycrates to make a sally through the brazen Wall of a good Conscience, to the relief of Bustris (and as some say Thyrses) from those just charges of barbarous Inhumanity, the World had loaded them with: and to the affronting of innocent Socrates, and vindicating his unequal Judges. But with what success, appears from Isocrates his tart Reflections upon those Orations: from the excuse that Demetrius Phalereus makes for him, that he writ those Orations only in Jeast, to give the World a Specimen of the fertility of his Wit, upon so steril Subjects: and from Virgil's stiling Bustris [illaudatus] unprais'd, for all he knew, that both Polycrates and Isocra∣tes had writ Orations, whose Theme was [the praise of Busiris.] And from Isocrates, that the Argument is not good, nor such as an honest discourse can be made upon. [:] Isocr. Bus. laud.) Peruse Christ's Sermon in the Mount, and examine whether the Doctrine he therein delivers, be not that which the World has declared it self to have a Transcript of, by its blessing those that he blesseth, by its cursing those that he curseth? by its groping after those Vertues he commends, by its boggling at those Debaucheries he condemns? What has raised the Heroes in all Ages, to an Esteem for Vertue, but Humility, Mercifulness, Purity, Peaceableness, aspiring to the top of Vertues Stairs, by a patient bearing of Evil and doing Good? What has ever been accounted the heroick degree of Vertue, but that Mark Christ sets those that would be perfect? Which of the Moralists, in their condescentions to humane weakness, stated the minimum quod sit, of ver∣tue more favourably, and more to the incouragement of the smallest sparks, then our Saviour has; who will not have the smoaking flax quenched with the injection of the least fear of his non-acceptance of a Cup of cold wa∣ter: A Point wherein Plato so fail'd, as Athenaeus passeth this Cen∣sure on him: Plato made Laws, not for men really existing, but of his own feign∣ing: so that when all is done, he hath men to seek, who are capable of power to perform the Rules he lays down: he ought to have writ things practicable: [—ic non optandis viris haec scribere, sed iis qui haec ipsa amplecti possunt:] (Dipnosoph. l. 11. cap. 21.) What has intail'd an indefeasible infamy upon Mens Memories, but such like Enormities as the Gospel decries? What but Luxury, Effeminateness, Cruelty, Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wicked∣ness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, Envy, Murder, Debate, Malignity, &c. have made the Names odious of that wallowing Hog Sardanapalus, (a perfect Scholar of Metrodorus, that sordid Epicurean, who blamed his Brother Timo∣crates, for making the least doubt of this Doctrine, That all things belonging to a happy Life were to be measured by the Belly, (Cotta in Cicer. de nat. deor.
l. 1.) that devouring God-belly-gulph Heliogabalus; that shame of the Coun∣try in whose Lap he was litter'd, (to use Valerius his words) Gemellus, who entertain'd the Consul and Tribunes with naked She-servitors: That helluo of his large fortunes Clodius, who, by breakfasting with dissolved Pearls, brought his Estate to that low ebb, as he had not a drie Crust to sup with in the Afternoon of his life, but what he begg'dat more provident mens doors. Of Xerxes, who so far effeminated his Subjects (by his own example, and his propounding of Rewards to the inventors of new pleasures) as their hands and inventions failed him, in securing to him the possession of his Imperial Crown. Of Sylla, who transmitted his own shame to all succeeding Ages, by causing his cruelty, in murdering 470 proscribed Persons, to be entred in the publick Rolls. Of Marius, Nero, Phalaris, and all that have been hand∣ed down to posterity, as the Monsters of the Age they lived in. Our Cade, and Kett, and Straw:—our Rosamond, Shore—have not their infamy, yet, derived down to so many Generations: but should the World continue yet as many as it hath done, it would be born down the Stream of Time to the very last of them: and had they lived in a Pagan Age and Climate, they would have given the same sence of these Opprobries of our Nation and Re∣ligion, that that Christian Age did wherein they lived. The sacred Compilers, then, of the Gospel were men of no vulgar Con∣ceptions, that could frame a Religion so every way fitting the common con∣ceptions of Mankind, and sute their Last to every Foot (not swoln with Pride or Prejudice;) so that the Voice of God that they publish'd, is the Voice of the People, and finds a party for it in every human Soul, not de∣generate; Pagans and Mahometans being so far Christian, as they have any thing in them praise worthy: among whom there is nothing cried up for Vertue, but what glitters like, and has some kind of resemblance to, Gospel∣vertue. § 2. The Poets Jove was not vulgarly reputed a God. The only valuable Exception against this Argument, is the Instance of the Pagan Idols; who being the worst of men, were yet prefer'd (in the opinion of the World) to the honour of Gods; which gave occasion to that Sarcasm of Euripedes, That Jupiter, Neptune and Saturn, and the rest of the Gods, deserv'd to be banish'd Heaven, as being guilty of those Debaucheries would render men unworthy to tread upon Earth: and to Menippus (in Lucian) to declaim against their Rapes, Incests, &c. and to Te∣rence, to flout the great Jove, for giving encouragement to Chaerea to perpe∣trate that Rape upon his Mistress, in imitation of Jove's upon Danae. In answer to which (and to clear the World from the imputation of dei∣fying the most debauch'd Persons that ever lived; (by which Act it would have confounded all Principles of Morality) let it be considered: That the Poets Jove had not, so much as among the silly Rable, the re∣pute of a Deity: for had they indeed esteemed that Letcher a God, his Ex∣ample would have had influence enough upon it, to have turn'd the whole World into a Brothel-house, in spite of all Laws to the contrary. For, as St. Austin observes, [Magis intuentur quid Jupiter fecerit, quàm quid do∣cuerit Plato, vel censuerit Cato:] (de civit. 2. 7.) They that took those Poe∣tical Monsters for Deities, must needs have been more swayed with their example, than with Plato's precepts, or Cato's practice. Now there being so few that pleaded the authority of Jove's Example to patronize their own Crimes, and they that had the face to do it, being universally badged with the im∣putation of impiety; for making that Plea, is evidence enough, that he was not cordially worshipp'd, under that form which the Poets presented him in. What needed those adulterous, covetous, ambitious Suiters, in Per∣sius, have whisper'd into his Ears their impious Prayers; if they had not re∣puted him worse than that most corrupt Judge Statius Albius, who (as
bad as he was) had any man begg'd his favour in such like Cases; would, with expressions of amazing horrour, have rejected the motion? Might they not have avowed and justified their impure and unjust Requests, as much as, nay rather than, those that other men pour out openly, for a sound Mind, a good Name, &c. as tending more than these towards the conforming of those Votaries to the God whom they invocated; had they indeed deem∣ed that Letcher, to have been God-Jupiter. The most audacious of them durst not thus have pull'd him by the Beard, had they thought him, whom the Poets painted, to have been a living Lion. 'Tis too manifest, that the Poets charming Style did insinuate those Ideas of the Gods (that they drew) into the minds of many, espe∣cially of such Persons, as were preoccupied with inclinations to those Vices: (for facilè credimus quod volumus) and that out of that Pondora's Box issued those Debaucheries that over-spread the Pagan World. When I was a Boy (saith Menippus in Lucian (Lucian ,) and heard Homer and Hesi∣od singing the Warrs, Seditions, Adulteries, Rapes, Incests of the Gods, I was verily perswaded that all these things were good and comely: for I could not imagine that the Gods would have done them, had they not they look'd upon them as vertuous. Who would not (saith St. Austin) think that course of life to be followed, that is presented in Stage-plays, instituted by▪ divine Authority; rather than that that is commended to us by Laws, that are but of humane Institution: [Quae actitantur ludis, authoritate divinâ institutis, quàm quae scriptitantur legi∣bus humano consilio promulgatis:] (de civit. 2. 8.) And therefore he concludes that the Devil's grand Design, in setting abroach the Poetical Divinity, was to ingulph the World in those beastly sins the Poets feign'd the Gods to be Actors of: he by this device, (de civit. 2. 20.) furnishing wicked men with a Cloak for their most sordid Immoralities (borrowed from the Wardrobe of Heaven) spurring them on to all manner of lewdness, that they might grow up into a Conformity to those whom they worshipped: and putting a check to all vertuous Motions, for fear of seeming therein to outstrip their Gods, and thereby to incurr their displeasure: [Quibus nihil aliud actum est, quàm ut pudor hominibus peccandi demeretur, si tales Deos credidissent:] (Senec. de beata vita cap. 26.) This would be the effect of mens believing the Gods to be such as the Poets describe them, viz. that men would not be ashamed of vitious living. This was the Ravishers Cloak. [Ego homuncio id non facerem, quòd Deus qui templa coeli summo sonitu concutit? Ego verò illud feci & lubens:] (Ter. Eunuch.) This was the fewel of Lasciviousness. ——cùm dira libido Moverit ingenium—(Pers. Sat. 3.) Alledged to this purpose by St. Austin (de civit. 2. 7.) Hence the Authour of the Book of Wisdom, (Cap. 14. 24, 25, 26.) imputes it to Heathenish I∣dolatry, That men kept neither Lines nor Marriages any longer undefiled: but either one slew another traiterously, or grieved him by Adultery: so that there reigned in all men promiscuously, Blood, Manslaughter, Theft, Dissimulation, Corruption, Unfaithfulness, Tumults, Perjury, disquieting of good Men, forgetfulness of good Turns, changing of Sex, &c. Hence Philo Judaeus tells Caligula, That should he, by his slaughters and impieties, gain the re∣pute of being a God, it would eternize the repute of those Villanies, and perpetuate the practice of them as laudable: (de legat. ad Caium, fol. 629.) So that it is beyond the reach of human Apprehension to conceive, that the Poets Creed should be universally embrac'd; and that belief not turn the World into a mere Chaos, in point of Morality. And therefore the Ge∣nerality of Mankinds retaining some Sentements of good and evil, is a plain Demonstration, that the Belief of the Poets was not Catholick; that the far greater part of Heathens dissembled with the Poetical Gods, as most Chri∣stains
do with the true: drawing near him with the Lip, but in Heart de∣nying him; or (in the Apostles language) professing that they know him, but denying him indeed. § 3. Vertue made Gods of Men; Vice Devils of Gods, in vulgar esteem. That it was Vertue promoted men at first to the honour of being God-born or Gods Incarnate, would be evidenc'd beyond all Contradiction, could we retrieve Pagan History to the first Original: but that being as impossible, as to count the Waves of the Sea, with that noted fool Caecilion in Aelian, (Aelian. var. hist. 13. 15. tit. .) I shall not lanch out into that deep, but creep by the shore of these common and universally∣received Maxims. 1. The first that bore the Name of Gods were the Founders and great Benefactors of their several Nations; who for their Vertues, at the breaking of the Shell of Mortality, were hatch'd into Deities, by the warmth of the Peoples resentment of the Benefits flowing to them from those Second Causes; after they had lost the true Tradition of the First, and were grown towards him unthankful. The Cretian Jupiter, of whom the Poets write, had two Name-sakes elder than himself (Cicero de natura Deorum:) whose true story Ennius, the Translator of Eumeruus, thus concludes, Deinde Jupiter, postquam quinquies circuivit terram, reliquitque hominibus Leges, Mores Frumentáque paravit, multáque alia bona fecit; immortali gloria memoriáque affectus, sempiterna monimenta suis reliquit: Vide Lactant. de falsa relig. 1. 11. And Diodor. Sicul. (lib. 3. antiq.) where he saith the Aethiopians thought the Gods (that is, of a second Edition) to be either sempiternal, as the Sun and Moon, &c. or such as had been Men, but for their Vertues and Benefits bestowed on Mankind, were made Gods: (Diod. Sic. ant. l, 3. pag. 72.) Hence that form in the 12 Tables: (—Divos colunto, & ollos quos in coelum merita vocaverint; Her∣culem, Liberum, Aesculapium, Castorem, Pollucem, Quirinum, &c.] (Cice∣ro de Legibus, lib. 2. pag. 319.) Hence Virgil (Aen. 6.) de Saturno, Qui genus indocile & dispersum montibus altis, Composuit, legésque dedit— Macrobius (in somno Scipionis, l. 1. c. 8, 9.) upon these words of Cicero: [Omni∣bus qui patriam conservârint, adjuverint, auxerint, certum esse in coelo definitum locum, ubi beati aevo sempiterno fruuntur:] hath this Observation;—hinc pro∣fecti, hinc revertuntur: To all those who have preserved, succoured, benefitted their Countries, there is a certain place assigned in Heaven, where they enjoy a blessed Eternity; that is, saith Macrobius, thence they came and thither they return. And cap. 9. he quotes Hesiod numbering the ancient Kings among the Gods: Indigetes divi fato summo Jovis hi sunt Quondam homines, modò cum superis humana tuentes, Largi ac magnifici: Whom we invoke for Gods, ('tis Jove's decree) Were Men of Bounty once and Gallantry; But now, with highest Deities, attend On our affairs, and us toth' Gods commend. Nay 'tis Cotta's observation (in Cicer. de natura deor.) that the Egyptians worship'd no Beast, but in consideration of some benefit it confer'd upon them: Ibis maximam vim serpentum conficiunt—possum de Ichneumonum utili∣tate, de Crocodilorum, de Felium dicere—belluas à barbaris, propter beneficium consecratas.—] For the same Opinion he (a little after) quotes Prodicus, Chius,
Euemerus, and his Interpreter Ennius; [Prodicus Chius, Ea quae prodessent ho∣minum vitae, Deorum in numero habita esse dixit:—fortes, claros, potentes vi∣ros tradit post mortem pervenisse ad Deos.—] 2. Now the first Jupiter (for instance) being succeeded by so many of his name (but not Vertues) as in process of time the Joves amounted to 300 as Tertullian (out of Varro) counts them: [Romanus Cynicus Varro tricentos Joves (sive Jupitores dicend.) introduxit:] (apol. 14.) and at last, the true History of him growing as much out of the Memory of men, as the History of the Creation was, when he was first made a God; this latter brood was brought over his shoulders, to share with him (as he had done with the only true God) in the honour of being esteemed Deities: each Nation contending that their own was the ancient Jupiter, ascribed to their own, all that was com∣mendable in others of that name; and fastned upon foreigners the Vices of their own Jupiters: So that it was the Vertue of the first Jupiter that advan∣ced all his Name-sakes to divine honour. And when the Crimes of the younger Jupiters were by the Poets fastned on him, this was so far from add∣ing to his credit; as, with those that believ'd the Poetical Stories, it lost him the repute of being a God: and with those that believ'd him to be a God, the Poets lost the repute of being faithful Historians, upon that very account, because they presented the Gods in the form of beastly immanities; and af∣firmed the God-born to have perpetrated more vile Enormities than ever were acted by the off-spring of most wicked men: not only charging them with Thefts and Adulteries, but with the devouring of their own Children, gelding their Parents, Incest with their Mothers, and many other fedities; as Isocra∣tes (Busirid. laudat.) observes, calling Poetical Theology, Blasphemy, and affirming the Divine Vengeance to have pursued most of them, for those im∣pious Fictions: many of them becoming Vagabonds and Beggars; others being struck blind; others, being exil'd, lived in perpetual fewd with their own Kindred: and Orpheus, the chief Author of such like Fables, being mangled alive, and torn in pieces. Wherefore (saith he) if we be wise, let's not follow their dotages; nor endure (since we make Laws that one man should not slander another) that this lawless liberty be given, of babbling what comes at Tongues end concerning the Gods: but let us think that both Thief and Recetter, the Reporter and Believer of such Sto∣ries are grievous offenders. For my own part (saith he) 'tis an Article of my Creed, that not only the Gods but the God-born are not only exempt∣ed from all Vice, but have all Vertues so naturally implanted in them, as they become Leaders and Masters to us Men, in all honest and praise-worthy en∣deavours. Hence Pausanias cautions his Reader, not to believe what the Athenian Temples represent concerning the Gods; as grounded on Poetical Fables. On the other side, where the Poets fictions were imbraced and applauded, the Gods that they presented were exploded: while they muster the Gods (saith Tertullian Apol. cont. gentes) into two adverse parties standing the one for Troy, the other for Greece: while they present Venus wounded by a mor∣tal hand, while she's fetching off Aeneas from Diomed's pursuit: while they bring in Mars pin'd almost to death, by undergoing a three-months penance in those Chains Vulcan had caught him in with Venus: while they sing, how Jupiter was secured by the help of a Monster, from being taken with his Curtizans, in the like snares: while they chaunt his lamenting Sarpedon's mishap, his dalliances with Juno: while, through the connivence of Princes, they take liberty to feign Apollo a Herdsman under Admetus; Neptune a Mason to Laomedon, and defrauded of his wages; Aesculapius to have been struck with Jove's Thunder-bolt, for taking too large Fees for a Cure: (sure it was not of the French Disease, that amorous God would have thought half a Kingdom a Fee small enough for that:) while the Mimick perso∣nates Anubis playing the Adulterer; Diana making love to the Swain Eu∣dimion (and lash'd soundly for her offences;) the Sun lamenting Phaeton's
Fall; Cybel (the Mother of the reputed Gods) puling at the feet of a dis∣dainful Shepherd; the Boy Paris umpiring the Contest for the golden Apple, betwixt three Goddesses. While (I say) the Poets publish in their ears, while the Mimicks present to their Eyes, the obscenities of their Deities, the vulgar conclude them no Gods: and instead of making them the Objects of Devotion and Religious Fear, esteem them Objects of Scorn and Derision. [Dispicite utrùm Mimos an Deos vestros in jocis & strophis rideatis?] Do you, when you hear joques and quirks put upon your Gods, laugh at the Jeaster's wit, or at the folly of your Gods? Durst ye make a sport of Phaebus his tears, and laugh, while he's presented weeping, if you really believ'd the Mimick-Phoebus to be a God. Had they esteemed the Mimick Gods, Gods indeed, they would have reverenc'd their presence more than Cato's, before whom the Romans were ashamed, in their celebrating the Floralia, to call forth the Mimicks to act their parts; confessing (as Valerius Max. observes, lib. 2. cap. 10.) that they had more respect to that one Man, whom Vertue had made vene∣rable, than to all the Spectators, yea, than all those Gods who were there personated. § 4. The different respect which Stage-players had amongst Romans and Gre∣cians: The design of Mythologists. Hence Plato (in his 2. and 10. Books of his Commonwealth) would have that kind of Poetry, that sings the flagitiousness of the Gods, expelled out of every well-constituted Republick; as tending to the effeminating of mens Minds, and corrupting of Manners. And the ancient Romans (to prevent that evil Opinion of the Gods, which they foresaw people would readily take up, from such Premises) forbad the use of Stage-plays in their Laws of the Twelve Tables; a Law in force 500 years after Rome built. And when in the Consulship of Sulpitius and Lici∣nius, the Pontiff, by direction of Sibyls Books, instituted them to asswage the then raging Pestilence: to secure the Vulgar from the dint of that Tem∣ptation to Atheism, that was laid before them, in those scenical Prostitutions: they were admonish'd of the baseness of those fellows, by a Decree prohi∣biting Stage-players to be free of the City (In Aug. de civit. dei, 2. 13.) as L. Vives affirms out of Livy. A Decree which speaks that Generation of men to have been (in the Opinion of the Senate) Persons of most debauch'd man∣ners, and profligated honesty (seeing that privilege of the City was granted to many thousands of flagitious men;) and therefore not to be credited by the People, in what they prated or presented, either concerning God, or Man. To this Constitution alludes Cicero, Roscium ità peritum dixit ut solus esset dignus qui in scenam deberet intrare: ità virum bonum ut solus esset dignus, qui eò non debeat accedere:] (Orat. pro Roscio, referente Augustino, de consensu Evangel. lib. 1. cap. 23. Tom. 4.) who said, That Roscius was so skilful an Actor, as of all others he deserv'd to come upon the Stage; but so good a man, as it was pity he should ever come there. And this Constitution (perhaps) they were in∣duc'd to make, upon their reflecting on that mischief which the Grecian con∣trary custom, of honouring Stage-players, had introduc'd; for it was early in the Age of Poetry, and before the Roman Name was known out of the confines of Italy, that the liberty of the old Comedians, back'd with the esteem they had in that State, had prejudic'd the Grecians against the common∣ly-received Gods. Briefly; St. Austin has drawn, into this short Syllogism, the Sum of what both Grecians, Romans, and Christians assert touching this business. The Greeks propound, If the Gods that Stage-players represent be Gods indeed, they that represent them are worthy of honour: The Latins assume, But Stage-players are not worthy of the lowest degree of honour, of being free Citizens:
The Christian concludes, Therefore those Gods that Stage-players represent are not Gods. A Conclusion most necessarily flowing from the Premises; but yet the Ro∣man Sages, fearing that the Vulgar might not have natural Logick enough to gather this consequence from their excluding Stage-players from the pri∣vilege of the City, they openly avowed and published this, as a sound point of their Divinity; That Jupiter in the Scene, was not the same with him in the Capitol. Thus Varro, quoted by St. Austin (de Civitate 6. 5.) expresses the sence of his Country-men. [In Poetical Divinity there are many things feigned, against the Dignity and Nature of the immortal Gods: for here we are taught, how one of them is born of Jupiter's Head, another of his Thigh, another of drops of Blood; how one play'd the Thief, another the Adulterer, &c. lastly, this Theolo∣gy attributes those things to God, which connot befal the most despicable and wretched Man.] Yea, fearing this might not prove Antidote strong enough against that deadly Poyson of their Religion that was propined from the Stage; (for as St. Austin observes, Jupiter was presented on the Stage, in the same posture and accoutrements, he had in his Temple:) at last they came to this shift, That the Poetical descriptions of the Gods, were nothing less than they pre∣tended in the Title-page and common Notion: but onely Schemes of Na∣tural Philosophy, under their borrowed Names, (that none might appre∣hend the Mystery of that Science, but their own Scholars to whom they communicated their Key) calling the Skie, Jupiter; the Air, Juno; the Sea, Neptune; the Earth, in its central parts, Pluto; in its superficial, Ceres, &c. Thinkest thou (say the Patrons of the Pagan Cause in St. Austin (de civit. 2. 24.) that our Ancestors were such arrant fools, as not to know that the Poetical Gods were not Gods, but only the Gifts and Creatures of God. That this was the old Subterfuge of the Romans, and of an elder Date than St. Austin (and therefore not invented as a Salvo against the Objections of Christians, but of common Sense) appears, from that passage in Philo Judaeus (de leg. ad Caium, 630.) where deriding Caligula for attempting to monopolize the honour of all the Gods to himself; and shewing how little he resembled Mars: I mean not (saith he) that fabulous one, but him by whom we understand natural Fortitude. (A trick that Philo himself had learn'd and (without any appearance of need) practis'd, in his turning those passages in sacred History into Allegories, wherein the Philosophers objected any shew of improbability or indecorum: and therefore I wonder not at his seeming allowance of this shift in them.) And secondly, from that speech of Lucius Balbus (in Tully's de nat. deorum, 2.) [Videtisne igitur ut à physicis rebus, benè & utiliter inventis, ratio sit tracta ad commentitios & fictos Deos: quae res genuit falsas opiniones, errorésque turbu∣lentos, & superstitiones planè aniles: Et formae enim nobis Deorum, & aetates, & vestitus, & ornatus noti sunt, genera praetereà, conjugia, cognationes, omniá∣que traducta ad similitudinem imbecillitatis humanae; nam & perturbatis ani∣mis inducuntur: accepimus etiam Deorum cupiditates, aegritudines, iracundi∣as: haec & dicuntur & creduntur stultissimè, & plena sunt vanitatis, summaeque levitatis.] You see therefore, how from Natural Philosophy, well and profitably invented, Reason was drawn by head and shoulders to fictitious Deities: which thing hath produced false Opinions, turbulent Errors and most doting Superstitions: For the Shapes, Ages, Apparrels, Ornaments, Lineages, Marriages, Alliances, and all other things of the Gods, are presented to us and drawn after the simi∣litude of humane frailty: They are moreover introduc'd with troubled Minds; and we learn their Lusts, Sicknesses and raging Passions: which things either to say or believe of them is a point of the extremest folly, vanity and levity: and therefore Piety forceth us to put a mystical interpretation upon the Poets, &c. But what need∣ed they to have cover'd the nakedness of their Poetical Deities from vulgar eyes with this Mantle, had they not suspected the avowing them, for such, would
have hazarded the bringing of their people into an opinion of Socrates, who in contempt of that Jove, instead of swearing by him, chose rather to swear by a Dog, a Goat, a Goose; conceiving the most contemptible Creature of Gods making, to have more Divinity in it, than that monstrous God of the Poets framing. So deeply are the Principles of Vertue and Vice (and among those vertu∣ous ones) that of honouring Vertue, radicated in the minds of all men (not debauch'd) as, rather than Vice shall supplant Vertue of its due reward of honour, Jove himself if he appear in its garb, shall be ungodded, and me∣tamorphosed (in the opinion of Mankind) into a Devil: for such the Pagan Philosophers themselves do (with one mouth) proclaim all those re∣puted Gods to be, that delight in Blood-shed, in Filthiness, &c. Jamblicus (de mysteriis pag. 98.) in answer to what Porphyry propounds to the Aegyptian Priest, touching the Opinion of those who thought all presages to procede from evil Spirits confesseth, that some do; to wit, such as for their de∣filements are conformed to impure Daemons, to prophane and dissolute Spi∣rits. And to his other Question, How come the Gods, upon wicked mens intreaty, to inflict unjust pains upon good men? he gives this in answer, (Id. Ibid. pag. 105.) If upon mens imprecations pour'd out to the Gods, some adverse things be observ'd to fall out unjustly: we must impute it to other Causes; which if we cannot find out, we must not (for all that) so much as suspect any thing of the Gods, unworthy of the Divine Nature, or of that certain science of their goodness which is inbred in our minds, and wherein all both Greeks and Barbarians agree with us—and a little after; If what we have said of Idols and evil Spirits be true—they counterfeit the presence of God, and therefore command their Worship∣pers to be just, that themselves may be thought to be good: but because they are in their nature bad, they are prone to do evil and to lead us to evil. Porphyry (de sacrif. pag. 314, 315.) out of Plato tells us, that as heat cannot cool us; so the Divine Nature (that is all Justice) can do no unjust thing: and therefore concludes, That all those Spirits, that either themselves commit, or tempt us to commit immoralities, (though they would make the World believe they are Gods, and their Prince the highest and holiest God) are no better than Devils. Plutarch (in his Pelopidas) reports, That while the The∣ban Army lay encamp'd in Leuctra, resolved to give battel to Cleom∣brotus and the Spartan forces; Pelopidas was terrified with a Vision of Scedasus Daughters there ravish'd and slain by certain Spartans; against whom when their Father could not obtain Justice at the hands of the Spartan State, pouring out dreadful execrations upon them, he slew himself upon his Daughters Grave. These Pelopidas thinks he hears, groaning about their Sepulchres, and cursing the Spartans; and their Father commanding him to sacrifice a yellow-hair'd Virgin, if he desired to obtain victory over the Spartans: Pelopidas communicates this Vision and Command to his Prophets and Associates: by whom (notwithstanding the allegations of the examples of Menaeceus, Macaerias, Pherecides, Leonidas, Agesilaus and Agamemnon, in fa∣vour of it) that Command was judged so barbarous, as it was impossible it could procede from, or the fulfilling of it be acceptable to any of the Gods; for those that delight in human blood and slaughter are infer∣nal Fiends, &c. Thus Salacus King of Aethiopia is commended for interpret∣ing that Dream, wherein he was counsel'd to assemble the Aegyptian Priests, and to cut them off by the middle; as proceeding from the diabolical inje∣ction of some Demons that envied his happiness, and desired to make him obnoxious to the just displeasure of the Gods, for so sacrilegious an Act: chusing rather to lay down the Egyptian Crown, which he had then wore 50 years, and return into Aethiopia: than to hold it at that price the Vision set upon it, (Herodot. Eutyrpe, 163.) Lo here, the point of this Objection turn'd against those that framed it: for Jove was so far from gaining by his Viciousness the repute of being a God, as the Vices of his Namesakes (imputed to him) dethron'd him from that
Heaven, to which his own Vertue had of old exalted him, while they knew and believed no other of him, but that he was the Founder of their Com∣monwealth; that he gather'd them (being formerly dispers'd like savage Beasts) into human Societie, that he taught them by Precept and Example the Trade of Vertue, they ador'd him for a God: But when they hear the Poets tell Stories of his Murders, Incests, Rapes, &c. they conclude him (if those Stories be true) a wicked Demon. Yea Plutarch (, The Venus and Harp of all Philosophy, in his Treatise of Superstition (Moral. tom. 1. pag. 389.) strenuously maintains the Point; That those who deny the Being of God, are not so impious, as they that conceive him to be such as the Poets feign him: I had rather (saith he) men should in their discoursing of me, say there never was any such man as Plutarch, than say I was such a man as the su∣perstitious account God to be; sickle, mutable, prone to anger, desirous of revenge for the least injury: and that from these misconceits of the Gods, men grew into the Opinion that there were no Gods. Would God this Christian Age had not too sad experience of the truth of this Aphorism! For since the Pulpit hath been made a Stage for Mimicks, who are train'd up to no other Art wherein they are more dexterous, than that of making Mows and wry Faces upon the Establish'd Religion; of misrepresenting the Chri∣stian Faith and the Authour of it (by fathering upon the Spirit their non∣sensical uncharitable blasphemous Prattlings; upon God the Father such in∣humane and bloody Purposes and Decrees, as make him look, out of their Dress, more ill-favour'd than the blackest Fiend; upon God the Son, the In∣stitution of a Religion more barbarous than the Worship of Moloch:) this Stage-play Divinity hath brought in Atheistical Contempt of God and the Ministery. But I dare not give my just Zeal its full scope in this place. I now alledge this only to shew, That the Law of Honesty, Vertue and Mora∣lity is so deeply imprest upon the Human Soul, as, rather than Men (who are not altogether brutified) will be led to Acts of Injustice, upon the sug∣gestions of a Divine Command, they will deny the Divinity of that Com∣mand; and chuse rather to worship no God at all, than one that's repre∣sented with such Properties as bid defiance to common Honesty.
CHAP. IV. Christian Religion concords with the highest Philosophical No∣tions. § 1. Divine Knowledg communicated from the Church to travelling Philosophers. Our Religion elder than Heathenism by Heathens confession. § 2. Christi∣an Articles implied in Pagan Philosophy's Positions. Man's happiness through Communion with God, and Conformity unto God. § 3. This Conformity and Communion effected by God-man. God manifest in the Flesh, born of a Virgin. § 4. Plato falter'd under the burden of vulgar Error. A man from God. Whence Multiplicity of God-Saviours. Pagan Independency. Their mutual indulging one another. § 5. Not many, but one Mediator, the result of the Heathen's second thoughts. Plato's Sentence sentenced by Platonicks. Nothing can purge but a Principle. St. John's Gospel in Pla∣tonick Books. The Christian Premisses yielded, their Conclusions denied by Gentiles. Plato's Sentence (under the Rose.) § 1. The Church gave life to, received none from, the Philosophers. THe Apostles, however illiterate, might perhaps spin out of their own bowels a course-spun Warp, which might fit to an hairs-breadth the home-spun Woof of vulgar Conceptions. But then how came they to a Do∣ctrine so exactly suting the more refined Notions of the most eminent Philo∣sophers? [Quis docuit psittacum suum ;] If they were men of crazy or but vulgar Brains, whence learn'd they to dogmatize, to Grecize, in their di∣vine Philosophy, so profoundly? to distil a Doctrine so absolutely Philosophi∣cal, as it either ecchoeth to what was taught in the most learned Schools; or is such as the most sagacious Wits were hunting after, but could not start, and must ecchoe to, upon its Proposals, or recede from their own Principles. Hence that of R. Obad. Caon. (in Psal. 45.) Kings Daughters were among thy honourable Women: [id est, opiniones sapientùm Nationum exterarum] that is, the opinions of the wise Gentiles. And that of Lactantius: [Quod si extitisset aliquis qui veritatem distersam per singulos, per sectásque diffusam colligeret in unum, ac redigeret in corpus: is profectò non dissentiret à nobis.] (La∣ctant. de divino praemio, 7. 7.) If the Truth dispers'd among several Persons, and scatter'd among several Sects, were, by any man, collected into one, and dige∣sted into a body, it would, without doubt, not dissent from us. When Apollodorus offer'd to Socrates a precious and gorgeous Tunick and Pall, to put on when he drank the poyson, and to be wrapped in when he was dead; Socrates, turning to Crito, Simacus, and Phaedo; what an honou∣rable opinion (saith he) hath Apollodorus of me, if he think to see Socrates in this Robe after I am dead; if he think, that that which will then lay at his feet, is Socrates, I know not my self who I am. (Aelian. var. hist. 1. 16.) This Socratical Aphorism Tully expresseth thus, [Mens cujusque, is est quisque.] Is one Egg more like another than this of the Schools to that of the Gospel, where Jesus concludes Abraham to be still living, from Moses his stiling God the God of Abraham so many years after his decease? That of Abraham he left behind him in his Sepulchre, is not Abraham, but that of him that still lives. But it would require an Age to transcribe, by retail, those numerous Phi∣losophical Axioms which speak the Language of Scripture so perfectly; as the whole matter of controversie, betwixt the Fathers Apologizing for, and the Philosophers contending against our Religion, was brought by mutual consent to this point: Whether the wise men of the World receiv'd those Do∣ctrines from our Scriptures, or the Pen-men of the Scripture from their Schools?
Celsus in Origen contends earnestly, that whatsoever was solid in the Chri∣stian Religion was borrowed from the Philosophers: by whom it was better and clearlier delivered. He instanceth in our affirming God to dwell in light inaccessible; this (saith he) is no more than what Plato teacheth in his Epi∣stles, [that the first Good is ineffable.] In our Saviour's commending Humi∣lity. This is Plato's Doctrine (saith Celsus) teaching in his Book of Laws, that [He who would be happy must be a follower of Justice with an humble and well-composed mind.] In Christ's saying, 'Tis easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: what is this (saith he) other than that of Plato, [It is not possible that a man can be very rich and very good.] From the fame Fountain Celsus will have Christ to draw that saying, Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that lead∣unto life, and few there be that find it; and that our Doctrine of the fall of Angels, and their being reserved in chains, was derived from the Poet Phere∣cides and Homer, (vide l. 4. col. 9.) The Patrons of the Christian Cause, on the other hand contended that the waters of the Academy were drawn from the wells of the Sanctuary: that the Sun of knowledg arose in the East, and thence displayed its Beams over the World. St. Ambrose proves that Plato borrowed of David in Psalm. 35. And upon that in Isaiah 40. [For she hath received at the Lords hand double to her ini∣quity,] saith he [Plato eruditionis gratiâ, in Aegyptum profectus, ut Mosis gesta, Legis praecepta, & Prophetarum dicteria cognosceret, &c.] (in psalm. 118. serm. 18.) St. Austin quotes St. Ambrose proving from Chronology, that the Gre∣cians borrowed of the Jews, not è contrà: and thence commends the reading of Secular History, (de Christiana Doct. lib. 2. cap. 28.) and, in his Epistle to Polinus and Therasias, writes thus; [Libros Ambrosii multùm desidero, quos adversùs nonnullos imperitissimos & superbissimos, qui de Platonis libris Dominum profecisse contendunt, dilligentissimè & copios ssimè scripsit:] (Aug. Epist. 34.) And not barely affirm'd it, but brought in evidence for the proof of it, either from common Principles of Reason, or the Authority of heathen Chronolo∣gers. St. Origen thus, (Contra Cels. lib. 6. cal. 1, 2, 3, &c.) [Moses was long before the most ancient of your Philosophers, and therefore they must borrow light from him; but it was impossible he could light his Candle at theirs, before they were lighted: and the Apostles were the unlikeliest men in the World to understand your Philosophers.] The same Father (Origen contrà Celsum lib. 1. cal. 13.) in answer to Celsus objecting Moses his Juniority to the Heathen Theologues, saith: that Hermip∣pus (in his first Book of Lawgivers) declared how Pythagoras translated his Discipline from the Jews into Greece: and that there was extant a Book of Haecateus, in which he so approves of the Jewish Philosophy, as Herennus Philo (in his Commentar. de Judaeis) questions whether it be the genuine Book of Haecateus, whose name it bears; it seeming to him improbable, that an Heathen Philologer would write so much in their commendation. St. Austin in his eighteenth Book de Civitate, from Chap. 2. to the end of that Book, demonstrates by Chronology that our Prophets were elder than their Philoso∣phers. And (in his 8. 11. de Civitate Dei) affirms Plato to have transcribed the description of the first matter, in his Timaeus (mentioned also by Cicero, and thus translated, [Mundum efficere volens Deus, terram primo ignemque jun∣gebat, When God was about to frame the World, he first joyntly made the matter of Fire and Earth:] from that of Moses, [In the beginning God made the Hea∣ven and Earth (Gen. 1. 1.)] Plato by Fire understanding Heaven: And his notion of the Air upon the Water, to have been Plato's mis-conception of that of Moses [The Spirit moved upon the Waters:] And his Dogma, (in Phaedone) [] that [Every right Philosopher is a lover of God,] to have been derived from the sacred Fountains, where no∣thing flows more plentifully than such like Doctrine. But that which made this most learned Father, almost believe altogether that Plato had read Moses, was his observing Plato to have been the first Philosopher who called God by that
name, which God reveal'd himself by to Moses in his Embassy to Pharaoh: [ I am that I am, or, That that is.] A name appropriated to God by Plato, in his Timeus, calling God , The ever-being:] and so familiar with the Platonicks, as in their Master's stile they super∣scribed their Treatises concerning God with this Title [.] Of him that is. A name (saith St. Austin) I find in no Books before Plato, save in those where it is said [I am that I am.] This was mo∣destly said of that cautious Divine; for the truth is) Alcimus writes to Amyn∣thas, that some Philosophers had got that Notion by the end before Plato, naming Epicharmus, and quoting those words of his, at which Plato lighted his Candle; and Plato himself in his Sophista confesseth little less. But it comes all to one, as to our Argument: for Epicharmus was a Pythagorian; and that Pythagoras the circumcised Philosopher, received that and all his o∣ther refined Notions from Moses his Writings, or by discourse from the Jewish and Egyptian Priests, at first or second hand; Isocrates (Busiridis laud. pag. 539.) gives as pompous a proof, as is to be met with any where. Of the Religion of the Egyptians (saith he) I could commemorate [,] many and great things, [—] in the ob∣serving of which I am neither alone, nor first: but many both of this, and the former Age: among whom is the Samian Pythagoras, who travelling into Egypt, became their Disciple, and brought Philosophy and Religion into Greece: and Clemens Alexandrinus (Stromat. lib. 1.) as full and clear one as can be required, who out of the Pagan Records, affirmeth Pythagoras, to have been circumcised in Egypt; that he, having thereby liberty of going in∣to their holy places, might the better learn their mystical Theology: and that he learned there to call his School [ a word of the same impor∣tance with [Synagogue.] The same assertion is made by Justin Martyr (in paraclesi ad gentes:) By Eusebius (in praeparat. Evang.) And, before them, by Aristobulus Judaeus (in his Epistles to Ptolemy Philometer, lib. 1.) quoted by Eusebius: to wit, that Plato did transfer many things into his, out of the Jewish Writings: up∣on which, saith Athanasius, [. The Law was not for the Jews only; but that Nation was the sacred School of the whole World, concerning the knowledg of God, and the way of spiritual living.] Clemens Alexandrinus, from their own stories, sheweth, that the Grecians did not only borrow, their best Notions from the Jewish Scriptures, but the manner of expressing them sententiously: A mode of teaching what Plato commendeth, as that which all the Greeks press after, but none attain'd to, but the Spartans: That they so esteem'd the form of uttering moral Rules in Proverbs, in imitation of Solomon, as they father'd such Sentences, as came nearest that Model, upon several Authors: as if they thought many of their wisest men must have put their heads together, for the production of one so compact a Sentence, as we have thousands of in Scripture: each one striving who should bear away the honour of being reputed its father, as the Cities of Greece strove for Homer. That which was thought worthy to be set over the Gates of Apollo's Temple [] some attributed to Chilon: Cha∣maelio, in his Book of the Gods, ascribes it to Thales: Aristotle to Pythias: That other: [Nè quid nimis:] some father upon Chylon; Strato (in his Trea∣tise of Inventions) upon Stratodemus: but Didimus upon Solon. (Stromatum lib. 1.) There is scarce a Sentence of note, either in the Poets or Philosophers, but what the same Clemens, in the same Treatise, patterns in our Scriptures; and demonstrates the Gentiles to have had theirs from thence, not è contrà, by computing the ages of the Founders of every Sect, and finding them, by their own reckoning, to be younger than Moses, by many hundreds of years.
Xenophon, the Author of the Eleatick, is said by Timaeus, to have lived in the Reign of Hieron the Scicilian Tyrant: by Apollodorus, in the time of Darius and Cyrus: so that this Sect is younger than most of the Prophets. Thales the Father of the Ionicks, is said by Eudemus (in his history of Astro∣logy) to have fore-told that Eclipse which happen'd at the Battel betwixt the Medes and Lydians, in the reign of Cyaxeres the father of Astiages, to whom agrees Herodotus, in his first Book; this Cyaxeres was contemporary with Sal∣manassar, who carried the ten Tribes captive: so that the Kingdom of Israel was standing upon its last legs, before this Sect had got foot. For the stating of Moses his age he brings the Testimony of Appion; (one who so far disgusted the Religion of Moses as he wrote that Book against it which Josephus answers) who making mention of Amasis King of Egypt al∣ledgeth the Testimony of Ptolomeus Mendesius (a Priest, who wrote the Hi∣story of the Egyptian Kings in three Books) and saith [that in the raign of A∣masis, the Jews, under the conduct of Moses, came out of Egypt:] which Amasis was contemporary (as he saith) to Icarus. And of Dionisius Halicar∣nassaeus, who in his Chronicles affirms the Argolicks, who derive their Pedi∣gree from Icarus, to be the most ancient of the Grecians: then whom the Atticks, who come of Cecrops, are younger by four Generations (as Tatianus saith) and the Arcadians who come of Pelasgus, nine: And the Photioticks, who come of Deucalion, fifteen: and the Wars of Troy twenty, that is, five hundred years. So much is the subject of Homer younger than Moses. Now Homer is the most ancient Heathen Author: and was therefore (Aelian. var. hist. 13. 22.) painted by Galaton, spewing Grecian Learning, and all other Poets licking up his Vomit. A posture wherein (bating the homeliness of the conceipt) Moses might with more reason be drawn. For whatsoever ma∣terial divine Truth the heathen World had (except the remains of the first Tradition by Noah and his sons) were but the fragments of his loaf, the crums they gathered up under the table of Shew-bread. Hence Eusebius spends the whole tenth Book, de preparat. Evangel. in accusing the Ethnicks of Ingratitude, for hating the Jews, from whom they learn'd the liberal Sci∣ences: and of Theft, for challenging those Ethick Precepts for their own which they stole out of the Hebrew Books. And the eleventh Book in prov∣ing the Platonick Philosophy to have been fetch'd out of Egypt and Judea: and the [] writ over the Portal of the Delphick Temple (spoken of by Plu∣tarch) to have been borrowed from Moses his History of God's giving him∣self this name [I am that I am.] And the twelfth in instancing what Plato∣nick Sentences concur with Moses. Besides those Pagan Authors quoted by Clement, we have Herodotus (Terpsi∣core.) [.] [The Ionians received the knowledg of letters from the Phaenicians;] hence all Learning is called Phaenician. And Eupolemus (libro de Judaeae Regibus) ait, , Moses was the first wise man. And for the juniority of most ancient Heathen Writers we have the Testimony of the same Herodotus, who (in the life of Homer) collects, out of Lesbian and Cumane Anti∣quities, that Homer was born 622. years before Xerxes his invasion of Greece: (circa finem.) And of Macrobius (in Som. Scip. 2. 10.) who affirmeth, that there is no Greek History extant which mentions any thing of note above 2000. years by-past, for beyond Ninus nothing famous is inserted into Books; Abhinc ul∣tra duo retrò annorum millia de excellenti rerum gestarum memoriâ, nè Graeca qui∣dem exstat historia; nam suprà Ninum nihil praeclarum in libros relatum est.] Now Macrobius lived under Theodosius (as Johan. Isaac, by Joseph Scaliger's in∣dication, observes, ex codice Theodosiani, lib. 6. titulo, de praepositis sacri cubicu∣li. And was, it seems, a Pythagorick Philosopher: and yet a Gentleman of that Christian Emperour's Bed-Chamber: vide Johan. Isaaci notas in Macro∣bium. My desire to secure my Reader from stumbling at the Objection of Celsus, and to shew him the validity of that Reply, which the maintainers of the
Christian Cause return'd to it hath forc'd me to this Digression, from the pur∣suit of that Argument I was producing, to prove the consonancy of our Faith with the approved Maxims of Philosophy; drawn from each sides claiming the Primogeniture and pleading that theirs was the First-born. It being there∣fore manifest, by the confession of both parties, that Christianity and Philoso∣phy agree in their Maxims: I shall take this as a Supersedeas from that toyl∣som labour of collecting the several parcels of Christian Verity, out of the vast Ocean of Secular Authors, on whose surface they lay scatter'd: the ga∣thering up whereof is compared by Clemens Alexand. (Stromat. 1.) to the set∣ting together again of Pentheus dismember'd limbs: and requires more read∣ing, and a stronger memory than I dare pretend to: being not only of a courser Clay, but wanting the helps which those learned Fathers had, whom Tertullian (Testimon. animae. cap. 1.) affirms to have evidenced to the World, by an enumeration of Particulars, that Christian Religion propounds nothing new or portentous, but for which it hath the suffrage of Humane Learning and Pagan Writers. A Province so well administred by St. Clemens of old, and the incomparable Lord of Plessai of late, as renders it a needless work for me. I shall therefore only instance in two or three such heads of Chri∣stian Doctrine (which I have not observed others to have spoken of) as ap∣proach nearest to the Foundation, and are vulgarly reputed opposite to the Dictates of Philosophy, yet have been attested to by Philosophers. § 2. 1. That man in order to his being happy must be restored to Com∣munion with, and Conformity unto God is the Assertion of the Platonicks, as well as us Christians. Plotinus, that most refined mouth of Plato (as one (St. Austin, lib. 3. Academ. quest.) stiles him, who had more insight into Phi∣losophy than a thousand of our modern Blatterers.) In his first Book, de dubiis animae, writes thus; Father Jove, pittying labouring Souls, made the bonds wherein they were held, solvable, and allowed them some interval breathings and intermissions, wherein they might live from their Bodies, and from that of themselves which they had contracted by converse with their Bodies: and sometimes be there, where the Soul of the World is always: taking no thought of these inferiour things, (vide Jamblicum de mysteriis: tit. Via ad felicitatem.) The ground of this Sentiment he might have had from his master Plato, who, (in his Timaeus) distils from his pen these golden drops: while the soul lives below God, she meets with nothing but turbulency and uncertainty (the perfect print of Solomon's seal, of his [vanity and vexa∣tion of spirit:]) She must therefore fly to her native Countrey (expressed to the life in St. Paul's) [having our conversation in Heaven.] But where shall we have a Passage-boat? How shall I make my flight thither? There is but one expedit and certain way; to wit, becoming conformable unto God. A main point of Chri∣stian Philosophy: which his foresaid Scholar thus comments upon (Plotin. de contemplat.) [All beatitude flows from our contemplating that best and fairest Fa∣ther, whereby our souls (bidding farewel to the body, and freed from drudgery) enjoys, in that mean while, that happiness, which the soul of the Universe enjoys eternally and without intermission.—No man can attain to an happy life, that does not, in the purity of chast love, adhere to that one best Good the inocmmutable God.] With the like Doctrine Plato in his Convivio feasts his guests ears. [A blessed man, by the inspection of the Divine Pulcritude, not only produceth, but nourisheth in himself, not only appearances and shadows, but real and substantial Vertues such as lively express him whom we contemplate.] Was ever any thing said by Christian Theologues more resembling our Philosophy than these Pla∣tonick Dictates? Compare those with the Evangelical Notions, of [being changed into the same Image by beholding the glory of God, &c.] and then say, if they make not as perfect an harmony, as if these lessons had been set by the same Master. Now whether God did ever hang out to the World a more lively Picture of himself, than him whom the Apostle stiles the express Image of his Father's Person? or did ever throw out a stronger cord of love,
to knit men's affections to himself, than the Son of his love? I dare refer to the determination of Philosophy it self, after I have discussed some other Ma∣xims, common to that and Christianity. § 3. 2. The Original Tradition of the all-comprehending Evangelical Promise, [The seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent:] that grain of Mustard-seed, whence grew the tall Tree of the whole Gospel: that Rose of Sharon in the bud, which in process of time dilated its leaves to their full dimensions; deliver'd to the World by Noah, that Preacher of Righte∣ousness, was not wholly obliterated out of the memory of the Gentile-World. That it still retain'd the Tradition of Man's Apostacy from God: appears from Celsus (In Orig. lib. 6. cal. 20.) his quoting Pherecides for bringing in the Serpent Ophioneus, as heading a Party against Saturn, the father of all the Gods; and therefore cast down with his followers out of Heaven, and bound in chains. From Aelian's reporting (Var. hist. 3. 1.) that the Serpent which Apollo slew, had usurped the place of the Divine Oracle: a plain intimation of his presuming to wrest Gods Oracles; and of his setting up his own in their room, in his conference with Eve. The same Author in his description of Tempe, in the story of Python, gives us a perfect prospect of Eden: into which the Serpent had insinuated himself; and where he received his deaths wound, his fatal doom. Erithraea (quoted by Lactantius (de orig. erroris lib. 2.) the greatest part of whose writings are repositories of the old Tradition:) turns this part of Moses his History into Verse. Man was form'd by God's hand, but being seduc'd by the Serpents guile, be became obnoxious to death, and learn'd to know good and evil. Hyginus (in his Poetic. astronom. titul. Serpens) quotes Pherecides speaking of golden Apples; of a Serpent set by Juno to watch her Orchard: of a Serpent which the Gi∣ants (in their ,) set upon Minerva, and thrown by her to among the Stars. Manifest prints of the old Tradition. Indeed the corrupt Matter is∣suing from the Wound, was a dayly Monitor to humane kind, that it had been struck with the Serpents poysonful sting: and therefore it is hardly con∣ceivable, that they should wholly lose the Tradition of the Remedy, the Me∣mory of that soveraign Plant which would cleanse and heal them. Though, through the vanity of men's minds, and the craft of those who made them∣selves Lords over their Faith (on purpose that they might settle themselves in a more absolute Dominion over their persons) that Tradition was in time so corrupted; as it requires a more than ordinary sagacity to scent out the foot-steps of it (and I hope the candid Reader will take that for my Apology, if in hunting after it, I come not always within so full a view of the game, or fol∣low so hot a scent, as to have the whole pack of Readers, with one mouth, cry (,) there, there.) Howbeit I despair not, but that (by the help of the Fathers pricking out some of the prints before me, and with the assistance of his Spirit whose cause I am pleading) I shall trace out the remains of this Tradition in secular Authors, so near its scent and first Original: as to make it probable, if no more, that what the Apostles delivered in Thesi touching the blessed Jesus, is suitable to what is taught in Hypothesi by the Philosophers: especially those of them, who (to vamp and furbish the sullied and almost worn-out knowledg thereof) travell'd into those parts where the Original of that Tradition was preserved. I will begin with that of Plato in the Phaedra pointed out by (the best versed in humane Learning of all the Fathers) Clemens Alexandrinus, (Stromat. 1. 98.) who quotes that travelling Philosopher reporting this to have been the Opinion of those Barbarians, of whom he learn'd his Philosophy; as also of
the Brachmans, Odrysians, Getes, Aegyptians, Arabians, Chaldaeans, and all that inhabit Palestine: That certain blessed Souls (or Daemons) leaving their supercelestial place, vouchsafe to descend into this earthly Dungeon, and, in assumed humane Bodies, to undergo all the miseries that man is obnoxious to in this life: and undertaking the care of Mankind, to give Laws, and teach Philosophy. This, Origen (Contra Celsum, l. 5.) reminds Celsus of, charging it upon his Epicurean blockishness and want of reading, that he should need be told, that it is the common sentence of all Philosophers (who held the be∣ing of a God, and his Providence over man,) that some Gods have been manifested in humane flesh, assumed humane shape, that they might deliver Oracles, and bring releif to mankind. Jamblicus writes after Plato's stile (de myster iis, tit. quando alia numina, &c.) making the Heroes or Semidei to unra∣vel the Snarls which the Cacodemons make: assigning to these last, that they oppress and distemper the Body, that they draw the Soul downward, and hin∣der it in its motion toward Heaven: to the first, that they stir us up to good Actions, that they enliven and enlighten us, provoke us to great and gene∣rous Vertues, that they watch over our Souls, and loose them from corporeal and terrene Intanglements. and in the same Treatise, [tit. quae ratio sacrifi∣ciorum, &c.] he lays down this as a Principle, that we cannot attain to Com∣munion with the incorporeal Deity but by the Mediation of the corporeal or incarnate. A point which he transcribed out of his Master Plato, who (in his Convivium, thus dictates: , &c. God is not to be approached to by man: but all the communion betwixt God and man is through the mediation of Demons: that is, good Demons, or Gods made men: a middle betwixt God and man, the bond which uniteth and joyneth us and God; as Plutarch observes, in his Treatise de defectu oraculorum, where he commends this opinion, as that which salves many and difficult doubts [, &c.] Of this Ethnick Principle St. Austin takes notice, (de civitate lib. 8. cap. 18.) titul. homines ut commendentur diis, bonis Daemoni∣bus uti debent advocatis: and (lib. 9. cap. 9.) tit. an amicitia caelestium per in∣tercessionem Daemonum possit homini provideri; and (lib. 9. cap. 17.) tit. non iali mediatore indigere hominem qualis est Daemon. That as the Pagan Philoso∣phers held, that men must make use of good Demons to commend them to the Gods: whether the friendship of the Caelestials can be procured to man, by the in∣tercession of Demons? Man does not need such a Mediator as the Demon is. And as to that branch of it which asserts the Virgin-birth, St. Cyril gives his Ca∣techumens this item (Catech. 12.) [.] If the Grecians question the possibility of Christ's Incar∣nation, they may be confuted by their own Mythologists. Upon which point Tertullian (apolog. cap. 21.) (after his common use) hath this excellent Ani∣mad version. [Recipite hanc fabulam, similis est vestris, &c.] If the story of Christs Incarnation be a Fable, ye ought to embrace it; you have no reason to think it strange, that the Son of God should be born of a Virgin: for how many Stories have you like this, and far less like to be true than this? You feign your Jove to have had Sons begot of Mortals, which even a good man would be a∣shamed to father: begot in Incest, of his Sister; in Adultery, of other mens Wives; in Fornication, of Virgins; in the shape of Fish, Fowl, and horned Beasts, &c. Had not the World been prepossest with this Opinion, That God-saviour was to be Incarnate, and to assume the Womans Seed; how could it have been so easily induc'd to believe, that Persons of more than common Prowess, Vertue and Activity (especially in cultivating, protecting, rescu∣ing, or delivering humane Kind) whose Original on the Fathers or Mothers fide was obscure, had their extraction on the Fathers side from some Deity or other. Whence Pausanias (in his Corinthiacis;) though he bring different reports of the Original of Asculapius, on the Mothers side, (so obscure was the Parentage of that great Succourer of all Mortals (as he is stiled in that Oracle
which his father gave to Apollophanes) whom the Dog and She-goat of Arestanus found on the Mount Epidaur) yet he fathers him, by common Vote, upon Apollo: and introduceth Apollo, thus resolving the Question of Apollophanes, concerning his Mother: That he was not the Son of Arsinoe, nor a Messenian; but an Epi∣daurian, the Off-spring of himself and the fair Coronis: And the same Au∣thor expounds Homer, as stiling Mochnon [,] Man, the Son of God. Stesichorus, in his Fragments, collected by Henry Stephen, stiles Cly∣mene (after she had brought forth Children to Sol) his Virgin-wife [] & virginalem uxorem. Nay if he were a person of extraordinary Beneficence to his Country, though he had been born in Wedlock, and during his Nonage reputed such a mans Son; yet after the performance of his hero∣ick, and more than humane exploits, some God or other claims him for his Son and makes his Father construe that Verse. Hos ego filiolos genui, tulit alter honorem. Thus Hercules shakes off his Father Amphitruo, for Jupiter; Plato would have discarded his Father Ariston; for Apollo; and Alexander his, for Ju∣piter Hammon. And so ambitious were the Females of the honour of be∣ing esteem'd Mothers of God-saviours, as they were contented to keep their Sons counsel, and to blow their Husbands Horn; (which it had been more for their credit, to have put in their pockets) had they not conceived, that the honour of that, would counterballanee the shame of this: Just as the Patriarchs zeal to have the promised Seed come from their Loins, over-weigh∣ed the sin and shame of their Polygamy. In which conceit, these good Women wrote after the Copy, which Mother Eve set them, at Cain's Birth; whom (thinking he had ben the promised Seed) she welcom'd into the World with this Congratulation [I have gotten a man from the Lord:] she thought she had got the Man of God, the promised Seed, by the fore-top, when she had the Seed of the wicked one by the heel. [Alii subtiliùs [possedi virum Dei:] quasi intelligeret Heva, jam se habere illum sibi promissum Serpentis vi∣ctorem: ità fidem Hevae laudant, quòd promissionem fide amplexa sit, de conte∣rendo per semen suum Diaboli capite: putant autem in persona vel individuo fu∣isse deceptam; quia ad Cain restrinxerit, quod de Christo promissum erat. (Calvin in Genes. 4. 1.) Hence Pharaoh caused Joseph, to be proclaim'd [Abrech] Saviour of the World: (St. Jerom, question. Hebraicis, Genesis 41. 43.) and as such they worshipped him afterwards, under the Symbol of an Oxe, as the Israelites did under the Image of a Calf. A great many such God-men were precipitated into the World, through its impatiency to stay, till the Fulness of Time wascoe. This is that which Origen (lib. 1. calum. 20.) gives in reply to Celsus his Jew, excepting against the Article of Christ's being born of a Virgin: We Christians (saith he) are not the only men that report Heroes to have been born of Virgins: of the truth of which Assertion, he there makes demonstration by several Instances. Of this extract were those whom Creon in Sophocles his Antigone stiles [,] Deos indigends. Tully's Invention is stranded, in seeking a salvo for that Point of Secular Theology and Religious Custom, of inclining to canonize those rather, who were feign∣ed to have a God to their Father, than a Goddess to their Mother: a Custom which seems to him to contradict both the Civil and Natural Law; where the Mothers side is esteemed the surer side. [Quid quorum matres? opinor etiam magis: ut enim in Jure Civili, qui est de matre libera, liber est: item Jure Na∣turae, qui de Dea matre est, Deus sit necesse est—tales tamen nusquam coluntur:] (de nat. deor. l. 3. pag. 132.) But this Observation unties this Knot, viz. It was the Seed of the Woman which the World look'd after for Redemption, and had re∣spect to, in their canonizing of their Worthies. For the clearing of which; and that the Sparks of Evangelical Truth, raked up in the fore-alledged Se∣cular Authorities, may shine out, it will be necessary to blow away the Ashes they are raked up in.
§ 4. All these Quotations faulter under the weight of that Vulgar Error, which had the chief hand in corrupting the Original Tradition, by introdu∣cing the multiplicity of God-saviours. An Errour (I suppose) at first taken up in Policy, by the Heads of the first Schisms from the Patriarchal Church; who, forsaking the one Body, cleft the one Head, the one Seed, into many, to serve their own Interests: teaching their several Colonies to expect (each Faction in their particular Separations) the Birth of the promised Seed in their own Conventicle: (Just as our modern Separatists from the Unity of the Catholick Church teach their several Parties to believe, that they are that peculiar Society, out of which must procede those more than men who must effect those strange things of which they dream waking.) And when upon these suggestions, each Schismatical Confederacy had brought forth Saviours of their own flesh and bone, the Politicians were forc'd to allow this multi∣plicity, for peace sake, to suppress their otherwise-endless contendings, about the priority of those several Saviours, which each Nation, before mutual Commerce, had made to it self: and the Meliority of those various Religions, wherewith those Gods were worshipp'd. To prevent irreconcileable wrangl∣ing upon this diversity (appearing still more and more, as the Nations of the World came acquainted with one another: So as not so much as the Pit∣cher that stands upon Hydras back to tantalize the Crow, but was contended about: some affirming it to be, that wherein Matusius presented to Demo∣phon his Daughters Blood mixt with Wine; others, that wherein Icarius pre∣sented Wine to the Ligurians, &c. (Hygini poetic. astronom. tit. Hydra, 226.) they all came to this point, and (by universal Consent) centred in this Opinion, That the Genii or Angel-guardians of each Country, deputed by God, as so many Lords Presidents over their Provinces, under himself the Emperour of the whole World, suted themselves in their government of them, to the Nature and Constitution of the respective Climates within their Jurisdictions. Hence, as it were, according to the disposition of the Matrix, one Coun∣try produceth A Virgin-born God of one temper; another, of another; one a Male, another a Female Deity; here a Mars, there a Venus; here a Saturn, there a Jupiter, &c. Every one of which are best pleased with that kind of Divine Service that best sutes the Genius of the place of their Birth. Hence Jamblicus builds the greatest part of his Discourse, about Di∣vine Worship, upon this Foundation of Gods Presidents over several Countries and Commodities: (de mysteriis, quae ratio sacrificiorum:) And Symmachus his Arguments to Valentinian, Theodosius and Archadius, for in∣dulgence of the Gentile Polytheism, upon this Maxim: [Varios custodes ur∣bibus cunctis mens divina distribuit: ut animae nascentibus,  populis fatales genii dividuntur:] (lib. 10. epist. 54.) The divine Mind hath distributed to all Cities various Guardians, as Souls are shared out to organized Bodies, so fatal Genii to Nations. That this was their pacifick Salvo, for their Multiplicity of God-saviours, and of the Worship tender'd to them, is manifest, from the Discourse of Cel∣sus in Origen (lib. 1.) where he states the Case thus: [The Law-givers of particular Regions were directed by the Angel-guardians of the places, in a way of congruity to their particular Climes.] (In allusion to which St. Paul stiles some Devils [ and ] (Eph. 6. 12.) Of the same stamp in Christian Rome, apostatized to Heathenism, are their Mahuzzims, who together with God (to them (when Daniel wrote) a strange God) that Church worships, causeth to rule over many, and distri∣butes the Earth amongst them, for a Reward: (Dan. 11. 39. Vide Meed, Vol. 2. Book 3. cap. 17.) [Thence that diversity of Laws, (saith Celsus) yet all just; of Religions, yet all pleasing to the Gods to whom they are directed.] The Ethiopians about Meroe worship Jove and Bacchus; the Arabians, Bacchus and Urania; Egygpt generally, Osiris and Isis (some particular Provinces ex∣cepted, that have their peculiar Deities; as the Saitae, Minerva; the Nan∣cratitae,
Serapis.—) And that they may please such variety of Palats; one Country hath these, another other kind of Rites: one Country abstains from eating Sheep, another from Goats, another from Heifers, another from Cro∣codiles (as sacred to their Gods) which other Countries feed upon, without fear of displeasing their Deities. To which purpose he quotes, out of He∣rodotus, (Herodot. Euterpe, l. 2. 109.) this pleasant Story. The Inhabitants of Marea and Appis (Towns in the confines of Egypt and Lybia) disrelishing the Religion of Egypt, because it prohibited the eating of Heifers (after which their teeth water'd) were taught by that Master of Arts, the Belly, to plead, their Towns belonged to Lybia, not Egypt: upon which they dispatch Messengers to Jupiter Hammon the Lybian God, to tell his Holiness, that they belonged to his Dominion; that thenceforward they would re∣nounce Egypt and her Cow-goddess: neither would they ask her lieve to eat Beef: For being without Delta (the utmost bounds of Egypt) they were born under a better Planet, than to be kept Tantalizing, within the sight of so many fat Bullocks as their Country bred, whose flesh they must not eat, for fear of displeasing the Goddess: for their parts, having said their Grace to him, they were resolv'd to fall to, if he would say Amen. But he (whe∣ther, after the guise of the English Courtesie, he would yield to his Sister∣deity the upper hand at Table, the preheminence in carving; or whether he thought it not worth the while (with her displeasure, and so great an appearance of Injustice, as removing the old Land-marks might be interpret∣ed) to add to his Province so Belly-god a people, as hung to him by no∣thing but the Teeth, and would prove only Trencher-chaplains) would not give them their longings, but bound them to a perpetual Lent, as being within the Jurisdiction of Egypt, which was not bounded with Delta, but the Nile; out of which whosoever drank their Mornings draught, must not dine with Beef. This point of Gentilism Joshua disswaded the Israelites from imbra∣cing, in his sarcastical allowing them to chuse, whether they would serve the Gods of the Nation, from whence they came; or of the Nations of of whose Land they had got the possession: or of the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jocob: of whose Faith this was the Crown, that coming into a strange Country, they neither brought their Penates with them, nor received the Gods of Canaan, but adhered to the true God who appeared to Abraham. Whereas Nahor's Family was tainted with the vulgar Error of Local Deities: so far, as Rachel (not daring to trust her self in a foreign Country without the salvifick presence of her Fathers Gods) stole away those consecrated Ima∣ges of them, into which she conceiv'd the Spirits of those Gods were entred: The purging his Family of which, and erecting an Altar, and adhering to the worship of that God appeared to him, was Jacob's commendation. The Mixture of Religions in Samaria grew up of the same seed; as also the fearful Apostacies of Israel and Judah, both while they were one Com∣monwealth, and after they were divided into two Kingdoms. For, not con∣fiding in their own God, they called in, as it were to his aid, the Gods of Egypt (the golden Calves) the Gods of Moab, Baal-Peor, &c. whom while they sought to please, with services sutable to each Deity, they fell to these barbarous immoralities (of open Fornication, of Sacrificing Children, &c.) as ripened them for Transportation and Captivity. In which School of Affliction they so profitted, as after that they could never be induc'd, by the severest torments, to invocate the names of any foreign Gods. But to re∣turn to the Philosophers. From this Distribution of Countries (saith Celsus) among Guardian∣angels, and their disposal of Religious Affairs, congruously to the Climates which fell to their lots; it comes to pass, that diverse Countries have diffe∣rent Funeral Rites: some by burning, some by interring, some by bury∣ing in their Kindreds Maws: each affirming their ownway best for themselves, and most pleasing to their Local Deities. So as the Scythians esteem Canni∣balism a sober and religious Custom; and some Indians account it an act of
Piety to kill and eat their decrepit Fathers. Of which different Sentiments we have a famous Example in the Story of Darius; who calling together his Grecian Companies, and asking at what price they would be hired, to devour their defunct Friends? received this answer from them, That they would not by any means be hired to commit so savage an Act: then calling his In∣dian Soldiers (whose Funeral Ceremony was, with a great deal of solemnity, and ostentation of Piety, to devour their deceased Parents) he propounded to them what wages he should give them to burn the Bodies of their dead Kindred? They holding up their hands, as Men astonish'd at the horror of this Motion, beseech him he would not pollute his Tongue and their Ears with such a more than barbarous proposal. Hence Celsus can allow the Jew to adhere to the Religion of his own Coun∣try; but that he should impose upon all other Nations the God of Israel (one of the least and most contemptible Provinces of the World) this he can by no means digest. Hence Josephus (contrà Appion, l. 2.) is so shie of condemning the Religions of other Countries; that to the calumners of Lysimachus he promis∣eth he will not recriminate; it being sufficient for him to maintain the Re∣ligion of his own Country, without taxing others: their Law forbidding them to speak evil of the Gods. And that therefore what he should speak in disparagement of the Grecian Deities, should be no other, than what had been formerly said by their own most approved Authors. Though he was grosly mistaken in his interpretation of that Sentence [Thou shalt not speak evil of the Gods:] (that being intended of Magistrates, as his Contemporary St. Paul rightly applied it (Act. 23. 5.) Yet this argues how tender that great Politician was, of breaking the Bond of common Peace, which tack'd upon this Pin; Let every Nation abound in its own sence, as to Matters of Reli∣ligion. This makes me less wonder that Xenophon (the greatest Politici∣an, Soldier, Orator, and Philosopher, that ever met in one Man altogether) should, in that his Specimen of an absolute accomplish'd Prince, constantly represent Cyrus as having an equal Devotion for the Gods of those several Nations, through which he made his marches or conquests: (Xenophont. Cyrus, lib. 2. cap. 1.) In his Expedition for the relief of his Uncle Cyaxeres, at his approach to the utmost bounds of Persia, he presents him invocating [] and beseeching the Gods and Heroes presiding over the Land of Persia, that they would propitiously dismiss him. At his entrance upon Media he presents him beseeching [,] the Gods of Media, propitiously to receive him, (Xenoph. Cyr. lib. 3. 19.) And at his entrance upon Assyria [,] he pacifies and propitiates with sacrifice the Heroes of Assyria. His custom of sacrificing [] was observ'd by Alexander and the Romans, who upon no other account sacrificed at Jerusalem, to the God of the Jews, when they sojourned there; as, out of Apollonius Rhodius his Scho∣liast, is observed by Scaliger (in Eusebii chronic. num. 1685.) Upon this ac∣count the Crime, which Creon charged Polinices with, was, That he attempt∣ed to overthrow the Land of the Theban Gods and their Laws; their Laws extended no further than their Lands:  whence the  took their name: (Sophoclis Antigone.) § 5. How far this supposition, of Gods assigning the Regions of the World to the Guardianship of particular Angels, may stand with Scripture-grounds; either according to Mr. Meed's Scheme, who applies to this pur∣pose that Text of Zachary, [These are the serene eyes that run to and fro through the world:] or according to the compute of some of the Ancients, who apply to it that Text of Moses; [When the most high divided to the nations their in∣heritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people, according to the number of the children of Israel:] (in the Exposition of St. Jerome, in Daniel. cap. 7. vis. 6.) That is, as Israel was divided into Twelve
Tribes, so the World was parted into Twelve [majores Gentes] Ancient Na∣tions, and an Angel set as President over each of them: one of them conceiv∣ed by Daniel to be called, the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia: (Jerom in Dan. 10.) [Princeps autem regni Persarum restitit mihi 21 diebus:] Videtur mihi hic esse Angelus cui Persis credita  (juxt à illud, [Quando dividebat al∣tissimus gentes—statuit terminos gentium juxt à numerum Angelorum Dei:] fa∣ciens pro credit â sibi Provincia, nè captivotum omnis populus dimitteretur, enu∣merans peccata populi Judeorum, quòd dimitti non deberent.) But the Prince of the kingdom of Persia resisted me one and twenty days. This seems to me (saith St. Jerome) to be that Angel to whom Persia was concredited; (according to that [When the Almighty divided the nations—he appointed their bounds ac∣cording to the number of the Angels of God:] an Agent for that Province that was committed to his trust, pleading, by commemorating before God the sins of the Jews, that they might not be dismist out of Captivity to the Persian Empire.) And because there were Twelve ancient Nations; hence these Presidents are altogether stiled by the Gentiles, [Duodecim Dii majorum gentium,] the Twelve Gods of the ancient Nations. How far (I say) this Hypothesis in general, and which of these ways of applying it is grounded on Scripture, would carry me too far out of my way to discuss: (Origen (lib. 5. contrà Celsum) hath an excel∣lent discourse upon this subject, whom they that have a mind may consult.) That which at present I am commending to my Reader, is the abstraction of Plato's Sentence, from the Errors of those times wherewith he was born down; yet so abstracted, it may afford us the Genuine sence of the Philoso∣phers, touching the end of God's Incarnation; viz. To communicate divine Oracles, and to relieve Mankind by suffering, that is, to be (in the Christian Dialect) our Priest and Prophet, our Lord-saviour. Whether this is to be perform'd, by piece-meal, for several Nations, by diverse Gods incarnate; or at once, for all, by one; according to the Dictates of the Philosophical Schools, where they speak under the Rose, out of the hearing of the Vulgar, and are not biass'd with fear of going against the Current of the Popular O∣pinion, is another Question, and comes next to be discuss'd: And let Plato's School determine it By the mouth of his Scholar Porphyry (as malicious and potent an Adver∣sary as the Christian Cause hath met with) who affirms (as he is quoted by St. Austin (de Civit. 10. 23.) that this was the Respond from the divine Ora∣cle, That the humane Soul cannot be purged by the most perfect Sacrifices offer'd to the very chief of the Celestial Gods, (the Sun or Moon;) but only by a Principle. Upon which St. Austin hath this Animadversion; Thou mightest have spared the labour of telling us, that nothing can purge the Soul but a Prin∣ciple; after thou hadst said, The Sun or Moon, sollicited by the purest and eve∣ry way compleatest Sacrifices, could not do it: for if they cannot, who are the chief of the Heathen Gods, sure, 'tis out of the reach of the underlings to do it. Observe by the way, rhat Ludovicus Vives translates Telesmata, perfect Sacrifi∣ces: but Selden makes them all one with Teraphims, that is, Images; which were thought to be [] replenished with the Deities of those Gods they were dedicated to: and whom they invocated after the per∣forming of sacrifice before them. (Such an one was Pope Gerebert taught to make by the Saracens of Spain; and our Bacon falsly reported to have erect∣ed.) Saving that the Teraphim was the head of a Man, bearing the name of one Deity alone; but the Telesmata had the Images and Names of all the Gods they could think of. Such were those of Apollonius Tyaneus, mention'd by Justin Martyr, (respond. orthodox. 24.) such as Scaliger (in his Epistle to Casau∣bon) affirms he had frequently seen. This therefore is manifestly the impor∣tance of Porphyry's Dictate, That the most religious worshippers of all the known Gods, cannot thereby be purged. But what means Porphyry by a Principle? That will best be discerned by observing (with St. Austin) that the Platonicks held Three Principles; the Father; the Intellect, Mind, or  of the Father: and the bond of these, viz. the Spirit: not the Soul of
Man, as Plotinus misinterprets it; (for that must have been postpon'd to the Father and his Mind; whereas Plato interpones it, that is, makes the Spirit the bond or tie betwixt them: (Vide testimonium Platonis (in Epimenide) de Patre Filióque; & Plotini verba (in libro quem inscripsit de tribus hypostasibus) citata ab Eusebio (in Praepar. Evang. 11. 10.) & Numenii testimonia de Trinita∣te; de primo Deo & Deo Creatore & Spiritu vivificante.) Thus also Zeno af∣firms, Fate (that is, the necessary Being) to be  and , the Word, God, and the Soul. And Plato himself (in his 6. Book de Legibus) brings in Socrates, after he had discoursed [,] Of the one Good (that is, God) telling Glaucus, he will speak [,] Of him that is both the begotten of that Good, and his express Image: and in his Epistle to Hermius, he hath these expressions—swearing by [,] God the maker of all things, and the Lord-father of that Principle and Cause: And in his Epinomides, he mentions [,] The Word, the most divine of all things; by which the World was framed, whom a wise man admiring, is inflam'd with desire to understand, how he may be happy in this Life and the future. As to the Third Principle, he saith, he knows not what Name to give it; except he should call it [the Soul of the World; because it gives Life and Being to all Creatures.] And in his Epi∣stle to Dionysius, he tells him that he writes [] of the Trine Divinity, that is, as Porphyry (alledged by St. Cyril against Julian) expounds him, Three Subsistances () in the Essence of the Divinity. Con∣sonant to which Platonick Dictate, is that Respond which the Oracle of Se∣rapis gave to Thales King of Aegypt, at the time of the Trojan War, inquiring who was happier than he? . . The Father, Word, and Spirit; (God alone:) That Cotternal Three in one. Thus Macrobius stiles the First Person [The truly chief God;] the Second [the Mind or Thinking of that God;] the Third [The Soul or Spirit proceeding from that Mind.] Anima ex Mente processerat; Mens ex Deo procreata est: (Macrob. in som. Scip. 1. 17.) These Allegations bid fair for the proof of this Opinion, That the Philosophers were not wholly strangers to the Mystery of the Trinity: And in the last of them Macrobius makes confession of the Trinity, in as plain terms as we Christians do; and of the Order and Manner of the Procedure of the divine Persons, plainer than the Grecian Church would yield, or the Latin Church could prove the sacred Scriptures to declare. I appeal to their Contests about the word [Proceeding] and the Clause [de Filióque:] And to Macrobius a Greco-latin Platonick his so clearly asserting, That the Mind was begotten of God (the First Person) and the Spirit proceeded from the Mind. But that's more than I do (or need to) produce them for: the use that I have for them, is only to give testimony, that the Platonicks vouch∣safed the name of a [Principle] to nothing, but God the Father, God the Word, and God the Spirit: and therefore it is not (even by their Principles) in the power of any other God, by his Mediation, to bring the Soul by Purgation into Conformity to or Communion with God: nothing but a Principle can effect that; and there are but three Principles, Father, Son, and Spirit, say the Platonicks. To this Platonick Notion of a Principle our Saviour seems to allude (John 8. 25.) where, to the Jews asking who he was? he answers [, &c. (in St. Austin's (de Civitate 10. 24.) and others (St. Ambros. Hexameron. lib. 1. cap. 4.) of the Fathers judgment) That he was the Beginning: [respondit se esse Principium.] To be sure the Platonicks did, in a peculiar Notion, denomi∣nate
God the Word, the Principle. Which made Amelius, when he read the Beginning of St. John's Gospel, (In the beginning was the Word [apud Deum esse, & Deum esse, & per ipsum omnia facta esse] the Word was with God, and was God, and by him were all things made) cry out [Per Jo∣vem! barbarus iste cum nostro Platone sentit Verbum Dei in ordine Principii esse:] This Barbarian is of our Plato's Opinion, that the Word of God is in the rank of Principles, &c. And that other Philosopher whom Simplicianus B. of Mil∣lain informs St. Austin of (de civitate 10. 29.) to protest [Those words of St. John [] deserved to be writ in Letters of Gold, and to he hung up in the most conspicuous places, in all Churches:) and St. Austin, in his Confessions, say, that [he had read the beginning of St. John's Gospel in the Platonick Books, in sence, though not in the very same words:] (lib. Confess. 7. cap. 9.) [procurasti mihi quosdam Platonicorum libros, & ibi legi; non quidem his verbis, sed hoc idem omninò: There I read (saith he) and found proved by va∣rious Reasons, That in the beginnning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, that by it all things were made: Multis & multiplicibus suaderi rationibus, quòd in principio erat Verbum, & Verbum erat apud Deum.—There (in the Platonick Writings) I read; That the Soul of man, though it bear testimony of the Light, is not the Light, but God, the Word of God, is that true Light that—Et quòd hominis anima, quamvis te∣stimonium perhibeat de lumine, non est tamen ipsa lumen, sed Verbum Dei Deus est lumen verum, quod illuminat omnem hominem.—And that he was in this World, and the World was made by him, and that the World knew him not: & quia in hoc mundo erat, & mundus per eum factus est, & mundus eum non cognovit. But that he came unto his own, and his own re∣ceived him not,—I did not read there: Quià verò in suos venit & sui eum non reciperunt; quotquot autem receperunt eum, dedit illis potestatem fi∣lios Dei, non legi ibi. There also I read, that God the Word was not born of flesh or blood, nor of the will of man, or the will of the flesh, but of God: Item ibi legi, quià Deus Verbum non ex carne, non ex sanguine, non ex voluntate viri, ne{que} ex voluntate carnis, sed ex Deo natus est: But that the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, I did not read there: Sed quià Verbum caro factus est & habitavit in nobis, non ibi legi. In those Platonick Writings, I found it said in va∣rious and many forms of speech, That the Word, the Son, is in the form of the Father, counting it no robbery to be equal to God; because he is by nature God: Indagavi quippe in illis (Platonicis) literis variè dictum & multis modis, quòd sit Filius in forma Patris, non rapinam arbitratus esse aequalis Deo, quià na∣turaliter id ipsum est: But that he emptied himself (taking the form of a ser∣vant) to the death of the Cross—is not mentioned in those Books: Sed quià seipsum exinanivit, formam servi accipiens, in similitudinem hominum fa∣ctus, &c. non habent illi libri. Indeed that before and beyond all, thine only be∣gotten Son incommutably continueth coeternal with thy self; and that mens Souls do, out of his fulness, receive what makes them happy; and by participa∣tion of that wisdom that rests in him are made wise, is affirmed in those Platonick Books: Quòd enim ante omnia tempora & suprà omnia tempora incommutabi∣liter manet unigenitus Filius tuus coaeternus tibi, & quia de plenitudine ejus accipiunt animae ut beatae sint, & quia participatione manentis in se sapientiae re∣novantur ut Sapientes sint, est ibi, &c. This is a Testimony so weighty, as we cannot question the truth of; it being given in his Confessions made to God: and so full, as it not only proves this Par∣ticular, That the Platonicks conceived the  to be the Son of God, by whom he made the World, to be in the Order and Degree of a Principle (which was all I produc'd it for in this Section) but my general Position, laid down in the first Section of this Chapter, That what the Gospel asserts in Thesi of our Jesus, the Platonick School asserted in Hypothesi, concerning him that was to relieve Mankind. Plato's Doctrine of Purgation came so near ours (saith St. Austin (de vera Religione, cap. 4.) as many Platonicks upon that account turn'd Christian [Paucis mutatis verbis & sententiis: aut si hoc non fa∣cerent,
nescio utrùm possent ad ea ipsa quae appetenda esse dixerunt cum istis fae∣cibus viscóque revolare: (ex Platonis Phaedro & de Legibus & Timaeo.) With the alteration of a few words and sentences; and if they had not, I cannot tell how they could, with the Birdlime and dregs of those their Errors (which Chri∣stian Religion confuteth) have flown back to that good they said was to be de∣sired, and those their sound Principles, which both we and they joyntly hold. The only thing they disgusted, being the application of those things to Christ; they stumbling at the same Stone, at which the Jews stumbled, the Cross of Christ: and taking it in scorn, that so mean a man as Jesus of Nazereth, should be reputed, to be the Saviour, to be that Principle, that  that Son of God, that was to enlighten every one that comes into the World; out of whose ful∣ness all our wants were to be supplied; by the participation of whose Wis∣dom we are made wise, &c. For St. Austin, when he saith. [He could not find in their Books that  was come into the World, came to his own and his own received him not, took up∣on him the Form of a servant, and humbled himself to the death of the Cross.] Must not be understood, to deny that it was to be found, or that himself had found in the Platonick Writings: that the  (in order to humane Re∣demption) was to come into the World, to assume our nature, to be wound∣ed for our Transgressions: for whoever it was by one (or more) that man-kind was to be relieved: that one (or more) must, as we have heard the Oracle (the God of Philosophers, as they stiled him) deliver, descend from his (or their) supercelestial place, into his Dungeon of Earth: and in  (or their) assumed body (or bodies) endure all the miseries of this life, &c. as (Sect. 3. cap. 4.) hath been quoted; out of which sentence (not only of Plato, but of all that exchanged not the old Traditional Philosophy for the Kitching-Experiments of Greece, whom Jamblicus compares to Ships with∣out Balast; for that they had emptyed themselves of what they had received by the old Tradition, (de mysteriis, tit. de nominibus sacris,) we have been, all this while, boulting the Bran of their conceipted Multiplicity of God-saviours, by the Sierce of their more sober and considerate Doctrine, poured out into the bosom of their friends, sequestred from the Censure of the Vulgar (be∣fore whom it was not safe to speak all they thought:) [Difficile est negare, credo, si in concione quaeratur; sed in hujusmodi concessu facillimum: (Cicero de natura deorum, lib. 1.) It is an hard matter, I confess, to deny this in the hearing of the multitude; but very easie in such a select Assembly of friends and Philosophers.] And have thereby gain'd from them the unforc'd confession of this Evangelical Truth. That man's restauration unto Communion with, and Conformity to God, cannot be obtained by the Incarnation of separate Spirits, or blessed Souls, but of God himself, descending into the Dungeon of this Earth, assuming our Nature, and in that Nature suffering what was due to us; and delivering to us the Divine Oracles. Plato therefore in assigning this effect to a Multi∣plicity of holy Souls or Spirits, coming down from Heaven, in several Ages, and Countreys, was a popular Complyance with the vulgar Errour: either out of fear to in his Master Socrates his fortune, or out of design to have the World believe (as some of his great admirers did) that himself was one of those officious Spirits: or if he spake as he thought, it was the froth and e∣bullition of that vanity of mind judicially inflicted upon such; as knowing God, did not worship him as God. That this was his Errour, and such an Errour, as himself, in his lucid Intervals, renounc'd, and was forsaken in, by his own followers: hath been sufficiently cleared; if the weight of this point, and the dissatisfaction of some most deservingly eminent Modern Di∣vines, did not make it shake upon its strongest supporters, and (as it were by its nods) becken to us to strengthen it by Buttresses: I shall therefore beg my Readers patience (which I doubt not but to obtain of him if he can but con∣strue that of the Epigrammatist; [Non sunt longa quibus nihil est quod demere possis; Sed tu, Cosconi, disticha longa facis:] Mart.) while I make it yet more manifest.
CHAP. V. None of their Local Saviours were able to save. § 1. Their white Witches impeded in doing good by the black. Lucan's Hag more mighty than any of their Almighties. § 2. None of their Saviour's Soul-purgers. § 3. Porphiry's Vote for one universal Saviour: not known in the Heathen World. Altars to the unknown Gods; whether God or God∣dess. § 4. The unknown God. § 5. Great Pan, the All-heal, his death. § 6. Of their many Lords none comparable to the Lord Christ; to us but one Lord. § 1. POrphyry (Aug de Civitat. 10. 9. 10. reference:) from experience confesseth the inability of those reputed good Spirits or God-Savi∣ours, to whom the Heathen applyed themselves for cure, to gratifie the commerce to them (their most severe worshippers) in their desired Soul-pur∣gations: in that they were often impeded by their Superiours; and their Su∣periours manacled in the Conjurers bands, so as they durst not effect the desi∣red Purgations; so terrified by the black Witch, as the white Witch could not loose them from that fear, and set them free, to do that good, to which their own natures inclin'd them, and their most religious Votaries solicited them. (Whereupon St. Austin facetiously thus explains: Ergo & ligavit iste & iste non solvit. O animae praedicanda purgatio! ubi plus imperat immunda invidentia quàm impetrat pura beneficentia; ubi plus valet malevolus impeditor quàm beneficus purgator animae.] The Cacodemon, it seems, could bind and the good Angel could not lose. Oh praise-worthy purgation of Soul! where un∣clean Envy obtains that power, which pure Bounty cannot; where the malicious opposer is of more strength than the liberal purger of the Soul. But however ri∣diculous either the opinion or grownd of it were: This Doctrine the Pla∣tonicks grounded upon that complaint which a certain Chaldean made, that all his attempts, and greatest endeavours, for the purging of his Soul, were frustrated; by reason that a man, potent in the Theargick Art, envying him that felicity, bound up the hands of the Divine Powers, charm'd by his Conjurations, so as they could not grant his Request. The Romans more than once experienc'd the same thing: for sometimes these Plebeian Deities lay bonds upon the Superiour: as those in Rome, whose sacred houses had been turn'd to private dwellings, suspended, and (as it were,) entred a pro∣hibition against Esculapius: that he could not proceed in the cure of the Pe∣stilence (then raging) till they had been compounded with, and their houses restored, (Cicero in orat. de Aruspicum responsis.) This was about the first pu∣nick War: (Orosius lib. 4.) of which St. Austin (de Civit. 3. 17.) [frustrà prae∣sente Aesculapio; aditum est ad Sybillinos libros:] After they had in vain, for two years together, invocated the aid of Aesculapius, they betake themselves to thy Sibyls Books. To which also they applyed themselves, in the time of that Plague that happen'd a little before the Invasion of the Gauls, (Livy, lib. 5.) and having long tryed the inutility of craving help at the hands of their Capitoline Deities, are directed to institute the Lectisternia (that is) to yoke the Gods, two and two together, Apollo with Latona, Hercules with Diana, and Mer∣cury with Neptune, into one Team: and after they had provinder'd them well (with Sacrifices) and smoak'd them (with Supplications) not to doubt, but that they would either themselves hale away the Pestilence, or not pass back, but let their Capitoline Jove, or helping father, do it, (Liv. lib. 5. 13. pag. 151.) Their experience before that of Joves inability to cure them (he giving him∣self to Women in his youth, had slipp'd the time of learning Physick (as St. Austin facetiously excuseth him) (de Civitat. 3. 17.) forced them fetch Ae∣sculapius from Epidaure to Rome to act the part of a Doctor amongst them. A∣pollo
having refused to undertake the cure (though fee'd with a promise of hav∣ing a Temple erected to him.) [Aedes Apollini pro valitudine populi vota,] (Liv. 4. 25.) and referring them to his son (as Ovid (Metam. 15.) tells the sto∣ry.) But the Pestilence still raging after all this; and whatever the Duum∣viri could collect out of Sibyl's Books, for the pacifying of Divine Wrath and averting the Malady, proving ineffectual: The people apply themselves to all the Gods they could think or hear of; in so much as there was to be seen in e∣very Street peregrine and unusual Expiations; whereupon the Ediles are charg∣ed to see to it, that they restrain those Supplicatings of strange Gods, (Liv. 4. 30.) The Senate was partial in this Decree: for if themselves, when they saw that their [Jupiter Optimus Maximus] their helping Father could not releive them: call'd in, his Grandchild, Aesculapius: why might not the people, when they found their Cure was beyond the skill of this Doctor, call in a Council to aid him: for they could not impute their not-recovery to their want of will, but skill; seeing Aesculapius had so lately been obliged to do his utmost, by their making him a free Deity of their City: And Jove by the oblation of opima spolia (dedicated to him by Cossus) and of a golden Crown, by the Dictator: (Liv. 4. 20.) I wonder that, after so many and clear experiments of their impotency, those Gods did not take up that Proverb, as well as we men, [Non omnia possumus omnes.] The forms of these God-terrifying In∣cantations are set down in Jamblicus (in Mysteriis:) tit. quomodo obserratores Daemonibus minabuntur. [If you will not do this] that I adjure you; or, on the other side, if you do that which I abjure you: [I will split the Heavens in pieces, lay open the secrets of Isis, divulge the secret that's hid in the abyss, stag∣nat Baris, scatter Osiris limbs to Typhon, &c.] And more elegantly in Lu∣can (lib. 6.) who brings in Erichtho thus threatning the slow-pac'd Gods and Goddesses whom she had invok'd. —miratur Erichtho Has fatis licuisse moras, iratáque morti Verberat immotum vivo serpente cadaver, Pérque cavas terrae, quas egit carmine, rimas, Manibus illatrat, regnique silentia rumpit; Tisiphone, vocisque meae secura Megaera, Non agitis saevis Erebi per inane flagellis Infaelicem animam? I am vos Ego nomine vero Eliciam, Stygiásque canes in luce superna Destituam, per busta sequar: per funera custos, Expellam tumulis, abigam vos omnibus uruis. Téque deis, ad quos alio procedere vultu Ficta soles, Hecate, pallenti tabida forma Ostendam, faciémque Erebi mutare vetabo. Eloquar immenso terrae sub pondere, quae te Contineant Eunaea dapes, quo faedere moestum Regem noctis ames, quae te contagia passam Noluerit revocare Ceres. Tibi pessime mundi Arbiter immittam ruptis Titana cavernis Et subitò feriere die— It cannot but move some kind of diverting if not recreating Passion in my Reader, cloy'd with so much serious and philosophical Follies, to hear my course Muse translate these smooth-footed Latin, into these hobling English Verses. Erichtho wondering how the Destinies Durst so long loyter, at death chasing, plies With living Serpents the dead Corps: and charms Deep chincks i'th' ground, through which she thus alarms,
With barking rage, the Manes. Tisiphon And thou Megaera (for my words ye scorn;) Or whip this damn'd Soul through the Streets of Hell; Or I'll strip you of borrowed names, and tell What kind of Hags ye be; ye Stygian Bitches, I'll hale you into th' open Sun, ye Witches, And leave you there, where neither tomb nor urn Shall dare conceal you. Hecate can turn Her coat, when she before the Gods appears, And have another face than here she wears: But they shall see her, in her native dress, Such as she is 'mongst shades, pale, sanguinless: That face she wears in Erebus she shall show Among th' Immortals. And the World shall know, What cares detain thee in grim Pluto's Court, (Proserpina) and why thou loves that lout; And what it was thou catch'd there, made Thy mother shuck thee off into a shade. And thou (unequal arbiter of the World) Titan and day shall in thy face be hurl'd. This was that masculine Poesie which Plato allowed in his commonwealth, and out of which Porphyry, in his Responds, confirms his Dogma, That the reputed Deities, oftentimes, proved less than men, in the hands of the The∣ourgicks. For he there brings in Hecate, forc'd by the Hag to give Responds, against her will. — . Thy will, Theodames: for Hecate, Forc'd by thy charms, dares not say nay. And least we think the evasion of Jamblicus to be of weight, who limits the efficacy of these Imprecations, to the infernal Deities (those vagabond Fairy-elves, that converse in the lowest Region) whom he confesseth any toothless Hag, if she mutter over them words of an harsh sound, that jerk the Air, though with non-sence, may put into a fright. The same Platonick introduceth Apollo, giving Responds against the hair. —. Your Charms from me, against my will, commands These Responds—I have said: now loose my bands. To spare the labour of particularizing; the Thessalian Hag in Lucian (lib. 6.) boasts, that she could charm what Gods she pleased, to whatsoever in∣voluntary acts she pleased: 1. Not only the bad Spirits, from doing the ill they are inclin'd to, or to do the good they are averse to (with power the Saviour of Mankind must be invested in, or those malicious Spirits (of whom the Platonicks make frequent mention) would prove too hard for him.) And therefore sacred Records inform us: That God bound up the lying, and forc'd a true Prophetick Spirit upon Baalam, contrary to the grain of his co∣vetous inclination; from which he could not extricate himself, by all the sacrifices he could offer, or shifting of place; (supposing, belike, the Daemon that bound him, might possibly be some God of the Vallies; or, if of the Hills, his Territories might not reach to all those upon which he sought for in∣chantments.)
And that our Saviours substitutes (his Ministers sent forth for the good of his people) Gabriel and Michael. (dan. 10. 13, 20, 21.) (vide Bullingerum in locum & in decadibus,) though for some while impeded by the Princes of the Kingdom of Persia and other Nations (that is those Caco-de∣mons, to whose lot, by their own choice (and Divine Justice saying Amen to their choice) they were fallen:) yet at last cast off those bonds, and break through the thickest files of their united force, to bring relief to Immanuel's people. 2. Nor the good spirits to exert their salvifick Powers; as Moses detain'd the Angel of Gods presence, and Jacob the Angel that wrastled with him. 3. But the very best, fairest, and most beneficial of their Gods, from granting the just desires of their most religious Worshippers, and to gratifie the most impious requests of malicious Conjurers. A clear confession, that the best and greatest of those reputed God-saviours, were so far from being able to purge Souls, as themselves stood in need of being purged, from the pest of fear. St Austin ingeniously, [Mirum est autem quòd benignus ille Chaldaeus qui Theurgicis sacris animam purgare cupiebat, non invenit aliquem superiorem De∣um, qui vel plus terreret atque ad benefaciendum cogeret territos Deos, vel ab eis terrentem compesceret, ut liberè benefacerent: sic tamen Theurgo bono sacra defu∣erunt, quibus ipsos Deos quos invocabat, animae purgatores prius ab illa timoris peste purgaret.] (de Civitate, 10. 10.) It is strange, that that Chaldean did not find out some superiour God; who could, either by greater terror force the terrifi∣ed Gods to do good, or to drive from them him that terrified them: and yet so far was that good conjurer destitute of sacred Rites, by which he might purge those soul∣purging Gods themselves of the Plague of their own fear. A passion which he who undertakes the rescue of men's Souls; if he be not absolutely exempted from, he is render'd utterly incapable to perform the office of Redem∣ption. § 2. Upon these Considerations Porphyry (de sacrificiis) grounds this As∣sertion. That as these reputed God-presidents had no power of releiving, but within their own respective Jurisdictions; so the purgation of the humane Soul was wholly out of their reach. The spiritual part of the Soul (saith he) which takes in the Images of Corporeal things, from the Fantasie, inform'd by the common Sense, may (by the cooperations of those Daemons) with certain Magical Consecrations, be made capable to receive the Images of those Spirits, and to see those kinds of Gods: But the Intellectual Soul, wherein is received the Verity of intelligible things, that have no resemblances of Bodies, cannot receive, by such Consecrations, any such Purgation, as renders it fit to see its pro∣per God, or those things that are true. Yet Porphyry (in the same place) takes down the efficacy of these Saviours one Pegg lower, and leaves them nothing to put forth their salvifick power upon, but Temporal Concerns, and the goods of the Body, or Fortune; and therefore counts it madness, in Pli∣losophers, to make any application to them; though perhaps (and but per∣haps) it be necessary for Cities to procure their favour, and make them, by material Sacrifices, propitious to them; for the sake of that external and corporeal good, they may confer upon those, who place their well-being in the affluence of such things. (The fairies may drop a Teaster into the good huswise's shoe, and that's the summ of their rewards.) And yet these Saviours cannot save to themselves this poor pittance of power; denied to them not∣only by St. Austin, who (in his five first Books de Civitate) not only proves, but proves out of Pagan Records, that those Saviours can neither do good nor hurt. But by the most sage Philosophers, and Philosophizing Poets, there quoted by him; to which quotation I refer my Reader, and pro∣cede to another Argument, for the proof of the agreement of the Plato∣nicks with us Christians in this Point, That none of those (by the Vulgar reputed) blessed Spirits, who became incarnate to redeem Mankind, were qualified for that Work: which was therefore to be laid upon one more mighty than them all; able to grapple with all opposite Infernal Powers;
an undauntable Lion, who would not faint nor be discouraged by Lions in the way; a Passion to which all their known God-saviours were subject, and thereby rendred incapable to accomplish the end of their supposed In∣carnation. § 3. Porphyry (in his first, de regressu animae) professeth himself of this O∣pinion, [That God was not so deficient in his care of Man, as not to provide as general a way of Purgation, as the Infection was; and make the Plaister as broad as the Sore:] which universal way of Redemption he confesses, had not been communicated to the World, as far as he could learn, either by the Customs of the Indians, the Disciplines of the Chaldeans, or the Philosophical Schools: there being something of what, in common Reason, was required, in order to the effecting of the Cure, wanting in all those ways of Soul-purgation, to which the most inquisitive Persons had applied themselves. Upon which that great Light of Africa, St. Austin (de civitate, 22. 27.) hath this Note: [Had Plato and Porphyry compared Notes, they would have turn'd Christian,] that is, had Plato dared to have spoken, as freely as his Scholar did, for an Universal Saviour: and had not Porphyry forsaken his Master in that point of Truth, which he asserted, touching the Incarnation and sufferings of the Saviour, they would have joyned hands with the Christian, and have sub∣scribed to his Hypothesis. This very Notion was the ground of their erect∣ing Altars and preferring Prayers to the unknown God. Hence the Mari∣ners call every man upon his God; and lest they might all mistake the true God-saviour, they awaken Jonah to call upon his God for help in that exi∣gent (Jonah 1. 5.) hence they were wont to close their petitions with [Dii Deaeque omnes:] (Servius in Virg. Georg. l. 1.) The Arabians, saith Gyrald, Syntagm. 17.) perceiving the insufficiency of their known Gods to re∣lieve them, dedicated Altars to the unknown God. Pausanias mentions: the Altar [] of the unknown Gods erected in Olympus, (Eliacis prioribus:) and several Altars at Athens of the same Title, (in his Attica:) the full Inscription of which, the indefatigable Selden (in his Prolegomenis to his Treatise de Diis Syriis) sets down in this Form; . . To the Gods of Asia and Europe and Africa: To the unknown Gods and strange Of the same importance were those Silver Tables (Cicero de natura deo∣rum, lib. 3.) which Dionysius rob'd the Grecian Temple of, being inscribed not with the names of particular Deities (as the Tables of their known Gods were) but indefinitely [To the good Gods:] whence that scoffing A∣theist drew an Argument for his Sacrilege, saying he would make use of their Bounty. But hitherto the Gentiles only exprest their diffidence in their own Local Saviours. That which St. Paul took notice of, dedicated to the un∣known God, speaks their acknowledgment of their being at a loss, as to the knowledge of the true God saviour; and their not daring ultimately to relie upon the help of any of their received Gods, either domestick or foreign; it being not in the power of all their reputed Saviours to satisfie their Appe∣tites, implicitly set upon an otherwise Saviour, than any of them were: (whom our Scriptures therefore call, The desire of all Nations;) even him whom they worshipp'd ignorantly and St. Paul declared unto them (Vossius de Idolo∣latr. lib. 1. cap. 2.) The occasion of erecting these Altars is thus laid down
by Isidore Pelusiatas (Epist. 69. lib. 4.) out of Pausanias (in his Arcadicis.) Some say the Athenians sent Philippides, to crave aid of the Spartans, at what time the Persians made their Expediton into Greece; and the Spectrum of God Pan met their Messenger upon the Hill Parthenium; promising them victory if they would erect an Altar and offer sacrifice to him; upon which report, they dedicated Altars to the [unknown God.] Others (saith Isidore) affirm, that the Pestilence raging, and the Athenians having to no purpose tried all their known and allowed Gods; it came in their mind, that pos∣sibly there might be a God to them unknown, who if atton'd would free them from that Plague: hence Epimenides caused the Beasts for sacrifice, to be let loose, and gave order that where they laid down, they should be sacrificed, [, to the proper God:] Whence (saith Laertius in his Epimenides) there were Altars at Athens without names [] that is, of any special God; for that Epimenides knew not to which of the Gods, by name, he ought to apply himself, for the a∣verting of the Pestilence: any more than the Romans knew, what God they should attone when an Earthquake happened: of which Agellius (lib. 2. cap. 28.) thus: [Veteres Romani, ubi terram movisse senserant, nuntiatumve erat, ferias ejus rei cáusâ edicto imperabant; sed Dei nomen statuere & edicere qui∣escebant, nè alium pro alio nominando, falsâ religione populum alligarent. Eas ferias si quis polluisset, piaculóque ob hanc rem opus esset, hostiam, Si. Deo, Si. Deae. immolabat. Idque ità ex decretis Pontificum observatum esse M. Varro di∣cit, quoniam & qua vi, & per quem Deorum Dearúmve terra tremeret incertum esset:] The ancient Romans when they perceiv'd or had been inform'd that there had been an Earthquake, bid Holidays for the deprecation of the ef∣fects of that Omen: but they did not specifie the name of God, lest by misnaming him, they should involve the people in a false Religion. If any man prophan'd those holidays, and therefore had need to make expiation, he offered sacrifice with this form of deprecation; [If thou beest a God, if thou beest a Goddess:] And this Order (saith Varro) was appointed to be observed by the Decrees of the Priests; because they were not certain by what force and by what God or Goddess the Earth-quake was caused. § 4. Now though Pausanias stile those Altars, the Altars of the unknown Gods; yet we are not to think that there was not an Altar dedicated to the Unknown God in the singular number: For Lucian (second to none in the knowledge of Heathen Theology) in his Philopater, swears by the unknown God at Athens [:] and, at the end of that Dia∣logue, exclaims [.] But we having found the unknown God at Athens, let us give thanks unto him, adoring him with hands stretch'd out to heaven. (Though with Lucian's lieve) the Athe∣nians unknown God was to them [] a strange God: not to be found there, but in Jewry, as Lucan sings (Tharsal. 2.) quoted by St. Austin (de consensu Evangel. lib. 1. cap. 30.) ——& dedita sacris Incerti Judaea Dei:—Judea worshippeth alone The God elsewhere unknown. Neither was the unknown God under that name invocated only at Athens: For Natales Comes (Mytholog. l. 1. c. 10.) reports out of Theagenes (de Diis) and Pausanias (prioribus Eliacis;) That at Hypaepae and Hierocaesarea (two Cities of the Persic Lydia) were two large Temples and Altars; to which the Priests approaching, implored the aid of the unknown God. However, from the charge given to Philippides, it is manifest, that the Athenians, be∣sides
those dedicated to the unknown Gods indefinitly, had Altars erected to the unknown God Pan, that is, the Universal Saviour. So far did, the most learned Adversary to the Christian Cause, Porphyry bewray his want of read∣ing, in saying, he could no where meet with the mention of that universal Remedy, which he was confident God had prepared for Mankind. Philip∣pides his Pan was not that Arcadian, whom the Grecians knew as well as a Beggar doth his dish, and had Altars dedicated to him by that name: but some Daemon that gave himself out to be, and was reputed, the universal Repairer of the whole World, the Son of Jove and Hybris, of God and de∣spicable Man, the Inventor of Musick; whence, though the Hill Partheni∣us produc'd Tortoises most fit to make Harps of; yet the Inhabitants would permit none to take them, because they thought them sacred to Pan: (It should seem by this, that the old and great Pan, was Jubal-Cain) (Pausan. Arcadic. ad finem) the Husband of Eccho (Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 22.) a fit Match for, and every way suting the Word of Promise: (who had no issue but by Eccho, children begot of the Seed of the Word; and sent not to redeem some particular Climate (the Province of the Heroes) but the Uni∣verse: whence Homer (in his Hymns) gives this Etymon of his Name, . Him Pan men call, Because he succours all. § 5. But our Saviour's Death cut this Daemon out of his work of any longer deceiving the Nations; (as Virgil out of Sibyl, had prophesied, in his Pan etiam Arcadiâ dicat se judice victum: Pan, even Arcadia being judge, shall confess himself conquer'd, if he dares strive with me.) For this was that Pan whereof Plutarch, from Aemilianus, a man both wise and serious (as that great Critick of Men characteriz∣eth him) tells this Story; (in his Book of the decay of Oracles:) That as Aemilianus was sailing for Italy, a voice was heard, from the Isle Paxae, calling to Thamus the Master of the Vessel, and commanding him, when he came over against the Palodes, to tell the Inhabitants, that the great Pan was dead: which injuction he had no sooner performed, but there was heard from the Island, a sad and wonderful groaning: the news of this Prodigy arrives at Rome with those Passengers, and quickly comes to the ears of the Emperour Tiberius; who sends for Thamus, and (being by him assured of the Truth of the Report) makes a diligent inquiry, of the learned men of Rome, who that Pan should be? This fell out toward the latter end of Tiberius his reign: For Plutarch flourished under Trajan, about the 100. year of Christ (Alsted. Chronol. 40.) and Philip, who tells this Story, in Plutarch, had then with him those to witness it, who had heard Aemilianus tell it, when he was an old Man: and must therefore be near our Saviours Crucifixion, else the Mariners would not have found Tiberius at Rome, but at Capreae. Whence appears how grosly his Theo∣logues were mistaken, in their determining this Pan to have been the Son of Mercury and Penelope; and the reasonableness of this Conjecture, That he was some Cacodemon, who (as the Coriphaeus of all those Thieves who came before Christ) had made the World believe, he was the [,] in Macrobius his phrase (Saturnal. l. 1. c. 17.) the All-heal, One Saviour: [] (Idem Saturn. l. 1. c. 22.) the Lord, not of the Woods, (as the Poets interpreted that Title) but (as Macrobius expounds it) of uni∣versal Nature; whose influence disperfeth it self round about the World: whom the Mythologists do therefore make the representation of the Uni∣verse, because they could not find any person appearing in the World to whom they could apply these Titles, and those descriptions which both Gre∣cians and Aegyptians make of Pan.
So that here we have the Confession of the greatest Theologues and the best cultivated Nations. That their received [] (as Isidore Peleusiota, in the Epistle above-quoted, stiles them) God-saviours or bealing Gods, were so far from being able to cure Souls, as they durst not relie up∣on them, for the removal of the Pestilence, a bodily Malady; but applied themselves to a God, whom they expected would in time discover him∣self to the World; though then a stranger to all Gentiles, and known only in Judea; as not only Lucan (before alleged) but long before him, Orpheus confesseth (in his Hymn de Deo)— [Whom no man ever saw, but a certain only begotten who proceeded from the ancient stock of the Chaldeans:] to wit, that water-born Law-giver Moses, as he afterward stiles him; alluding, I suppose, to God's showing Moses his back-parts. § 6. A principle wherein the Patrons of the Christian and of the Pagan Cause were so well agreed, as they put the Controversie betwixt them to this issue; Whether, in common Reason, our Jesus was like to be that one unknown universal Redeemer; or some one in the Crowd of their reputed Saviours? Hence Julian (in his Treatise against the Galilaeans) singles out Aesculapius to outvie Christ, in the claim of the common Saviour; who, being the Son of Jove, descended from Heaven to Earth, in the Sun-beams, for the health and welfare of Mankind. And Celsus in Origen (lib. 7. ca∣lum. 14, 15, 16, 17.) having argued against the likelihood of the Christi∣an Assertion, That Jesus of Nazareth is that, to the Gentile World unknown, God; who being the desire of all Nations, came to redeem them from those miseries, from which their received Saviours could not free them (it being, as he thinks unreasonable to imagine, that the so very inconsiderable Nati∣on of the Jews, (a people so far out of Gods special care, as he did not provide for them so much as a place upon Earth, wherein they might live together; but permitted them to be scatter'd over the face of the whole Earth) should attain to the knowledge of the true God-saviour (so hard to be found out) rather than the studious and most inquisitive Philosophers:) labours to outvie the blessed Jesus with Hercules, in the power of repulsing all external adversary force (called therefore [] the Scatter-evil, as Clemens Alexand. observes (in his Protreptic.) With Aesculapius, for the Virtue of expelling bodily Diseases (who for all his skill could not cure the Roman Matrons of that epidemical Abortion which befel them at the time of the War with Pirrbus, (Orosius l. 4.) But St. Austin excuseth him for that, as professing himself , non Obstetrix,] a prime Physician, but no Midwife: (de Civitate, l. 3. c. 17.) And therefore Celsus providently advis∣eth, that if we suspect the sufficiency of these Two, to relieve the World of all its incumbrances, we joyn to them (as auxiliary Saviours) Orpheus, who without doubt (saith he) was inspired with a divine spirit, and suffered death for the divine Doctrine he delivered: (Observe, Reader, that the Epicu∣reans could not get out of their Minds, nor refrain their Tongues from acknowledging, that men are relieved by the Death and Doctrine of their Saviour.) Or Sibyl, whose authority Christians so sar prize, as they quote her Verses for the proof of Christs Divinity. (An Heathen Epicurean was the first man that derided the Christian Doctors for quoting the Sibyllines in favour of our Faith: talidedecore gloriamur:) Or Anaxarchus and Epictetus, who gave so great examples of patient and heroick suffering. In this discourse; as Celsus cunningly begs the Question, and takes it for granted, that these Saviours, of his naming, outweigh our Saviour; (whereas their is more weight in his little finger, than in the loins of a thousand such like Mock-saviours:) So he openly confesseth, that not any one of the Gentile reputed Heroes was sufficiently qualified, to be the common Saviour; and subscribes to what I am proving, That none can be the Universal Redeemer, but he that hath in himself the combination of all those salvifick Vertues, which the Heathen
conceiv'd to be dispers'd amongst all their Deities. How much better doth our Apostle state and determine this Question; (1 Cor. 8. 5. 6.) There are Gods many, and Lords many; but to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we for him: And one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him:] understanding, by [Gods] the supreme and sempiternal Deities which the Gentiles worshipp'd. By [Lords] those half-God half-man Medi∣atours, whom they called [Baalim] Lords; (Meed's Apostacy of the later Times) by whom, as middle and indifferent Agents, betwixt those superiour Gods and us Men, they thought we received all manner of Good. Now as the Soberer Party of Gentiles held, There was but one only supreme God; so also, that there was some one individual Lord, the common Saviour, in whom should centre all those saving Properties, that were scrambled (by blind De∣votionists) amongst the crowd of their Local Presidents: and by whom the supreme God would give, not some things to all (as he doth by the host of Heaven:) nor some things to some, either Countries (as their Local Presidents) or Men (as their Lares) or Members, (as those divine Relievers to whom Jamblicus assigns the Cure of several Maladies afflicting the several Members of Man's Body) were supposed to do: But all things to all men: (Jambli∣cus de mysteriis, titul. de supplicationibus.) Hence Caligula (who put in for the repute of a God-saviour among all Nations) was not content with that ho∣nour which the several parts of the World had confer'd upon their respe∣ctive Heroes, but challengeth in gross, what they had attain'd to in parcels, and habits himself with all their Ensigns and Symbols; with Hercules his Club and Lions Skin; with Castor's Cap; with Bacchus his Ivy and Javelin; Mercury's Caducaeus, Wings and Cloak; Apollo's radiant Crown, Bow, Ar∣rows, Graces, Praeans; Mars his Gorget, Helmet, Shield, Sword: and not questioning his passing for a God incarnate in the rest of the Roman Provin∣ces he commands his Statue to be erected in the Temple of Jerusalem with this Title [NOVI JOVIS ILLUSTRIS CAII,] Of the new helping Father; Caius, outshining the ancient Heroes: (Philo Judaeus legatione ad Caium.) I expound Jupiter, [Juvans Pater] the helping Father, by the authority of La∣ctantius, (de falsa Religione, l. 1. c. 11.) who affirmeth that those Philosophers gave that Etymon, who said they worshipp'd, under that name, the best and greatest God, that is, the Everlasting Father, as our Scriptures stile God Re∣deemer. And by his Novi, I think, he understood that new-born Saviour or God incarnate, whom the Oriental Prophecy mention'd as about that time to appear in the World.
CHAP. VI. God the Light, Man's Reliever. § 1. Phebean Light mistaken for the true. All-healing Light. Joves and Vaejoves. Mythology an help at a dead lift. § 2. Wisdom begotten of God; Man's Helper; the Fathers Darling. § 3. Made Man. Sibyls maintain'd, as quoted by Fathers: Come short of Scripture-Oracles. § 4. Virgil, out of Sibyl, prophesied of Christ. The Sibyllines brought to the Test. Tully's weak Exceptions against the Sibyllines. § 5. Si∣byl's Songs of God Redeemer; the Eternal Word; the Creator. Apollo commends Christ. Local Saviours exploded. § 1. THe Gentiles we see, in their second thoughts, pitch'd upon the Notion of one only Lord-saviour. We will next enquire whom they conceived this Saviour to be, or what. And let the most learned and sa∣gacious of all Heathen Philosophers determine this Question in the general, I mean Varro, who, as he is quoted by Lactantius (de falsa Religione l. 1. c. 21.) and by Macrobius (Saturnal. l. 1. c. 7.) affirmeth; That Saturn was to be atton'd by the Oblation of Light, and that Faunus mistook that Oracle which commanded him to offer to the Father of Gods, Saturn, [] [—,] by misinterpreting [] to signifie Men (as sometimes it used to do among the Ancients:) whence arose that barbarous Custom of sacrificing Men, which Hercules abrogated; by informing the Hetrurians, that by [] was meant [Light:] and by instituting the Oblation of the Image of Men made of Osiers; which being set on fire were thrown down from the Milvian Bridge into Tyber: In which Motion they resembled the Light, immersing it self into the Abyss, in the form of man; and, in particular, represented the Sun falling into Thetis or the Sea. For the World being impregnated with this Notion, That God the Light was to be Man's Advocate with the Father; or that God, the Word of God is that true Light, that enlightens (with re∣lief, the whole World of Mankind: (a point which St. Austin saith he had met with in the Platonick Writings (Confession. l. 7. c. 9.) And wanting patience to stay (as to her application of that Maxim) till the Fulness of Time was come, when that Light should dwell amongst us. And seeing, for so many Ages, nothing appear comparable to the Sun for splendour, brought forth this false and precocious Conception; That sure the Sun was that Light: to whom therefore the Priests, in that Prayer that Macrobius mentions (Saturn. 1. cap. 23.) thus applied themselves: [] Oh Almighty Sun, Life of the World, power of the World, Light of the World:] Hence those Titles given to Apollo (that is, the Sun, as Macrobius evinceth from the Titles themselves (Saturnal. 1. 17.) [] sospitalis, [,] Remover of evil, author of health. Hence they pictur'd him with the Graces in his right hand and a Bow in his left, as one by whom God communicated to us all good, and protected us from all evil. Hence the same Author asserts, and proves by particulars, That all the rest of the Gentile God-saviours (Janus, Saturn, Apollo, Bacchus, Mars, Mercury, Esculapius, Salus, Hercules, Isis, Osiris, Adonis, Attine, Ho∣rus, Jupiter, Adad) were not Deities, but either Instruments by which the Sun works, or Emblems of those particular salvisick Properties which are al∣together eminently and radically centred in the Sun, (Saturnal. l. 1. à cap. 17. ad cap. 23. To Macrobius our own learned Antiquary Mr. Selden assents (in his Diis Syriis)
and proves all the Syrian and Egyptian Gods to have been representations of the Vertues of (that Hermaphrodite-light) the Sun and Moon; the Ancients thinking that the Soul of God-saviour, either had been or was to be assumed into those Planets, after he had performed his saving Gests upon Earth, his [animus] the divine part of it, into the Sun; his [anima] or humane Soul into the Moon, as being a Saviour of both Sexes: upon which reason they called Apollo [] the Twin, because he exhibited (saith Macrob. Sa∣turn. 1. 17.) a two-fold appearance of his Deity by illuminating and form∣ing the Moon; for from one Fountain of Light doth that Twin-constellati∣on illuminate the spaces of Day and Night. Whence the Romans worship∣ed the Sun (by the appellation [didymaei Apollinis:] under the name and form of the two-fac'd Janus. And yet to exclude all other Deities from partak∣ing with him in the honour of Mediatorship, the same Author (ibid.) tells us, That Numenius derived his Name [] not from [] his opening of obscure things; but from [] in the ancient use of that word signifying one and alone. That the Assyrian Adad, the same with the Sun, had that name from its Oneness, and signifies the one Lord: (Saturnal. l. 1. c. 23.) Upon which Johan. Isaac. hath this Note, [Significa∣verit itaque appellatio Dei unum, at ipse Deus Solem,] The name of that God signisieth [one,] the God himself signifieth the Sun. To which will give light that of Herodotus (l. 1.) [,] Of the Gods they wor∣ship only the Sun. And that of Plutarch (de Iside & Osiride) [] The one Zoroastres calls [Oromazes] the good God: the other [Arimanius] the Vejove or the evil God, betwixt them both they place [Mithra] the Sun, whom therefore the Persians call Mediator. This Entire Opinion of the Persians, Manes (the Patriarch of the Manichees) espoused: That of there [Jove and Vejove] in his two-fold Principle, good and bad; this [of the Sun] in that Opinion which St. Austin asscribes to the Manichees (contrà Faustum, l. 20. c. 1.) [Vestrae vanitati placuit, in Sole ponere virtutem filii, & in Luna sapientiam:] Your vain mind pleaseth it selfwith pla∣cing the virtue of Christ in the Sun, and his Wisdom in the Moon. The excellent Vossius opposeth these two Testimonies of Herodotus and Plutarch; and, upon the authority of the latter, rejects the assertion of the former [That the Persians worshipp'd no God, but the Sun:] But if we duly weigh them, they are not contradictory, but explicatory of one another. For Herodotus speaks of God-mediatours, whereof, amongst those many which after-ages erected, the Persians only worshipp'd the Sun, adhering in that point to the elder Tradition. And Plutarch's [Oromazes] is nothing else but that God-Creator, whom the ancient Persians worshipp'd without an Image or Temple, con∣ceiving him infinite and incomprehensible; (whereas of God-saviour they made Representations; which, at first, were the Images of those Heroes whom they mistook, for the promised Seed: and, in process of time, the Symbols of the Sun, into whose Body they conceived the Souls of their He∣roes to be assumed.) Now it is no wonder, that not being able to salve the appearance of evil with the goodness of God, they fancied a Vejove, ano∣ther Eternal Principle of Evil, betwixt which two Principles they placed God-mediatour, (as they called their Mithra) that he might on man's be∣half repel the evil of the one, and procure benefits from the other. Chri∣sippus (saith Macrobius) derived his name [Apollo] from the privitive [] and [] many; :] because he is the alone God-saviour, and hath no partakers. That I do not strain courtesie with Chrysippus his sence in this Interpretation, is manifest from that other Ety∣mology of that Name which is there subjoyned: [,] they think Apollo hath that name, from his curing diseases; to him therefore did the Milesians, sacrifice under the name [] salvifick, in order to their obtaining health, (as saith Meandrius.) And Pherecydes re∣ports, that Theseus, when he was carried into Crete, to the Minotaur, made a
Vow [] To the health-conferring Apollo, and Artemis, that is, the Moon. And that we are here to take health in its largest sence (as it comprehends all kind of Welfare and salvation from mi∣sery,) appears from the account that Macrobius gives of the Institution of the Ludi Apollinares among the Romans, which were first instituted in the Pu∣nick War, by the motion of Cornelius Rufus the Decemvir, upon his finding in the Sibyls Books this Oracle. HOSTEM. ROMANI. SI. EX. AGRO. EXPELLERE. VULTIS. VOMICAM. QUE. QUAE. GENTIUM. VE∣NIT. LONGE. APOLLINI. CENSEO. VOVENDOS—HOC. SI. RECTE. FACIETIS. GAUDEBITIS. SEMPER. FIET. QUE. RES∣PUBLICA. MELIOR. NAM. IS. DIVOS. EXTINGUET. PERDUELLES. VESTROS. QUI. VESTROS. CAMPOS. PASCUNT. PLACIDE. If you would (O Romans) expel the enemy out of your coast, and the vomit cast from a Country so far distant: I advise you to vow sacred Games to Apollo after the Grecian mode, &c.—This if you perform regularly, you shall always rejoice, and your Republick shall grow better; for that God will extinguish your enemies, which so sweetly forrage your fields. One point of the Grecian Rite, which they observed in celebrating these Games, was their offering to Apollo an Oxe, to Latona an Heifer with gilt Horns: the first to the Male, the second to the Female-light. By all which Testimonies it is as clear as the Sun, that the Gentiles thought Light to be that God to whom they were to apply themselves for the removal of all sorts of maladies, not only bodily but ghostly, [à quo vis salubris subvenit animis corporibúsque mortalium:] Ma∣erob. (Saturn. l. 1. cap. 20.) as to him from whom a saving power was ad∣ministred for the succour of Soul and Body; as to him by whom Saturn, the father of [Jove] (the healing Father) the [sacer ,] the blessed Mind, or [sator ] the creating Mind (whose quatripartite issue were the four Elements, [Jupiter] the Fire, [Juno] the Air, [Neptune] the water, and [Pluto] the Earth) was to be appeased; as Fulgentius (Mytholog. l. 1. titulo, De Saturno) observes, out of Apollophanes, Heraclitus, Theopompus, and Hellanicus. As also Vives (de civitate l. 7. c. 19.) out of Dionysius, Plutarch, Varro, Festus, Agellius, Macrobius, Propertius, Lactantius and Ovid; where he quotes Ma∣netho the Aegyptian Historian, relating how Amasis instituted the Consecrati∣ons of Wax-tapers to Saturn; which they lighted and set upon his Altars to attone him (saith Macrobius, Saturnal. l. 1. c. 7.) This was to denote the expiatory sufferings of this heavenly Light in an earthly Body. Upon which which reason, they that took the Sun to be that Light, did not only conceive him, to fall every night into the Ocean, but to run his course through the Zodiack, beset with Monsters, the conquering of which put him to such pain, as gave ground to the Proverb [Herculean Labours;] while he is supposed to encounter with the pushing Ram, the goring Bull, the stinging Scorpion, &c. And to have been wounded and hard put to it, in his contend∣ing with Python: But I shall have occasion, hereafter, to express the sence of the most industrious Heathen, touching the Passion of the Common Sa∣viour. I will therefore conclude this Section with one critical Note more out of Macrobius, and one upon him; both tending to the illustration of this Point. That which I note of him is, that the Sun's Name, [] is derived [,] from healing; which the Grecians abbreviated into [] in that form of Invocation [] i. e. Medere Paean, Heal us Paean, when they begg'd health for themselves: but when they invok'd his aid a∣gainst an enemy, by way of imprecation, they used this Form, [] that is, Let thy arrows fly Paean: this Form Latona used when she spurr'd the Sun on to repulse the assaults of Python; this Form the Delphick Oracle taught the Athenians, what time they begg'd Apollo's help against the Ama∣zons: for he commanded them that when they went to Battel, they should in these words invocate the saving aid of Apollo. That which I note of Ma∣crobius, is this, That living in the Court, and being an Officer of the sacred Bedchamber of the Christian Emperours Honorius and Theodosius; of all Gen∣tile
Philosophers, he was most concern'd to play the part of a Mythologist dexterously, and, if it were possible, to reduce the whole Body of Pagan Theo∣logy into Natural Philosophy; that being the only Salvo of that Religion, in the Opinion of the Prince of all Mythologists the great Varro: On which ground O∣rigen triumphs over Celsus (lib. 1. calum. 14.) and the Pagan Theology, shewing that we did not betake our selves to the allegorical Exposition of Scriptures, by reason of their speaking any dishonest or unworthy things of God, as their Poets did of their Jove, whose sayings therefore their Mythologists turned into Allegories. For after that Socrates had detected their inhumane Sacrifices, ab∣surd and ridiculous Rites, execrable and prophane Mysteries: And Euheme∣rus discovered all those whom they worshipp'd for Immortal Gods, to have been Mortal Men; they had nothing to cast over Religion's nakedness but this Cloak. How must then those philosophers, who out of a supersti∣tious reverence to Gentilism (for its Antiquity) turn'd back their eyes from seeing, and design'd to hide from the Worlds eyes, its nakedness, bestir them∣selves in the practice of this art of palliation, after the Christian Philoso∣phers had more strenuously and convincingly demonstrated the filthiness of it: and above all others, Macrobius, whose daily converse was with the most emi∣nent Christians: and especially in that Treatise where he introduceth a Chri∣stian Philosopher (under the name of Euangelus) as an Interlocutor. Hence that Preface of Vettius, (Saturnal. l. 1. c. 7.) [Saturnaliorum originem illam mihi in medium proferre fas est, non quae ad arcanam Divinitatis naturam refertur, sed quae aut fabulosis admixta disseritur, aut à Physicis in vulgus aperitur; nam occultas & manentes ex meri veri fonte rationes, nè in ipsis quidem sacris narra∣ri permittitur:] Religion allows me to bring to Light that Origin of the Saturnalia, which is either mix'd with Fables, or out of those Fables explain'd to the Vulgar by Natural Philosophers: not that which bath respect to the secret nature of Divinity; for such Reasons as are occult, and flow from the fountain of pure Truth, we are not permitted to disclose, no not in the administration of sacred Rites.] And yet for all this premeditated Resolution, and notwithstanding the Biass of Inter∣est, so forcible is the naked Truth, as it cannot be penn'd up in those corners into which he labours to drive it, but openly displays its beams through all those thick Clouds he draws over its face; for though his aim be to make the World believe, that the Gentiles in their worship of the Sun, intended on∣ly to glorifie the Maker of it, in commemorating its Natural salvifick Proper∣ties and Effects: yet the Series of his Discourse doth plainly evince, that that Notion of his never entred into the heads of those Authors whom he alledg∣eth; but that they, through the misapplication of that Maxim [God the Light is the Redeemer of the World] thinking the Sun to be that Light, bestowed upon him such Titles as are proper to the one only Lord Redeemer, and belong to the Sun, not by Nature, but (upon their Supposition) Institution to that Office. § 2. They whose Eye-sight was strong enough to pierce through all vi∣sible Light, in looking for that Light, that was to come into the World: stiled it [,] or [,] that is, Minerva; whom they conceiv'd to be the Issue of Jove's Brain, born without a Mother (as the Etymon im∣ports which the Grecians gave of [Athena] (Motherless) and of [Pallas,] (born of Jove's Brain:) to whom they assigned the settling and composing the Mind of God; (a phrase parallel to that, In whom I acquiesce) and perpetual∣ly shaking her Lance in the defence of Mankind (a fit posture for the Captain of our salvation) according to other derivations of those names which the Hea∣thens gave: (Anonym. observat. libellus annex. Natalis Comitis Myth. tit. Pallas.) A manifest allusion to the Doctrine at first delivered to the Patriarchs, touching the two-fold Generation of that Light, that was to refresh the World, of that Minerva, or Wisdom of God, who hath the Father's Understanding, and more-than-wise Counsel (to speak in Orpheus's phrase, quoted by Macrobius, Saturnal. 1. 17.)
[] by whom the World had been created, and was to be restored: the one E∣ternal, of the Substance of his Father (in respect of which he was [] without Mother: and [] everlastingly begot; as they feigned Apollo: [Camurienses, qui sacram Soli incolunt insulam,  Apollini immolant] (Macrob. ib.) The other temporal, of the Sub∣stance of his Mother, (in respect of which, he was to be [] without Father) that he might be the express Image of the Eternal Father, whom Hermes (quoted by Lactantius (de vera sapient. divinar. institu∣tion. lib. 4. cap. 13.) stiles without Father or Mother, because he is from E∣ternity neither made nor created nor begotten; and of whom the Platonicks (as you have heard) affirmed the Son or [] to be the express Image. Now it being impossible that God the Son could resemble God the Father in the point of his Ingenerability (if I may, in the penury of words to express that inconceivable Mystery, use that barbarous, and to English Ears strange, word) except he were born twice: once without Mother, and again without Father, (both which put together render him perfectly like the Father.) Rea∣son led the sagacious Heathen to this Conclusion, That the promis∣ed Seed of the Woman (by which Mankind was to be restored) being to be in that Generation without Father (and so far be born in the Image of God) must be assumed, by a person preexistent to that Generation, who in respect of his former Eternal Generation was without Mother (and so far born in the I∣mage of God the Father;) and therefore must be a Person infinitly discriminated from the whole pack of those petty Saviour; those Puppies whom (canis fe∣stinans parturivit caecos) the impatiency of the inadvertent World (and the ti∣tillations of the Political World) brought forth, before the fulness of Time: these having, in the repute of all, but one only (and at once) conception of the divine Seed mixt with humane; by which was made a confusion of Na∣tures, and a production not at all resembling the Eternal Father, in point of Ingenerability: for these Issues (in respect of one and the same instantaneous and individual Conceptions) had both Father and Mother; being on their Fa∣thers side, the children of some God's Loyns, (not of Jove's Brain, as the  was conceiv'd to be: not of God's Will, as St. Austin (de haeresibus) affirms Hermes to have thought the ineffable Word to be [Filius benedicti Dei & bonae voluntatis.] The Son of the blessed God and his good Will: upon which St. Austin thus flouts the Pagan. [Quaerebas Pagane conjugem Dei, audi Mercurium. Abjiciatur quaeso ex corde tuo impura pravitas, Conjux Dei bona vo∣luntas est:] Thou demandest of what Wife God begat his Son? Let Mercury an∣swer thee. Cast I pray thee impure pravity out of thine heart; [The wife of God is his own good Will, of that he begat his Son.] In the expressing of whose Eternal Generation, though the Gentiles spake not by Rule (as we do) yet they blunder'd out our sence, and communicated the Reliques of the Old Tra∣dition of the eldest Nations, in such Terms as they could. Trismegistus (re∣ferente Lactantio de vera Religione, 4. 6.) in his Book entituled [] the perfect Word. [The Lord and Creator of all things, whom we usually call God, begat [,] God the second Person, visible and sensible.] I call him sensible, not (saith Trismegistus) because he hath sence (that's not our business now to resolve;) but because the Father sends him to reveal himself to the World: [] (parallel to St. Paul's [God manifest in the flesh;] to our Saviours [He that hath seen me hath seen the Father also;] and to St. John's [No man hath seen God at any time, but the only begotten son, who is in the bo∣som of God, he hath reveil'd him.] Hermes proceeds; because therefore he produced him [] first, and one, and alone: and because he was pleasing in his sight, and full (of Grace) of all truly good things, he sanctified him, and loved him exceedingly, as his own proper Son.
Upon which St. Austin hath this Observation; [Quem primò factum dixit, poste à unigenitum appellavit, (Augustin. de 5. haeresibus) him, whom before he said God made, he afterwards calls his Son and begotten. This Son of God Tris∣megistus (as he is there quoted (by Lactantius, de vera Religione l. 4. c. 6.) stiles [] God's Workman; and Sibyl [] Gods Counceller; because, by his Councel and Hand, he fram'd the World. These passages, in truth, (as well, in the judgement of Lactantius, and St. Austin: (for he makes the same, both quotations and applications of Hermes and the Sibyllines (tom. 6. de quinque haeresibus) are a Transcript of that divine Discourse of So∣lomon touching Wisdom, (Prov. 8. 22.) The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old—when he prepared the heavens I was there—then was I by him, as one brought up with him, and I was daily his de∣light. Trismegistus (referent. Lactant. l. 4. c. 7.) affirms, That the Cause of this Cause, is the Will of the sacred Goodness; [.] which produced that God (God the Son) whose name it is not possible for humane mouth to express: and a little after; speaking to his Son, saith,  there is a certain ineffable word of Wisdom of that Lord of all, of whom we have preoccupations or preconceptions, which to expressis above the power of man. This ineffable word Zeno asserts to be the Maker and Governour of the whole World, (Id. ib. cap. 9.) item Tertual. (apolog. contragentes, cap. 21.). [A∣pud vestros quoque sapientes, , id est, sermonem atque rationem constat arti∣ficem videri universitatis. Hunc enim Zeno determinat factorem qui cuncta in dis∣positione formaverit, &c.] § 3. Now that he, who is this Light of Light, this God-born of the Essence of his Father, before all Worlds, was (in the opinion of the wisest Heathens) to become Man for the Redemption of the World, to become [] mortal, in regard of his assumed humane Nature (as the Milesian Oracle answered those that enquired whether he were God or man, may be evident from the Testimony of the Sibyls; and indeed, was from thence so clearly evinc'd by the Patriarchs of the Christian Cause, as the Adversaries had no place of refuge left but this sorry one, That the Verses alledged were not Si∣bylline, but forged by the Christians, as long since complain'd St. Austin, Quod à sanctis Angelis vel ab ipsis Prophetis nostris habere poterunt—quae cùm proferimus à nostris ficta esse contendunt:] August. (de consens, Evangel. lib. 1. c. 20. Tom. 4. pag. 164. b.) That which the Sibyls sing touching Christ [They might learn either of the holy Angels, or the Writings of the Prophets: but when we urge Pagans with their Verses. they contend that we Christians forged them.] And before him, Constantine (in his Oration, cap. 19.) where he mentions and answers that Calumny. In which way of calumniating that most immaculate Spouse of Christ (the Primitive Church) with a suspicion of the most damnable A∣dulterations, that any Society can be guilty of; some of our Modern Criticks have not been afraid, nor asham'd to run with the Pagan Wits (but with far more excess of impious scorn, and to the utter subversion of all rational Belief; for if that Church was so far deserted, not only of Grace, but com∣mon Honesty, as to forge Sibylline, what assurance can we have that she did not forge Divine Oracles?) I shall therefore first (for the preventing of an inundation of Irreligion) make up the Bank, that has been cut by those too sharp Wits; to whom no∣thing was wanting to render them absolutely (and without exception) judici∣ous, save the learning of the first Lesson in that Science, [To be wise with Sobriety.] 1. Lactanctius (de vera sapientia, 4. 15.) would tell these Calumniators, that, were they as well read as they pretend themselves to be, they would never have made this Objection [Quod profectò non putabit qui Ciceronem
Varronémque legerint, aliósque veteres, qui Erythraeam Sibyllam, caeterásque commemorant, quarum exempla proferrimus: qui Authores autè obierunt, quàm Christus secundùm carnem nasceretur:] The Verses of the Sibyls which the Church alledged, she found quoted, in the writings of Tully, Varro, and other old Writers, who were in their Graves, before the blessed Babe lay in the Manger. Touching Varro the same Father (de falsa Relig. l. 1. c. 6.) gives us this account (and therein resolves the Question of Tacitus whether there were more Si∣byls than one, (Annal. 6.) [An una seu plures fuerint Sibyllae?] M. Varro (than whom never man was more learned, either among the Greeks or Latins) in those Books which he writ to Caesar, the Great Pontiff, speaking of the Quinde∣cimviri, saith, that the Sibylline Books were not the Works of any one Sibyl, though they were all called Sibylline, because all Women-prophetesses were of the ancients called Sibyls (either from the Delphick Prophetess of that name, or from their declaring the Councel of God ( enim Deos, non ,) for they called (according to the Aeolick Dialect) God [Sios] not [Theos;] and Counsel, not [] bit [.] thence the Sibyls were so called, who were Ten. All whom he reckons up under those Authors who wrote of them severally. The first the Persian, of whom mention is made by Nicanor, who wrote the Gests of Alexander. The second Libyssa, whom Euripides mentions (in Lamiae pro∣logo.) The third Delphick, of whom Chrysippus speaks (in his Book of Divi∣nation.) The fourth Cumaea in Italy, of whom Nevius (in his Punick War) and Piso (in his annals) make mention. The fifth Erythraea whom Apollodorus Erythraeus affirms to have been his Citizen, and at the Gracians expedition a∣gainst Troy, to have prophesied the overthrow of that City, and the lying Pen of Homer. The sixth Samia, of whom Eratosthenes writes, [That he had found in the ancient Annals of the Samians, that she had prophesied of him.] The seventh Cumana; by name, Amalthaea, or, as some call her, Demophile, as others, Herophile: She brought nine Books to Tarquinius Priscus, demanding three hundred Philippicks for them; a price which the King would not give, but taught at the madness of the Woman: upon which she burnt three of them in the King's presence, and demanded the same price for the remainder; at which the King more admired her folly: But she persisting upon the same price (after she had burnt other three) for the three then remaining, the King gave it her. The num∣ber of these Books was increased, after the repair of the Capitol, because they gathered up and brought to Rome all the Books of any of the Sibyls that could be found, either in the Grecian or Roman Cities. (Vide Tacit. annal. 6.) The eighth Hellespontica, whom Heraclides Ponticus writes to have flourished in the time of Cyrus. The ninth Phrygia, who prophesied at Ancirae. The tenth Tyburtina, whose name was Albunea; who is worship'd at Tybur as a Goddess. The Verses of all these Sibyls are extant, and divulged up and down, except of Cumana, whose Books are conceal'd by the Romans, it being unlawful for any to look into them but the Quindecim-viri. Their several Books, but without distinction of Names; saving that Erythraeas Name is inserted in her Verses; being more famous and noble than the rest: of whose Prophecies Fene∣stella (a most diligent Writer) speaking of the Quindecim-viri, tells us, That C. Curio the Consul made a motion to the Senate, that Embassadors should be sent to Erythrae, to search out Sibyls Verses, and conveigh them to Rome; and that P. Gabinius, M. Octavilius and L. Valerius, being sent upon that errand, col∣lected a matter of a thousand Verses out of private Manuscripts. Touching Tully's Quotations of the Sibylline Oracles I have spoke before (Lib. 1. cap. 9. sect. 5.) and shall, to what I have made there upon that Sub∣ject, add now these Animadversions: That the Sibylline Oracles were not only in being before Christ's time, but a moat in the eyes of those, who were averse to Monarchy (because they were interpreted to point at the erect∣ing an universal Monarchy, and to boad that indefinitly and in general be∣fore Christ's Incarnation, which the Church after his taking of flesh, ap∣plied to him in particular:) So as the Church was so far from inventing the Oracles, as she did not so much as invent the application of them to the
Messias; but had that done to her hand by other Heathen Divines, who con∣ceived they had respect unto him, that was to be born King of the Jews. For though I believe the more ancient Times look'd upon them [as deliramenta] as little better than the dotages of old Women; because of their denouncing certain monstrous Miracles, without describing either how, or when, or by whom, those things were to be effected (of which deficiency both Lactan∣tius after, and Cicero before Christs Birth, take notice:) yet when the Ea∣stern Prophecy touching the Messias came to light (by means of the Septuagint) those Scripture-oracles, by their punctual describing of every circumstance, gave that light to those more general Sibylline Oracles, as they grew for∣midable to that party, that could not endure to hear of a change of the Worlds Government, into that form which both of them foretold the rising up of. And when the general ones in Sibyl, and the more distinct ones of sacred Scripture, came to receive their accomplishment, their sense grew more plain, and the application of them more obvious, which till then was unintelligible. The voices of the Prophets sounded in the ears of the Jewish people for above fifteen hundred years; and yet were not under∣stood, till Christ's Doctrine, Actions, and Passion had commented upon them. I do not at all wonder, with the learned Dalaeus (de usu patr. lib. 1. cap. 3.) that Ruffinus (in zeal to Origen) should forge an apology for him, under the name of Pamphilus; nor that he should father a Treatise of Sextus, the Pytha∣gorean Philosopher, upon Sixtus, the holy Martyr: nor that he of whom St. Jerom complains, should forge a Letter under his name, wherein he makes him confess, the Hebrews had by their delusions perswaded him to translate the Bible, after that maner he did: But rather at his ranking the most an∣cient Fathers among Forgers, for their quoting the Sibylline Oracles; and most of all at the reason he gives: [because Celsus objected that against Christians.] For had he consulted the place, he might have taken notice of Origen's Reply; That, if Celsus his Epicurism would give him lieve to put himself to the trouble of examining the Authors, out of which they made their quotations, he would find, they did not forge them of their own heads, but found them in Authors of high esteem among all Philosophers but those of Celsus his Sect: (Origen contrà Celsum, lib. 7. Calum. 16.) Besides, it is not like that such holy men would support so strong an edifice, with so weak a prop of a pious fraud; or borrow help from a falshood, to evince the Truth. If they durst have been so impudently ventrous, how easie had it been for their learned Adversaries to have detected the Imposture, and silenced the Christian Advocates with reproach and shame? (as Dr. Heylin in answer to Casaubon (Geogr. Marmoricâ, pag. 931.) If it be question'd, how they came into the Christians hands? Lactanti∣us inform us, out of their own Writers; That the Books of all the Sibyls, save Cumana, were vulgar, and in every Man's hand that would reach for them. And though Augustus caused a thousand Sibylline Oracles to be burnt (which by the number seem to be those very Verses of Erythraea which the Roman Legats collected;) against which he might (perhaps) have a pique, upon rea∣son of State, because of their agreement with that Eastern Oracle, which had put the World into those expectations of a change, as that wise Prince thought ought not to be cherished; as tending toward the keeping of the Empire from a perfect settlement. Upon the same account Agrippa, in his Edileship, the year before M. Anthony's overthrow) banished Astrologers and Prestigiators (Di∣on 49.) perhaps, because upon their instigation, Anthony had caused the Ale∣xandrians to give to Caesarion the Title of King of Kings. Yet notwithstand∣ing, the Manuscripts, out of which the copies were transcribed, were still in Being. To that Objection from the burning of the Capitol in the Social War, &c: and therewith all the Sibylline Oracles there deposited, no more need be
said but this: That the Fathers made no quotations out of those Books of Cumena which Tarquin bought (the only Books there laid up, and into which alone it was not lawful for any to look, but the Quindecim-viri, to whose custody they were committed:) and had they been as common and vulgar as the rest were, out of which the Fathers made their allegations, it is like the Church would have made little or no use of them. For, from the time wherein that Prophetess liv'd, and the use which the Romans made of them, I guess she wrote in another strain, and by another spirit, than Cumaea and the rest did. [Quod ex Cumaeo carmine se fassus est transtulisse Virgilius, quo∣niam fortassis etiam ista vates eliquid de unico Salvatore in spiritu audierat, quod necesse habuit confiteri.] (August. Epist. 156.) Virgil saith that he translated this Poem out of Cumeas: because perhaps this Prophetess had received something in the spirit concerning the one Saviour, which she was necessitated to confess. And that Tarquin's Cumena wrote the Epilogue to Numa's Aegeria, being that to her, which the Prophets were to Moses, an Interpretess; who taught them to apply Numa's general Laws, touching Religion, to particular occasions and contingencies; For, all I find produc'd out of her Oracles, are certain Directories, in such cases as they could not resolve, by the help of Numa's Rubrick. 2. As for other Sibyllines they were burnt afterwards indeed (by the Arch-traytor Stilico:) but before that time, the best part of them had been quoted by, and transcribed into other Authors, out of which, what is now extant of the Sibyls, is for the most part gathered, (Heylin Geogr. Ar∣moricâ.) And yet 3. Even Cumenas were in being, and escaped burning, in the Reign of Julian; when the Temple of Palatine Apollo was consumed by fire: [Ubi ni multiplex juvisset auxilium, etiam Cumaena carmina consumpse∣rat magnitude flammarum:] (Ammian. Marcellin. Julian. l. 23. cap. 2.) Where, if there had not been a great deal of help, the violence of the flames had con∣sumed the Verses of Cumena. A Testimony beyond all exception, given by one of Julian's Military Commanders, and an Eye-witness. § 4. But to put it beyond all possibility of a rational Doubt, That the Si∣byls were preexistent to the Apostles, as to those their Oracles which the Church made use of: Virgil had out of them (before our Saviour's Birth) composed his Genethliacon: wherein, as he interprets them to portend the greatest change and restoration of the World, by the procurement of one to be born about that time; so he comprehends all, in effect, which the Fathers quoted the Sibyls for: all which are not applicable to any person, that has yet appeared in the World, save the blessed Jesus. So that both Song and Descant (mutato nomine) were made to the Churches hand. See Constantine's Speech (in Eusebius) chap. 20. where that religious Emperour comments up∣on Virgil's 4. Eclog, and shews, That he (who was contemporary with Au∣gustus) in that Oracle, translated out of Sibyl, wrote so truly and aptly of Christ, [Ut nec his veriùs quicquam, nec ad Servatoris virtutem aptiùs dici pote∣rit:] That nothing could be said either more truly or more properly of our Saviour, than the contents of that Poem. Add to this the diligence used by the Romans, to prevent the taking of forged Oracles into the Sibylline Canon; exprest by Tacitus (Annal. 6.) in the case of Quintilianus the Tribune, his putting it to the Senat's Vote, whe∣ther a certain Book of Sibyl (which Caninius Gallus, the Quindecim-vir, had requested might be received into the number of the Sibyllines) should be put into the Canon? Of which Tiberius hearing, chides the Tribune, as too young to understand how business of that consequence ought to be managed: but se∣verely rebukes Gallus, for that he being an old Master of Ceremonies, should so much, as put it to the question, before he had (as the manner was) caused the Book to be read and canvas'd by his Colleagues and other persons skill'd in such Affairs; withal admonishing him, how Augustus (for that many vain things went under the famous name of Sybyl) had decreed, That it was in∣sufferable, that those Verses should pass (though but in private hands for Sibyls,
that had not been first legally examin'd. The like caution our Forefathers used (saith he) after the burning of the Capitol in the Social war, making search in Samos, Ilium, Erythrae, through Africk also and Sicily and the Italick Colonies, for the Verses of Sibyl, [dato Sacerdotibus negotio, quantum humana ope potuissent, vera discernere:] (Tacit. ib.) and committing to the Priests the charge of discern∣ing which were true, as far as by humane strength it was possible. I observe here by the way, that no Sibylline Verses were permitted to be, even in pri∣vate hands, but such as were approved to be such; and that therefore those Sibylline Oracles which the Quindecimviri, after approbation, had received into their custody, remained (in other Copies) in private hands, and were not (as those of Cumena) lock'd up from vulgar inspection. But that for which I directly alledge this discourse of Tacitus is, to prove, that the Ro∣mon State would allow nothing for Sibylline, that would not endure the se∣verest scrutiny. And therefore had those Verses which the Church quoted, as such, been spurious, (or but under the least suspicion thereof) we should have heard of it by otherwise Persons than Celsus, we should have heard not only the Epicurean Hogs grunting it, but the Lions roaring it against us. Cicero indeed excepts against the divine Original of those Acrostick Sibyllines (out of which Caesar procured some body to pick the name of [a King] as a Title which the Universal Monarch should assume; which Title he there∣fore would have had the Senate to confer upon himself:) for that such curi∣ous versifying savour'd too much of the Lamp, and father'd those Poems rather upon humane Industry, than divine Inspiration. But first, this Rea∣son can be of no force with us, who know what excellent Poems Moses, Deborah, David, Solomon, Hannah, &c. made, by divine Inspiration: Nor with those eminent Philosophers, who queried how Apollo came to lose his versifying Vein? of which they could not have had any scruple, if they had not believed his Oracles were at first given out in Verse: nor with himself, if he had not forgot, since the Father whipt the Son for extemporizing in that Vein Parce precor genitor, posthac non versificabor: Or not coneiv'd the Divine Mind not able to do that, (when it would) which his did (against his will.) Secondly, had they been the result of humane In∣dustry, it could not be of those men that were not in Being till after he was in his Grave, as the Christian Name it self was. And lastly, had he had Au∣thority on his side (which is the main proof in matters of fact) he would rather have produced Witnesses to depose, who was the suspected father, by what Legerdemain they gain'd the repute of being Sibyls (and that among the Romans, where none could be canonized for such, till they had under∣gone the severest censure that humane Wit could invent, to try their legiti∣macy by:) than attempt to prove them Bastards by such weak reasons, as have not force enough to repel the single Testimony of any one person that is not of profligated credit, much less the united Vote of the uninterrupted succession of the whole College of the Quindecim-viri and most knowing Pa∣gan Divines: who (before Tully was born) upon serious examination, had past them for Sibylline: and (after the divulging his reasons to the contrary) per∣sisted in the Opinion, That they were not of humane Invention, but divine Extraction. Briefly, I shall despair of ever disputing those men out of their preoccupations, with whom the Rhetorical flourishes of one Orator, or the Fancy of one Augur (and he prejudic'd by interest) is of more weight; than the joynt authority of so many Sages, and the general Voice of all people, who had no temptation to be too favourable, but rather over-severe, in their sentencing those Books to be Sibyls, which imported, not only such alterati∣ons, in general, as the forethought of, is naturally sormidable to all honest men of settled and composed spirits, (that love not to fish in troubled waters:)
but particularly, the erecting of a Monarchy in Judea, that should over-top the Roman Empire. Having therefore thus laid the foundation, and proved the Sibylline Ora∣cles to have been, in common repute, of divine Original: and those to have past for Sibyls (by the Vote of those Ages were best able to judge) out of which the Primitive Church made her allegations. I proceed to shew that all they who imbraced those Oracles (and they were the far greater part of the culti∣vated World) were of opinion (if not faith) that the Universal Redeemer could not be any created blessed Spirit, but the Eternal God himself, who to that end was to be incarnate; this being the Respond of those Oracles they held to be divine. § 5. Erythraea in the beginning of her Song, celebrates the Son of the high God with these Titles (Lactant. de vera sap. 4. 6.) . . [The all-refreshing Creator, who gives the sweet Spirit to all, and whom God hath made the head over all Gods:] And concludes that Song thus; . [Him hath God given to all that believe in him, to bring them to honour;] or God hath given to all men that believe, to crown him with honour, or to esteem him the ancient of days; (for [] senex and [] honor, are so near a kin, as the one is derived of the other; and that, in the judgment of Plato, who (in the 2. of his Polit.) hath [] having old men in honour.) However Sibyl here teacheth, That the same God is the cherisher, the re∣fresher, the restorer of all, who is the Creator of all, and whom God hath made high above all Gods; and given to them that believe, to honour him, as him that bringeth them to Glory. Another Sibyl (quoted by the same Father) sings thus; . [Acknowledge him for thy peculiar (or proper God) who is the Son of God.] This brings to mind that fore-cited passage in Porphyry, [The intellectual Soul can∣not, by any Theurgical purgations, be made capable to apprehend its proper God) [,] which as it confirms the legality of this quotation (for it was from this Sibylline, and no where else that I can find, that that great Phi∣losopher had this Notion) so it implies the learned World's preoccupation with this conceit, That none of their reputed Gods, was that proper Savi∣our of Mankind, who was to work out the Souls perfect Redemption: (and seems to be a transcript of that older one) [He is the Lord thy God, and wor∣ship thou him] (Psal. 45.) A Cure to be effected only by the [] the Word, as Sibyl elsewhere expresseth; . [Working all things and curing all diseases by his word:] They conceiv'd God might delegate particular Cures to Local Deities, but the all-curing God must be the all-making God; and that none could restore, but that Word by which all things were created. In manifest allusion to that of the Psalmist, [In them he hath set a tabernacle for the sun.] Another Sibyl thus warbles, quoted by Lactan. (de divino praemio, 7. 19.)
, . [God shall send a King from the Sun, who shall make peace all over the Earth.] To which Julian (alluded in that quotation of his which hath formerly been al∣ledged;) who, not daring to question the authentiqueness of this Sibylline, and taking it for granted, that the common Saviour must come from the Sun (that his Aesculapius might, according to this Oracle, be qualified for that Office) fancied him to have descended by the Sun-beams into this World. And St. James in his [.] Every good gift and every perfect gift, is from above, and cometh down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of change:] The comprehensively good, and every way perfect Gift, the All-heal, de∣scends not from this visible Sun, which every day appears in several habi∣tudes and positions, and, every year, is farther from us, or nearer to us, af∣ter the proportion of its moving toward the Northern or Southern Tropick; from whence it casts several shadows to the several parts of the World; (some being [] that cast no shadows at all; some [] that cast sha∣dows on one side; and some [] that cast shadows round about.) But from that Fountain of Light, that's exempted from all mutation. From inacceisible Light came that Sun of righteousness, which arose upon all Na∣tions, with healing under his Wings. This is the only God can save to the uttermost, whom (as the Oracle of the Milesian Apollo (Lactant. de ira Dei) describes the God of Judea) infer∣nal Devils fear. (Of which and the like Responds, St. Austin (de consensu E∣vangelist. 1. 15. (& de civitate Dei, 19. 23.) writes thus: [Quidam eorum Philoso∣phi (sicut Porphyrius Siculus in libris suis prodidit) consuluerunt Deos suos, quid de Christo responderent; illi autem Oraculis suis Christum laudare compulsi sunt: nec mi∣rum cùm Daemones, &c. Mar. 1. 24.) Some of their Philosophers (as Porphyry writes) enquired of their Gods, what they could say concerning Christ; and that they were forc'd in their Oracles to commend Christ: which is not at all to be thought strange, seing we read (St. Marc. 1. 24.) That the Devils confest him to be the Son of God. But let us hear Apollo: —, , . [This King God (in the Apostle's phrase, the only Potentate) and Creator of all things; the Earth, the Heaven, and Sea; revere; before whom hellish darkness and Demons tremble.] And therefore Sibyl chides the Grecians for their extreme vanity (Lactant. de falsa Relig. lib. 1.) ; ; , ; [Greece, why dost thou put thy trust in provincial Presidents, who are but men? Why dost th bring vain oblations to dead men? Why dost thou sacrifice to Idols? Who injected this folly into thy mind, that thou should do these things, and neg∣lect the person of the great God?] This was that Grecian folly which (as I said at my entrance upon my dis∣course, upon Plato's reporting his own, and those Barbarians Opinion, from
whom he learn'd his Philosophy;) Grecizing Moses intermixt the true Tra∣dition with, making it speak the Language of his own Country: wherein he was not only forsaken by his own School, but exploded by the adherents to the Sibylline Books; out of which these last-quoted Verses give so express a Reproof of that, and so full Proof of the contrary Doctrine (that men are to expect salvation, and (in order to the obtaining of it) to put their trust, not in many, but one Saviour, (who is the Person of the great God) as I shall burden my Reader with no more Allegations, nor any further discourse upon that point; but proceed to another Hypothesis of the Ethnick Theo∣logues, concurring with the Fundamentals of the Gospel, and exprest in that forecited passage in Plato, viz. CHAP. VII. Man healed by the Stripes and Oracles of God-man. § 1. Jew hides face from Christ. Greatest Heroes greatest sufferers; the expia∣tory painfulness of their Passions. § 2. Humane Sacrifices universal: § 3. Not in imitation of Abraham. Porphyry's Miscollection from San∣cuniathon. Humane Sacrifices in use in Canaan before Abraham came there: And in remotest Parts before his facts were known. In Chaldea be∣fore Abraham's departure thence. § 4. It was the corruption of the old Tradition of the Womans Seed's Heel bruised. Their sacred Anchor in Extremities. § 5. The Story of Kings of Moab and Edom vulgarly mis∣taken: different from Amos his Text. King of Moab offer'd his own Son, the fruit of the Body for the sin of the Soul. § 6. What they groped af∣ter exhibited in Christ's Blood. § 7. Man's Saviour is to save Man by de∣livering divine Oracles. Heroes cultivated the World by Arts and Sciences. § 8. Gospel-net takes in small and great. The Apostles became all things to all men; how? § 1. A Relique of the old Tradition, delivered in Paradise, and wrapp'd up in those clauses [The Serpent shall bruise the heel of the Womans Seed; and he shall break the Serpents head:] the first implying Christ's Passion, and the latter his undeceiving the World, by delivering true Oracles to the World, which had been cheated by the Devil's false ones. Of the first Member of this Tradition we find reserves in the Sibylline Books quoted by Lactantius (de vera Rel. lib. 4. cap. 16.) . [He shall become miserable, contemptible, without form; that he may give hope, afford help to miserable men.] , , , . [He shall fall into the hands of sinners and infidels; who shall with impure hands box him about the ears, and spitefully spit upon him, and he shall give his most in∣nocent back to scourges.] . —
[When they smite him upon the cheek he shall hold his peace; so as Men shall not take him for the Word, oe understand why he came (to wit) to make the dead hear his voice; and he shall wear a Crown of thorns.] . . [They shall give him Gall to eat, and Vinegar to drink: these are the Commons which that inhospitable Generation will allow him: By which misusages his face shall be so marred, as his own shall hide their faces from him, as seeing nothing in him that was desirable;] that could speak him to be [The desire of the Nati∣ons:] for thus sings another Sibyl of the Land of Judea: . [Fool that thou art! thou canst not know thy own God, through the vizour of that contempt thou casts upon him.] These Responds eccho so distinctly to the Voices of the Prophets, and so exactly sute the History of the Gospel, as, had they all proceeded from one mouth; they could not have made a more perfect Harmony. That the Writings of the Philosophers are Repositories of the same Do∣ctrine, hath been already evidenc'd out of Plato, who affirms that it is the Opinion of those Barbarians of whom he learn'd his Philosophy, as also of the Brachmans, Odrysenans, Getes, Egyptians, Arabians, Chaldeans, and all that inhabit Palestine; That those blessed Souls, who leave their supercelesti∣al place, and vouchsafe (for the relief of Mankind to assume humane Bodies) do in order to that undergo all the miseries of this Life. To which Isocra∣tes gives his Vote (in the name of the greatest part of the World) telling us (in his Euagoras) [. That most of those that were re∣puted Semidei (half-God half-man) and those the most famous, were reported to have undergone the greatest calamities; and that in pursuit of achievements, which were more full of danger to themselves, than of Immediate profit to others: (Isocrat Hel. laudatio:) [—.] of which he giveth instance (Orat. ad Philippum) in Hercules: whom notwithstanding, with the same breath, he affirms [—] to have had more Wisdom than Fortitude. Now how it could stand with his Wisdom, to imploy his Fortitude in those dangerous and painful labours, which brought so much hardship upon himself, and no profit to others, can hardly be resolv'd: except he undertook those labours (otherwise in vain) as Expiations, and spent his sweat and blood, as Libations, as Propitiations, to appease the incensed Deity, not for his own but his Countries sins: for [The God-begotten (saith Isocrates, Busirid. laudat.) [] are free from sin, and have all Vertues in their perfection.] By this oblation of himself for others, Hercules his labours were beneficial to the whole World: [.] and he procured to himself the Surname of [] (Clemens Alexandr. Protrept.) The driver away of evil: Not by the physical force of his achievements; (for most of them, such as his killing Serpents in his Cradle, his suffocating of Achelous, his killing of Nessus, his purging the King of Elis his Stable, his hunting to death the Parthenian Hart, his conquest of the Amazons, his fetch∣ing the Hesperian Apples, his slaughtering Diomedes Horses, and his haling up of Cerberus, &c.) had no natural tendency, either to the conveying of good unto, or removing of mischief from Mankind:) but by the merits of his suf∣ferings. Celsus instanceth in Zamolxis, among the Getes; Mossus, among the Cilicians; Amphilochus, among the Acarnanians; Amphianorus, among the
Thebans: & Trophemius, among the Lebadienses: (Orig. cont. Cels. l. 3. c. 9.) where he compares the blessed Jesus, in point of suffering, to those reputed Gods of these Nations; who all underwent violent and painful deaths for their Countries good. Besides, Isocrates, in comparing him with Theseus, observes that Theseus his gests were (in their own nature) behoofful to the several Countries wherein they were perform'd; and yet he was not deified. A manifest Argument, that the World, in its canonizing Saviours, consider'd not, so much, the present beneficialness of mens Exploits, to them for whom they were perform'd; as their expiatory painfulness to them that perform'd them. And therefore that strenuous and philosophizing Oratour did, contrary to his wont, put in a Bar against Euagoras his obtaining the honour of being esteemed a God, in that very Argument he presseth for his deserving of it, as well as, or ra∣ther than, the best of the reputed Semidei: for that their lives were incum∣bred with bitter afflictions, but his (like that of the Gods) freed from in∣cumbrances. For, by his favour, this was the Worlds sense; That who so would redeem the World from misery, must, while he abode in this Rule (to which he descended for Man's relief) undergo misery, be (in the Prophet's Language) a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; I say acquainted with it; grief must dog them, and tread upon their heel. Hence it was that Q. Curtius did not obtain the repute of a God, though he threw himself alive into that Gulph, in the Market-place: Nor the Decii (Father and Son) though they devoted their own heads for the publick safety; Nor Codrns, though he offer'd his life for the Athenians: Nor Themistocles, though, by a volun∣tary potion of Bulls Blood, he fell down before the Altar, as a Victime for his Country: Nor the Philaeni, who would be buried alive where they stood, upon condition that that place might be their Countries Bounds (Valer. Max. 5. 6.) Neither could Adrian, with all his Art, avoid the scorn of the World; for attempting to deifie, his Paramour Antinous, who voluntarily immolated himself, to gratifie Adrian in his Magical Divinations, whereto an humane Sacrifice was required: (Dion Adrianus.) Because their sufferings were but short; whereas the Saviour must be acquainted with grief during his life. § 2. This Doctrine the World wrote in the blood of her Sacrifices, which was universally accounted Expiatory, at the first, in reference to that which was to flow from the bruised Heel of the Womans Seed. [Vide Cypri∣an (de ratione Circumcisionis) hujus oblationis doctrinam sacrificia continebant antiqua.] To whom Calvin assents; [Ipso more sacrificandi, quamvis adulte∣rino, convictae fuere gentes propriae indignitatis, ut agnoscere deberent, humano generi non aliter propitium esse Deum quàm reconciliatione interpositâ—dis∣camus quicunque unquam Deum verè quaesierunt, litationem in sanguine tulisse, ità ante Legem latam semper victimis sancita erat Religio:] (Calvin in 2. praecept.) Sacrifices of old contain'd the Doctrine of the oblation of Christ's Blood (saith St. Cyprian.) By the very manner of sacrificing (saith Calvin) though adulterated, the Gentiles were convinc'd of their own unworthiness, and that they ought to ac∣knowledge, that God is not made propitious any other way, than by the interposi∣tion of reconciliation wrought by the Blood of the promised Seed: we may there∣fore learn, that whosoever sought God truly, offer'd bloody Sacrifices. So that Religion was always (even before the giving of the Law) ratified by Victimes. Though in process of time, the Gentile, that had the Institution of sacri∣ficing only by oral Tradition, grew as vain as (and no more vain than) the Jew (who had that Tradition in writing) did, in a shorter tract of time; both of them misconceiving the Blood of Bulls and Goats to be in themselves ex∣piations for sin, without relation to that which it typified Yet as God hath beaten the Jew from that conceit, ever since the final demolishing of that Temple, wherein alone it is lawful for him to offer bloody Sacrifices; so the Gentile argued himself out of it by degrees: in so much as in those parts of the World, that have continued Pagan to our memory, we cannot re∣trieve
the time ('tis so long since) when any Blood was offer'd (as propitiato∣ry) but humane. (Heylin America) The Inhabitants of Nova Gallicia are wor∣shippers of the Sun, and Cannibals (pag. 1041.) They of Nova Hispania think the Gods are pleased with the blood of Men, which they sacrifice to them (pag. 1044.) The Men of Peru, at the death of their great men use to kill and bury with them one or more of their Servants: (pag. 1065.) They of Brasil, on high Festival days, have publick assemblies, and make merry over the roasted Body of a fat man, whom they cut in collops and eat (pag. 1079.) This makes me think they are Cannibals, not in respect of their common Meals, but their Religious Festivals; or if they eat mans flesh ordinarily, they contracted that Custom (as o∣ther Nations did that of eating the flesh of Beasts) by using to eat it, at Sacrifice∣feast: however I find not any sacrifices in use in that new found World but of men. And where the blood of Beasts was sacrificed of old (as old as any Secular History reaches to) there also was offered the blood of Men, in order to the pacifying of divine Wrath; a clear evidence that the World durst not trust to any, but the Blood of the Womans Seed, to make its peace with Heaven. For the inforcing of this Argument it will be requisite that I prove these three Points. 1. That, so far as Secular History reacheth, it hath been the universal Cu∣stom of the Pagan World, to sacrifice men for the appeasing of the divine Wrath. 2. That this Custom was not taken up in imitation of Abraham's offer to sacrifice Isaac. 3. But upon the Worlds Experience of the ineffectualness of the Blood of Beasts, after it had lost the true Institution of bestial Sacrifices, and be∣gan to rest in the opere operato of sacrificing, without respect to the blood of the Womans Seed, &c. Touching the first, Clemens Alexandrinus (protreptic.) instanceth in the Messenians, among whom Aristomenes sacrificed, for the appeasing of the Gods, three hundred men. The Lacedemonians, among whom Theopompus did the like. The Tauri (a people inhabiting the Taurican Chersonesus) who sacrificed all the Strangers they could lay hands on to Diana (quoting for this Enripedes.) (That pair-royal of Friends, Pylades and Orestes, had died no o∣ther death; if they had slain their Keepers, and stolen away the Goddess: (Lucian. Toxaris.) The next whom Clemens instanceth in are the Thessalians, among whom the Inhabitants of Pella sacrifice an Achaean to Releus and Chi∣ron; (for which he quotes Maninius (in his Collection of Wonders.) The Cretensians, among whom the Lycians sacrifice men to Jupiter; (for this he quotes Anticlides, in reditibus.) The Lesbians, who (as Dosidas saith) pacifi∣ed Bacchus with humane Hostes. The Phocensians, whom Pythocles (in his third Book de Concordia) affirms to have sacrificed Men to Diana Taurica. The Athenians, among whom (as Demaratus writes, in his first Book of Tra∣gical Things) Ericthonius (for the pacifying of Proserphone) sacrificed his own Daughter. And the Romans, among whom (as Dorotheus relates, in his fourth Book of the Affairs of Italy) Marius sacrificed his Daughter [Diis Averrun∣canis,] To the Gods that expel mischief. Lactantius (de falsa Relig. lib. 1. cap. 21.) proves this to have been an anci∣ent Custom in Italy, to precipitate Men from the Milvian Bridge, for the ap∣peasing Saturn's wrath (out of Ovid's in Fastis, ———quotannis Tristia Leucadio sacra peracta Deo:) And to sacrifice to the same God their own Children. After whose Dialect (Micah 6. 7.) the Prophet introduceth apostate Judah querying, [Shall I give my first born for my trangression? the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?] to which the Spirit returns this pat answer: [He hath shewed thee, O man, what
is good, and what the Lord requires of thee, viz. to do justly and love mercy:] (neither of which can be done in this barbarous inhumanity to thy own Bowels) [and to humble thy self to walk with thy God:] not to outrun God in thy hastening to bring forth a Saviour before the fulness of Time, &c.) In the same place the same Lactantius relates out of Poscennius Festus, this Story: That the Carthaginians, being overcome by Agathocles King of Sicily, and conceiving that to be the effect of God's displeasure against them, for the rendring of Heaven propitious, sacrificed two hundred Noblemens Sons. Of the same bran (saith he) are the Rites of the Mother of the Gods, whose Priests attone her with the Blood of their Genitals, and of Bellona wherein her Priests lance and slash their own shoulders, with Swords which they carry in both their hands, as they run like frantick men about her Altars: the very same Oratory which the Priests of Baal used, who in their contest with Elijah, when he lent a deaf ear to the sound of their Prayers, lifted up to him the voice of their blood, as that, they doubted not but would ob∣tain for them a favourable audience. Herodotus (in his Euterpe pag. 128.) relates; how at Busiris, in the Festivals of Isis, after the Sacrifice, the whole Company (being many thousands) lash themselves till blood come: and that in Papremis, the Company that assemble (to worship the Deity of that place) fall together by the ears, and wound, yea kill one another. Dion (Roman. histor. lib. 43.) reports, that Julius Caesar, to propitiate Mars, caused to be sacrificed to him two of those Mutineers, who raised a commo∣motion in the Camp, because of Caesar's Prodigality in his exhibiting showes and Plays to the Senate and People (grudging that so much water should run beside their Mill:) for which (he saith) he had neither Sibylline, nor any other express Oracle, but only Custom. Pliny (lib. 36.) writes, that the Moors sacrificed Men to Hercules: others say to Saturn (as Plato, by name, in his Minoe, and Dionysius Halicarnassus; as also Theodoritus Cyrenaeus.) Tacitus (de moribus Germanorum) saith, That the Germans do on certain stated days appease Mercury with humane Sacrifices. That the Semnones (the most ancient Stock of the Suevians) on certain anniversary holy Days, meet together in a sacred Grove, and begin the solemnity of the day with sacrificing a man for the Common Good; (for so I translate his [caeso publicè homine.] That the Reudigni, Aviones, Angli, Varini, Eudoses, Snardones, Nucthones, in the service they perform'd to the Mother of Gods (whom they call Hertham, that is Earth, the very English of the Grecian []) drowned those that had officiated in the Procession. The same Historian Tacitus (an. 14. fol. 207.) tells us that Suetonius Pau∣linus (at the taking of the Ifle of Man) found Groves devoted there to bloody Superstition: for they used to sacrifice Captives at their Altars, and to look into their inwards by way of Auguration. Dictys Cretensis (who was comrade to Idomenoeus, in the Trojan War) wrote a Journal of that War; which Paxis presented to Nero, and Septimius Romanus translated into Latin) in which Treatise (de Bell. Troj. lib. 1.) we are told, that for the appeasing of Dianas displeasure against Agamemnon (for slaying the Hart that was feeding in her Grove) his Daughter Iphigenia was required in sacrifice. Upon this ground Euryphylus (in Virgil) perswades the Grecians, when they were returning from Troy, to appease the angry Deity with humane Blood, with the blood of Polixena: (Aeneid. lib. 2. Sanguine placastis ventos & virgine caesa, Cùm primùm Iliacas Danai venistis ad auras. Herodotus (Melpomene) relates, how the Getes (the most morallized of all the Scythians) send every year to their God Zamolxis, a Man, whom they had first sacrificed. And how the Messagetes immolate in their old Age, all Per∣sons of note, counting none happy, but them that die that kind of death:
(Herod Clio.) And lastly how the whole Scythian Nation do sacrifice to Mars (whom they esteem the chief God) one of every hundred Captives; whose Blood they gather into a Basin, and with it besmear a Fauchion, which with them is the Idol, or Representation of Mars: (Herodot. Mel∣pomene.) This Custom reached to the farthest Western Nations (as Plutarch (de su∣perstitione) observes) who, if they had Children of their own, sacrificed them to Saturn, if not, bought other mens Children, to that purpose, as men buy Lambs or Chickens. While they were sacrificing their Mothers were to stand by and look on, who if they shewed any sign of sorrow, they were ever after accounted opprobrious persons. Yea, as far as (the then reputed World's end) Hercules Pillars (as Timae∣us the Historian affirms, in his rebus Deliacis;) for the Inhabitants near to those Pillars (saith he) use to sacrifice their Kinsfolks, if they reach the seventieth year. Strabo (lib. 11.) reports, that in Albania (a Country near the Caspia Sea) they used to sacrifice to the Moon (their supreme Deity) those of their initiated servants, that had most of that Goddess in them, after they had been sumptuously feasted a whole year before. These two last I report upon the Credit of Natalis Comes (Mytholog. l. cap. 17. de victimis:) not out of penury (for to the best of my knowledge there is not an old Historian extant, that gives not many Examples of this inhumane Pie∣ty:) but because I would not let this part of my Discourse pass without the honourable mention of his Name, who hath taken such Herculean pains up∣on this Subject: to whose Labours I refer my Reader for fuller satisfaction; if he require any; after he hath heard Tertullian's Judgment, (Apolog. 8.) [à vobis ostendam fieri, partim in aperto partim in occulto; per quod forsitan & de nobis credidistis,] to wit, That the commonness of humane Sacrifices, through the Pagan World, induc'd them to believe that Calumny raised a∣gainst the Christians, [That in their Coventicles they sacrificed a Ghild, whose blood they mingled with crums of Bread, and so did eat it.] (A Calumny rais∣ed upon their mistake of the Christians Commemorative Sacrifice, the Sacra∣ment of the Body and Blood of Christ.) A thing so abhorrent to Nature, as no man could deem it possible for another man to grow so inhumane, ex∣cept he who was himself grown so inhumane. And therefore saith he of all things, our sacrificing Children should not be objected to us as a crime, by the Heathens; who themselves did immolate Infants to Saturn, openly and without controul, till Tiberius, being Proconsul of Africk, nail'd the Priests themselves to those Crosses upon which they used to crucifie Children: and now secretly, notwithstanding the Imperial Edicts against it. Yea, in the most religious City (inhabited by the Off-spring of pious Aeneas) there is a certain Jove whom they appease with the shedding of humane Blood even at this day, and that in the most publick place and greatest concourse, the Thea∣ter. In your painting the Christian God as delighting in humane Blood, you shape him after the Prototype, which you have conceived in your mind, of your own Jupiter; whom you fancy to be the true Son of his Father Saturn, because he resembles him in Severity, and will not be appeased but with the Blood of that Nature which gave the offence: [O Jovem Christianum & so∣lum patris filium de crudeliaate.] And therefore you have no reason to ac∣cuse Christians, as the only men that represent God as not appeasable, but by Christ's making an Oblation of his own Blood, for the sins of the World; a Sacrifice far more like to be acepted as a Propitiation, than those Victims you offer; of men condemned to the Beasts (and therefore polluted with their own guilt;) or of innocent Babes, who are merely passive (and offered against their own Will;) or of decrepit Persons, though willing: for since old Age pusheth them forward, what merit can their be in chusing to go out at this door, where, in their passage to their Grave, they shall not meet with those Incumbrances of extreme old Age, which singly are worse than an hundred
deaths? or of those who in the prime and flower of their Age do offer them∣selves Victimes, for the benefit of Man-kind: since a few more years will put them beyond their choice, and bring them under a necessity of dying: whereas that Blood, which we affirm to have been shed for the sins of the World, was the Blood of a spotless Lamb: offer'd by Christ himself; (he was Priest as well as Sacrifice,) and laid down his Life; for no man could take it from him against his will, &c. §. 3. Touching the second branch of this argument, That this custom of propitiating the Deity with the oblation of Human blood, was not in imita∣tion of Abraham, but the corruption of the old Tradition, &c. though I find great names muster'd against this Assertion, yet when I consider that they march under the conduct of the Jewish Rabbins (who are ambitious of having the whole World in debt to them) this Army of Lions grows less formidable, as being led on and headed by such sheepish Captains, as R. Salomon Jarchi, who (upon Jeremy, 7. 31.) bringeth in God speaking concerning Molech after this manner [When I spake to Abraham to sacrifice his Son, it entred not into my heart that he should sacrifice him, but to make known his righteousness.] having first fancied, that the Heathen, in defence of their practice, objected the Exam∣ple of Abraham. A thing which no more enter'd into the Pagan's heart, than it did into God's to have Isaac sacrificed; nor was ever objected to the Jews; of which this (I conceive) is proof sufficient: That neither Philo Judaeus nor Jo∣sephus, nor his Adversary Appion, make the least mention of the Heathens imi∣tating Abraham, or pleading their imitation of him in their own defence. A Ca∣lumny from which those great Patrons of Judaism would certainly have quit∣ted their Religion, had it then been objected, when they wrote of that Obla∣tion: Josephus (Jud. antiq. lib. 1. cap. 14.) most copiously: and Philo (de pro∣fugis) allegorically: neither can it stand with reason that Appion (who scraped up whatsoever he could find in Books, or invent of his own Brain against the Jewish Religion) should omit so material and plausible a Plea, if the World had then thought of it. The first clear intimation of Abraham's offering his Son that is met with in Pagan Writers is in Porphyry (as he is quoted by Eusebius) (praeparat. Evangel. 1. 7.) where speaking of Saturn, he saith, [the Phaenicians called him Israel, and that he had an only Son called Irud (which in the Phoenician Language signi∣fies an only Son) of the Nimph Anobret;] whom his father, being in some great calamity, sacrificed upon an Altar purposely made. If I may call that clear which the two eyes of Learning, Grotius (in dent. 18. 10.) and Vosstus (de idol. 1. 18.) cannot see how at all it concerns Abraham, but that the trans∣scriber of Eusebius meeting with [] (the name of Saturn among the Phoe∣nicians) as appears by St. Jerom. (Phoenicibus [Il. qui Hoebraeis El.] Jerom. E∣pist. 136. ad Marcellum:) and by Sanchoniathon himself [,] Sanchoniathon apud Eusebium, prep. Evang. 1. 7. [El.] which self same they call [Saturn.] This note Vossius had from Grotius; [atque ad hanc con∣jecturam, quam certissimam arbitror in familiari sermone mihi praeire memini di∣vinum virum Hugonem Grotium.] (Vossius Ibid,) and withal this conje∣cture that the Immolations mentioned by Sanchoniathon was by Saturn's Wives procuration,) The Transcriber, I say, of Eusebius, ignorant of this Phoenician use of [] supposed it to be a contraction of [.] But to take it in its full strength, according to the ordinary reading, and the com∣mon application of that Name to Abraham, of whom came Israel; I can∣not see, how it implies, the Heathens deriving their sacrificing of children, from Abraham. For 1. This was not pleaded by Porphyry, against the Jew, but Christian; nor against the Christian, till he had cryed shame of the Heathen World, for its barbarous Immolations of innocents: for the palliation of the filthiness whereof that indefatigable enemy of the Christian name brings in this story. 2. Porphyry's Author, Sanchoniathon (from whom he hath this Story) nei∣ther
names Israel (but Saturn, whose Soul after his death assumed (for its heavenly body) the Planet so called:) nor his, but his wifes (the Nymph Anobretha) sacrificing of her only Son, after the death of his Father. 3. Thirdly he relates this fact of Saturn, or his Wife, as an imitation of the ancient Custom of that Nation, to sacrifice the Princes most beloved Son, in times of eminent danger, to that Deity that takes vengeance of sin, for the pacifying of his wrath. [Morem priscis—] [cùm itaque Saturnus rex,]—(Eus. pr. evan. 1. 7.) So far is Porphyry out in his alledging Abraham or Israel, as the Samplar out of which the Heathen World transcrib'd that bloody Copy: as his own Author makes that very fact of Abraham, which he al∣ledgeth, to have been done, in observance of a Custom in ure long before A∣braham was. 4. Porphyry (for the credit of Sanchoniathon) affirmeth that he gather'd his Antiquities, out of the Records of the several Cities, the sacred Inscriptions in the Temples, and of Jerom-Baal the Priest of the God Irvo, or Jao; If we admit this Jerom-baal to have been Gideon, whom the Scripture calls Jerub-baal, which is of the same sense, in the Phoenician Language; only, after their custom, changing one [b] into [m] (as in [Ambubaiae, Sambu∣cus,] &c.) it will not follow, that this Author was contemporary with Gi∣deon: for he might use Gideon's Records after his death, and (in all likelihood) came to the knowledg of him and them: by means of that intercourse be∣twixt the Israelites and the Inhabitants of Berith (where Sanchoniathon lived) the worship of whose God [Baal-Berith] the Israelites fell to, after Gideon's death. But that he was not elder than Gideon doth necessarily follow from hence: (see Dr. Stillingfleet, Orig. l. 1. cap. 2. sect. 3. 4.) and indeed 'tis mani∣fest he was much younger than Gideon: from which Chronological Concessi∣on of those that are of opinion that the Heathens sacrificed Children in imita∣tion of Abraham, I argue against that opinion thus: If the story of Abra∣ham's Fact had not till that time arrived, by Oral Tradition, at their next door neighbours (the Phaenicians) but must be fetch'd out of Hebrew Re∣cords, till then unknown (to the greatest Antiquary the Heathen World af∣fords;) how can it be imagin'd that the report thereof should reach all over Canaan, so many hundreds of years before that; wherein children were made oblations, so long even before Moses, as he speaks thereof as of ancient use among them. Even their sons and their daughters have they burn'd in the fire to their Gods.] (Deut. 12. 31.) In which particular God himself is so far from suspecting the Gentiles would or did follow Israel, as he gives Israel cau∣tion not to follow the Gentiles: [Thou shalt not enquire after their Gods, saying, How did these Nations serve their Gods? even so will I do likewise.] (vers. 30.) which would have been to small purpose, had the Gentiles in those oblations followed Abraham; for the Jew might then have replyed (to the Prophets re∣buking him for that practise) that therein he followed the Nations, in no∣thing but wherein they followed Abraham (whom those very Prophets bid them look to, who were sent to rebuke them for sacrificing their sons and daughters to Molech.) It would have been more seasonable in that case (had the case been as our Opponents imagine) to have warned them not to look to Abraham, but to the intentions of God to try Abraham's Love and Faith, in his tempting him to offer his only Son and his Son of Promise. But the Psalmist (Psal. 106. 35.) hath determin'd it beyond all doubt, that the Is∣raelites in sacrificing their Sons and Daughters served the Idols of Canaan and learned their works, that is, those abominations which the Canaanites had practised (as Moses saith) before Israel came among them: and for which Is∣rael should have rooted them out. Nay, so far were the Canaanites from learning these works of Abraham, which Abraham's Posterity learn'd of them; as that before Abraham's tryal, the old Inhabitants of Canaan, by reason of these works, began to look white towards Harvest, though as yet their sins were not fully ripe (Gen 15. 16.) yea Moses having spoken of offering sons to Molech, among other of their bestialities (Levit. 18. 21.) as the sins that God
visited upon the Canaanites (vers. 25.) tells the Israelites (ver. 27.) [.] for all these same abominations have the men of this Land, who were before you done: and this Land hath been defiled, upon which Text Philo Judaeus saith [Barbaras quoque gentes per multas aetates litasse mactatis filiis, cujus sceleris Moses eos accusat:] (de Abrahamo, pag. 243.) It appears that the Gentiles for many Ages before Abraham, did sacrifice children, from Moses his saying [The men of this Land (Canaan) who inhabited it before you, did do all these abominations and the land was defiled.] 5. Had those circumjacent Nations taken up that practice from Abraham's Example, what better Argument could they have used than that, to induce the Jews to it? and sure had the Jews upon that reason conform'd to that Gen∣tile Rite, we should have heard them plead that, for their adhering to it; ra∣ther than those sorry reasons they bring for their resolute contumacy and per∣tinacious resistance of the Prophet's motion to them to forsake it! [As for the word that thou hast spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to thee, we will do as we have done, for then it was well with us, we had plenty and peace, &c.] how much more strenuous would this reply have been, [then we did well; for we followed Abraham.] 6. If the Phoenicians had no knowledg of Abraham's fact, till Sanchoniathon found it in the Jewish Records, so long after Moses: how could the know∣ledge of it reach, in almost as short a time, as far south as Affrica, as far north as Scythia, as far east as India, (for 'tis not to be conceiv'd, from whence but India or Tartary: the Americans derive their Pedigree or the Inhabitants; of the Caroline Islands, the worship of Molech: whose Images in that form wherein they are described by Diodorus Siculus in the twentieth Book of his Bi∣bliotheca: were found there by the first discoverers of that Island; who also affirmed that they threw children as sacrifices into the glowing hands of that Idol; who were there scalded to death, by vertue of a fire within the hollow body of the Image: of all which Vives received good intelligence just as he was commenting upon the 19. Chapter of the 7. Book of St. Austin, de Civi∣tate Dei, which treats upon that subject.) As far west as Hercules Pillars: that is, through all the Nations of which ancient History gives us account. For this custom, of sacrificing men to appease the divine wrath, will appear to have been in a manner universal (almost, if not altogether) as early as that Age wherein the most critical Computers affirm Sanconiathon to have lived: If we cast a diligent eye back upon those quotations that have been already al∣ledged. Nay if the Phoenicians did not know it before then, how could the Carthaginians practice it, as the custom of their native Countrey Phoenicia: since that Colony was as old as Joshuah, from whom they fled into Affrica, and built Carthage. There was graven on two Marble Pillars, near Tangis or Tangere, this Inscription; [Nos fugimus à facie Joshuae, praedonis filii Nave:] We fled from the face of that Robber Joshua, the son of Nun; which Proco∣pius reports he saw (as Euagrius Scholasticus affirms, Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 18.) 7. Seeing Sanchoniathon (the only Pagan Writer whose Testimony my An∣tagonists produce) relates that fact of Saturn (as they say, of Abraham) as what either he, or his Wife after his decease, was forced to by vertue of the ancient use of hat Countrey: All their presumptions; grownded upon the Phoe∣nicians conveighing this Custom not only to their own Colony at Carthage, as Diodor. Sicul. affirmeth it to be (Bibliath. l. 20.) And also Herodotus, who saith Cambyses intended a War against the Carthiginians: but the Phoenicians (be∣ing the only Seafaring men Cambyses had) absolutely refused to be imployed in that service: for that they were sprang from the same stock that the Carthagi∣nians were (Herodotus in Thalia. St. Austin also informs us, that from thence the Carthaginians had their Extract: [interrogati nostri rustici quid sint; re∣spondent Punici Chanam;] (that is, Phoenician Canaanites,) St. Austin (in epist. ad Romanos.) But (being the greatest Traders by Sea in the whole World)
(Heylyn. Geogr. Phoenicia;) to all those Countreys with whom they trafficked These presumptions, I say, fall too short of proving the Inference they are premised to: for all this might be, they might convey their own old Custom, but not as grownded upon the fact of Abraham; and therefore, for the Ori∣ginal of it, in those Parts of the World that they had dealings with, we must look, (beyond Abraham) to the more ancient practice of the Phoenicians, upon which Abraham's practice, as they relate it, was grounded (not è con∣trà) and which was in ure (before Israel came there) in the land of Canaan, and in Chaldaea, before Abraham came thence: for the Hebrew Doctors say that the Chaldeans would have sacrificed Abraham in the fire, for his speaking against their Idol, which (I suppose, from their making fire the symbol of it) was the Sun: and that's all one with Molech: (vide Calvin (in genes. 11. 28.) & Josephum (Ant. Jud. l. 1. cap. 8.) & Hieronimum (in genesim.) But to put it out of doubt, that humane Sacrifices were in use before Abraham; Diodorus Siculus tells us, that the Ethiopian Priests used to perswade their Kings of old to a voluntary laying down of their Lives, for their Countreys good: and that Ergamenes (in the time of Ptolemy the second) was the first Ethiopian King who threw off that Superstition: and that from these (being the most ancient Nation) the Egyptians, and others borrowed their Hierogli∣phicks, their sacred Rites, and all other Ceremonies, whereby the Gods were honoured Died. Siculus (antiqu. lib. 3.) Now that Jupiter Hammon (the Ethiopian God) was Molech, or the Sun, may be read on the horns they assigned him; which were nothing else but types of the Sun's Beams, Bacon (sa∣pientia veterum.) Selden (de diis Syriis.) § 4. Touching the third branch of this argument, That the custom of sa∣crificing children is to be father'd, upon the corruption of the old Tradition, of sacrificing Beasts, after the world (having lost the ground of the first insti∣tution of sacrifices) thought the bestial Sacrifices, of themselves (without re∣lation to the blood of the womans seed, which they typified) were propitiato∣ry: and found them, by after experience, in-available, This is in it self so rational an Hypothesis (upon the grant, that it is not to be father'd upon the Example of Abraham) as, that, being disinherited, the estate must fall to this, as heir at Law. Yet, because that hath carried it by so long a Prescription, I shall not move for its total Ejectment; till I have proved the Title of this to the Child whose Parentage is in controversie. To wit, that God having made promise of the Woman's Seed, and instituted Sacrifices as Types of that blood: (Grotius reck ons the custom of Victimes among those which were not taken up by natural Instinct, nor the Collection of Reason, but by divine Tra∣dition: a custom retain'd in all Places and Ages (de verit. Christ. rel. lib. 1.) the World corrupting that Tradition, came to this point: that humane Blood must be more effectual, than bestial, to attone the divine Justice. After that Agathocles had subdued Affrick (with the remainder of that Ar∣my, which when it was intire, was routed in Sicily, by the Carthaginians) and laid seige to Carthage: the Inhabitants imputing the disaster to the dis∣pleasure of the Gods, betake themselves to all manner of Supplications, and see the Gods whom they supplicate with large donatives; for they thought (saith Diodorus) by this means to deprecate the anger of the Gods, [If to their prayers they join'd sacrifices and donatives.] (Diodor. Sicul. bibliothec. l. 20.) But suspecting all this would not pacifie the enraged Deity: at last they be∣take themselves to humane Sacrifices; and immolate, for the publick Good, two hundred of the choicest Sons of the most Noble Persons: to whom two hundred more of Voluntiers joyn'd themselves; and so march'd four hundred in a Body to the Altars of Saturn, as Victimes for their City. 'Tis easie to observe, in this story, That the Carthaginians looked upon the sacrifices and other gifts they dedicated, as Bribes to blind the eyes, and appease the displea∣sure of their (before that) neglected Gods: But that the suspicion they had (when they considered the imminent danger they were in, and the grievous∣ness
of their Crime, in wholly neglecting; and of their fore-fathers, in cheat∣ing Saturn with Changlings, instead of Noble-men's Sons) that their Silver and Gold, that their bestial Victims, would not expiate so great a guilt, nor procure Redemption for them from so great a danger; prompted them to make all sure by the oblation of humane Blood: when they revolved these things in their minds, and saw the enemy before their walls, thinking to make up all former breaches with their Gods, and to supply the defect of other applications; they betook themselves to this course of Expiation, saith Dio∣dorus. To which eminent Act of Piety (as they thought) they imputed the safety of their City and recovery of their Countrey: as on the contrary that Historian in the same Book chargeth Agathocles his overthrow upon his sacri∣ficing his Friend and Landlord Ophella, to his own ambition. For (saith he) on the same month and day whereon he slew Ophella, and drew his Army to himself, he lost in Sicily his own Army, and both his Son's, and which is most worthy of note (in his opinion) for slaying one Friend, he not only lost two Sons, but lost them by the hands of Ophella's Souldiers. In which passage my Author seems to compare Agathocles his Immolation of Ophella to his own lusts, with the Carthaginians Oblation of their Children to Saturn: that, the meritorious cause of his ruine: this, of their deliverance. Hence Philo, [immolandos exhibuisse filios, vel pro incolumitate patriae, velut averterent bella, siccitates, inundationes, pestilentias:] (de Abrahamo, 243.) the Gentiles sacrifi∣ced children for the common safety, for the averting of War, Plague, drought, &c. Hyginus (Poetic. Astronom. tit. Hydra) reports that the Plague raging at Phla∣gusa (near Troy) Demiphon enquired of the Oracle what course he should take to pacifie the incensed Deity; Apollo commands they should every year sacri∣a Virgin of noble Parentage. Petronius Arbiter, amongst the most trite and obvious things, in Classick Authors, reckons. [responsa in pestellentiam data, ut virgines tres aut plures immolentur.] (Satyric. pag. 1.) Responds given, for the removal of the Pestilence, that two or three or more Virgins should be sacrificed. If we review those Instances of humane Victimes that have already been quoted, we shall find, they were applyed to (as their sacred Anker) when all other ways of supplications were found inavailable, and their distress such as required immediate redress and would admit of no delay. Thus when the Priests of Baal found their God to lend a deaf ear to their Prayers, they in∣voke him with the voice of their own Blood. When the Grecians in their expedition to Troy at Aulis, cannot, by their Hecatombs of bestial Victims, obtain the favour of their angry Goddess, they immolate Iphigenia: and when in their return home, at the Taurick Chersonesus, they cannot by any other means attone Achilles's Ghost, or engage a fair wind homeward, they with joynt consent sacrifice Polixena. When the Marcomanni invaded the Empire, an. Christi, 271. Fulvius Sabinus made a motion in the Senate by the Emperour's Order, that the Sybil's Books might be consulted, and such Sacrifices offer∣ed as they appointed for so great an Exigent: to the which he instigates them in these words, [Serò nimis, P. C. de reipublicae salute consulimus, serò ad fata∣lia jussa respicimus, more languentium, qui ad summos medicos nisi in summa de∣speratione non mittunt,] we consult too late (oh ye conscript Fathers) about the safety of the Commonwealth, we look too late to the fatal Commands after the manner of languishing persons, who send not for the best Physicians but in greatest Extremity. Now what these fatalia jussa were, appears from the Emp. Aurelian's letter to the Senate. [Miror vos patres sancti tamdiu de aperiendis Sibyllinis dubi∣tasse libris, quasi in Christianorum Ecclesia, non in templo deorum omnium tractaretis. Agite igitur ceremoniisque solennibus juvate principem Necessitate publica labo∣rantem inspiciantur libri: quae facienda fuerint celebrentur, quemlibet sumptum, cujuslibet gentis Captivos, quaelibet animalia regia non abnuo, sed libens offero.] (Vopiscus in Aureliano, pag. 100, 102.) I wonder (holy Fathers) that you should thus long dwell upon the question, whether the Sibylline Oracles are to be con∣sulted or no? as if you handled this question in a Church of Christians, and not in the Temple of all the Gods. Go to therefore, and with solemn Ceremonies aid
Prince labouring under the publick necessity. Let the books be looked into, and whatsoever they appoint to be done, be it to sacrifice Cattel, Captives, or whomsoe∣ver, it shall be observed. § 5. But we need no better evidence, that men fled to humane Blood in those extremities (out of which they found no exit any other way) than what the sacred Scriptures afford: where it is recorded, that the King of Moab being besieged in Kirharraseth, & seeing that he could neither hold out against the assaults, nor with his select band make his way through the Forces of his Enemies: and being resolv'd not to yield, till he had tryed the last means of invoking and engaging the divine aid; took his eldest Son (that should have reigned in his stead) and offered him up for a Burnt-offering upon the wall. (2. Reg. 3. 26.) [And when the King of Moab saw that the battel was too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred men to break through, even to the King of Edom: but they could not. Then he took his eldest Son, &c. And there was great indignation against Israel, and they departed from him and returned to their own Land.] I shall not here dispute, whether Junius & Tremelius their first or second thoughts are soundest. It will be sufficient for my turn, to prove their second not overwise (except in St. Paul's sence:) being part of them grounded upon their correcting the Text as themselves translate it: the Text [Accepit filium suum primogenitum:]—The Margin, [Corrigendum, [Ejus,] id est, Regis Edomoeorum.] Such is their conceipt that the King of Moab sacrificed the King of Edom's Son: for the framing of which, they turn [Suum] (which clearly carries it to the King of Moab) into [Ejus] to which they make the King of Edom the antecedent; whose Son (they would make us believe) the King of Moab took Prisoner, in that fruitless sally he made to break through the King of Edom's Forces; a thing in its self ('tis true) possible, though very improbable; that he, who could not break through to the King of Edom's Forces (sor the safety of his life by flight) should be able to carry off such a Prisoner, who, doubtless, was near his fa∣ther's Standard) in his retreat to the City, through the Forces of the Kings of Judah and Israel, which lay betwixt the City and the King of Edom; as that expression does more then imply, [to break through even unto the King of Edom;] strange that he should venture back again, through two Armies: with the incumbrance of a Prisoner, rather than through one, for his own safety. However the Argument [à posse ad esse] can be of no validity here, where the consequence is as manifestly impossible, as it is for God to lye: for the Text saith the King of Moab took [suum primogenitum] [.] Septuagint, [he took his own first begotten son.] his own first begotten son, in which relative there can be no ambiguity, though the [Ejus] which they foist into the Margin, and the [his,] which stands in our English Text may, in Grammar, refer indifferently to either the King of Edom or of Moab: and therefore I am more scandalized with these learned men's turning of [suum] into [ejus] than I am with the Collecters of the Contents of our English Bibles, for applying that relative to the King of Edom, (Eng. con∣tents of 2 Reg. 3. [the King of Moab sacrificing the King of Edom's son.] To return to Junius and Tremelius: their opinion touching this subject (expressed in their notes on Amos 1. 16.) [filium Edomaei captivum in hola∣caustum absolutissimè obtulit, The King of Moab did undoubtedly offer the King of Edom's son for a burnt-offering) Is chiefly grounded, upon their jumbling two Stories into one (just as the Poetical Fables grew up, from confounding the true Histories of several Joves, and applying them to one of the young∣est and worst of them) this, related in the book of Kings: and that which Amos mentions (chap. 2. vers. 16.) [for three transgressions of Moab—be∣cause he burnt the King of Edom's bones into lime.] By this means metamor∣phizing the King of Moab's son, into the King of Edom's: and then the King of Edom's son, into the King of Edom himself: and lastly, the sacrificing of a living youth upon the wall; into the haling of dry bones out of the Sepul∣chre,
and burning them to Chalk; things no more like one another, than Chalk is to Cheese: and all this (as themselves confess) contrary to those rea∣sons and the authority of good Authors, upon which they had some time been of another Opinion: and (so far as my small reading reacheth) to the current of Expositors, who thus express their judgments touching this Text of Amos [quando id factum non constat:] So Emmanuel Saa [quando hoc fa∣ctum sit nusquam legitur:] So our learned Gualter. Saa (indeed) saith, the Hebrews make this in Amos an Appendix to that in the Book of Kings, and that the Chaldee Paraphrasts have a conceipt, that they besmear'd their houses with the ashes of those bones instead of Chalk; and Gualter propounds it as probable, that the Moabites (after the end of that war mention'd in the Kings) did, in the revenge of the Edomites, confederating, against them with the two Palestine Kings, dig up the bones of the King of Edom (formerly dead) and burn them in contempt. But that it was the King of Edom's son that was sacrificed in the seige: or that he that was sacrificed, the same man whose bones were burnt to Chalk (according to the tenour of Amos's discourse) neither they nor any considerate man ever thought, before Junius and Treme∣lius. And now from the clear Text in the book of Kings, and the Para∣phrase of Josephus upon it, in order to the clearing of the point, for the proof whereof I alledge this Text: I observe. 1. That the King of Moab offered his son as an holocaust, as a propitia∣tory sacrifice, to appease the wrath of God. [Scilicet deo suo, ut sic placa∣ret:] (Em. Saa in locum:) to wit, to his God, that he might appease him. 2. That he betook himself to this way of supplication, when all other means of safety fail'd him, when he was at the utmost point of extremity and despair; [quod, ubi praeter spem, non successit: rem extremae necessitatis & de∣sperationis aggreditur,] (Joseph. antiq. Jud. lib. 9. cap. 1. ad finem) when his sallying out had not that success he hoped, he betook himself to that shift which is never used but in extream necessity, and when men despair to find relief any other way. 3. That, for the safety of himself and Crown, he sacrifices the most pre∣cious oblation that was in his power (as he thought) to give, his son that was to reign after him; an argument that the Heathen imputed the prevalency of their oblations, to the worth of them and their preciousness in the esteem of those that offer'd them. The Superstitious (saith Plutarch, De Superstiti∣one) they that over-do it in their Religious Services, do account humane Sa∣crifices most precious and acceptable to the Deity. At this rate the Idola∣trous Jew discourseth in the Prophet: Will the Lord be pleased with thou∣sands of rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oyl? shall I give my first-born, the fruit of my body, &c. Of the same mind were the learned Jews; Midrash Tilli, in Psal. 94. 12. Beatus vir quem tu castigas domine: tria sunt à deo gra∣tiosè data. 1. Lex: 2. Terra Israel: & 3. Saeculum futurum; media obti∣nendi haec sunt afflictiones: de lege quem tu erudieris ex lege: de terra; Sicut pater castigat filium: Deut. 8. de saeculo fuit; Sicut sacrificia pacificant, sic af∣flictiones sunt via vitae, Pro. 6. Sacrificia sunt ex divitiis, sed afflictiones sunt in corpus ideóque anteferendae sunt, &c. Vicars. There are three things bestowed on us by God which speak him gracious to us. 1. The Law: 2. The holy Land: 3. the Age to come: afflictions are the means to obtain these: of the Law it is said; Blessed is he whom thou chastisest and instructest out of thy Law: of the Land it is said; as a father chastiseth his son, &c. of the Age to come it is said, as sacrifices pacifie wrath, so afflictions are the way of life: Sacrifices are of our goods, but afflictions are upon our own bodies, and therefore to be preferr'd before sacrifices; that is, our own blood is more available for the procuring of God's fa∣vour than the blood of Rams. These being grown ignorant of God's righteousness, having lost the sight of Gods scope in the Levitical Law, and not looking to Christ, the end of that Law, went about to establish their own righteousness; set themselves another mark: viz. the procuring acceptance of God, and justification from
sins guilt, by the price and valew of the Oblations themselves: Thence when they reflected upon the inconsiderableness of Hinns, they propounded Rivers, and ten thousand Rivers, of Oyl: and at last seeing the infinite disproporti∣on between those attonements and the sin attoned for; they capitulate with God, upon these terms; that he would accept the fruit of their Body for the sin of their Soul. The gentile proceeded, in the same way of paralogiz∣ing, to the oblation of humane blood, to the sacrificing of his own Chil∣dren; It was the custom (saith Sanchoniathon in the place forecited) in such like extremities to sacrifice the Princes best beloved son, his dearest Child, to pacifie the wrath of the provoked and revengeful Demon: and with the child sometimes the life of the Mother, by ripping the Sacrifice out of her Womb. of which Lucan, Vulnere si ventris, non qua natura vocabat, Extrabitur partus, calidis ponendus in aris. They lay on tepid Altars Babes, not born Of Mothers Wombs, but from their Bellies torn. That by expending two lives at once, they might inhance the price of their bloody Oblations, and make sure it was innocent blood they offerr'd. § 6. To think that God would eat the flesh of Bulls and drink the blood of Goats, to allay his thirst of Revenge, was a most brutish Fancy. But it was most inhumane and barbarous to conceit, such horrid Parricides (as the immolation of Innocents) to make atonement for sin: a fact exceeding in Immanity the savageness of Brutes, who cherish their Off-spring: and pawn their own lives for the safety of their young ones: so as it were better to live after the manner of Beasts, than to worship such impious, tetrical, and san∣guinary Gods (saith Lactantius:) (de fulsa Relig. 1. 21.) yea to deny the Being of God, rather than think him to be such an one as is pleased with such sacrifices; as who so offer, address themselves to Temples; as if they were going to the Caves of Bears, the Dens of Dragons, the lurking places of Sa∣vage Beasts (as Plutarch argues) (de superstitione) who wonders, that men should account those impious, that deny there is a God: and yet should not esteem them such, as affirm him to be such an one, as the superstitious believe him to be: for my own part (saith he) I would rather chuse, that men should say, there is no such man as Plutarch, than that they should say Plutarch is so prone to anger, so desirous of revenge, so blood-thirsty as nothing will appease him but the torture of innocents, &c. had it not been more expedient for the Galls and Scythians, never to have taken into their mind any conce∣ption at all of a Deity) than to think those to be Gods, who joy in the blood of butcher'd men; and that to be the most perfect sacrifice? Had it not been more profitable for the Carthaginians, to have had (at first) such Law-givers as Critius or Diagoras, who would have determined there is no God: than to sacrifice their children to Saturn? Say, some Typhons or Giants (hav∣ing profligated the Gods) should in their room, have Dominion over us, could they desire other kind of Rites or Sacrifices? [Deciorum devotionibus placatos deos esse censes? quae fuit eorum tanta iniquitas ut placari P. R. non pos∣sent, nisi viri tales occidissent:] Cicero de natura deor. (lib. 3. 121.) [Do you think (saith Tully) that the Gods were appeased with the Devotions of the Decii? what a degree of iniquity was it in those Gods that they would not be pacified to∣wards the people of Rome, except such excellent men laid down their lives for them.] But yet as barbarous as these Immolations (of humane, of innocents Blood) were, they had clearer prints of the Original Promise, then bestial Victims, seperated (as in time they grew to be) from that blood of the Womans Seed, of which in the divine Institution) they were to be Types; the scent of which
Blood in bestial Sacrifices. The Gentiles having once over-run, and being at a loss, ran counter, till they took the scent of it again in the first Promise: and then, not being able to follow it down that train of bestial sacrifices that God had laid; (it being through length of time, grown cold, and they having no Huntsmen (no divinely inspired Interpreters) to set them on) they con∣cluded it had not gone that way. Cum sis ipse nocens, moritur cùm victima pro te? Stultitia est morte alterius, sperare salutem. Quoted by Grinaeus (in Euseb Demonst. Evangel. 3. 4. Why dies the beast for peccant man? By other blood than humane, can No humane soul redeemed be. And then becoming vain in their Imagination they pursue a fresh scent of it in the Blood of humane Victimes, of innocent Children: missing that one Seed (as St. Paul stiles Christ) and falling upon the many, which (as their occasions served them) they ran down one after another, and made Oblations of, as propitiatory Sacrifices. In which mistake of the Individuum, they yet pitched upon 1. The Woman's Seed, 2. The most innocent of the Woman's common Seed, Children. 3. And that Seed, which was to the offerers most precious, their own Children; acknowledging hereby that nothing could redeem humane kind from the extremest suffering, but the most precious, spotless, Humane Blood, that could be thought of, or procured. Wherein as they perfectly agreed with the Christian Hypothesis; so I have the suffrage of the happiest Searcher into the Original of Idolatry, that ever undertook that task, to my position, the great Vossius: [Nec quicquam in mundo est excellentius homine: nihil parentibus carius est quam liberi. Sic igitur judicarunt, non me∣liùs summum posse Deum demereri, quam si immolarent liberos suos, etiam in maximarum divitiarum ac potentiae spem natos. Haec vera est illius sacrificii ratio.] (Vossius de orig. idololat. lib. 2. cap. 5.) Nothing in the world is more excellent than man; nothing more dear to parents than Children: the Gentiles therefore, thus judged, that they could not by any better way procure the favour of the high God then if they sacrificed their children, especially such as were born to the hope of great fortunes and power. This is the true reason of this kind of sacrifice. And yet the Gentiles wrote the Christian Doctrine more plainly and fully in the blood of humane Sacrifices at the first Institution, than in their later Customs and degenerate use of sacrificing Captives, in stead of Natives, Natives grown instead of Children, Children instead of First-born, First-born of Subjects in stead of First born of Kings, First-born of royal Females (in use in the Trojan Wars) instead of the First-born Sons of Kings, either heirs to (as in the case of the King of Moab;) or possessors of their Father's Crown (as was the custom of the Aethiopians.) And First-born Sons of Kings in stead of their only begotten Sons, possessed of Royal Power after their Fathers death, which was the most ancient Custom; as appears from the Phaenician Story. To which Observation, if we add that which we have heard Macrobius (in Som Scip.) deliver, as the common Opinion [that all Kings are God-born,] we may without labour of brain collect, this to have been the Opinion of the World [That nothing can propitiate the Deity for the sin of man, but the blood of his only begotten Son, made man.] Hence, as the great Debate, in point of Sacrifices, betwixt us and the Jew, was, Whether the Blood of Bulls and Goats, or of the promised Seed of the Woman, be propitiatory: so the Original Contest betwixt us and the Gentile was, whether that Blood of their Sons and Daughters (which they offer'd) was that propitiating Blood of the Woman's Seed; or the Blood of the Cross? Wherein they came nearer to us than the Jew, in the state of the
Question, and put us to no farther labour, in confuting theirs and establish∣ing our Assertion, than to prove that Blood to be the most precious and spot∣less, and therefore the most salvifick that ever was paid as a Ransom; compre∣hending in it self alone, all that was requisite towards the redemption of the whole man. [Haec via totum hominem mundat & immortalitati mortalem ex omnibus quibus constat partibus praeparat: ut enim non alia purgatio quaerere∣tur ei parti, quam vocat intellectualem Porphyrius: alia ei, quam vocat spirita∣lem; alia quae ipsi corpori: proptereà totum suscepit, veracissimus potentissimús∣que Mundator & Salvator:] (St. August. de Civitate, 10. 32.) The most per∣fect Gentile Sacrifices could not purge the Soul; but Christ our Sacrifice cleans∣eth the whole man and prepares mortals for immortality, in all the parts of which they are made up: for to the end we should not seek one kind of purgation for that part of man that Porphyry calls intellectual; another for that he calls spiri∣tual; and another for the Body: therefore hath our most faithful and powerful Purifier and Saviour taken whole Man. In which Point, the Heathen World saw itself labour under that great disadvantage, as at the first starting of the Que∣stion, the Roman Empire would, by an Edict prohibiting humane Sacrifices, have wiped her mouth (with Solomon's Whore) and denied the Fact: had not the Patrons of the Christian Cause made palpable Demonstration of it, by pointing to those Humane Victims to the Latian Jove, that were openly sacrificed in Rome it self: and to other Deities through the whole body of the Empire; (Tertul, Apol. 8.) Upon which disappointment, those Philosophers which enter'd the lists against the Church, (or wrote in defence of Natural Theology, (not daring, for very shame, to deny the fact) turn it into all imaginable shapes, but of its natural Form, that it might not serve the Christian's turn. Hence Plutarch decries humane Sacrifices as barbarous (and well he might, for so they were.) Porphyry explodes the Vulgar Opinon that the blood and steam of sacrificed Animals was the food of the Gods; affirming that none but Cacodaemons can delight in such food: wherein the Christian does more cordially concurr with him, than Jamblicus (his Fellow-philoso∣pher:) for he, though he give him his say in gross, yet takes it away by retail: or rather consents to him in general words, but opposeth him in deed, and in particular Conclusions. (Jamblicus de mysteriis, tit. [De sacrificiis unde vim habeant, & quid conferant:] tit. [Quae ratio sacrificiorum, quae utilitas.] In all which windings and turnings (more than I am willing to follow them in) they did but seek Subterfuges from the dint of the Christians Plea from u∣universal Practice, by perverting the state of the Question: which was not, Whether humane Sacrifices were of any efficacy (towards the averting of e∣vil, or the obtaining of good) in deed and reality? but, Whether, in the World's Opinion, they were not of that tendency? nor whether they were justifiable in Morality; But whether they were practised or no, as propitiati∣ons in Divinity? which Jamblicus himself is forc'd to confess, more than once; Good men (saith he) being expiated by Sacrifices, receive good things from the Gods, and have evil things driven away; (tit. Chaldeor. mysteria.) And a∣gain, The Prophets foretold impending judgments, and admonish'd People, by Sacrifices to appease the Divine Nemesis; (tit. Inspiratus vacat ab actione:) And lastly (having assigned the cause of the wonderful efficacy of Sacrifices, to be a certain friendship, accommodation, and habitude, inclining the Work∣man to respect his Workmanship) he concludes thus: When we take and sa∣crifice any thing living, that hath sincerely, and exactly observed the Will and De∣cree of its Maker, by such a Sacrifice we properly move (causam opificiam) the working cause, to do us good, and bring us releif; (tit. Quae ratio sacrific. quae u∣tilitas.) How much more moving must the Oblation of Christs blood be? who exactly fulfill'd the Will of God: not only by a passive kind of Obedi∣ence, such as Vegitatives and Animals yeild to the Law of Creation; (such as Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapour (fulfilling his word, Psal. 148. 8.) nor by a bare not actually sinning, such as Infants yield: but by an every way compleat fulfilling all Righteousness: and who was made a Victim, not by force and
compulsion, but by his own free oblation of himself. It is St. Jerom's ob∣servation (upon Daniel's seventh Vision.) That when ever Expiation was to be made, Michael was sent from God with instructions to Israel; whose name signifies [who like the Lord.] God by this intending to teach us, that none can make expiation but God alone: [ut scilicet intelligatur, quia propiti∣ationem vel expiationem nullus possit offere nisi deus.] And Philo Judaeus his (upon Levit. 4. 3.) that Moses does (as good) as affirm the true High-Priest to be without sin:—tantum non dicens, verum Pontificem expertem peccati es∣se (de victimis pag. 528.) The Jewel I have been all this while, raking for, in the Dunghil of Heathen Philosophy. § 7. The second Branch of the last general Hypothesis, common to us and Philosophers (viz. That God-saviour incarnate must work Man's restauration into Communion with God, by communicating divine Oracles to the World) lies more bare-fac'd in their Writings; and that it does so, is not disputed by a∣ny (that I have met with:) and therefore I shall quickly dispatch that point. Jamblicus affirms, that the Law of Religion was given by divine inspirati∣on from the first Father of the World, from whom were all Symbols in Sacri∣fices, signifying some invisible thing, [Quae lex data est divinitùs à primo patre mundi, a quo & omnia symbola in sacrificiis significantia aliquid occultissimum;] Jambl. (de myster. tit. de providentia, pag. 31.) that is, from the supream God by the middle Deities; for the same Jamblicus speaking of the Rites used in the Worship of the Gods, (de myst. tit. quae ratio sacrific. pag. 135.) lays this down (as the common Opinion of all their Theologues.) [That these Ceremonies are not the Inventions of Men, nor obtain'd Authority by Custom and Prescription, but were divine Revelations, communicated to the se∣veral Nations, by those Deities to whom God had committed the care of those Nations:] (these are those local God-Man-Saviours, concerning whom we have spoke already.) Of the same tendency is that fore-quoted Clause out of Celsus; where he saith, that these Presidents did appoint the several Re∣ligions (that obtain'd place in their respective Cures) congruously to the Tempers of the Climes and People committed to their trust; and that there∣fore those Religions were all good; and that the very best (quoad hic and nunc) for every particular Nation, which their local Praesidents had instituted. And that of Tully. Mercurius tertius quem colunt Phenentae, quem tradunt Aegypti∣is leges & literas tradidisse. Apollinem Arcades Nomionem appellant, quòd ab eo se Leges ferunt accepisse:] (Cicero de natura deorum, lib. 3. pag. 133. 134. With which concurrs that Testimony of Plato in his Symposium [those Semi∣dei that mediate and keep up a correspondency betwixt the Gods and us, do bring to us the injunctions of the Gods [] Apuleius (de daemonio Socratis) calls them Interpreters on both sides, and bearers of Salutations. (St. Austin has a whole Chapter upon this Subject: [an daemonibus nunciis & interpretibus dii utantur;] de Civitate, lib. 8. cap. 21.) And that of Jambli∣cus (de mysteriis titulo de ordine superiorum: quaesunt in diis &c.) [quae sunt in diis ineffabilia, & occulta, daemones exprimunt, atque patefaciunt.] Those things that are ineffable in the Gods, the Demons declare and reveal to us. Hence we find this clause (he gave Laws) inserted in the Histories of all the Heroes (vide Lact. de fal. rel. lib. 1. cap. 10. 11.) But to spare the labour of multi∣plying Instances, that place of Plato, I mention'd at the beginning of this dis∣course is abundantly sufficient (where those blessed spirits that descended to take care of Mankind, are said to have given them Laws:) neither that of O∣rigen against Celsus (lib. 5. cap. 1.) whom he charges (in his affirming, that never any God or Son of God came down from Heaven, to reveal divine Counsels) to oppose the Vulgar and received Opinion of Philosophers: and proves that charge by many clear instances; one of which we have (Act. 14. 12.) when St. Paul had by a word speaking, presently and perfectly cured the man, that was born lame: the Lystrians conceived him to be Mercury appear∣ing in humane form) because he was the chief speaker: clearly expressing this
to be their Opinion, that the healing God was to be the great Gods Messenger, and to restore men's discomposed Minds, (as well as Limbs) by his word: the very Office which the Prophets assigned to the Messias, and the Apostles and Evangelists applyed to Christ; A prophet shal the Lord raise unto you of your brethren, like unto me (as touching his humane) but infinitely superiour to me (in respect of his divine Nature.) And that's the scope of that so much abused Text [all thy children shall be taught of God;] (Isa. 54. 13.) if Christ be better at expounding Scripture, than our new illuminates. Who, when the Jews excepted against his affirming himself to come down from Heaven, (because they knew his Father and Mother, supposing him to be the Son of Jo∣seph) as they said) (Joh. 6. ver. 42.) gives them this reply. That no man could come to him (that is as one that came down from Heaven, and whom they were bound to hear under pain of extermination) except the Father drew him (ver. 44.) not as a log by main force of hand; but as a man, by strength of Argument: by teaching him the meaning of that Text in the Prophet, [and they shall all be taught of God] (ver. 45.) which cannot be understood of the person of the Father, for no man hath seen the father but the son, (ver. 46.) Nor of the Spirits teaching; for that the Church had from the beginning (thou gavest them thy good spirit) (Nehem. 9. 10.) But of the Person of the Son, who was in the Fullness of Time, to assume Flesh, and dwell among us, and teach not only Jews but Gentiles, what they must do to be saved: So as, in the last revelation of the divine Will, God will no longer deal by pro∣xy: but himself in the Person of the Son, will speak face to face, which you might have learn'd, in Hypothesi, had you diligently weighed that Text: (of Isa.) and though I, in respect of my humane Nature, am the son of Mary, and as you suppose, of Joseph, whom you know: yet, at my Baptism, you might have learn'd that I had another Generation: for then my Father bare witness by a voice from Heaven, that I was the son of God: and at my transfiguration (having avouched me to be his well beloved Son) he gave command that I should be receiv'd, as that Prophet whom all are to hear: every man therefore that hath heard and learn'd this of my Father concerning me; that I am that great Prophet that was to come into the World (like to my Brethren, as to my Manhood: but equal to the Father, touching my Godhead) will cer∣tainly come to me, and learn of me: as to those, whom my Father (by these clear convictions, and furthermore, by that Seal he hath set to my Commissi∣on to teach, in those Miracles I work) does not draw into a full perswasion; 'tis impossible that they, while they are under that obstinacy, should come unto me. Hence it is that our Saviour so much presseth, and layeth so much stress upon the believing, that he was he, that should come to tell men all things; hence St. Paul begins his Epistle to the Hebrews with the proof of this, that Jesus of Nazareth was that divine Person, the express Image of the Fathers person; by whom (according to the Prophecies that went before) God hath spoak in the last, that is, the Evangelical Age. § 8. Humane Laws (we say) are Nets, which small fish escape through and great ones break; but Christ's Law is so framed, his Gospel net so knit, as the Vulgar fry stick in it by the Finns and Gills of common Sentiments: And the greatest disputers are intangled in it by strugling. It takes the poor of this World by the compliance with their innate Notions; and the wise, in their own craftiness. By it Learning was pos'd, Philosophy was set, Sophisters taken in a Fisher's net: Plato and Aristotle were at a loss: And wheel'd about again, to spell Christ's Cross. As our great British Divine (and Divine Poet) sings (in his Church (tit. Providence) in which Poem as he hath given us an abstract of Church-history;
so (I fear) there is a more discerning spirit of Prophecy expressed therein, than in all our modern golden Dreams, and Comments upon Daniel and the Revelation: these Predictions being but guessings at (if not perversions of) the sence of dark Texts: his the applications of as clear menaces, as any are in the whole Bible: and these (too) commented upon, by the constant method of Providence in the World; which usually so shapes its rewards and Pu∣nishments, to mens demerits: as for our knowing what will betide our selves, we need not consult ambiguous Oracles, but such plain sanctions of the royal Law, as have been made good upon, and befallen other Churches, for exam∣ples to us: for if we will not be diverted from following Egypt and Greece's steps: we must arrive at their dismal end, if we, by our debaucheries of mind or life, put the Gospel from us, and draw upon our selves strong de∣lusions; a Revelation-Criticism will not secure the one to us, nor us from the other. But to return from this Digression. The constitution of Christian Religion is such, as it finds all that is of man, left in man, a party for it, in the Market; and all true Philosophy, a party for it, in the Schools of Philo∣sophers (saith Clem. Alexandr. Strom. l. 1. pag. 94.) whether of the Barbari∣ans or Grecians (I mean) not the Stoick, Platonick, Epicurean, Aristotelian: but, whatsoever any Sect rightly taught; whatsoever they taught Pious or Just, is but a Branch of eternal Truth, pluck'd from the Tree of Life (the ever-being Word.) An observation grounded upon these Prophecies: I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches of it,—and build it as in the days of old,—build the old wasts, raise up the former de∣solations, the foundations of many generations (Amos 9. 11. Isa. 61. 4. Isa. 58. 12.) and this to the end, that the residue of men (that is the Gentiles) might seek the Lord (Act. 15. 16.) as St. James expounds the Prophets: which in∣forceth us to interpret those Prophecies, not of Persons only, but Doctrines. For the Gentile was grafted in, not only upon the cutting off of the Jews, but upon the raising up of those Foundation-truths; which not only among the Jews, but the many Generations of the Heathens, had been buried under the rubbish of humane Vanities built upon them. This interpretation induc'd the Apostolical Synod, to reestablish the Precepts of Noah, as an Expedient to gain upon the Gentiles. The Platonicks conceived all knowledg to be no∣thing else but [reminiscentia] an awakening of the mind to see innate Noti∣ons: The Notions of the Gospel were not innate, yet so imprest (by Tradi∣tion) upon all mens minds; as the embracing of it, is call'd a man's coming to himself. (Psal. 22. 27.) All the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and turn to the Lord. And therefore true Philosophy is so far from being a Prejudice against, as it is an Introduction to, a Preparation for the Gospel. When the Philosophers (saith Isidore Pelusiota) saw, in that grain of Mustard-seed, all that Truth Vertually laying, which they had been seeking for; how many of them, bidding adiew to their own Opinions, betook themselves to the shady Branches of the Tree of life, and there found rest: how many Pythagoreans, (formerly the Ma∣sters of pride and disdain) became the Scholars of our meek Jesus? How many Platonicks (letting fall their Crests, proudly lifted up through an opinion that they excell'd all men in the Art of Discourse) sat down at Christ's feet under the shade of the Mustard-tree? How many Aristotelians, how many Stoicks (scorning that Wisdom whereof they had made greatest boast) thought themselves happy if they could be enter'd among those Disciples of Christ, who observe his word?] (I∣sidor. Pelusiota. lib. 4. ep. 76.) Our Religion is nothing else, but the last and best Edition of that, which was either writ on mens Hearts, or promulg'd in Paradise, to the old; and by Noah, to the new World (who is therefore stil'd the Treacher of Righteousness) which being Pentheus like) pull'd Limb from Limb by the several Sects (each party getting some relicks and scraps of it) the Apostles gather'd up its scatter'd Limbs, and fram'd them into a perfect and compleat Body of Divinity again; (clothing its Bones with the Flesh, lling its Veins with the Blood, not of slaughter'd Beasts, but of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World) and presented it to the World; wherein there
was no Nation so barbarous, but if they came near and felt it, they might find something in it, of which they might say: This is flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone: whatever I retain (either of right Reason, or solid Religion) is comprehended in this. This is that express Image of the Father, of which I had the rough-draught: All the Wisdom I have retain'd, or learn'd, I meet with in this foolishness of Preaching. of this the Apostle was so confident; as to the Jew, he became a Jew; to the Gentile, a gentile: (1 Cor. 9. 20, 22.) not by a sycophantick and temporizing compliance with the least of their Errours, but by taking advantage of the truths they held, as Mediums by which he ar∣gued them into an assent to the Gospel: dealing with every man at his own suresby-weapon, and upon his own sound Principles. He did not flatter them as Clisophus did King Philip; who when the King's Eye was wounded, bound up his; and when the King had received a hurt on the shin that made him halt halted with him, as if he had been lame: and never saw the King make sower faces, but he look'd as if he were eating the same sharp sawce. Nor conform to them as the Arabians did to their King; who if he were lame of any Limb, they mutilate that Limb of their Bodies: Or the Dionisiocolaces to that Tyrant; who (because he was purblind) groped about for the Dishes that were set before them, till he had got his hand into his (Athen. dipnosoph. 6. 6.) But St. Paul conform'd to Jew and Gentile in their seeing Eye and sound∣est Limbs. Pleading with the Jew, from old Testament-texts: With the Gentile, from the Law of Nature, and the common Traditional Religion: that in the Jews mouth and heart, before the giving of the Law by Moses; that Word whose sound went into all the World by oral preaching, the seed of the Christian faith (Rom. 10.) With the Philosopher, from his most sub∣lime Verities: Such as the several Sects, with whom the Apostle had to do, could not deny (without contradicting those Notions, they were most assured of the truth of:) and yet were not able to defend (against the assaults which their other erronious Opinions made upon them) upon any other but Gospel∣grounds, the only Sanctuary and City of Refuge for all divine Truth: in se∣peration from which, like a Beam, cut off from the Sun: a Stream, from the Fountain: a Branch, from the Tree: a Limb, from the Body; it cannot subsist. This Tent-maker so contriv'd his Tabernacle, wherein he plac'd the Sun of Righteousness, his Gospel, wherein he exhibited Christ; (give me lieve to lisp and stutter now, with those I am opposing (who speak of the Gospel as the device of men:) for I shall hereafter demonstrate it, to be the Contrivement of God:) as it excludes all bad Airs; takes in all the Light, (that was before scatter'd among several Sects) So as Christ keeps open house in it, for all comers; the way-faring man, though a fool, may turn in hither, and find lodging (where his Soul may be at rest) a Table furnish'd with plain Cates, suting his Countrey-palate. The wise man may here be entertain'd, in as much state as heart can wish. In the Muse's Chamber, in Apollo's Din∣ing-room; his vast Soul cannot have that room to expatiate her self in: as in Solomon's Curtains, in Sarah's Tent: nor find that satisfaction in Plato's A∣cademy, in Zeno's Porch, in Aristotle's Walk; as in our King's Galleries, in the Prophets Schools, in Christ's upper Chamber: nor meet with that abstruce Learning in the Egyptian Hierogliphicks, as in the embroidered hangings of Christ's Presence-chamber. Now how men of crazy Intellects, could frame so excellent a Model of Wisdom, so perfect a Mirrour of all Metaphisical Science (truly so called:) we may sooner strain our Brains out of joynt, by stretching our mind to imagine, then imagine, with the least shew of proba∣bility. To which labour in vain I leave the Sceptick, while I lead the Chri∣stian Reader to the Law and Prophets, and shew him (what Ammonis, St. O∣rigen's Master of old urged the Philosophers with:) (Euseh. Eccl. 6. 13.) viz. That the Gospel is calculated exactly to the Meridian of the old Testament; in whose Types, Precepts, and Predictions, there is not one imaginary Line, but hath its paralel in that.
CHAP. VIII. The Gospel calculated to the Meridian of the Old Testament. § 1. In its Types. § 2. Its Ceremonials fall at Christs feet with their own weight The Nest of Ceremonies pull'd down. That Law not practicable. § 3. Mo∣ses his Morals improved by Christ by better Motives: Moses faithful; Christ no austere Master. Laws for Children; for Men; for the Humane Court; for Conscience. Christ clears Moses from false Glosses. § 4, It was fit that Christ should demand a greater Rent, having improved the Farm. St. Mat. 5. 17. explain'd. Christian Virtue a Mirrour of God's, admired by Angels; St. Mat. 7. 26. urged. The Sanction of the Royal Law. § 5. St. Paul's Notion, of Justification by Faith only, explain'd, it implies more and better work, than Justification by the works of the Law. Judaism hath lost its Salvifick Power. Much given, much required. The Equity and Easiness of Christ's Yoak Discord in the Academy; none in Christs School. § 1. THe Gospel is so fram'd as it exhibits to us the Substance of the Law's Types; wherein the things pertaining to the Person, Office, and Kingdom, of the Messias, were umbrated; without reference to which, most of them are such childish and beggerly Toys, as the instituting of them is ma∣nifestly unworthy of infinite Wisdom, and that solemn pomp (of signs and wonders) that went before them, as inducements to the Israelites to receive them with due reverence, would be in the most candid Interpretation of im∣partial Reason) no better than the Mountains swelling, and going in hard la∣bour to bring forth a ridiculous Mouse. From which imputation of folly (observed, and objected by the Heathens, against their Lawgiver) the most learned Mythologist Philo Judaeus, though he attempt to vindicate Moses, yet missing Moses his Scope, (and not looking to the end of his Law) he falls far short of his purpose; and makes worse work of it, than a Novice-Christian would, that has but learn'd this Principle [the Law was a shaddow of good things to come, but the body (that casts those shadows) is Christ;] A Tast where∣of he gives us (in his Treatise of Circumcision) wherein (having premis'd how unlikely it is, that so severe a Ceremony should be taken up upon weak Grounds) he lays down these wise reasons for it. 1. [The prevention of the growing of the Carbuncle in that part:] (Just as if a man should advise to have the Head chop'd off, to prevent the aching of it. 2. [That that Membrane might not be a receptacle of uncleanness:] upon the same reason they must not only, with the Egyptian Priests, shave off their hair (which he grounds upon the same reason) but slit their Noses, and crop their Ears, and dismember themselves of other Vessels receptory of Excrements. 3. For the procuring of Foecundity, of which he saith it is a necessary Cause [aiunt enim ità semen rectà ejaculari integrum, nec diffluit per sinus preputii:] As if Nature could not frame her own Tools, in a form fittest for the use, she in∣tends them. And yet these Grounds of Circumcision (he saith) came to his ears by the Tradition of divine men, his Ancestors, who most diligently ex∣pounded Moses. Of the like grain are the Reasons he gives, why God pro∣hibited the planting of Groves about the Tabernacle; [because it was not meet, to bring man's or beast's Dung near the Tabernacle, to manure the Trees, and make them flourish.] (Philo de monarchia 2.) Of Gods commanding the Priests, to wear linnen while they officiated. Because such garments are not made of a matter proceeding from mortal Creatures, as woollen are.] Eadem cum ratione insanit, with the same kind of reasons he plays the fool, in making the High Priests Apparel a resemblance of the World; his Jacinth colour'd Vest tipifies the Sublunary; his Pectoral, the Celestial Region; the two Emeralds on either Shoulder, the two Haemispheres; the twelve Stones therein, the twelve
Signs of the Zodiack: Its name [Rationale] does denote, that all things com∣prehended by the Heavens, were made and adorn'd, upon Principles of the best Reason:] Thummim, or Verity, does denote that [no lye can come into Hea∣ven:] Urim, or Clarity, that [all the light, which is in the sub-celestial, flows from the celestial Bodies: The Flowers on the Fringe do tipifie the Earth, whence they spring: the Pomgranates, Water: called [] for their fluidness: the Bells, the Harmony and Concent of the Parts of the World among themselves (Philo de monarch. 2.) With how much more credit do the Evangelists bring off Moses, when they present Christ as the substance of that Mannah, that Bread of Heaven, that Angel's Food, wherewith the Jews were sustained in the Wilderness: of that Rock, of which they all drank: of that brazen Serpent lifted up to heal those who were stung of fiery Serpents: of that Pascal Lamb, by the sprinkling of whose Blood, they were preserved from the stroak of the destroying Angel: a Lamb of the Flock, without blemish; a perfect man; (of the stock of Abraham) and without sin, and taken up, carried in procession into Jerusalem, on the same day, whereon their Paschal Lamb was seperated from the Flock: his Blood, the thing signified by the Blood of Bulls and Goats, his Divine Nature, by the Goat that was dismist (the Scape-goat;) his human, by the Goat that was sacrificed; his Body, the sub∣stance of Tabernacle and Temple (wherein the God-head dwelt bodily:) his Priest-hood, as to the offering of the great Propitiatory, typified by Aaron's Priesthood: as to his Blessing in the vertue of that Sacrifice, by Melchisedech's Time would fail me to enumerate particulars. See more of them in St. Je∣rome's Preface to his Exposition of Hosea. [Velum Templi scissum est; & o∣minum Judaeorum secreta patuerunt. Verus Helizaeus aquas steriles atque mor∣tiferas sapientiae suae condivit sale, & fecit esse vitales: Marath aqua legis ligno patibuli dulcorata est.] [The Veil of the Temple was rent in twain from top to bottom; to signifie that all the Jews Mysteries were by Christ laid open: He be∣ing that true Elisha who with the salt of his Wisdom season'd those steril and mor∣tiferous Waters of the Sanctuary, and made them healthful. It was by the wood of his Cross that the bitter water of the Law was sweetned. The Apostles setting the Watch of the Gospel, so exactly to the Dial of the Ceremonial Law, as to keep touch with all its Minute-shadows: their drawing the features and proportion of Christs Face; so as to resemble that Image, which the glassy Sea of Mosaical Rites reflects: So as in those Draughts we see his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God (full of Grace, as to himself; full of truth, as to them:) and thereby also rendring the Law it self full of Grace, and worthy to be esteem'd the progeny of the Divine Mind; speaks them to have had their wits about them. § 2. The Gospel is perfectly consonant to the Old Testament, in re∣spect of its Precepts and Ordinances. It hath indeed abolished the Ceremo∣nial Law; but without clashing with the Sanction of that Law) and upon clear and indubitable Old Testament-principles, where we hear God saying; [he would make a new Covenant] with them, not according to the Covenant he made with their Fathers, when he brought them out of Egypt, which Co∣venant they brake: and promising to erect [a new Priest-hood not after the or∣der of Aaron, but Melchisedech. From both which common places, the A∣postle argues strenuously; (Heb. 8. and 7.) [when he saith the new, he maketh void the old;] [where the Priesthood is changed, there must of necessity be a change of the Law.] The Old Testament points out him that is to be a Priest for e∣ver after the order of Melchisedech) as to come of the Tribe; not of Levi, but Judah: which Topick the Apostle pursues and applies to the blessed Je∣sus, who according to the Prophecies that went before of him, sprang of the Root of Jesse, came from the loins of David, and was the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah; of which Tribe, none by the Law, were to be made Priests, but of the Tribe of Levi: and that therefore the Levitical Law was prescribed a∣gainst, in the Prediction of Jacob, and in the preheminence of this Melchise∣dokian
Preist before the Aaronical, hinted by Melchisedech's Blessing and receiv∣ing Tithes of Abraham, while Levi was yet in his Loyns; almost four hundred years before that Law, which assigned Levi to the Priest-hood. And lest, this Law which assigned Levi to that Office, might be interpreted as vacat∣ing Melchisedech's: the Apostle observes that long after Aaron had been made a Priest, and that without an Oath, that Kingly High Priest, after the order of Melchisedek, was made a Priest by Oath: (Hebr. 7. 17. 18.) In the Old Testament, (Malac. 1. 11.) God expresseth his dislike of Le∣vitical Sacrifices and Ordinances, in comparison of another Sacrifice and Ser∣vice that was to be exhibited. A point acknowledged by the Jewish Rab∣bies; who upon these Texts have these reflections, Psal. 69. [Laudabo no∣men dei—& placebit deo super vitulum novellum, cornua producentem & un∣gulas.] This is the new worship, that shall be given to God, in diebus Christi (saith Aben Ezra.) A worship, will please God better, than the Oxe which Adam sacrificed; [Qui perfectus erat de terra creatus:] a perfect Oxe (an∣swerable to one, three years old) the day he was created: having hoofs and horns (saith R. Solom.) Than that three years old Oxe of the Peace-offering; or so large as he can push with his horns, or so great and comely as he makes men contend about him (saith R. David:) all center here, that the most choice Legal Sacrifices are not comparable to that spiritual Worship which should be introduc'd in the days of the Messias. Without relation to which, legal observances were not good, nor such, as by which they should live (Ezeck. 20. 25.) God protesting he never spake to their Fathers, touching Sa∣crifices and Oblations, abstracted from that end of the Law (Jerem. 7. 22.) and chiding them for treading his Courts, for making many and fervent Prayers, for offering Incense, for bringing their Oblations and burnt Offer∣ings; without having an eye to the spiritual part of worship, and to Christ (the Life and Spirit of all acceptable Worship;) (Isa. 1.) Of which imper∣fection and faultiness of the first Covenant the Apostle takes notice; as that which made way for the second (Heb. 8. 7.) In the Old Testament God promiseth that, under the Kingdom of Messias, he would take Priests and Levites out of all Nations (Isa. 66. 21.) that stran∣gers should be Israel's Pastors, Plough-men, and Labourers in the Vine-yard (Isa. 61. 5.) What must then become of the Law, prohibiting any, but the sons of Aaron to approach the Priest's Office, to minister in the Sanctuary? Levi must lose his Plough, when Messias makes Gentiles put their hands to his, and therefore there is much more of ingenuity, and correspondency to their own Prophets than in modern Jews, in that story of the Jerusalem Gomarists, told by R. Judab: of a certain Jew, who being at Plough, and hearing an Arabian telling him, that Messiah was born; presently loosed his Oxen, and sold his Plough and Gears (Lightfoot Harm. pag. 9.) Lastly, (for to instance in all the Topicks of this tendency would put me upon transcribing the greatest part of the Prophets, and the Epistle to the He∣brews:) in the Old Testament we are told, That Jerusalem it self, the Tem∣ple, the place elected by God for Legal Worship, should become a perpetual desolation, within a few years after the coming of Christ; That Rook's Nest (as they had made it) should be pulled down (Dan. 9. 26.) and then sure the whole brood of those callow and imperfect Rudiments (annex'd to it) laid in it, must fall to the ground. That a time would come, when the true Jove would shake that his lap, wherein his grand Seer, the Eagle-eyed Moses, had laid the Eggs of his Ceremonial Laws. Haggai. 2. 6. [I will shake not the earth only, but the heavens:] that is, as St. Paul (Heb. 12. 27.) expounds that Text; not only the Vanity of the Gentiles, but the Jewish Religion, though of Divine Institution, so far as it is to be shak'd. Or which comes all to one, [The heaven,] that is, the heavenly Sanctuary, the Temple, God's Court, the place of his Residence, where he dwelt between the Cherubims. That Sion would be ploughed up (Micah 3. 12.) [Sion shall be ploughed as a field and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the Lord's house as the
high places of the Forrest. This the Chaldees alledg in behalf of Jeremy (Jer. 26. 10.) and the Rabbies observe the accomplishment of it, then, when Turnus Rufus ploughed up the place of the Temple (Dr. Lightfoot, Vespacian 2. paragr. 1.) and what must become then of the whole Crop of the Temple-Ceremonies which had been there sowen, and of the Eggs there deposited? That Jerusalem, the dish wherein Levitical services were to be served up, should be turned up-side-down, and wiped as a man wipes a Dish, (2. King. 21. 13.) . It shall be turned upside down up∣on the face thereof. What can that portend but the spilling of the Cates? So that, to a considerate Spectatour, it cannot but be matter of highest admi∣ration, to see that blinded Nation groping for the door, when the house is fal∣len flat to the ground; and like a company of dispersed Ants, whose hill is digged up, carrying their Eggs in their mouths above this sixteen hundred years; not knowing where to lay them, but expecting still their old Ant-hill should grow up again, out of the dust, wherein it has lain all that while; not considering that, by this time, their Eggs must needs be grown addle. A∣las, what a spirit of slumber hath divine Vengeance powred upon them! see∣ing they still persist in denying that Holy and Just One, after Moses hath so pe∣remptorily and palpably denyed them; after God hath pull'd them from him and hedged up their way to his Law, by an absolute impossibility of observing it! The Temple wherein the greatest and most eminent part of that Law was only performable, being by his irresistible hand demolish'd, and kept from being again erected (in spight of all the attempts of the most daring enemies of our Jesus) and the Nation, to which they are peculiarly calculated, being dispersed, and ceasing to be a Nation. Nay after themselves have (in effect) renounc'd the Religion of Moses, and betaken themselves to the Religion of the Patriarchs, which yet is unpracticable among them in the point of Sacri∣fices: so that they worship God in a way, which neither their Fathers, nor their Fathers-fathers knew: A way taken up by themselves, since the demo∣lishing of their Temple, and dispersion of their Nation: wherein they add and take from their own Law, contrary to the Divine Sanction. In vain do they urge those Texts that seem (in the Letter) to import the perpetuity and irrevocableness of Moses Law: such as (Deut. 29. 29.) Things revealed belong to us and our children for ever. (Lev. 23. 14.) First fruits a sta∣tute for ever; and, the passover a statute for ever, (Ex. 12. 17.) For, if they will allow David to speak in Moses his Language, when he applies ever to the Temple (Psal. 132. 13.) [This is my rest for ever;] and allow their own eyes to interpret David's [ever] (now they see the place of his residence for ever demolished:) the Chain, wherein they think themselves still bound to Moses, will fall off of its own accord: can the [ever] of Oblations, possibly, be stretched beyond the [ever] of that Sanctuary to which they are limit∣ted. As vain is the exception against the cogency of this Argument, from the Instance of the first Temples laying waste, during the Babylonish Captivity: during which time, though the Law, as to the practise of it, was, in some points suspended, yet it was not abolished. For, 1. The Law had a shrewd shake, and was loosen'd in its sinews, by the ruine of the first Temple: Gods withdrawing then the Ark of his Presence and Covenant from them, was a sign he would quickly grow weary of sitting on Mount Sion; now, that his foot-stool was removed: his not vouchsafing to give them Fire from Heaven, for their Sacrifices in the second, as he had done in the Tabernacle and first Temple, and yet accepting their Offerings made by strange fire (so directly contrary to the Law) was an Argument, that he stood not so much upon Levitical punctilios, as he did at first, when he punish'd Nadab and Abihu with suddain death, for offering with strange fire. If the Jews will avouch their own story upon (Dan. 6. 4.) [Ut invenirent oc∣casionem Danieli ex latere regis;] (where interpreting [latus regis] to be the Queen, or the King's Concubines, they tell us, that Daniel was an Eunuch;)
they must be forc'd to a confession, that God stood not much upon the Cere∣monial Law, when he preferr'd an Eunuch (who by that Law was not to come into the Congregation) into that intimate Communion with himself, as to reveal to him more of his Counsel than he did to any Prophet beside Moses: (Jerom. in locum:) I urge these Instances as Arguments ad hominem (they be∣ing the Jews concessions, though in themselves not true, as I shew else∣where.) It is from their own Premisses, I infer this Conclusion. That God weaned them by degrees from Moses, antiquating one Ceremony after another; till at last Christ cancell'd the whole Hand-writing of Ordinances: breach upon breach was made in that wall of partition, till Christ took it wholly a∣way and rac'd it to the ground. 2. God promised to return that Captivity, to restore to them their own Land, and to repair the ruines of the first Temple; but this Captivity will never be return'd, the second Temple will never be repair'd: but both Nati∣on and Place are to be perpetual Desolations. Of this I make proof else∣where, and therefore here shall propound this only Argument to evince the truth of it, (viz.) That during the desolations of the first, the Spirit of Pro∣phecy was not with-held from them, God raised them up Prophets in Baby∣lon: he then set them up Way-marks, guides to their Cities again; he whist∣led to his Flock, scatter'd in that gloomy and dark day of their wandring, to prevent their total dispersion, and to keep them within the hearing of Cyrus his Proclamation: But since the desolating of the second Temple, they have had no Voice, no Vision, none to answer how long; no Prophets have risen up among them, but false ones, as themselves acknowledg: such as Ben Coz∣ba, of whom their Taba (in Taanith per 4. halac. 6.) and Maymon (in Taanith per. 5.) quoted by Dr. Lightfoot (Vespacian 1. Sect. 1.) thus write. [It was on the 9. day of the Month Ab, that the great City Bitter was taken, where were thousands and ten thousands of Israel who had a great King over them; whom all Israel, even their greatest wise men, thought to have been Messias.] And be∣fore him, and Jerusalem's fall (according to our Saviour's Prediction) the many false Christs, of whom Josephus in the History of that Age, gives many instances. § 3. As the Ceremonial Law fell with its own weight, was disannull'd by its own Vote, and cancel'd by vertue of its own Ordinances: So that Old Te∣stament-law, which cannot be shaken, 1. Is confirm'd and establish'd, in the Gospel, upon better Principles, and more powerful Motives: 2. And im∣proved by our Royal Lawgiver, in many branches of it, that budded not un∣der that Testament: 3. And in the whole of it, to the utmost heroick degree of Christned Morality, 1. That an humane Soul cloathed with Mortality is capable of, 2. Or can be drawn to by the most powerful Attractives of the Spirit of Grace, 3. Most plentifully poured forth upon all that sincerely em∣brace the Gospel. Of all which points I shall speak distinctly; not only be∣cause they demonstrate that Christ came, not to destroy, but to perfect and fill up the Law, but do also present Christ and the Gospel to us, in a quite other form, than the faithless Solifidian draws them in; whose Models of Christianity look. as if they were designed to shame Religion. 1. The Salvifick Grace teaches us, in the Gospel, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live godly, righteously, and soberly; with more masculine and strenuous Motives, than were propounded under the Law. The Argument then was [I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage; but that which was but implyed in that, is in the Gospel clearly expressed, and obedience prest from our deliverance from the bondage of Satan, the vassalage of our own Lusts, the chambers of eternal Death. The motive expressed there was: That thy days may be long in the land, a land slowing with milk and honey:] here the darkness of Type (that was upon the face of that earth) is dissipated; the waters (that overwhelm'd it) are divided from it, and the dry Land made to appear, that
Land that is very far off, far above all visible Heavens. The Childrens Rat∣tles and Nats being laid aside, the Gospel openly hangs out Prizes, becoming men of full age to run for, in that Race of Holiness that's set before us. This they that would, might have received as their encouragement then; they that took the pains to crack the Nut, found this Kernel of heavenly, with∣in the Shell of those earthly, inducements. In Christ's Manger there's clean Provender, fann'd and winnowed to our hand: in the Crib of Moses, the Corn was in the Chaff; yet so, as they that had their senses exercised to dis∣cern, did seperate the Corn from the Chaff. Now the framing of Gospel∣motives so, as they clash not with, but are superordinated to, yea extracted out of those of the Law (as their spirits) speaks the Compilers to have been men of well composed Minds. To take at that hint which Moses gave, of God's intending some better thing than Canaan, in his informing us; that the whole earth (whereof Canaan was a part) was accursed for Man's sake: and Canaan not only actually under the effects of that Curse; (for it bore Briers and Thistles;) but the most cursed part of the whole Earthly Globe then, when the promise of it was made to Abraham (as being contaminated with the abominations of its Inhabitants, more than any other Countrey. Or at those hints which the Patriarchs gave, of their looking beyond an earthly Ca∣naan, in that promise; in their confessing themselves to be pilgrims and stran∣gers, even when they were setled in Canaan: [I am a sojourner as all my fa∣thers were,] (Psal. 39.) In their not taking those many opportunities which were offer'd them of returning thither, after the end of the Famine, during the whole time of Joseph's Presidency, or of those Kings who knew Joseph: but chusing rather to stay in Goshen, than to go back into Canaan: where, for all its fertillity, they had been famish'd, if Egypt had not releiv'd them: (e∣nough singly to have convinc'd them, that some better thing was involv'd in the Promise.) To take (I say) at such hints, and thence to conclude so irre∣fragably as they do, that the Patriarchs saw, by faith, a Land beyond that, e∣ven an heavenly. Their presenting the Church in such a posture, as Christ's left hand is under her head, while his right hand doth embrace her: (as St. Jerom, from the Fathers, expounds that place (Can. 2. 6.) in his comment upon Zachary) (cap. 4.) So as the two Olive-trees; (Law on left, Gospel on right hand) pour Oyl into the golden Candlestick, the Church, argues the A∣postle's discoursive faculty to have been very sound. 2. Which may be further evidenc'd, by their giving such an account of Christ's improvement of Moses his Morals, in some Branches (that were virtually in the Bole or Root, though they did not actually put forth, till they fell under the vegitating influence of the Sun of Righteousness) as neither speaks Moses unfaithful in his omitting of them, nor Christ austere, in his re∣quiring some things that under Moses were dispensed with. [Christus prae∣cepta supplendo & conservavit & auxit:] (Tertul. Cont. March. l. 4.) [Christ, in supplying the defects of the Law, did as well preserve it as enlarge it.] As in the cases of Polygamy, divorce, retaliation, deportment toward enemies, &c. By their imputing Moses his giving of dispensations, to the hardness of that peoples heart, for whose benefit, and whose temper his Laws were fram∣ed: who were tolerated in less, to prevent their breaking out into greater sins (Mat. 19. 8.) And his not imposing some (and those the most spiritual and heroick Duties) to the Childishness of the Synagogue, being under age till the Fulness of Time (Gal 4. 1.) The Christian Age is thence stiled, by St. Chrisostom (tom. 3. pag. 93,) [] the age ripe for great∣er commands, Both which being removed by Christ; hardness of heart (by the plentiful pourings out of his Spirit:) and childishness, by making us men in knowledg (through his most manifest revelation of spiritual and E∣ternal life:) As also that heavy Yoke of carnal Ordinances, sutable to the Necks of that carnal People; who minded not [] the eternal and natural rules of Justice and Piety (Just. Martyr :) (and therefore imposed upon them, as we send Children
to School, to keep them employed: (To impose some checks and stops in their course of carnality, to find them work (as Justin Martyr tells Tryphon the Jew) and out of the way of those harms they are otherwise prone to run into.) From which divine Impositions they took occasion of becom∣ing more childish, relying for acceptance with God, more upon those bodi∣ly Exercises, than substantial Holiness. These Incumbrances (I say) being taken away by Christ, it cannot be counted an act of Austerity, that he should evacuate all dispensations to sin; and having eased us of the burden of car∣nal Commandments (grievous to an ingenious and generous spirit, such as the Gospel infuseth) should lay so much more weight upon us of noble work, congenial to every humane, and delightful to every evangelized Soul. Christ being come, our brangling and babling work was less: wherefore we had also a greater Task, as having greater assistance given us,] (Theophilact. in Rom. 6. 14.) (for I interpret his [] the wrestling of Boys in the Fenc∣ing-school; and [] the exercises of men, and experienc'd Practitioners; as is manifest from the opposition they are set in.) [] (Theoph. in 1 Cor. 9. 21.) Having a Law more sublime than the old Law, viz. the Law of Christ. 3. By their presenting Moses in some of them, as prescribing Laws Poli∣tick, for the outward Man, not Spiritual, to the Conscience; and therefore dispensing with them (in curia soli non coeli) before Man's, not God's Tri∣bunal. [] (Isid. Pel. Epist. 134. lib. 4.) The Old Testament made Laws, for the Hand; the new, for the Heart: that regulated, the Action; this the Thought. An hint of which St. Matthew gives (as that divine Critick Dr. Hamond observes) in his prefacing those passages in Christ's Sermon (on that Mount, where he publish'd his royal Law) which concern retaliation, and loving of friends, and hating enemies with [an [] ye have heard] but leaving out [the [] by or to them of old] thereby signifying those Doctrines to have been Doctrines of Moses his Law, but not of the De∣calogue, not moral Precepts, wherein Conscience was concern'd; but belong∣ing to Policy and the humane Court: wherein, Moses intending to prevent the first injury (as the learned Isidore observes.) [] for fear of suffering the like. (Isidor. Pe∣lusiot. lib 4. epist. 209. tit. in illud oculum pro oculo.) the offended person was allowed to implead the offender, and to have a Tooth, for a Tooth; an Eye, for an Eye. August. (contr. Adamant. Man. cap. 5.) saith [Constitutus est eis primus lenitatis gradus: ut injuriae acceptae mensuram nullo modo dolor vindicantis superaret. Sic enim & domare aliquando posset injuriam qui eam primò non su∣perare didiscisset. Unde dominus huic gradui superaedificavit alterum; ut qui jam audierat, non ampliorem vindictam, quàm qua quisque laesus esset, redderet: placatâ mente totum se donare gauderet: quod etiam in illis veteribus libris Prophe∣ta praedicavit dicens, Domine mi, si feci istud, si reddidi retribuentibus mi∣hi mala: & olim Propheta dicit, de bujusmodi uno patiente injurias & levissime tolerante, Dabit percutienti se maxillam: ex quo intelligitur, & mensuram vin∣dicandi rectè carnalibus constitutam, & omnimodam injuriae remissionem, non tan∣tùm in novo Testamento esse proeceptam, sed longè antè inveteri pronunciatam:] The first degree of Lenity enjoyn'd them was, that they should not through smart, of the injury they had received, exceed the measure of the offence in taking ven∣geance: for thus, he who had first learn'd, not to exceed; might learn, in time, wholly to remit the offence. Upon this reason, our Saviour to that lower degree added an higher; that he who had already been taught, that he must not take re∣venge, beyond the demerit of the injury: might have joy in himself, if he could with a pacate mind forgive the whole: which even in the Old Testament the Pro∣phet commends saying: [Oh Lord if I have done this thing, if I have reward∣ed evil to them that are mine enemies:] And another Prophet speak thus, of one who suffer'd such like injuries, and bare them patiently: [He gave his cheek to him that smote him:] From whence we learn that Moses did well in setting
bounds of revenge to carnal men, and that the free and total remission of injuries was not only justly commanded in the Gospel, but before that, commended in the Law. And for that other of hating their Enemies, that is, the seven Nations; whose sins being ripe, God had sentenc'd the extirpation of them, and made the Jews Executioners of that Sentence (and to have their Cloaths and Pos∣sessions for their pains;) it was necessary, in order thereunto, that they should not pity, but hate them; and that right sore, as God's Enemies: so that nei∣ther he that took that Limb from another, which himself had been deprived of by him; nor he that took away the Life of any of the seven Nations, was responsible for it, before their Judicatories; no more than Hangmen are, a∣mong us, for chopping off Hands or Heads of condemned persons: who yet, if they hate those of whom they are the Executioners (as their own, and not as the Republicks Enemies) and have an Eye more to the Wages, than the executing of Justice, may be guilty (before God) of horrid Murder. And if the Ghostly Father (in his admonition to the condemned) should, in a Paren∣thesis, advise the Executioner, to take heed of contracting the guilt of blood upon his Soul, by a male-administration of his Office: who would accuse him of accusing the Law? No more ought Christ to be thought either to oppose or accuse Moses, in these his reformations; tending not towards the abolition of common Justice, but towards the cautioning and regulating of private Persons aggrieved, in seeking redress of Injuries, or of publick Persons ap∣pointed (as the Ministers of God) to take vengeance upon them that do evil, that neither of them should be over-rigid, in seeking redress, in every petty and inconsiderable Case: and when the importance of the Injury done (ei∣ther to private Persons, or the publick Law) forces them to it; in invo∣cating aid of the Law, to aim not at their own revenge, but God's Glory and the preserving of common Equity. [Ista praecepta magis ad praeparationem cordis quae intùs est pertinere, quàm ad opus quod in aperto fit: ut teneatur in se∣creto anima patientiâ; in manifesto autem id fiat quod eis videtur prodesse posse, quibus bene-velle debemus: (Augustin Marcellino epist. 5.) These Precepts of Christ do rather appertain to the heart than the outward man: that the Soul may possess it self with patience within, and the Christian do that openly, which he thinks will be most profitable to those, to whom we are bound to do good. Thus I have heard some say, that our Laws, touching Usury, con∣fess it unlawful by the Law of God, and damnable in his Court; yet seeing that most men had so little of the fear of God before their eyes, as (notwith∣standing God's excluding Usurers out of his holy-hill) they would be dabling with the accursed thing) that they might set bounds to men's avarice, make it extortion, to take more consideration than the Law allows: that by this li∣mitation, the covetous (whom God abhors) that are resolved to run the hazard of their own damnation, may bring it upon themselves, with as little detri∣ment to others as may be: and that the Christian indeed, that dares take God's bond and suretiship, for the poor borrower, may lend gratis without a∣ny other consideration, than that hundred-fold Reward which he hath pro∣mised. Though I hope better things of the Usurer, yet this tenure of our Law may serve to illustrate Moses. 4. By their giving an account, of Christ's discharging Moses his Law, from those false Glosses and Doctrines which his Expositors had fastned upon it: expressed in St. Matthew by this form of preface ([, it hath been said,] without either [the , ye have heard,] or [, to them of old]) prefix'd before Christ's discourse, touching Divorce: thereby signifying, that the matter there recited (called by the Pharisees a command of Moses (Mat. 19. 7.) was neither given by Moses in the Law, or by any other after him, to that ancient People, as a Precept: but was a bare permission in the case of turpitude (Deut. 24. 1.) given them for the hardness of their heart. Where, yet, all that Moses commands is only this: That he that doth put away his wife (in that case which he permits (for the prevention of a worse evil) but allows not much less commands) should do it in due form of Law.
Now the Pharisees having put this sence upon Moses, as if he had, in the case of uncleanness, commanded and () for any slight Cause, made it lawful, to put away ones Wife. Christ vindicates Moses from this Gloss; and that out of his own Writings; where he gives an account, of the first Institution of Marriage, of Adam's Aphorism when God brought Eve to him, [This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh;] and of Moses his Inference from thence, [Therefore ought a man to cleave to his wife.] Can there be a better Argument of a well tun'd Mind, than to set Christ's prohibition in as perfect a concord to Moses his toleration of Divorce, as that second part of his Song bears to his Descant upon the Epithalamium which Adam sang in Paradise: and with so much dexterity, to remove out of the consort, that Discord which the Pharisees had made, by their putting of Moses out of tune with himself? § 4. No less a Decorum do the Evangelists observe in their giving an ac∣count of Christ's improvement of the whole body of the Moral Law (to the highest pitch, that Humane Nature (in this Warfare-estate) is capable of, or can be induc'd to (by the powerfullest Motives, or greatest Assistance) and of his requiring an higher degree of inherent Grace, and the exerting thereof, in more noble Acts of Obedience (to be performed both by the outward and inward Man) in order to God's accepting of us, through Christ, to Salvati∣on, as Persons Justifiable (without impeachment to God's Justice, in con∣demning others: or to the truth of divine and irrevocable Menaces) from the charge of Unbelief and Hypocrisie; then was required in the Mosaical Covenant. Such a pitch of Theological Virtue, of Evangelical Righteous∣ness, Christ more than once calls aloud and distinctly for; as that without which men cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. [I am not come to de∣stroy but to fulfil thé Law (Mat. 5. 17.)] , a word that, when it is applyed to a word or a Prophecy, signifies, to perform or fulfil: but, in other cases it is to fill up, to compleat, to perfect as (2. Chron. 24. 10.) they cast ob∣lations into the Chest, till they had made an end, till they had fill'd it, and used by Christ in this sence (Mat. 23. 32.) fill ye up then the measure of your fathers: whereupon Eusebius saith [admonebat etiam eos, ut altiùs saperent iis quae Judaeis a Mose praecepta fuerant, &c.] (Euseb. demon. evang. 3. 7.) Christ also admonish'd his hearers, that they should savour such Heroick verities, as were higher than those, that Moses gave in command to the Jews.] expressed well by the Ancients, by the similitude of a Vessel that had some Water in it before, but is now filled up to the brim: The holy Waters, that were but An∣kle-deep, and ran in the middle of the Channel before, are made by Christ Bank-high, and Chin-deep; the Image of God in Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, to which Old Testament-believers were to conform, (under pain of being rejected as Bastards not Sons) was but a rude drawn piece, in compari∣son of that Image which Christ drew to the life; and requires conformity to now; under the same pain. That this is Christ's mind in this Text is mani∣fest; from what he adds [Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (the most knowing Expositors of their Law, and the strictest Sect of their Religion) ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven:] From the following Instances (in this Chapter) of several particulars of the Law, barely set down first, and then improv'd by Christ, in this form, [But I say unto you: from his commanding us to be perfect, as our heavenly Fa∣ther is: From his rejecting that rich man, who had from his youth kept all the Commandments (in the general and express sence) for his refusing to come up to those terms (of forsaking all when call'd to it) which Christ had made necessary, to the rendring of men qualified, by the Tenour of the Go∣spel-law, for the Kingdom of Heaven. From St. Peter's stiling Christians [A peculiar people, a nation of kingly priests, that hold forth the virtues of God; and are partakers of the divine nature:] From St. John's telling us, [That he that is of a Christian Hope (and sure none but such as have Christian Hope hold
the Christian Faith) purifieth himself as Cod is pure;] and [that he that doth righ∣teousness is righteous, as God is righteous.] Which Texts, though they imply not inless perfection, much less equality with God in holiness, as some blasphe∣niously gloss upon them) yet they can import no less than such a Conformity to God's (in Christian) Virtue; as renders it (as to its Genius and Comple∣xion) super-humane; and those that are endowed with it, the Shrines and Temples of God, wherein a more noble spirit resides, than Adam was capable of in his state of Innocency. As is observ'd by Grotius (that wonder of men for Reading, Judgment, and (which crowns both) Modesty.) Ad vitam coe∣lestem nobis dandam requirit Deus sanctitatem animi eximiam, & quae illum Ada∣mi, non modó ex quo lapsus est, sed & eùm, in quo primùm est conditus, statum longè excedat & nos Angelis aequat, manente tamen discrimine eo, quòd corpora humana ab Angelicis distantia secum ferunt:] (Grotius ad Cassand. consult. articul. 2.) To our being capable of receiving the heavenly Life, God requires an eminent san∣ctity of mind; even such as doth far exceed that, which Adam had, not only after he fell, but when he was first created; and equals us to Angels, bating this diffe∣rence, which humane Bodies, distant from the substance of Angels, carry about with them. Yea I humbly conceive, that the poorest, sincere Christian hath a love to God, a knowledg or apprehension of God; of a more generous kind, a more noble tincture, than Cherubims and Seraphims have: who have their names from ardency of Love and perspicacity of Understanding (as if their essence were made up of delighting in and contemplating of the divine Good∣ness.) Not that we either love, or know God, more or better, than they do: (I have more knowledg of my Ignorance and Chilness, than to harbour such a Luciferian thought, than to set my triumphant Throne above those Stars of the intellectual Heaven:) But there is in our poor cole (almost choak'd with, and buried in, ashes) that peculiar sparkishness; that flows from our leaded frail Glass, those vivid Reflections of the divine Light and Heat, as draw the admi∣ring eye of those Flames of Fire (those pure Christal Mirrors) after them (1 Pet. 1. 12.) [Which things the Angels desire to look into:] as wondring to see in; (1 Tim. 3. 16.) [] it put Angels into an exstacy to con∣template the Mystery of the Gospel: and desirous to learn of the Church the manifold Wisdom of God (Eph. 3. 10.) these friends of the Bridegroom, be∣ing ravish'd with contemplating the conjugal knowledg and love, which the Bridegroom and his Bride have of, and bear towards, one another; so illu∣strious is the foresight thereof (in the Glass of the holy Trinity) (whence the Angels that fell learn'd it [non speculando verbum, sed suscipiendo illuminatio∣nem à Verbo] (Bonávent. l. 2. dist. 4. 9. 1.) Not by beholding the word but by re∣ceiving illumination from the Word.) moved envy in Lucifer and his confederate Angels (Hieron. Zanch. de operibus Dei l. 4. cap. 2.) [quia inviderunt hominem hanc dignitatem:] This was the Devil's great sin, that he envied Man's happi∣ness: and the glimmerings of it, in those righteous persons who walk'd with God (before Christ's Incarnation) made them the Objects of the envy of the the Devil's Seed (1 John 3. 12.) though they were but faint glimmerings of that Grace which Christ calls for and requires, in his Gospel-Law; where the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than John the Baptist (than whom there had not been a greater Prophet born of Woman) (St. Mat. 11. 11.) where the feeble are to be as David, and the house of David as God (Zechar. 12. 8.) The meanest Form in Christ's School, to equallize the highest in Moses his: and the highest in Christ's, to take out those Lessons, that were never read to any, before Christ set up School; and to perform those Exercises that were never set to any, till Christ gave us a Formula of them in his fulfilling all righ∣teousness, and a command to perform them (Chrisostom, de virgin. cap 44.) [] God indulged those times in those and many other things; but after the coming of Christ the way is made much streight∣er, and more noble work set us. [Secuudùm Natur am vivere, laus ejus est, qui nondum credidt:] (Justin ad Zenam.) To live according to Nature, is his commendation,
that hath not yet attain'd to the Christian Faith: to which whosoever subscribes, binds himself to a more holy and heavenly frame of Heart and course of Life, than any of the most strict forreign Sects propounded: And that under pain of losing the reward of a Christian. For the proof of which we have as full and clear Testimony (from the mouth of him, who is Amen, the faithful and true Witness) as for any Doctrine in all the Bible: not only in that foremen∣tion'd Preface to his Royal Law, but in the Sanction annex'd to it (St. Mat. 7. 26.) [Every one that heareth these sayings of mine] (these terms that I have added to the remedying Law, as it was dispenc'd by Moses, in this Form of words prefix'd [But I say unto you:]) For what can these sayings of Christ's be; but what he had, in that Sermon, said unto them, over and above what they had hear'd was said to them of old time) [and doth them not) shall be lik∣ned unto a foolish man: which built his house upon the sand, and the rain des∣cended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it;] and all this both Law and Sanction, he preach'd not as the Scribes, as a Commentator on Moses; but of his own au∣thority, in his own name, as a Lawgiver: which Sanction (set to his Law, when it first went out of his sacred Lips) he was so far from reversing, as when he seals up all Prophesie (the whole new Testament) the Law to his Disci∣ples: he binds it upon them, and confirms the unalterableness of it, in such forms as these.] [Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man, according as his work shall be:] (Rev. 22. 12.) that is, [to them that continue in well doing, eternal life; but to them that are contentious, (will rather be arguing with God about his Proposals, quarrelling with his Law of Li∣berty, than submit to the practice of it;) and obey not the Gospel: indignation and wrath, &c. (Rom. 2. 8.] I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end, the first and the last:] and what I said at the first, I say now at the last: what I was at the beginning, I shall be at the end: still of the same mind, and of this mind: [Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in, thorow the gates, into the city, for without are dogs, &c.] [If any man shall add unto these things] (make those things ne∣cessary to salvation which I have not made so: as the Judaizing Pseudo-chri∣stians (who beside the Yoke of Christ) made the Yoke of Moses necessary) [I will add to him the Plagues that are written in this book: And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this Prophesie] (make that needless, that I have made needful: as the Gnosticks did) [God shall take away his part out of the book of life.] (Rev. 22. 13. &c.) In which Quotations, and hun∣dreds more of sacred Texts, the Evangelists do so fully obviate the Popish Distinction of Precepts and Counsels, and the Antinomian's, whole brood of worse Birds of that evil Egg (who turn all Christ's Precepts into Counsels;) And (in the language of Isidore) so manifestly pervert, and (Isidor. Pelusiot. lib. 4. ep. 125.) [,] adulterate the divine Doctrine by mixing the pure and limpid sence of sacred Scripture with their own Opinions: as I wonder how Christian ears can endure to hear their Croakings, in flat Contradiction to the divine Oracles: or tingle not to hear them, putting those things to the question, which Christ has so positively, and without the least ambiguity determined; and that their folly is not mani∣fest to all men, (as well as their audacity) in their interpreting ambiguous places, in the Apostolical Writings, point blank to Christs manifest and plain sence: as if that Spirit of Promise, by which their Pens were directed, had not brought to their remembrance, but made them forget what Christ had said, and prompted them to propound Salvation upon as contrary Terms to Christs, as darkness to light. And in their concluding against the ne∣cessity of Evangelical good Works, from those very places where the neces∣sity of them is most strenuously asserted and maintain'd. To show these blind Leaders of the blind, how great their Darkness is (even in those things where∣in, they think, they have the clearest Light) when they hear St. Paul con∣clude,
that a man is justified by faith, not works; they take faith there, to be terminus diminuens, and to import a lighter burden, an easier Yoke than those works which they deny justification to. § 5. Whereas it will easily appear, to him that rightly states the grand Contro∣versie (then arising upon the Coming of Christ) and the common notion of the word [Faith] in the stating of that Controversie: That none of the con∣tending parties did (or could, except they would wilfully pervert the stated sence of that term, and become Barbarians to one another) understand by Faith (in that question) any thing else, but Christian Religion. Can any man think, that St. Paul had not more Grace or Wit, than to assert that a man's bare depending on Christ for salvation, without observing that Physician's Rules, would bring him health? That they who do not so much as believe him; but give him the lye, when he protests he will exclude from Interest in him all those that keep not his sayings: that they (I say) who when he pro∣nounceth woe and menaces, do not take him for an honest man, (a man of his word) either can believe in him for eternal life; or if they should, would obtain it by him? or lastly, that he (or any body else in their right wits) would dispute that which all rational men grant, (viz.) that no Religion can save any man that does not cordially comply with it; or that any man can cordial∣ly comply with a Religion as of divine Original, and not conform to its Pre∣cepts, not follow his God in the observance of his Commands? I put it to the Consciences of the whole Tribe of these lisping Divines, to say, whether Christian, Jew or Pagan did not all confess, that how saving soever the re∣spective Religions which they stood for were, yet they would not benefit him that was not true to them, that did not cordially embrace them; and accept of what they promised upon the terms which they propounded. Let them ask a Jew or a Mahometan what it is that constitutes a Christian, and makes him capeable of the benefits of that Religion? they will readily reve as plain and true an answer from them, as we can give either of them if they ask us what constitutes a Jew or Mahometan? (To wit) A cordial Compliance with, and Conformity to the Law of Christ; as that which constitutes a Jew, is complying with the Law of Moses; a Mahometan, with the Law of Mahomet: in observance whereof they expect undoubtedly to be saved; because they make no question but that their respective Lawgivers were sent of God, who cannot lye. So far do our new Illuminates fall short of Pagans, Jews and Mahometans, in the knowledg of the true Notion of Faith (as it signifies our Act;) as what these fumbling Theologues grope for (in the dark of their own bewildered Imaginations) lay so bare fac'd to every smatterer in Religion, to every Novice initiated in Judaism and Gentilism as well as Christianity: that none of them ever moved question about it, but were wholly taken up in dis∣puting whether Faith (as it signifies the divine Object of our Belief: (that is) Christian Religion, were able to save them who cordially embraced and lived up to it? Till the Gnosticks (to maintain Libertinism) perverted the common use of that Notion, in the aforesaid Question; and wrested St. Paul's Do∣ctrine, to import Justification by a Faith short of that of Devils (viz.) by a bare frigid assent to the truth of the Gospel, in so remiss a degree as it did not work fear (for had they by Faith been moved with fear or hope, they would have prepared an Ark to the saving of themselves, in order to their obtaining that hope.) This forced St. James to demonstrate the falsity of that Thesis, in the Gnostick's sence of Faith; and to infer that a man is justified, not by Faith only (as Faith signifies our Act) from those very Instances (of Abraham and Rabab:) whence St. Paul concluded Justification by [Faith only (as it signi∣fies the Object of Christian Belief) without Works;] that is, by a faithful ad∣hering to and practice of Christian Religion, without the help or observance of Moses his Law: That having been the ancient and catholick way of Salva∣tion; wherein eternal Life was attainable, before Judaism was in being; and whereby they that were true to it, in all Nations (to whom the sound of Mo∣ses
his Trumpet never reach'd) obtain'd pardon of sin, and God's acceptance of them to eternal life, through that blood of the Redeemer, which was pro∣mised in God's Covenant of Grace with Adam, tipified in the Blood of Sacri∣fices long before Moses; and exhibited and actually tenderd, as an Oblation propitiatory for the sin of the World, in the Fulness of Time, predicted by the Prophets. After which, because the foundation and pillar of it, was be∣lieving that Jesus of Nazareth was that Seed of the Woman, promised to the Patriarchs; and that Seed of Abraham, promised to the Jews: of which later and more distinct promise all the circumstances did so meet together, and concenter in the blessed Jesus: as they must renounce Faith in Moses, and their own Prophets, that did not believe, that he was that person fore-appointed of the Father, to break the Serpents Head. Thence this Religion was called [Faith,] and the Professors of it [Believers;] names whereby, in common use, they were sufficiently discriminated from all others; and therefore used by St. Luke in his History of the propagation of Christian Religion; and by St. Paul in his disputations about Justification (without the addition of any E∣pithete) to signifie, The whole and entire Oeconomy of that Religion, or way of knitting God and man together) which Christ propounded; and the ad∣herers to, And expectants of Salvation in, that Way. Of the same impor∣tance and equipollency, are the Notions, of [anointing] and [Christian;] the first importing that Religion which Christ was anointed to preach, and the later, persons imbued with that Religion: as also [master,] (or [teacher] sent from God) and [disciple] but not so free from ambiguity as these of [faith] and [believers.] Upon the like Reason [Works of the Law] are used, to denote [Works, directed to be performed, by the Religion of Moses] in order to mens finding, acceptance with God, unto eternal Life: And the relations conducing thereunto, his Writ∣ings having obtained universally (where they were spoke of) the name of [the Law] with the addition sometimes, of the Law [of Moses] or the Law [of  Jews] (when the Discoursers upon that Subject were [Jew] and [Gentile,] because the Gentiles hold their Religions to be Divine Laws, as well as the Jew did his:) But when the Christian discoursed with a Christian or a Jew, they stiled it the [Law,] without such addition (they being both agreed that it was Divine, and the only Divine Law in writing, that had been com∣municated to the World before the exhibition of the Messias.) And to a∣breviate that demonstration, in continued discourses on that Subject, (where it was often to be repeated) instead of [the Works of the Law] (that is, in∣joyned by that Law) they used the simple term [Works.] In the room whereof, they sometimes used the name of that Work which obliged them to all the rest, viz. Circumcision. Hence these Terms: [Circumcision, Works, Works of the Law, the Law, the Law of Works] in the sacred Writings are e∣quivalent, and imply [the terms of that Covenant God made with the Jews, by the Mediation of Moses; as abstracted both from that he made with the Patri∣archs (before) and by Christ (after Moses).] This for the verbal Terms which are easie to be understood by him that observes, what was the great Question agitated in those Times (Isidor. Clarius, in Rom. 3. 20.) [Si cogita∣remus, quae versaretur eo tempore controversia, non erit admodùm difficilis scopum assequi hujus Epistolae: at sine hac consideratione luditur opera.] But whoever attends not to St. Paul's scope in that Epistle, shoots at random, and spends his fools bolt to no purpose. As to the thing it self, I hope these papers will have the for∣tune to fall into no mans hand of so perverted a judgement, or obtuse wit, as shall not at the first hearing give their vote and assent to these Pro∣posals. 1. The grand Question in debate betwixt St. Paul and the Jew was [Whe∣ther the well-pleasing of God, and his acceptance of us (as persons intituled, by his gratious Covenant) to his promise of Pardon, and eternal life) was obtaina∣ble (as the case then stood) by obedience, and observance of, that Religion which was instituted by Moses, or by Christ?) I insert this clause [as the case then stood,] be∣cause
Christ and his Apostles denyed not, but plainly affirmed, That Salvation had been of the Jews; (that is) that Salvation was attainable in the Jewish Re∣ligion, by all those that in observance of it, look'd to the end of it, Christ. But the Question then was, [Whether the great Prophet (that is in the bosom of the Fa∣ther) being come, and his Law being gone out of Sion, and the word of the Lord him∣self from Jerusalem; that old Religion had not lost its salvifick Power?] which, that it had, the Apostle maintains and proves by many Arguments; a∣mongst which this is not the least; That God expected more now from the sons of men, to testifie the sincerity of their Love to him, and to make them capable of his acceptance of them, as sincere, than he did, during those dark∣er Revelations of his Grace, and more sparing allowances of divine Aid. In the demanding whereof the old Religion coming short, was thereby disina∣bled and become uncapeable to save; it being possible that a man might, af∣ter the coming of Christ, perform what it required, on condition of Salvati∣on, and yet not make those returns to God (for the rich Revelation of his Grace by Christ) as he would accept of, for good payment; or as might de∣nominate him, an honest man, a man keeping a good Conscience towards God, and not dealing fraudulently with him: As he must do, if he pay no more Rent of Thankfulness and Obedience, now that his Farm is improv'd (and manur'd with the Lamb's Blood) then was by Contract payable, before that Improvement. 2. And that therefore Justification by Faith implies God's demand of a greater rent, now under the Gospel, than would have passed for good pay∣ment, during the first Lease, or Law of Works. Not as if, either then or now, that Righteousness of Heart or Life (that was, or is required) could, or was intended to be paid, as the least part of our Ransom: as a Fine, for our Forfeiture of the original Contract betwixt God and us, in a state of In∣nocency: No, it cost more to redeem a Soul, by way of price, than all the Righteousness of Angels and Men (summ'd up together) can amount to: that must be let alone for ever; and wholly exterminated from the limits of our discourse touching Justification, when the Question is, [Whether we are justified by faith or works?] But Christ having stood to, and fulfill'd the Terms of that Covenant, whose Condition was Perseverance in Innocency: and paid the Forfeiture that we had made; in both which he supererrogat∣ed; exhibiting that active and passive Obedience, which infinitely exceeds in worth what was required of us: (For that Law demanded man's Obedi∣ence, or Death; but he tender'd both, and in both, not only man's, but God's; the Person subjecting himself to Obedience being God-man;) upon which consideration our Kinsman, not only redeem'd the Inheritance that we had lost, but purchas'd a better for us: It were therefore against all Reason and Equity, that he should be denyed a power to dispose of his own Purchace, to whom, and upon what Terms, he pleaseth: which his good pleasure he hath (from time to time, by some means or other) revealed, and at the last in his own person communicated; wherein it hath pleased his infinite Wis∣dom to proceed in this Method, that in all other former dispositions of the good things he had undertaken to purchase for us, he accepted of less ac∣knowledgment from us, than in this his last will and Testament, made after his actual Purchace: bequeathing Himself and Benefits upon different Terms and Conditions (suitable to the Revelations of his Grace, the Emanations of di∣vine Power, and the Obligations he hath laid upon us.) Hence is that observa∣tion of St. Jerom (on Gen. 6. 9.) [Noah was a just man, and perfect in his genera∣tion:] [Signanter ait in generatione sua; ut ostenderet, non juxtà justitiam consum∣matam sed juxta justiciam generationis suae, fuisse justum:] It is to be mark'd that he calls him just, [in his Generation;] to signifie that he was not so, in respect of consummate Justice; but that he was just, for a man of that age; for one that li∣ved under that Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace. Christ observing, in these his disposals, that generally-acknowledged Rule of common Equity (so of∣ten inculcated in the Evangelists:) That to whom men concredit much, of
them shall much be required; and of them that have received little, of them little shall be expected [,] to expect the same things (à summo minimóque) of Children and of men: the same tale of Brick, from them to whom Straw is given, and them that must gather Stubble in stead of Straw; to lay equal burdens upon unequal strengths; to require the same In∣terest, for the loan of different Summs; of them, to whom hundreds were; and of them, to whom thousands are concredited, is extremely unequal. But the account of the difference betwixt Moses and Christ, as the Antinomians casts it up, is as monstrously unjust, as John Scotus his partition, of the two great Fishes, to himself (who was a little man) and the one little one to the two tall Persons that sat next him, at the French King's Table: giving this Reason to the King, accusing him of making an unequal division, contrary to his order; that he had exactly perform'd his Majesty's Injunction: for here (meaning himself, and the two great Fishes, upon his own Trencher) is one little one, and two great ones; there (pointing to the two proper and corpu∣lent Person's, and the little Fish he had laid before them) are two great ones, and one little one. The Joque might pass, as witty, from his Jeaster; but sure the Action could not arride the King as just, and becoming a Philosopher; except Scotus came nearer to Truth, than he did here to Justice, when to the King asking him, what was the difference between a Scot and a Sot? he an∣swered, the Table, if it please your Majesty; (the King sitting right over a∣gainst him: (Camden's Remains.) by no better Rules of Equity, do the Solifidians proceed in their discriminating the two Testaments; assigning the Gyants work to the Pigmie, and the Pigmie's to the Gyant. A partition that may pass for currant, with silly Women, laden with Lusts; and those mon∣sters of men, whose souls are fallen down into their Paunch or Groin▪ those [,] persons of dislocated Minds, whose Intellects are put out of joynt, by being precipitated from the Pinacle of the Head, to the baser parts, those, [,] brutish Animals, that corrupt themselves in those things they naturally know: who make no other use of Religion, but to bribe and gag Conscience, or to be a Pander to their Lusts: such a Cover may fit such Pottage-pots; Such Lettice may sute such lips. The Image of God in the Gospel, thus turn'd heels upwards, may please such, as have no other thoughts concerning him; but how they may either escape his spurns, or banish the o∣pinion of a Deity out of their minds, or make him truckle under (their God of Gods) their Belly. Such Jovinian Libertinism may take with such Jovia∣lists, as St. Jerom describes. [Favent tibi crassi, nitidi, dealbati, adde si vis uxta Socraticam irrisionem, omnes sues & canes, & quia carnem amas, vultu∣res quoque, aquilas, accipitres & bubones—de tuo armento sunt, imo inter tuos sues grunniunt,—quòd multi acquiescunt sententiae tuoe indicium voluptatis est: non enim ta te loquentem probant: quàm suis favent vitiis.—Pro magna sa∣pientia reputas, si plures porci post te currant quos Gehennae succidiae nutrias post praeconium tuum;—semper pseudo-prophetae dulcia pollicentur, & ad modicum placent—egregia sanè vox & audiat sponsa Christi:] (Jerom. cont. Jovinian. par. 1. tract. 2. ep. 6. cap. 49.) Such beastly hearers may applaud such filthy dreamers, as he tells Jovinian (Ibidem.) [Tibi cedunt de via nobiles, tibi os∣culantur divites caput; nisi enim tu venisses.—In aviariis tuis non turtures sed pupae nutriuntur, &c.] Thou hast for thy favourites and abetters of thy licen∣tious Doctrines a company of old fatguts, of young spruce painted Monsieurs; you may add if you please (to make up the number) such as Socrates in derision calls Sows and Doggs; and because thou art all for the Flesh, Vultures (also) Eagles, Goss-hawks and Owls.—If I see any with shining Faces, with periwigg'd Heads, with curled Locks, with rosie Cheeks, they are of thy drove, they grunt among thy Hoggs. The reason why so many acquiess in thy Opinion, is, because pleasure votes for it; they do not so much yeild to the Reason of thy Discourse, as to the sway of their own vitious Inclinations. Dost thou think it a point of great wis∣dom, that thou canst draw a company of Swine after thee, which thou feeds and flatters till they come to be hung up in Bacon-fliches in the smoke of the infernal
Pit.—It hath ever been the Custom of false Prophets to speak pleasing things, and delight men for a moment.—An excellent Doctrine indeed, and such as becomes the chaste Spouse of Christ to hear!—However by prophesying such smooth things thou hast obtain'd that respect as Noble men give thee the wall, and rich men fall upon thy neck and kiss thee; for if thou hadst not opened and widen'd the way, the reeling Drunkard and belching Epicures could never enter into Para∣dise, nor those Lapwings (not Turtles) which are only bred in thy Aviaries, so into the highest Heaven, if thou hadst not brought it down to them. But how a Doctrine fram'd to please and gratifie such like She-men as these (they commonly being, in every sence, the Major Party;) how such a Codpeice-Religion and Tap-divinity, as the Antinomian has perverted the Gospel into, should take with any grave, sober and studied Divines; with a∣ny of our well-bred Gentry; or with any of those of a courser Clay, that have but any spot of Grace, or the least glimmerings of common Sentiments of Good and Evil; is to me unconceavable. And I must sit down, wonder∣ing in silence at this strange sight: that God should be presented (with the ap∣probation of any that are not unman'd) as conniving at those Immoralities, Immanities, Debaucheries in the New: (wherein he has afforded more Light to discover the exceeding sinfulness of them, more Assistance against them, stronger Motives to avoid them, and threatned a much more grievous Punish∣ment against them that do them) which he would not connive at, under the Old Testament: As if God had sent his Son into the World to set Hell loose, and enlarge the Devil's Kingdom: to proclaim impunity to all man∣ner of Licentiousness; to give men Passes to go to their own place (to that that Judas went to) without stop, molestation, or trouble of Con∣science. Whereas the difference lies point blank on the other hand (as has been proved) the Law of Faith demanding so much more Work, than the Law of Works did: as our Vails are more, our Reward greater, our our Helps of all sorts more plentiful, and our Obligations more con∣straining, then theirs were to whom that Law was given. So as in this diversity of Terms or Conditions, the same general Rule is laid down in both (as their Basis and Summ) [Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy mind, with all thy soul and with all thy strength:] which last Clause being a qualification of the Precedent, renders this Proposal, a fit Ba∣sis for any Covenant that God ever made, or can make with Mankind; for Justice can require no more, nor mercy less, in general, than that we love God, and express our love to him, according to our strength; than which Angels cannot do more, nor the weakest Christian less: whose lov∣ing God with all his strength, argues as much sincerity as Angels show, in their loving him according to theirs: the Gnat moves with as good a will, though not with so great a force as the Eagle; and therefore its in∣dustry as commendable as his. And the Ant is as laborious in carrying a grain in her mouth, as the Elephant is in carrying a Castle upon his back. Angels that are mighty in strength; and, according to that, fulfil God's Commands; reap no greater commendation from Christ than the Angel of the Church of Laodicea did; who had but a little strength, and kept Christ's word. For it is according to what men have, and not according to what they have not, that God and man expect returns should be made, by them whom thay oblige. God, therefore, having given to Man a power not to sin, demanded his perseverance in Innocency, or a sin-less Obedience in our first Parents: In which they faising, and God inflicting as a penalty upon them and their Off-spring (naturally descending of them) the withdrawing of that power (which he was not bound to bestow at first, much less to restore after they had forfeited it) he was pleased to make another Covenant with them, of his mere Grace and Bounty: That as to Satisfaction of his Truth and Justice, in the Expiation for the breach of that first Covenant; he himself would provide a Lamb, in the Merits of whose Blood, every man should have a share, that did but love him
with all that strength which God had left him, or should afford him. From which different Degrees of afforded Strength, arose the different de∣grees of Love and Obedience to God, required (as Conditions of God's accepting our love to him, as sincere) in all the After-Covenants which he made with Man. Now for the Apostles to fit these super-added strings to the Polycord of the Old Testament; to tune the still voice of the Gospel, to the shrill tones of the Law; to make Christ's Pipe accord with David's Harp; the Trumpet on Mount Sinah, with the Law that went out of Sion; to set their new Song, to the old Tune, was not the work (Ambu∣baiarum) of every trivial Ballad-singer; but of minds well set, and perfect∣ly harmonious. A blind fortuitous Concourse of such variety of Herbs could never have produced so-well-ordered a Sallad, temper'd to the tasts of all savoury Pallats. Seeing the wisest Philosophers were so far from a general consent one with another, as not one of their Schools agreed with, but contradicted it self; (Euseb. de praep. Evang.) demonstrates how the School of Plato jarred with its own Dictates. Symphoniam & consensum scripturarum commendat per antithesin monstrat â Ethnicae Philosophiae ▪ adeò ut invalescente opinionum varietate & re pugnantiâ, alii in Sectus divisi hostilibus  decertarent, alii  laudarent, &c.] And thence commends the Symphony of the sacred Scriptures, from the Untun∣ableness of Gentile-philosophy with it self; insomuch as through the prevailing of various and repugnant Opinions; some being divided into Sects contended with hostile hatred; and others grew to that pass, as they would affirm nothing, but turn'd Scepticks.
CHAP. IX. Gospel-history agrees with Old Testament-prophesie. § 1. Christ's Appeal to the Prophets, § 2. The primary Old Testament-Pro∣phesies not accomplishable in any but the blessed Jesus. Jacob's Shilo; Gentiles gathering. Scepter departed, at the demolishing of their King's Palace. § 3. By consent of both Parties. Not till the Gentiles ga∣ther'd. Children to Abraham of Stones. Gentiles flock to Christ's Stan∣dard, § 4. Signs of Scepter's departure. Price of Souls paid to Capi∣tol. Not formerly paid to Caesar. Mat. 17. 25. explained. § 5. Jews paid neither Tythes nor this Polemoney to any but their own Priests before Ves∣pasian, who made Judah a vassal to a strange God; such as their Fathers knew not. § 1. NO less harmoniously does Gospel History fall in with Old Testa∣ment-prophecy, touching the Messias; His Lineage, [of the house of David, Psal. 132. 12. Act. 2. 30.] His Mother, [a Virgin, St. Mat. 1. 22, 23.] His Place of Birth, [Bethlehem, Mat. 2. 5, 6.] of Education, [Nazareth, St. Mat. 2. 23. that from his dwelling there he might be known to be the Branch [Natzar,] a name given the Messias, Isai. 11. 1. Jer. 23. 5. Zachar▪ 6. 12. &c.] of Retreat from Herod's Cruelty, [Egypt, St. Mat. 2. 15. Hosea 11. 1.] of his greatest Converse during his Ministry, [Galilee] of the Gen∣tiles, Mat. 4. 14. Isa. 9. 1, 2. The time of his Ministry [half seven Years, Or the half of a Prophetick Week Dan. 9. 27. So Scaliger de emendatione, Pas∣cha Christi,] The specifick Miracles for confirmation of his Doctrine, [healing sick, restoring sight to the blind, legs to the lame, &c. St. Mat. 11. 4, 5. Isa. 35▪ 6. Isa. 61 1. Christ appeals to his working Miracles by the rule of Prophesie.] His being betrayed by one of his Familiars, one that did eat of his bread, [Judas, St. John. 13. 18. Psal. 41. 9.] The Price he was sold at [thirty pence,] The Fields name that was bought with that price of blood [the Potters] Field, St. Mat. 27. 7, 8, 9. for which the Evangelist quotes Jeremy though the Text be in Zachary chap. 11. 13. because the 10, 11, 12. Chapters of Zachary were a part of Jeremy's Prophesie, not committed to writing till after the Captivity, and then annex'd to the former Chapters of Zachary: as other mens Psalms are inserted amongst David's; and Agur's Proverbs annex'd to Solomon's, as that Jewish Proverb imports, The Spirit of Jeremy rested on Zachary; (Ham∣monds Annotat. Heb. 8. 9.) The flight and dispersion of the Apostles, St. Mat. 26. 31, 56. Zach. 13. 7. His Crucifiction betwixt two Theives, St. Mar. 15. 27, 28. Isa 53. 12. His Buffering, St. Mat. 26. 67. 27. 29, 30. Isa. 50. 6. His Vineger, his Gall, St. John 20. 28, 29. St. Mat. 27. 34. Psal. 69. 21. The di∣viding of his Vesture, The casting lots for his seamless Coat, St. John 19. 24, 25. Psal. 22. 18. The piercing of his Side, Their not breaking of his Leggs (as they did theirs that were crucified with him, St. John 19. 36. Exod. 12. 46. Psal. 34. 20. Zech. 12. 10. Psal. 22. 16. &c.) As these things were foretold of the Messiah, so they were in every Title fulfill'd in the blessed Jesus. I ap∣peal now to all men of Common Sence, to judg, whether men of dislocated Understandings, could have carryed the matter so eavenly, as the Evangelists did here, making their Gospel-relations (as well wrought Wax) to take the perfect Impression, and Seal of Old Testament Predictions? presenting Jesus of Nazareth, wearing that very Coat of Arms, which the Prophets had blazon'd for the Christ: so as the word which they preach'd concerning him, differs not in the least, Title, Tone or Accent, from that which the Prophets preach∣ed touching the Messia: Of which our Saviour was so confident, as he made frequent appeals to the Tribunal of Moses and the Prophets: offering to put
the Issue of the whole Cause to this trial; that if he did not express, to the life, that Model, which the Prophets had drawn of the Messiah, he would be content they should disown him, and esteem him an Impostor. No less earnest were the Apostles to have Moses and the Prophets umpire the Controversie; making with their Hearers such candid Expostulations as these: [We preach no other things of Jesus, than what Moses and the prophets said would come to pass:] if you can find one line in the face of your Messiah (as 'tis drawn by their Pencil) which we cannot shew you in Jesus Christ's, we will give you leave to spit in our faces. A Point wherein the Jews joyn'd issue with the Christians in the Primitive Times; but were as often foyl'd, as they provok∣ed to this way of determining the great Question in Controversie; Whether Jesus of Nazareth was the promised Messias? [Itaque dicunt Judaei, provoce∣mus istam praedicationem Isaiae 7. & faciamus comparationem, an Christo, qui jam venit, competat, &c.] (Tertul. adv. Judaeos, cap. 9.) Let us bring (say the Jews) this Doctrine of Christians to the Test of the Prophet Isaiah (Chap. 7.) and by comparing it, see whether the name [Immanuel] which he gives to the Mes∣sias agree, to him who they say is come? Why? (saith Tertullian) ask any Chri∣stian, and he will tell you that Jesus Christ is Immanuel (that is) God with us: as the Prophet expresseth the Importance of that name. But how doth that agree to your Jesus which is here said, [The Child shall receive the riches of Da∣mascus and the Spoils of Samaria against the King of Assyria?] Do but consi∣der (saith Tertullian) that the Child is to receive these, before he can say Dad or Mam (Is. 8. 4.) and it will convince you of the vanity of that fancy of yours, [that the Messias is to be a mighty Warrier, and to subdue all Nations by force of Arms:] for then he must call his Souldiers together, not by sound of Trum∣pet, but by blowing his Coral-whistle; and ride upon his Hobby-horse to take in Castles. And withal call to mind, that the Riches of Damascus and other East∣ern Countreys of Arabia, (to which Damascus anciently belong'd) are Gold and odoriferous Gumms, Spices and Plants. And then you may learn, that at the wise men's presenting our Saviour with Gold, Frankincense, and Myrh, the abe Jesus received the Riches of Damascus before he could cry Father or Mother, &c. And whereas the Jews objected the impossibility of a Virgin-birth; and there∣fore expounded Isai. to speak of a young woman. Tertullian replies, that that would have been no Sign; for there is nothing more ordinary than for young wo∣men to bear children (vide caetera loco citato.) By this Method of arguing the Jew was so baffled, as he wav'd the dispute about Christ's Person, and stood only upon a Dispute about his coming (in St. Austin's time;) of which he gives this Reason: Because he was so manifestly describ'd in their own Prophets, that the Baptist sent to ask Christ, art thou he, that the Jews said, tell us if thou beest the Christ: and that to this day they look for just such an one as our Jesus. [Quomodo autem nobiscum non de Christo sed tantum de adventu ejus disceptarent, nisi bene nossent eum in libris Prophetarum, cur à Joanne quaeritur u∣trùm ipse sit Christus? cur ipsi domino dicunt, quamdis animam nostram tollis? si es Christus, die nobis palàm? nisi quod hoc nomen, in illa gente, per illas literas & scribatur, & expectabatur,] (Aug. contra Faustum, tom. 3. lib. 12. cap. 44.) So true is that of Tertullian, [Quid est autem signare prophetiam? quoniam im∣pleta est prophetia per adventum ejus; ipse est signaculum omnium prophetarum:] (related out of him by St. Hierom in Dan. vision 8.) What's meant by the seal∣ing of Prophecy (in Daniel) but that all Prophecy is fulfil'd in Christ's coming, he being the seal and full sum of all the Prophets. Nay so perfectly did every Tenon of Evangelical History fit every Mortice of sacred Prophecy, as the Pagan World (saith St. Aug. epist. 59.) [Nam ipsa prophetia, quid aliud, nisi à nobis putaretur esse conficta, si non de codicibus inimi∣corum probaretur:] might have thought the Apostles had forged the Old Te∣stament-Oracles, at their own fingers end; were it not that they are safely kept in the Jews custody, and to be found in the Archives of those grand ad∣versaries to the Christian Name; and therefore he imputes to a signally graci∣ous Providence the making good upon that Nation that prophetick Prayer;
(Psal. 58. 12. [Slay them not, lest they forget.] In God's preserving the Jews (in the midst of those several Nations into which they are disperc'd) a visi∣bly distinct Body from the Natives, with whom they neither mix in Marriage or Religion: by means whereof the Church can no where want a Demon∣stration of the Truth; they being her Library-keepers; and carrying those Books after her, whose Authority she urgeth, for the defence of Christian Religion: of whose quotations, if Gentile, Jew, or weak Christian, make any doubt, he may step into their Synagogues and satisfie himself, by enquir∣ing of those that are our Enemies in their Hearts, our Witnesses in their Books: (vide Aug. tom. 4. pag. 509. de fide invisibilium.) Ergo occisi non sunt sed dispersi—in libris suffragatores, in cordibus bostes, in codicibus testes, &c. § 2. As the Gospel exhibits the full accomplishment of former Pro∣phecies; so 'tis absolutely impossible, that the chief of those Prophecies can be fulfill'd upon any other Person, than our Jesus, to whom the Apostles apply them. Such is that of old Jacob; [The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver from betwixt his feet, until Shilo come, and unto him be gather∣ed the people or gentiles.] for the understanding of this Prophecy, I shall bor∣row Light from the sagatious Mede in these Animad versions. 1. Scepter is not to be restrained here to [Kingly power] but signifies [any Power or Majesty of Government under what name or form soever;] whereof a Rod or Staff (the word here translated Scepter) was anciently the Ensign: hence the Septuagint translates it [,] there shall not fail a Ruler, nor [Juridicus] a Lawgiver from betwixt his feet, i. e. of Juda's Loyns (it being the use of Scripture, modestly to express the place of generation by Thigh or Feet) upon the mistake of which Oriental Idiom, grew the Fable of Bacchus being born of Jove's Thigh. 2. Till Shilo come, i. e. the Christ the Messiah; as the Jews anciently acknow∣ledged not only in their Talmud (where Shilo is reckon'd among the Names of the Messiah:) but in all the three Targums or Paraphrases, that of Jerusalem rendring it expresly [until the time that King Messiah shall come;] that of Jo∣nathan [until Messiah come, a little one of his sons;] applying it to David the least of Jessee's sons; that of Onkelo's, [till Messiah come, whose is the King∣dom. 3. And to him the Gentiles shall be gather'd; there is nothing in the Ori∣ginal to answer [shall be,] and therefore the word [until] is common to this, with the former Sentence, namely thus: The scepter shall not depart from Ju∣dah, until Shilo come, and the gathering of the people be to him: Two things being here specified to come to pass, before the Scepter depart from Judah, or Judah cease to be God's Commonwealth. 1. The coming of the Messiah or Christ into the World. 2. The gathering of the People, Nations or Gentiles to him. 4. This Exposition, as it clears the Text from those difficulties, where∣with the Question of the Scepters departure is intangled and perplexed (to the hardening of the Jew in his mis-belief) so it clearly states the time of its Departure, (viz.) at the Destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish State, by Titus; when both these things were come to pass: Christ being come, and the Gentiles converted unto his Obedience. If it be objected that Christ was estated in his Kingdom over the Gentiles at his Resurrection; actually en∣ter'd upon the managing of it over the Gentiles at his calling of Cornelius, formally rejected the Jews at St. Paul's turning from them to the Gentiles, the Answer is easie, plain and full. 1. That by his resurrection God declared him to be that Person whom he had appointed to that Kingdom. 2. His actual entring upon the Exercise of his Royal Power, over the Gentiles in the Call of Cornelius, was his taking livery and seisure; and his rejecting the Jews, after that, as it is an argument, that he first provided himself a People among the Gentiles, before he outed the Jews; so his calling of the one, and rejecting of the other was not plenary but initiatory, or in part: the very
Mystery that St. Paul speaks of Rom. 9. and 10. that blindness in part was hap∣ned to Israel until the fulness of the Gentiles should come in, that so all Israel (the remnant of Israel after the flesh, that had renounc'd Judaism and become Christians; and the spiritual Seed, the Gentiles, coming in to the Gospel in a full body) might be saved. In which Interval, the carnal Seed were ene∣mies; that is, in part cast off; for the Gentiles sake (that they might be grafted in, in the room of those four Branches) but yet the election, the rem∣nant of them that believed, beloved, for the sake of the Fathers. God hav∣ing a kind of hankering after them (even the whole Nation) upon the ac∣count of their being the Off-spring of his friend Abraham, and therefore re∣taining the Nation, by the handle as it were of the Remnant, and rejecting them but in part, and by degrees, till he wholly cast them off, and remov∣ed his Court from them unto the Gentiles, having demolished his Palace a∣mongst them, and made the Throne of his Glory a perpetual desolation. Hence St. Austin states the Time of the Scepters departure, so as he makes Kingdom and Temple, and Priesthood, and Sacrifice, and that Mystical Unction (up∣on the account whereof their Kings were called [Christ's] or anointed) to de∣part all together: at that time, when the Resurrection of Christ having been preach'd to, and embrac'd by, the Gentiles; they were subdued by Vespasian From the ceasing of all which then, he argues, they were only Types of Christ; (de consensu Evangelist. l. 1. c. 13.) [Nec alia re magis claruit, illius Gentis Regnum, & Templum & Sacerdotium, & Sacrisicium, & unctionem illam mysticam—non fuisse nisi praenunciando Christo deputata; quàm quòd occisi Chri∣sti Resurrectio postquàm caepit credentibus gentibus praedicari, illa omnia cessaverant niscientibus Romanis per quorum victoriam, nescientibus Judaeis per quorum sub∣jugationem, factum est ut omnia illa cessarent. To this our Saviour hath re∣spect (and comments upon it) in his Prophecy of this Destruction of the Jew∣ish State (the Departure of the Scepter) (St. Mat. 24. 14.) where having nam∣ed some other things that were to precede it, he adds this as the last Sign. [This Gospel of the Kingdom (i. e.) of the Messiah) shall be preach'd to all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come:] i. e. the end of the Jewish State, when the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Apostles through the whole Roman Empire, should be gather'd unto Christ, then should the Jewish Church-Commonwealth (I mean that particular form of Go∣vernment which God prescribed to them, as a Nation admitted to the partici∣pation and fellowship of his Grace) with Junius (de politia Mosis, cap. 5.) be utterly dissolved; which till then had continued, united, under some Po∣lity or Form of Government under God as their King, from its first begin∣ning. The Jews (as Josephus (ant. 14. 10, 12.) affirmeth) and proveth (out of Strabo) that he might not be thought to flatter his own Nation) being till then not only in Judaea, under the Government of their own Nobles (having Judicatures erected by Gabinius, the Roman General; consisting of their own Elders, and proceeding by their own Laws) but in Cyrene, Egypt, and other places of their former Dispersions, having Magistrates of their own, and us∣ing their own Laws, no otherwise than in an absolute Commonwealth. But was, then, melted down into, and swallowed up by the Roman Empire; (Euseb. cron.) [deletis Jerusalimis Regnum Judaeorum defecit:] (the learned Scaliger mistakes the meaning of that term, (animadv. ad Eus. Cron. pag. 198. b.) for Eusebius means plainly, that Jerusalem being destroyed, the holy Kingdom, which God till then had erected over them, ceast. Their Thear∣chy then expired; their King-of-old broke up his Court amongst them, so as thenceforward they have had no King but Caesar: the right Scepter of that Kingdom of Judah, which God had wielded over them, then visibly depart∣ed, when the Palace of their great King was finally desolated: their holy State and Oeconomy was now rooted up, the divine Ordinances once planted amongst them were now extinguished; (Dr. Lightfoot parergon, 178.) and themselves banish'd Heaven and Earth (& coeli & soli sui extorres, sine homine, sine Deo, rege: (Tertul. advers. Gent. cap. 21.) without either man or God-king.
And instead of the Kingdom of the Messiah, which they expected would have been erected over them, at the expiration of that Divine Polity establish'd by Moses: (and rejected when it was come nigh them) they were brought under the Anti-Messiacal (if for illustration, I may here use that word, in place of [Antichristian]) Dominion of Vespasian. Judaei non receperunt Christum sus∣cepturi Antichristum: (Aug. ap. de diversis tom. 10. in die paschae.) Repulerunt agnum, eligerunt vulpem, ideo partes vulpium facti sunt (August. tom. 8. pag. 262.) The Jews rejected Christ, being afterwards to embrace Antichrist: they refused the Lamb, and chose the Fox; and therefore became the portion of Foxes, who had been God's portion: For Vespasian, whose Vassals they became, imposed himself upon them not only as the Emperour of Rome, but as their King Messiah; and was reputed so not only by the Romans, but by Josephus him∣self and the sober Party of unbelieving Jews; (vide Dr Hammond's note b. on Mat. 24.) and whatever the Zealots thought in secret, they were forc'd to make open Abrenunciation of their King of old; and to enter a Recogni∣zance, to accept of Caesar's Gods in his room; by the payment of that half-shekel to Jupiter Capitolinus, which was used to be paid to the Temple, while God was their King, as an acknowledgment of homage: upon no other but this new tenure, were they allowed the use of their old Laws. (Xiphilin. E. Dione Vespasian pag. mihi 537. ab eodem Tito jussi sunt quotannis didrachma pendere Jovi Capitolino ii qui patrias leges eorum tuerentur.) Doubtless we have too much gratified the mis-believing Jews, and laid Stumbling-blocks in their way, by our conceiving, that the departure of the Scepter implies primarily a change of the external Form of their Government, or deprivation of liberty, to use their own Laws, and to enjoy Judges of themselves; things but accidental to that [Theocraty,] Government wherein God presided more immediately and specially over them, than other Nations; which was exercised under several Forms, and with such variety (as to those Circumstances and external Privileges) as sometimes they enjoyed, sometimes were deprived of them. Grotius (de jure pacis & belli l. 1. cap. 4. par. 7. pun. 5.) proves, that the Manichees taking up Arms against Antiochus, can be de∣fended by no Plea, but that of extreme necessity; not from the Jews , &c. For they had been subdued by Nebuchadnezzar; and brought un∣der an absolute, not conditional, Subjection to the Assyrian Empire. To which Supremacy over them, the Persians first, and then the Macedonians suc∣ceeded: and they did not stipulate with Alexander or his Successors, but came (without making any Conditions) under his and his Successor's Jurisdiction, as they had been under the Empire of Darius. And if they were at times per∣mitted, openly to live after their own Rites and Laws, that was from the Kings bounty (a precarious Right) not from any Law imposed upon the Em∣pire. Hence Tacitus (hist. l. 5.) gives them this Character. [Judaei dum As∣syrios penès Medósque & Persas Oriens fuit, vilissima pars servientium;] while the East was in the power of the Assirians, Medes and Persians, the Jews were the veriest slaves that the Empire had. And therefore he that discourseth with a Jew, on this Subject (of their Scepter) in that Notion, and upon that Prin∣ciple, shall hardly be able to hold his own against him, much less to convince him, that the Scepter (as to those Circumstances) was not departed before the coming of the Blessed Jesus. The granting of which to him (in Jacob's sence) wholly raseth the Foundation of our Religion; and adminsters to the Jew an occasion of baffling and deriding us. [Nil aliud proficiunt, nisi quod subsan∣nandi materiam praebent Judaeis, &c.] (Calvin in Gen. 49. 10.) This is that the Jews would have; and therefore I wonder (not to hear their Talmudists affirm that Judah's Septer departed in Herod the Great) but that some learned men should, upon their Authority, be of that opinion: and withal assert the Scepter's departure, to be a fore-runner of the Messias (as Goodwin in his Anti∣quities l. 1. c. 1.) Which Assertion as it directly oppugns the plain words of Jacobs Prophecy. [The Scepter shall not depart, till, &c.] So it gains the Jew time to suspend his belief, that Shilo is come, though it be never so ma∣nifest
that the Scepter be departed. For if Shilo be to come after that, he may possibly come a thousand years hence, for all that the Scepter departed a thou∣sand and an half ago. §3. That we may therefore beat the Jew from those Subterfuges, that we have made him, It will be necessary that we hold to that Exposition of Jacob's Prophecy, which hath been premised (viz.) That the Tribe of Judah and those of Jacob's Posterity, who (in the defection of the ten Tribes from God and the house of David) adhered to the Kingdom of Judah, should continue one Body-politick, govern'd by their own Municipal Laws of divine Institu∣tion, as God's peculiar Lot, till he should set his only begotten Son (his King) upon the holy hill of Sion, and give him the Heathen for his inheritance (Psal. 2.) That God would not cast Judah off, as he did the ten Tribes (the Kingdom of Israel, those of his Father's Children that would not bow to Judah's Scepter; but cryed, [To thy tents, O Israel: look to thine own house David; what portion have we in the son of Jesse?] dissolving their whole Body Politick, and scattering it piece-meal over the face of the Earth, writ∣ing them [Loammi] ye are not my people, long before Shilo came. That (I say) Judah should not thus be rejected, till she had rejected her Messias, and the Gentiles should be gather'd to him. That, for all their provoking of their God to Jealousie (in the mean while) by them that were not Gods, he would not provoke them to Jealousie by them that were no people; till that no people, should become the people of Israel's God; till then the Jews should be a Nation of Kings and Priests to God. In order to his keeping of which Promise to the house of Judah, though that Kingdom (before the Babylonish Captivity) had corrupted it self with abominable Idolatry, more than the Kingdom of Israel; yet God took not that advantage against them: & it pleased him (in remembrance of his promise to Abraham, and that the Line of our Saviour might be more discernable) to purify them in the Babylonish Furnace from all Propensity to Heathenish Idolatry. Insomuch as since then No torments have had the power to warp them in the least towards it, (Dr. Heilin's Judea.) Yea so far did this Zeal of theirs against the Gods of the Gentiles carry them (when their zeal grew into dotage, and became to be without knowledg) as they would not acknowledg their own God, manifest in the flesh, upon this reason, because he was given out to be the God, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles; but at the hearing of it, rend their Cloaths, cast Dust in the Air, and cry, Away with the speaker from the Earth, he is not fit to live (Act. 22. 22.) So that from thence forward Ju∣dah did never directly, cast off the God of their Fathers; nor in gross, their Thearchy, though they vacated many of the Moral Precepts (by their Traditi∣ons) and the whole Ceremonial Law (in not looking to Christ the end and Substance of it.) Wherefore God continued their King, and they stood in relation to him, as his peculiar Inheritance; till they refused the Scepter of his Son; and by consequence his, who had set him up King. And then the Scepter departed by consent of both parties; The Jews saying, of the King's Son, This man shall not reign over us: and God, upon this their rejectment of his Christ, saying of them, I will not feed you, I will not be your shepherd, the ancient compellation of Kings. Thus the Angel comments upon Jacob's Prophecy (Dan. 9. 26.) [After the threescore and two weeks Messiah shall be cut off and not for himself,] as Master Mede expounds that Text. That is, not from life: for that had been done before the end (viz. in the middle of the last of those weeks: but from reigning as their King, cut off, from sitting upon that Throne of the house of David, by their refusing him to be theirs, and his casting them off from being his. God indeed had often (before this) sould them into the hands of their Enemies, into the hand of Jabin, Sisera, Eglon and at last of Nebuchadnezzar: but that was not an absolute sale, but a Mort∣gage for years; redeemable, after the Assyrian had received his pay of them, for the service he had done God, against Tyre and other of his proscribed Re∣bels:
that being all the consideration mention'd in that Bargain: wherein God did not pass away his Propriety in them, but entred a Proviso of recove∣ry, in that command to Jeremiah's Unckle, to preserve the Evidences, in to∣ken that that Captivity should return (Jer. 32. 7.) The equity of which Pro∣viso was grounded upon the insufficiency of that Consideration, as to God's passing away his Right of Inheritance, pleaded by the Church in that Capti∣vity (Psal. 44.) [Thou sellest thy people for nought, and hast not encreased thy wealth by their price.] They were not sold absolutely for nought, either in respect of their Demerits and Provocations; or altogether, in respect of Gods Truth (for he thereby saved the credit of his promise to the King of Assyria, that he should have his hire:) but comparatively they were sold for as good as nought in that God did not thereby increase his wealth, add to the heap of the Riches of that Grace he had made over (by Covenant) to Abraham and his Seed; in respect of which former Bargain (contracted with the Father of the Faithful) he could not (salvâ side) without suffering his Faithfulness to fail, without impairing his Truth; as well as in respect of his great name, [King of Saints] cast off the Carnal Seed wholly from being his Kingdom, till he had taken his Spiritual Seed into their room. And indeed God's punishing of his Rebels with total Rejection, before he had erected his Kingdom of Grace in the midst of his Enemies (the Gentiles) would have been the punishing of him∣self, with the forfeiture of his Visible Kingdom of Grace, and the stripping of himself into the bare Kingdom of his Providence. So far would God have been from encreasing his wealth by their price, as he would have made a losing Bargain, and bankrupt himself of a peculiar People; if he had cast off Judah before the accession of the Gentiles to his Scepter of Grace: which did not happen, till their flocking in to Christ's Standard; As is manifest from their Prophets speaking of this gathering of the Gentiles to Shilo (even to the last of them) as of a thing de futuro. [He shall lift up an ensign to the Gen∣tiles,] (Isa. 11. 12.) [Thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not: and na∣tions that knew not thee shall run unto thee,] (Isa. 55. 5.) [My name shall be great among the Gentiles,] (Mal. 1. 11.) So that at the Expiration of Old Testament Prophecy, this gathering was yet to come, It was yet in the shell of the Promise. And since Malachy, there hath not been any gathering of Gentile Nations to the God of Israel, to make his name great in all the Earth saving that of the Christian Flock, to that Shepherd whom the God of Israel is not asham'd to call his Fellow, his Equal; and of whom the Prophets have foretold, that he should bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, Hitherto therefore that Plea was prevalent; [We are thy people save us, thou never bar∣est rule over them.] If thou destroy this people [What will become of thy great name?] what will become of thy Promise to Abraham? of thy Kingdom of Grace? For God was obliged, by the Interest of his Glory, and by his Pro∣mise to the Patriarchs, not to remove the Scepter from Judah till Shilo come, and the Gentiles were gather'd to him. But when Shilo was come, the Baptist forewarns Abraham's Children, not to trust any longer to that Plea, as their security against approaching vengeance [Think not to say (when you are consulting how to escape wrath to come) we are Abraham's children;] That Plea is now growing out of date: [For God is able to raise up children to Abraham (and a People to himself) of stones;] that is, out of the obdurate Gentile World, men as hard as Stones; and hi∣therto, in respect of Gods Covenant with Abraham and pre-ingagement, as uncapable as Stones, of becoming the People of the God of Israel in your room, of becoming, as you are now, the Kingdom of God: or (as Ireneus (Advers. her. lib. 4. cap. 16.) renders it) of them that worship Stones (as the Gentiles did) it being usual in the holy Dialect to call Nations, by the name of the Idols which they worship (as Bell boweth down, &c.) This God was ever able to do in respect of his absolute Power: but that Power being (as to the exercise of it) bounded by his Will (for it were Impotency in God to do what he will not) and his Will declared to Abraham; he became Debter
to his own Faithfulness and Truth so far, as he had not a Moral Power to do it; that is, could not do it without impeachment of his Truth, before this Fulness of Time came; wherein God is to raise up a new Seed to Abraham, and to call them a people that were no people; to make Japhet dwell in the tents of Sem, [ejecio scilicet Israele:] (St. Jerom in Gen. 9. 27.) i. e. to take the place of Israel, to graft the wild Olive Branches upon the Root and Fa∣ther of the Faithful; implied (as Isidore Pelusiota well observes) in the fol∣lowing words, [Now is the axe] (lib 1. epist. 64. Eulampio.) [] to wit, of this acute and evange∣lical Decision (that every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit be hewen down:) [laid to the root of the tree;] not a Mattock to dig the Roots up, to make the Covenant with Abraham, touching his Seed, void; but an Axe, to cut off witherd Branches, after the Gentiles that were grafted in had tak∣en root. By which Axe or two-edged Sword (as the Apostle stiles it (Heb. 4.) Is cut in pieces; that double Dilemma, whereby the carnal Jew deceived him∣self, and thought to intangle God: 1. If we be rejected, who have Abraham to our Father, God breaks the Covenant he made with him; And 2. Leaves himself destitute of a People, we being his peculiar People, and the only Nation in the World over whom he is King. The Reply which the Apostles gave to this first Objection was; That the prime Article of God's Covenant with Abraham, was [That he should be a father of many nations, that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be bles∣sed,] and therefore, should he not take the Gentiles into his Kingdom, (now that one Seed, that is, Christ was come) he would have broke Covenant with Abraham. As to the Jews, he sent Jesus Christ first to bless them: but see∣ing they refused to be blessed upon those Terms of Faith, upon which God blessed Abraham (thereby declaring themselves to be the Devil's Children; quarrelling with that Covenant (as the Devil did with that which God made with Adam) and not Abraham's; who without Hesitancy, tergiversation, or making his own terms with God, simply and unreservedly submitted to God's;) and seeing the Gentiles accepted of them; (thereby becoming the Children of faithful Abraham.) It was not consistent with God's Promise to Abraham, to leave him childless (as they, so far as lay in their power, had made him) much less would it stand with his Oath that he would bless them that blessed him, and curse them that cursed him,) not to bless those Heathens, (with the adoption of Sons, and reception into Abraham's Family) who bles∣sed Abraham with a spiritual Seed, and acknowledged themselves his Children (by becoming of his Faith, and treading in his Steps:) and that in favour of that fleshly Seed, which would have left him no Seed of the Promise, no Seed of his Faith; but have brought upon him (if they might have had their will) the Curse of Sterility, in that juncture of Time, wherein God had pro∣mised to multiply it as the Stars of Heaven, and to make him a Father of many Nations. (Act. 13. 46.) [It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you (Jews) but seeing you put it from you, and judg your selves unworthy of everlasting life, loe we turn to the Gentiles: for so hath the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth; (Isa. 49. 6.) and when the Gentiles heard this they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord.] And (Rom. 4. 16.) [That the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham who is the father of us all (as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations.) Pa∣ralel or answerable to him whom he believed, even God, who quickneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were; who against hope, believed in hope that he should become the Father of many Na∣tions:
[answerable to him;] that is, as God is not the God of the Jews on∣ly, but also of the Gentiles; so should Abraham be the Father both of Jewish and Gentile-believers: the believing of which as to the Gentiles, was as no∣ble a degree of Faith as that whereby Abraham believed the Promise that in Isaac his Seed should be blessed; when he was about to sacrifice him, this be∣ing no more against hope, than that God would raise up a seed to him of Gen∣tiles dead in Sins. And to the second they answered; that the Jew need not trouble his head with contriving how or where God would find Subjects, if he were reject∣ed; for the Gentiles were flocking in apace to the Standard of Messias, and ere long the Fulness of them would be come in, and so all Israel be sav∣ed: that is, (Dr. Ham. annot. in Rom. 11. 12. 25.) they should (every where act the Call of the Gospel) come in, in such numbers as they would (in every City and eminent Town) afford matter enough, for the consti∣tuting of Evangelical Churches, or visible Assemblies of Christians there: by which means the Jews will, at length, be provoked to believe; and so all the true Children of Abraham (Jews and Heathens both; but particularly, the Remnant of the Jews) shall repent and believe in Christ. And for them that will not be gain'd by these Methods, God may cast them off, upon gain∣ful Terms; having, in lieu of them, a great multitude of Subjects, which no man could number; of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues; (Rev. 7. 9.) Christ foretells that (upon the Builder's rejecting the precious Stone, and its becoming a Corner-stone) the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to another Nation; (Mat. 21. 42. 43.) And according to this Prophecy of Christ, and Application of Jacob's Prophecy, which Christ and his Apostles made to the time of Jerusalem's final Desola∣tion, God did, then, remove his Scepter from Judah: that ceasing then to be God's Kingdom, and the Kingdoms of the World becoming the King∣doms of God and of his Christ, within a few Centuries afterwards, when Christs Royal Law came to be established and protected by the Imperial San∣ction, and the Edict of Princes become Christian. In whose Territories (in the mean time) God had his imperial Cities, his Cities on Hills that could not be hid; Christian Churches so visible and conspicuous, as spake him to be King of all the Earth, in the same sence that he had been King of Judea; that is, in respect of his Kingdom of Grace, of his golden Scepter. Briefly there was such a gathering of the Gentiles to Shilo, before that rejected King's coming to destroy miserably those bloody Rebels, and to root out their Place and Nation; as he need not be to seek for Subjects, when he cast off Judah and chose the Gentiles: any more than when he refused the Taberna∣cle of Joseph, and chose the Tribe of Judah (Psal. 78. 67. 68.) for the Go∣spel had then been preach'd to, and brought forth fruit in, all the World. God manifested in the Flesh had been preach'd to the Gentiles, and believedon in the World, as hath been formerly shewed. § 4. But then this being laid for a Ground, that the Scepter's departure imports, properly and firstly, the Removal of the Thearchy from the Jews, and translating it to the Gentiles: and the time of its departure being thus stated, to have been in such a Juncture as wherein God might, and did, break up his Court in Judea, without impeachment of his Truth or Honour, which he could not do before. It will be obvious enough, that that Pro∣phecy; (consequentially to this) implies (as the effect of it) a gradual with∣drawing of their outward Polities, Liberties, and Privileges, thereon de∣pending; as the Sun being set, the light of it departs by degrees till it wholly disappear. Of which, though we can make no Demonstration, while it is in Motion (it takes such minute and insensible steps) much less from thence con∣vince an obstinate and captious Adversary, that the Sun is set (if it be not seen at its going down) till the Light of it be impair'd to a degree, beyond what the most gloomy Sky, the thickest Mist, or the most dismal Eclipse, can re∣duce
it to; yet when its Light is dwindled into such a degree of privati∣on, 'tis a palpable evidence, that the Sun (its Fountain) is departed our Horizon. As therefore I have been forc'd to prove that the Scepter (not∣withstanding any loss of Light it did, or could sustain, before the Gentiles flock'd in to our Saviour's Standard) was not , departed, there having been from David to Christ no greater diminutions of its Light, then had been from Jacob to David: and therefore the Jew, upon the same reason that he will not look downwards, in Judah's Line for Shilo as low as our Jesus: must look upwards for him beyond David; for if those castings down of the Crown to the ground which it sustain'd, by the Apostacy of the ten Tribes, the Babylonish Captivity, the Persecution of Antiochus, the Dictatorship of the Macabees, or what else occurs in the History of that Interval, speak the de∣parture of the Scepter; much more must it be departed in the interval before David, in the Egyptian Bondage, or under the Judges, of which time their own Scriptures affirm that there was then no King in Israel.) Nor till our Savi∣our's time (which is my Herculean Argument) was there any such concourse of a new People to Israel's God, as could have justified him, from the imputation of making a losing Bargain, should he have cast off his far more numerous old, and have adopted that new People. Though I confess that great access of Proselytes in Solomon's Reign (said to be an hundred three and fifty thou∣sand, by Dr. Lightfoot in his Parergon of the fall of Jerusalem, cap. 12.) might occasion the Jew to think it was the Gentiles gathering to Shilo; and boaded the departure of the Scepter in the falling away of the ten Tribes: and doubtless those Gentile Converts (together with the Levites and those that feared God adhering to the house of Judah, being so numerous, as in the worst of times there were seven thousand of them) fill'd up the rent that was made in Judah's Royal Robe, by tearing off ten of its Skirts. But to return As I have been forc'd to prove, that before our Saviour the Scepter was not departed: and therefore this Prophecy of Jacob is not applicable to any before him. So I shall now shew it is not applicable to any since, by demonstrating the Scepter to have departed at that time; by such Effects of its departure, as are acknowledged for such by the Jew himself, and pointed to as such by his own Scriptures, and invelop that Nation in a Darkness that may be felt, and far exceeds the blackest Darkness which befel that State in its greatest E∣clipses. The Sanctuary half Shekel paid to the Capitol. It is Doctor Lightfoot's Observation out of Xiphilinus apud Dionem (in the Place fore-cited) that in acknowledgment of their Subjection to the Empe∣rour, the Jews were enjoyn'd by Vespasian to pay to the Capitol that Di∣drachma or Half-shekel, that they usually paid to the Temple for their Lives; [A ransom for their souls unto the Lord,] (Exodus, 30. 12, 13.) [The mony of the soul's estimation; of every one that passeth the account,] (2 Reg. 12. 4.) for I take both these places to speak of one and the same Shekel: though Master Weems makes them two, calling this latter [Argentum transeuntis,] that is, the Half-shekel which they paid to the Lord, when they were num∣bred by head: making a distinction, where there is no difference: for in that Text which he quotes for the first (Ex. 30. 12.) there is mention made that [that was to be payed when they were numbred (three times in two verses.] [When thou takest the sum of the Children of Israel, after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul, unto the Lord:] [when thou num∣brest them,] (ver. 12.) and (ver. 13.) [this they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbred.] Xiphilinus indeed does not expresly say, it was that Half-shekel that was paid to the Temple, that Vespasian appointed every Jew to pay to the Capitol: but Josephus speaks home (Bel. Judaic. 7. 26.) [
.] i. e. [The Emperour Vespasian laid this Tribute upon the Jews, wheresoever they lived: that they should pay to the Capitol that Didrachma, which thitherto they had paid to the Temple.] 1. That this was the Half-shekel which they paid to the Lord for their Lives, as his Tribute is manifest from both those fore-quoted Texts, for Moses (Exod. 30.) or∣ders the high Priest, to imploy it in the service of the Tabernacle, and Jehoash appoints the Priests to repair the Temple with it (2. Reg. 12.) as also from another passage in Josephus (Antiqu. Judaic. 14. 12.) where he calls it sacred mony, because every Jew yearly paid it for his Life to God, and sent it to the Temple, from all parts of the World where they were dispersed; from whose numerousness (he saith) it came to pass, that Crassus found such vast summs in the Treasury of the Temple, when he plunder'd it: and that Mithridates surprized eight hundred Talents at Cons, which the Jews of the lesser Asia had deposited there, during those Wars, not daring to send them to Jerusa∣lem, lest they might be snap'd up in the passage? 2. And that this Shekel was never by any Conqueror, before Vespasian, required as Tribute, is mani∣fest, from Josephus, affirming that till then, it had been used to be paid to the Temple; from Pompeius reputing it so sacred as he durst not lay hands on it, when he enter'd into the Temple; from men's imputing Crassus his o∣verthrow, to God's avenging himself upon him, for robbing the sacred Trea∣sury where these Half-shekels were deposited: that it was paid to the Tem∣ple in Caligula's Reign, is manifest from that place of Josephus (Ant. 18. 12, 16.) where he writes, that the Jews of the Province of Babylon made choice of Neerda because of the strength and inaccessibleness of that place) for their sacred Treasury, where they deposited the sacred Didrachma; till at certain Seasons they could send it to Jerusalem; which they used to do with a Con∣voy of many thousands, both for the greatness of the charge, and danger of being robb'd by the way by the Parthians. But this is most clearly evinc'd from the sacred Gospels informing us that the Tribute-money (St. Mat. 22. 18. 19. St. Mar. 12.) imposed upon the Jews by the precedent Emperours, had Caesar's Image and Superscription upon it, and was a Roman Coin, hence stil∣ed (both in St. Matthew and St. Mark) [,] by a Latine name, and the Tribute it self [,] census, in all printed Copies and Manuscripts that I have seen or heard of (save that old Greek and Latine M S. which Beza sent to the University of Cambridge (where it is [,] Pole-mony) a word coin'd at the fingers end of the Scribe; for the Tribute laid upon them by Augustus or Pompey, and taken off by Agrippa was not paid by the head but by the house (as Josephus expresly affirmeth. (Josoph. Jud. Ant. 19. 5.) [Re∣misso ei tributo quod soliti erant in singulas aedes solvere.] 2. And, upon this very account, our Saviour determin'd it to be Caesar's due: in which determination he proceeded according to their own Concessi∣ons, as Lightfoot observes (Harmony. Sect. 77.) (quoting the Jerusalem Tal∣mud bringing in David and Abigail talking thus. Abigail said, [What evil have I or my Children done?] David answereth, [Thy Husband vilified the Kingdom of David:] She saith, [Art thou a King then?] He saith to her, Did not Samuel anoint me King?] She saith, to him, [The Coin of our Lord Saul is yet current.] And again in Sanhedr.—[A King, whose Coin is current in those Countreys—the men of the Countrey do thereby evidence, that they ac∣knowledge him for their Lord:—but if his Coin be not current, he is a Rob∣ber.]) And that with as much advantage as could be desired, in order to his convincing them, that the Tribute of that Denarium was due to Caesar; but the Tribute of the Didrachma due to God: that bearing Caesar's Picture with this Inscription (say Antiquaries;) []—Caesar August. such a year after the taking of Judea, (Hammond ann. c. in Mat. 22.) But this, (if it were the Kings, or common, Shekel) being stamped on one side with a Tower, standing betwixt  and : the whole In∣scription, with that which was written beneath, amounting to this Motto. [Jerusalem the holy City;] the rundle being fill'd with this. [David King
and his Son Solomon King.] or if it were the Sanctuary-shekel, having on one side the Pot of Mannah, or Aaron's Censer, with this Inscription; [The Shekel of Israel:] on the Reverse side, Aaron's Rod budding, with this Motto in the Rundle, [Jerusalem the Holy City;] that is, Jerusalem the Royal City of the great King; (Goodwin antiq. lib. 6. cap. 10.) Beza (on Mat. 17. 24.) makes the same Description of that Shekel, which was given him by Ambrose Blaucerus. And Arias Montanus saith, that while he was at the Council of Trent, there was brought unto him by a friend an ancient piece of Jewish Coyn, with the very same Figures and Characters: weighing half an Ounce; vide Aster. sol. (in numb. cap. 3. 40. 47.) which soever it was in which they paid that Tribute for their Lives, it was Gods Coyn, and bare upon it God's Claim, and their Acknowledgment, of his peculiar Supremacy over them: and therefore, as Caesar's demanding of that Tribute of the Jews would have been, in truth, a taking away from God what was God's (as Goodwin well observes) so the Jews paying of it to Caesar, would have been a giving of Caesar what was Gods. This Tribute which Caesar exacted and Christ ordered them to pay, was not the Half-shekel due to God; for then Christ would have bid them give it to God, Weems: which I wonder they ob∣served not as well as Weems; there being so near a relation betwixt taking and giving, and their scruple propounded to and determination of it given by Christ, not respecting Caesar's Act in demanding, but their own in giving; that what was God's (as this Half-shekel was) must be given to God, not to Caesar. In which resolution of their Question, as Christ cleaves the hair be∣twixt not only God and Caesar, but the two extream and vitious Opinions touching Tribute, (the one of the Pharisees, Galileans, and Zealots, who de∣nied all Tribute to Caesar: The other of the Herodians or Court-party, who held all kind of Tribute to be Caesar's due;) so this very prudent and equal partition of his, is afterwards by malicious Persons improved into an accusa∣tion against him at his Arraignment before Pilat, (St. Luk. 23. 2.) as if he forbad to give Tribute to Caesar. A most false and groundless Suggestion; for he did not only pay that Tribute himself, but punctually determined Caesar's Right to Caesar's Penny. 3. As to that other Tribute (of the Half-shekel due to God) neither he nor his Countreyman paid it to (nor was it demanded of them by) Caesar; till their City was demolished, their Temple burnt, the Race of their Priests made unuseful (as Titus told them;) and the Lineage of David cut off by Ve∣spasian; but was paid to their own Collectors, for the use of the Temple: as is manifest not only by the Arguments before hinted, but these supernumera∣ry ones. 1. Our Saviour's Plea for Exemption from payment of that Tribute (Mat. 17. 25.) [The children of Kings are free,] cannot, with any colour, be ap∣plied to any other Tribute, but that of the Half-shekel, which that holy Na∣tion paid to their holy King, whose Son Christ was (and not of the Empe∣rour:) and therefore by the Rule of common Custom, was not lyable to pay that Tribute. It being the use of all Kings, to exact Tribute of Strangers (that is, of the children of other men (their Subjects) not their own.) For that by [Aliens and own] in Christ's Speech, is not meant Subjects and For∣reigners, is apparent, from Kings exacting Tribute from their own native Subjects, as well as from them that are become their Subjects by Conquest; yea from their own (that is) Subjects, and not from Forreigners. Christ pleads not here the privilege of being a Roman; or had he done so, that Plea would not have exempted them from paying the Tribute due to the Im∣perial Crown; had he indeed been the Emperour's Son, he had been exempt∣ed from paying it. From which Analogy he argues, that he being the Son of God, the Collectors of Gods (his Fathers) Tribute, should not have de∣manded that Tribute of him. Notwithstanding he being Man also, and un∣der an Obligation to fulfil the Law, rather than offend, in not paying his Church-duties, he fetched Money out of a Fishes mouth,
Briefly, the Tribute then demanded of, and paid by Christ, was both de∣manded for, and paid to that King whose son Christ was. 2. Had that been a Roman Tribute it would have been gather'd by the Roman Collecters, the Publicans, who in all probability would have been here named; whereas on the contrary, the persons are here stiled (as by a known Title) they that received the Didrachma [] or (as Erasmus) [They that used to receive the Didrachme or Half-shekel. § 5. Hence I draw these Corrolaries. 1. Their reasoning is too short; who, from Tullies mentioning the Ro∣mans to have had the Tribute of Land in Syria, paid by way of Tythe; ar∣gue, that God's Tythe of Jewry was by Pompey diverted from his Treasury to the Roman Coffers A conclusion which as it wholly subverts the grand Foundation of Christian Religion (to wit, the Verity of the old Testament by asserting the Departure of the Scepter before the coming of our Jesus, (that is Shilo) (for what greater evidence of that, than their paying their King's (God's) Tribute unto any other, but himself;) so it appears to be without ground: for grant we the Assumption, That the Roman State tyth∣ed Judaea, yet it will not follow that they paid those Tythes in kind, which were due to God; but only that the Romans (at their Conquest of that Nati∣on) finding it under the Government of the High Priest (to whom the Tythes were payable by the Law of God) might demand a Tribute, in the same pro∣portion; and yet not the same in specie that was paid to the Temple: but leave that still to be received by the High Priest, for his maintenance, and those uses to which their own Law had appointed. Which that they did is manifest from the Decrees of Julius Caesar (Joseph. ant. 14. 17.) made when he was second time Consul; [that Hircanus and his Sons should enjoy the High Priesthood, with the same Rights and Privileges that his Ancestors had done:] and, when he was the fifth time Consul; [that Hircanus and his Sons, High Priests, should receive the Tythes, as till then their Ancestors had done:] A clear Testimony, that whatever Tribute Pompey and Crassus had imposed upon the Jews (albeit it were in proportion of Tythe) it was not the Tythe which belonged to the Priests; for that (saith Caesar) had, till then been paid to the High Priest. 2. That though the Jews had paid a yearly Tribute to the Emperour, bearing Proportion to that Didrachma, which they were by Law enjoyn'd to pay to God; yet it was not that in specie: the Didrachma being paid to the Temple, when that yearly Tribute was paid to Caesar, as hath been proved already so fully as no more need be added; only, because I am now in Jose∣phus, I shall, out of him, produce one unanswerable Argument to evince, that it was not the intention of the Romans (in the Tribute they imposed up∣on the Jews) to encroach upon God's Right, or to impede their payment of Church or Temple-duties. Julius Caesar (after he was created perpetual Di∣ctator) writes in his own, and Senate, and People of Rome's name to the Magistrates of the Parians, telling them how ill he resented their prohibiting the Jews to keep their sacred Conventions, and to collect Oblations and Mo∣neys for their Sacrifices; and lays before them the Decree of Sex. Caesar, who when he was Consul (though he interdicted all other Fraternities) yet he al∣lowed the Jews to hold Religious Meetings, and to gather Collections in or∣der to the maintenance of their Religious Services: and his own Example, who permitted the Jews to live after the custom of their Forefathers, and their own Laws; (Josephus Ibidem.) Dolobella (after Caesar's Murder) writes to the Ephesians and all the Asians, that it was his pleasure (as it had been of all the Emperours his Predecessors) that the Jews should be permitted to use the Customs of their Fathers to meet for holy Exercises as their Law commanded, and to confer their accustomed Oblations towards maintaining their Temple and the Services thereof (Joseph.
antiq. 14. 17.) and (to spare other instances) Titus aggravated the Rebellion of the Jewish Priests (whom he charges to have been the Incendiaries of the War) from the favours which the Romans had shewed the Jews ever since their Conquest; amongst which hereckons this for one of the chief, That they had always been allowed to receive the Tribute which by their Law was due to God, and to collect free gifts for the use of the Temple: [Quódque maximum est, Tributum capere Dei nomine, ac donaria colligere permissimus:] (Joseph. Bel. Jud. l. 7. c. 13.) There is no convincing of him that shuts his eyes against this Light. 3. The Jews therefore till Vespasian, were not commanded to pay the Di∣drachma to any but their own Collectors for the use of the Temple; which he, ordering to be paid to the Capitol, made a greater Incroachment upon their sacred Privileges than any former Conquerour had done, even to the utter subversion of their holy State; making (as much as in him lay) the God of Judah a Tributary King to the Gods of Rome. Not that he himself was conquer'd by those Gods (as Vespasian blasphemously implyed by trans∣ferring his Tribute to them) in the Conquest of his people the Jews (August. de consensu evang. l. 1. 14.) [Non quòd ipse sit victus in Hebraeo populo suo, qui Regnum ejus Romanis expugnandum delendúmque permisit:] whose Kingdom he permitted the Romans to carry away by force: For though the Conque∣rours at the present triumph'd over him, and made their Idols set their seet upon the subjugated Neck of this sleeping Lyon; yet it was not long ere he rouzed up himself, and having taken his Kingdom from that Prophetick Na∣tion (because then he was come who was promised by it) he (by Christ) sub∣dued to his name that Roman Empire, by which that Nation had been sub∣dued: and converted it, by the Force and Devotion of the Christian Faith, to the Overthrow of Idols: an admirable thing (saith St. Austin, de consensu evangel. lib. 1. cap. 14.) [That he whom the conquered had so offended, as he would no longer reign over them, and the Conquerours would not then receive for their King; is now worship'd of all Nations, and manifested to be that very God of Israel, of whom so long before was prophesied:] (Isa. 54. 5.) [The redeemer, the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called.] Now was fulfilled the Prophecy of Moses (Deut. 28. 64.) The Lord shall scatter thee a∣mong all people, from the one end of the earth unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other Gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and stone. Let the Jew shew, if he can, in what other Dispersion, but this un∣der Vespasian, they served Gods of Wood and Stone. In the Babylonish Cap∣tivity they had that constantly in their mouth, [The Gods that made not hea∣ven shall utterly perish from under this heaven,] (Jer. 10. 11.) and were so far from falling down before their Idols, as they chose rather to be cast into the Lion's Den, into a fiery Furnace. Or in what sence, during this last and fa∣tal Dispersion, they have been induc'd to serve Gentile-Gods of Wood and Stone, but in their being forc'd to pay that homage of Soul-tribute to the Capitoline Gods, which was the holy one of Israel his due, while he stood in that relation to them: which being ceased, they as Slaves, become tributary not only to a foreign State (for that had been their frequent portion, without impeachment of God's peculiar Sovereignty over them, even then when he ruled over them in fury; that being a gracious Dispensation to bring them back into the Bond of the Covenant: they that formerly led them captive and tyrannized over them, were but as their Shepherd's Dogs to fetch them in again when they strayed away, and would not be reclaim'd by their Shep∣herd's Whistling to them in the Ministry of their Prophets) but forreign God's. Master Mede's Paraphrase upon the Text last quoted doth in part express my sence, that is, [they should serve them, not religiously but politically, inasmuch as they were to become Slaves to idolatrous Nations:] it being his Conceipt, that [Gods] are here put for [Nations serving strange Gods.] But (saving the honour I bear to the memory of that worthy Person, then whom few of Christ's Oxen have labour'd more strenuously on Christ's
Floor in not treading out his Master's Corn; the Encomium which St. Austin gives St. Jerom.) I humbly conceive, Titus with the point of his Spear, hath writ in the Dust of Jerusalem so clear a Comment upon this Text; as we need not fly to the refuge of a Trope for its Exposition: when we see that People become Servants not only to the idolatrous Ro∣mans, but the Idols of Rome; whom they serve, not Religiously, but po∣litically; being forc'd (their Conscience, the Seat of all Religious Wor∣ship, reclaiming) to do that Homage to them (while they pay the Tribute of their Soul to the Capitol) which was the God of Israel's due; but now as inacceptable to him, as the Tythe of the Whore's hire was of old: of which Philo Judaeus (lib. 2. de Monarchia) hath this Observation: [It was not with the Money that God found fault, but the person that offer'd it was together with her hire abominable: how vile therefore must she be in Gods sight whose Money he accounts prophane and adulterate:] may not we as ratio∣nally conclude, that God expressed his abominating the Jewish Nation, by his refusing to accept the price of their Souls, and his assigning them to pay it; (and thereby to accknowledg Fealty) to strange Gods; and such Gods (so it follows in Moses Prophecy) as neither they nor their Fathers knew; which could be no other than the Roman: for the Gods of Egypt Syria, Chaldaea, &c. (whither they had been formerly carryed captive) their Fathers knew too well, and had often gone a Whoring after them: But these Gods, whom Vespasian made them serve and become Tributary to, their Fathers scarce ever heard of, and themselves never acknowledg∣ed, till now that God set the wicked over them, and plac'd Satan at their right hand (Psal. 109. 6.) They who rejected their own King (to whom the Wise Men of the Gentiles paid Homage) are forc'd to bring those Presents into the Idol's Temple which formerly they had come with into God's Courts. Scaliger (appendice ad emendat. temporum, pag. 25.) applies to this business that of the Satyrist. Omnis enim pòpuli mercedem pondere jussa est Arbor— When he saith every Tree (to wit of the Jewish Oratories) payeth Tri∣bute, he alludes to that Tribute which ancient Boooks, Moneys and Martial mention. Sed quod de Solymis venit perustis Damnatum modò: Mance tributum. The Tribute now imposed upon the Jews is that which comes from their Temple consumed with fire; that is (saith Scaliger) the Half-shekel (which formerly they used to pay to the Temple, while it stood) they were injoyn'd after it was demolished, to pay to the Capitol. To which apper∣tains that Inscription of the Jewish Coyn (after this Tribute was released, and the Capitoline Gods turn'd out of doors.) [CALVMNIA FISCI JU∣DAICI SUBLATA:] the reproach of the Judaical Tribute remov'd: Had God spit in their faces it would not have been a greater reproach than their paying this Tribute was. How did God in this retaliate their scornful va∣luing of his Son at thirty Pieces; that goodly price was cast to the Potter: But here God appoints the price of their Souls to be cast to Devils, as long as there were any in the Capitol to receive it. By that he provided a Burying∣place for Strangers in the Land of Promise (a Dormitory with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for those of the East and West in whose eyes Christ was more pre∣cious than in theirs, that with them they might rest in hope of a Resurrecti∣on to Glory.) By this he declared his Rejection of the Children of the King∣dom, the disimparking of that Nation, and turning it into the Wild and Common of the World, the Demesnes of the God of this World. And that
according to the plain Exposition which their own Scriptures make: For this Tribute being formerly payable to God as a Ransom for their Souls (Ex. 30. 12.) what can their not paying it to God (but to him, out of whose hand God had ransom'd them) import less, than his turning them over into the hands of their old Lord? What could have been a clearer Evidence of God's casting up his Royalty over them, of his unwillingness to stand any longer engaged to protect them; than his ordering them (in his adorable Provi∣dence) to pay the Rent for their Lives to a strange God? As their Tythes were the Hedg of their Estates, and God stood bound by his gracious Promise, while they paid them duly by his appointment, to protect and prosper the Fruit of their Labours. (Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10.) [Ye are cursed with a curse, ye have robbed me in detaining Tythes: bring your Tythes and prove me herewith whether I will not open the doors of Heaven unto you, and pour you out a Bles∣sing, and I will rebuke the devourer for your sake and he shall not destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your Vine be barren.] So this holy Tribute was the Hedge of their Persons, and demanded of God to be paid to himself, that they might, by vertue of his Covenant, oblige him to secure them from Pe∣stilential Diseases; [that there be no plague amongst you:] (Exod. 30. 11.) And therefore the non-payment of it to God, was a casting down of the Fence of his special Providence, and a laying them open to the Dominion of Evil Angels. Israel's Watchman, by appointing his Stipend to be paid to another God, bid them in plain English, look to themselves: for he would take no farther care of them, or charge over them; his gracious Eye should be no longer upon them. [I will no more pity you, I will no more deliver you; that that dieth, let it die.]
CHAP. X. More Signs of the Scepter's departure. § 1. Covenant-Obligationvoid. They return to Egypt, &c. § 2. Temple-Ves∣sels Prophanation revenged of old, not now regarded. § 3. Titus and Ve∣spasian rewarded for their service against the Temple. § 4. Judah's God deaf to all their Cries. § 5. They curse themselves in calling upon the God of Revenges. § 6. Jewish and Gentile Historians relate the Watch-word, [Let us depart.] § 7. Jacob thus expounded not by Statists, but the A∣postles. § 1. 2. GOd hath made evident Demonstration of his reprobating that accursed Nation in his accomplishment upon them that Threat of Moses (Deut. 28. 68.) [The Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again by ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thee, thou shalt see it no more again: and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bond-men and bond-women (gratis) for nought, for no man will buy you.] god had promised them perpetual Li∣beration from Egyptian Bondage, (Exod. 14. 13.) so Junius and Tremelius; Calvin thinks that not only their not return to Egypt, but their not coming in that way (of the vast howling Wilderness) whereby they came from Egypt, is here hinted: and to that Objection, how could they go by Ships through the Wilderness? gives this in answer, that they might be shipp'd and cast up∣on the Shore, over against the Plains of Moab, and so trudg by Land through their old Walk. However, this is manifest, that though God had promised they should never again become Slaves to the Egyptian; Yet now the Jews having cast him off: he looks upon himself as disobliged from his Promises made to them; (Ergo illuc eos retrahens, gratiam redemptionis quodammodò de∣levit:] and forgetting the Covenant, now out of date, he makes good this Threatning upon them: partly by Titus, who sent all the Captive Jews bound to Egypt for Drudges and Slaves (Josephus Bell. Jud. lib. 7. 16.) Except some chosen young men of goodly Complexion and proper Bodies, whom he reser∣ved for Triumph: some Boys under sixteen, of which he sold as many as he could get money for; for there were more sellers than buyers (Haumer. in Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 8.). And some boysterous Carles, whom he al∣lotted through the Provinces for Spectacles and the Teerh of wild Beasts. Partly by the voluntary flight, of those who escaped the Conquerour's hands unto Alexandria and the Egyptian Thebes; at both which places, by men of their own Nation, there residing, they were either slain or delivered up to the Roman Sword (Joseph. Bel. Jud. l. 7. c. 29.) And partly by Adrian, who (after he had made it death for any Jew to look towards the place where Jerusalem (then Ardianople) had stood) sent all the Jews he could not find Chapmen for, into Egypt, to sell themselves to their old Enemies for Bond-men bondwomen; but the price of a Jew then ran so low as they sold themselves gratis, for want of Chapmen (St. Jerom in Zach. 11.) Time was when that Prayer of Onias, Sirnamed the Just, was look'd upon as Canonical: [Oh God, the King of the whole World, seeing these that are with me are thy people, and those of the opposite Party are thy Priests; I beseech thee hear not the Prayers of either side against the other;] (Joseph. Antiq. l. 14. c. 3.) A Jew then could open and stop God's Ear, his Prayer was the Key to the divine Treasury of Mercies and Judgments. Nay God was wont to hear before they call'd; to see their Afflictions, and hear their Groans, under their Pressures, before they made their complaint to God. But since their Fathers God hath turn'd them off, to the Gods of the Capitol. (Though the Earth received the blood of 3024730. of them in the Jewish Wars (those Wars wherein Christ came to re∣quire
that Blood, at the Father's and Children's hands, the guilt whereof they had invoked upon their own heads at his Passion.) Though 970000. of them were in those Wars taken Captive; (Joseph. Bel. Jud.) yet neither the cry of the Prisoners, nor the Voice of the Blood of the Slain hath enter'd into the Ears of the Lord of Hosts; except it be to make Musick in them, while God laughs at their Calamity. § 2. Time was when Israel's God awoke to avenge himself upon Belsha∣zar, for alienating the Bolls of the Temple from that sacred use to which they had been dedicated; and making them either carowsing Cups at a com∣mon, or Instruments of Libations to Babel's Idols at a sacred Feast: for the Jews (saith St. Jerom, in locum:) have this Story. That Belshazar observ∣ing that the seventieth Year of the Captivity (that is of the first Captivity) being come, that yet the Jews were not redeem'd, thinking Jeremies Prophe∣cy to have been wind (in a Triumph over the Jews hope of Deliverance) made a great Feast, where he and his Nobles [Insultantes Deo Judeorum quòd, &c.] insulting over the God of the Jews, as too weak to grapple with their Bell, made Drink-offerings of thanksgiving to the God of Babel, in the Bolls sacred to the God of Judah, whom he blasphemed (in Rabsheca's curs∣sed Dialect) as being no more able, than the Gods of other Nations, to de∣liver his People out of the hands of the King of Babylon. But this despised, God chalked him up a Reckoning upon the Wall, before he rose from Ta∣ble: and made him pay it that night, at the price of his Life and King∣dom; both which he was deprived of, before he went to bed. Which Cir∣cumstance Xenophon (Cyri, institut. l. 7. c. 22.) thus relates. [When Cyrus his men entered the Royal Palace, they found the Guard tippling, by Candle-light, in the outward Room; against whom the Invaders using hostile force, the Cla∣mour being heard within, the Doors are instantly open'd by the Kings Command, to see what was the Cause of that Bustle; upon which advantage Cyrus his men rushing into the King's Chamber, found the King standing with his Sword drawn, whom they forthwith slew.] God then stirred up the Spirit of his a∣nointed Cyrus to avenge Judah, upon Babel, while he was but his Unkle Cy∣axeres (called in Daniel Darius) his General; and to order the Return of God's Captives, and the Rebuilding of his Temple as soon as he came to the Imperial Crown. But Vespasian carried captive the holy Utensils of the second Temple: The Table of Shew-bread (whereon the twelve Tribes in the Tipe of twelve Loaves, had stood day and night under the favourable inspection of Israel's God:) The sacred Lamps (Emblems of that manifold and marvellous Light of divine Revelations which that Nation peculiarly enjoyed:) The holy Veil (that which fignified God's discriminating them, in point of special favour and intimate Communion, from all the Nations of the World.) And lastly, the Book of their Law of the Covenant that God made with their Fathers.) These, (saith one of their own, Josephus (Bel. Jud. l. 7. c. 25.) Vespasian car∣ried in Triumph, after the Images of the Roman Idols, to the Temple of Ju∣piter Capitoline, and reposited them either in his Palace, or in that Temple of Victory, which he built in Memorial of his Conquest of Judah. And as Trophies of his Victory, not only over the Jews, but the God of the Jews, if their own Rabbies be to be believed, who (as they are quoted by Vicars in his Decupla in Psal. 94. 2, 3.) Compare Nebuchadnezzar with Titus, and affirm, that as the first gloried over the desolation of the First, saying, [Who is that God that can deliver you out of mine hand?] (Daniel 3.) so this second insult∣ed at the desolation of the Second Temple, saying, [The God of the Jews is gone a Voyage by Sea, let him land and give me Battel.] My thoughts are here distracted through plenty of Matter, and cannot tell where to begin to pitch their dazell'd Eye: whether upon that miraculous Providence whereby, in the midst of these Conflagrations, (which Massy Pillars of Brass could not re∣sist the violence of) were preserved such combustible things as the Veil, and
Book of the Law: by whose contrivance it came to pass, that in the vast Ru∣ines and Rubbish of the Temple, should be found the Table of Shew-bread and the Lamps, where so many things were buried of more bulk, of more va∣lue, both in common esteem, and in the opinion of the Jews. Or upon that secret (and to him unseen) guidance of the everlasting Counseller, that directed Vespasian to single out for his Triumph such sacred Utensils, as (of all others) were most lively Representations of the peculiar Privileges which that Nation had enjoyed under her great King; and altogether, the perfect Hieroglyphick of that holy State (a Corporation, consisting of twelve Tribes, (upon which the Eye of God was always fix'd) seperated from all other Kingdoms to be holy unto God, (as the Holy of Holies was from the Tem∣ple by the Veil:) Living under the fruition of divine Light (and in Cove∣nant with God, in black and white.) Or that all-ruling Power that guided the Scribe's hand, to give the World an account of the so solemn cancelling of the Bond between God and his sometimes Covenant-people, the taking away of the Veil of Partition betwixt that and other Nations; the removal of his Lamp from them, and them from his favourable Inspection. So that henceforth the Shew bread-table (whereon they were wont to be presented before the Lord) must stand before a God that hath Eyes, but sees not; their Jehovah having turned over his care for them to the Latian Jove: From henceforth the Veil of the Temple (whereon were painted Cherubims, those Eyes of the Lord that run to and fro through the Earth:) A Type of that difference which God put betwixt them and the rest of the Inhabitants of the Earth, must be hung up in the Capitol: as if, in scorn, God had sent the I∣dol-watchmen upon that Hill: this Type of his, to help their eyes; that they might look to their new Charge; or intended to signifie, that now the Capitoline Gods should peculiarly seperate these their new Clients, from all their old Worshippers: as in truth they did. For all other Nations gave them divine honour, thinking they were God's: But the Jews are forc'd to homage them, whom they knew were no Gods: and therefore were holy to these their new Lords, after a peculiar way of seperation. and different from all the People in the World. Henceforth their holy Lamps and Book of their Law must be deposited among the Gentiles, in their Metropolis, and perhaps, in the Emperour's Palace: that all Nations upon the Earth might vindicate God's severity against the Fedifrages, and proclaim the Equity of his Ways, after a Perusal of the Covenant betwixt God and them. That the Gentiles might be lighten'd to the acknowledgment of that Lord Christ, whom the Jews had rejected, to whom Lamp and Law would be more useful, than they had been to that blind Generation, which by malicious Ignorance had put out its own Eyes. § 3. But these wonders (that these Utensils should escape the Fire, should be singled out for Triumph; and a Jewish Priest's committing all this to per∣petual Memory; which so clearly expresseth God's cancelling his Covenant with the Jews, and his calling the whole World to be Witness of his giving them so full a discharge) have nothing worthy of admiration in them, in comparison of that, for which principally I made the premised Allegations, viz. That Judah's God should all this while hold his peace, if indeed he were at that time Judah's God; and had not renounc'd all Relation to those some∣times holy Things, holy People, nay and holy Name too: For the Roman Eagle flutter'd in Triumph equally over all these, That he should suffer the Actors of these Tragedies to reign in honour, to depart in peace: one of their own Priests urgeth this Argument; (Joseph. Bel. Jud. l. 6. cap. 11.) God was wont to avenge you on your Adversaries: but Vespasian may thank the Jewish Wars for the Empire: these Fountains (and for instance that of Siloam) which were dry to you, run so plentifully to Titus, as to afford Water enough for his Men, for his Cattel, and the flowing of the Grounds he has gain'd. Therefore, I believe, God hath left the Temple, and is fled from you, and takes part with
them with whom ye war.] I shall therefore prosecute this Argument more particularly. This, I say, can never be sufficiently admired, that Israel's (quondam) God, should suffer the great-Instruments of their Misery; to live applauded as the Delights and Darlings of Humane Kind, to die bewailed with no loss sorrowful resentment of the Publick, than that which men feel for, and express at, the loss of their own dearest and most intimate Relations, and to be followed to the Funeral Pile, with more Praise than Flattery her self could pour out upon living Princes, [Titus, cognomine paterno amor & deli∣ciae humani generis—Excessit, quod ut palàm factum est, non secus atque in do∣mestico luctu maerentibus publicè cunctis, Senatus tantas mortuo gratias egit laudés∣que, quantas congessit nè vivo quidem unquam atque praesenti:] (Suetonius: Titus, cap. 1. & 11.) Vespasian had no Mene Tekel writ against him: for that Appari∣tion he saw in his sleep (of a pair of Ballances hanging up in the Porch of the Palace, with Claudius and Nero in one, and himself and Children, in the o∣ther Scale) was a Vision of Peace, importing the Translation of the Imperial Crown out of the Julian into his, the Flavian Family; and the continuance of it in that Family, as long as it had remain'd in the former during the Reigns of Claudius and Nero; and that with such Felicity, as the happy and beneficial Reigns of him and his Sons, should counter-ballance the Mischiefs which the World receiv'd, by the male-administration of those two last degene∣rate Branches of the Julian Stock. By which Vision and other Portents, he was so well assured of his Son's Succession, as he was wont to ascertain the Se∣nate. [That in spight of all treasonable Attempts to the contrary, he was sure, his Son, or no body, should reign after him (Sueton. Vespasianus, cap. 25.)] Titus indeed complain'd at his death, that he had done one act for which he repent∣ed, and but one: [[Neque enim exstare ullum suum factum paenitendum exce∣pto duntaxat uno.] (Sueton. Titus, cap. 10.) So far was God from writing such bitter Bills against him, that might make his Countenance fall, his Joynts shake, and his Knees smite against one another (as he did against his Fellow∣blasphemer:) as he with hands stretched out to Heaven, and a naked Breast, complain'd to the God of Heaven almost in Job's Phrase; [I am cut off, but not for my iniquity; for I do not remember that ever I did any Act to be repented of except one:] What that Fact was, he neither discovered (saith mine Authour) nor is it easie for any man to tell: some thought it was his too much intimacy with Domitia, his Brother's Wife: but if that had been so, that impudent Woman would have boasted of her being nought with so great and good a Man; for she was a Woman not shy of keep∣ing her own Counsel in such Cases. If I may give my Conjecture, I suppose, it might probably be his seeking to obtain the Judaean Crown for himself; a Design which his Father was jealous he had in his head; and for which he in∣cur'd hatred and blame, while he served his Father in the Judaean Wars. How∣ever it could not be his slaughtering and captivating the Jews, his sacking their City and Temple, his carrying away the holy Spoils; for here were such a Multiplicity of Acts, as to have confessed himself guilty in those things, had been to have accused the greatest part of his Life, after he came upon the the open Stage: which was, in a manner, spent in Actions of this tendency. And had God, for vindicating the Glory of his sometimes-great Name, charg∣ed upon his Conscience the guilt of his challenging the God of Judah, he would have charged it so home as to have made him confess and give glory to God. And to speak the naked Truth, though the Rabbies put a blasphe∣mous Gloss upon the words of Titus, yet he did not thereby intend to af∣front that God who sometimes had been Judah's God: but knowing that he came against Judea at the call, and by the conduct, of that God: to dis∣hearten them and encourage his own men, he told them; [Their God was put to Sea,] that is, he had forsaken the protection of them and their Land; their strength was departed from them: upon which account he subjoyn'd; [Let him come and give me Battel;] that is, try if (with all your strongest cries) you can engage him to take your part, who, I am sure, takes mine a∣gainst
you. The words indeed sound like Nabsheca's or Nebuchadnexxar's, but the difference of the times make their sence as different from theirs, as Light from Darkness. The God of Heaven was then God of the Jews, and those Nations indivisible: and therefore they, in the name of their Idols, defied the God of Heaven, under the name of the God of Israel. But now the Relation of the God of Heaven to the Jews is ceased: so that that relative Title is not applicable (de praesenti) to him; and the thing signified by it is a mere Idol. And therefore Titus might in the name of the true God (who sent him) defie that Relation, and trample upon the Jew's Confidence in a bare and and (then) insignificant Name, the Relation being now out of doors. Which if it had not been, Divine Vengeance would not have slept all that while with∣out giving some hints, at least of God's displeasure, not only against these Emperours, but the Empire it self, for killing and dissipating his sometimes flock: As he manifestly did for its killing the Lord of Life; whose Blood he vindicated upon the Roman State, in his permitting Tiberius, after the Passi∣on of Christ, to vent those, to the Commonwealth, destructive Vices, which till then he had palliated, in his setting over the Empire that raging wild Beast Caligula, that noted Brute Claudius, that Monster of men Nero; in his in∣volving the Empire in those bloody civil Wars under Galba, Otho and Vitel∣lius: Whereas, on the contrary, as if their shedding the Blood of the Jews, had expiated the Guilt of Christ's, the Empire was never happier in any Succession of its Emperours, than of those who were Instruments of the Jews ruine, and their Successors. § 4. Lastly, where have been God's Mercies of old, where the sounding of his Bowels towards his ancient People (these so many hundred years) while they have been scatter'd, as Chaff before the Wind, to all the Points in the Compass, and made a Prey to the several Nations of the World, among whom they have been sojourning all this while: (If that be not improperly called sojourning, out of which that bewildred and benighted People shall never find Out-gate.) Would their Plea [We are thine, save us,] have been thus long unanswered, had not the old Relation betwixt God and them been out of date? Ever since [Libanus open'd her doors that the Fire might devour her Cedars,] (Zach. 11. 1. &c.) since the Temple (built of the goodliest Cedars of Liba∣nus) opened its doors, on the night, on its own accord (Joseph. de Bel. Jud. l. 7. c. 2.) to which Prodigy (happening a little before the Tem∣ple's Ruine) Rabbi Jochanan applied this Text of Zach. (Dr. Lightfoot on the Fall of Jerusalem:) and the sober Jews interpreted it to import the burning of the Temple: ever since this Prophecy and Prodigy took ef∣fect. There has been [an howling of the Fir-trees,] (the Vulgar Jews;) [of the Oaks of Bashan,] (their Heads and Chieftains;) [of their Shepherds,] their Priests, Levites and Princes;) [a roaring of the young Lions,] (the In∣fants of the Seed Royal; (St. Jerom, in Zach. 11.) The whole Nation high and low have been crying mightily to Judah's God; to return their Captivi∣ty, to avenge their Blood. [But Ego non sum ego,] I am not I, their Father's God will not now own the name of [Judah's God:] that Title is a mere I∣dol, a Nothing in the World; there's no such God in Heaven, as Judah's God; and they gain no more by invocating that Name, than if they were blessing an Idol, than if they were censing one of the Vanities of the Hea∣then, who have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not; there's no voice, no hearing, no returns of answer: but the eccho of that fatal and seal'd decree (Zach. 11.) [I will no more pity you, I will no more deliver you out of the hand of your king, into whose hand I have delivered you; I will not feed you: that that dieth let it die. I will no more plead your cause with those your possessors (that slay you and hold themselves not guilty) with those your shepherds that pity you not.] You once had a Shepherd that did pity you, but you are gone a∣stray from him; and these into whose hands you are fallen will not pity you:
neither will I pity you, to rescue you out of their merciless hands: I will not scare them away from their Prey by my Judgments: [nihil mali pro tanta crudelitate patiebuntur;] (as St. Jerom renders it out of the Septuagint) they shall suffer no Punishment from me, for all the cruelty which they exercise upon you: [Let them sell you and grow rich by your impoverishing;] let the Extortioner catch all you have; let the stranger spoil your labour, the Stranger to whom you lend, the Creditour of whom you borrow; (Dr. Hamond in Psal. 109. vers. 10.) let whosoever you deal with oppress and in∣jure you, I will not right you; I will give no other word of command con∣cerning you, to those whom in fury I set over you, but this [pasce gregem occisionis,] feed the Flock of Slaughter; Let them graze till they be fat enough to kill; [nutriatur ut crescat qui posteà occidendus est:] If you spare and tole∣rate them to thrive and get Estates; do it not out of clemency, but with an eye to your own Profit, [non propter clementiam, sed pretium reservati:] All the feeding you shall have, shall be to make you fit for the Shambles; Upon all which St. Jerom hath this Note, [Audi, Judaee, qui tibi spes vanissimas repro∣mittis & non audis dicentem Dominum atque firmantem, non eruam te de manibus eorum; quòd Aeterna sit apud Romanos tua futura Captivitas: Et pascam pe∣cus occisionis; ut semper Judaei nutriantur ad mortem.] Hear, oh Jew, who dost again promise to thy self vain hopes of a return from this thy last Captivity: and mindest not what the Lord saith and affirmeth: [I will not deliver thee out their hands;] That, this thy Captivity (by the Romans) will be eternal, [feed the Flock of Slaughter:] that the Jews shall be always fed, that they may be slaughter'd. Sixteen hundred year's Experience hath commented upon these Menacies, during which time the Jews have been a Prey to any would put out the hand for them. Those of them that converse amongst the Eastern Christians, go in danger of their Lives; upon every tumultuous Assembly of of the common People: and constantly every Easter, wheresoever they be: Insomuch as if a Jew do but stir out of doors (betwixt Maundy-thirsday at Noon and Easter-Eve at night, the Christians among whom they dwell (though far fewer in number will be sure to stone them: (Heylin Geograph. Palestine.) Wheresoever that [Turba] Multitude of No-people have their place of aboad, they are without God, without a King, without Scepter, Sheep scatter'd upon the Mountains without a Shepherd; a prize to whom∣soever will assault them; a Generation hated of all men, and hating all men: whose hatred of Christ, blind zeal for now-mortiferous Ceremonies, and doting confidence in a dead Lyon (a Messias yet to come) put them daily upon those extravagant courses, as scarce a week passeth, wherein they do not render themselves obnoxious to the revenge of him that beareth the Sword, and administer just occasion to Magistrates of proceeding against them, either to Confiscation, Imprisonment, Banishment or Extirpation. And if Judgment be not speedily executed: [defertur non aufertur,] 'tis not forgiveness, but forbearance till their Punishment may be of more advantage to the Republick. So that whereever they have been allowed to reside, they have been kept (as Poultrey in a Coop) only till they were fat enough to kill and pluck, to have either Life or Estate taken from them; Christian States use them only for Spunges (as our King Henry did Emson and Dudley) permitting them to suck in great Estates (by Usury and Brokage) and when they are full, squeasing them into the Exchequer. Upon this point of State, after they had been plunder'd they were banish'd England (by Edward 1. an∣no 1290.) Out of France (by Philip the Fair, 1307.) Out of Portugal (by Emmanuel, 1497.) Out of Naples and Sicily (by Charles 5. 1539.) Under no less Vassalage are they in the Turk's Dominions; where, Achmad, the year after the Christians lost Rhodes, gave the Jews of Egypt no longer time, than while he stayed in the Bath, to deliberate upon this Question; Whether they would aid him with all they had (in his Rebellion against Sultan Selim) or provoke him to extirpate the memory of Israel from off the face of the Earth? (Scaliger Canon. Isagog. lib. 2. pag. 157.)
Ever since God's removing his Court from amongst them, they have been howling under these burdens of Oppression, but procure no relief; cannot obtain of God to revenge their quarrel; cannot prevail with him to pour out his threatned Judgments; [to smite with his plagues those people that have fought against Jerusalem:] this Jerusalem below, who is yet in bondage with her Children.) [Her adversaries flesh hath not consumed away, while they stood upon their feet, their eyes have not consumed away in their holes, and their tongues in their mouth;] (Zach. 14. 12.) [Haec passos non esse Romanos (qui Hierusalem subverterunt) omnibus perspicuum est. Nos autem dicemus, omnes persecutores qui afflixerunt Ecclesiam Domini, (etiam in praesenti saeculo) accipis∣se quae fecerint. Legamus Ecclesiasticas historias: quid Valerianus, quid Decius, quid Dioclesianus, quid Maximianus, quid saevissimus omnium Maximinus & nuper Julianus passi sunt: & tunc rebus probabimus etiam juxtà literam prophetiae veritatem esse completam:] (saith St. Jerom upon this Text) [That the Ro∣mans, who overthrew Jerusalem, did not suffer such things as these, is manifest to all men: but we Christians may say, that all Persecutors who afflicted the Lord's Church have received even in this world) the punishment of their Tyranny. Let us read, in Church-history, what Valerian, what Decius, what Dioclesian, what Maximianus, what (the most cruel of them all) Maximinian, and Julianus (the last of them) have suffer'd: and then we shall be able to prove from matter of fact, that the verity of this Prophecy hath received its accomplishment even ac∣cording to the letter.] See more instances, in Evagrius Scholasticus his Inve∣ctive against Zosimus the Ethnick for reviling of Constantine: (lib. 3. cap. 41.) For these that St. Jerom names. Decius, being defeated by the Goths, and his Son slain, was enticed by the Enemy into a Fen, where he was drown'd; (Carion. Cron. lib. 3.) Valerius, being perswaded by an Egyptian Priest to persecute the Church, and to offer humane Sacrifices, in the fourth year of his Reign, was taken Prisoner by Sapor King of Persia, who (for several years made use of him when he got on horseback, in room of an Horsing∣block; and in his extreme old Age fley'd off his Skin from the Neck to the Feet (Idem Ibid) Dioclesian and Maximian (vex'd, that all their rage could not suppress the Christians) laid down the Empire, and betook themselves to a private Life: from that time, unto his end, Dioclesian pined and wasted a∣way with diseases: but Maximian hanged himself; (Euseb. Ec. hist. lib. 7. 29. lib. 8. 2. 5. 14. 19. Socrates l. 1. c. 22.) Maximinian overcome by Licini∣us at Tarsus, died of the Lowsie Disease, in the midst of most cruel Tortures; a corrupt Matter (issuing from a Fistulá in his Privities) eating up his Bowels; and an unspeakable multitude of Vermine swarming out, and breathing a deadly stench (yielding an intollerable and horrible Spectacle to the Behold∣ers) such as the Physicians were not able to bear the noysomness of, but some of them were poyson'd with it; (Euseb. Eccles. hist. l. 8. cap. 16.) Julian, in a Battel with the Persians, was wounded in the Liver by an Arrow; but from what hand it came is not known: Calistus one of his Guard (who wrote his Life in Heroical Verse) saith it was some Devil that ran him through (So∣crates Scholast. l. 3. c. 19.) but he himself apprehended, it was the Arrow of Christ's revenge; and therefore taking the blood which ran from the wound in the hollow of his hand, he threw it up towards Heaven, and cried out [Vicisti tandem Galilaee,] now at last thou hast over-match'd me, oh Jesus of Ga∣lilee; and with that despairing voice breathed out his impure Soul. What such thing hath befallen the Prosecutors of the People of God's Indignation? What one Testimony of the Divine Displeasure hath been shown upon such as have made havock of that now-accursed Nation, which was sometimes so dear to God. as he that touch'd them had as good have touch'd the Apple of his Eye? At the hand of what Nation, of what Man, of what Beast, hath God required their Blood. And that all this was done in contempt of their Nation, not Law, and not because their Fathers God could not, but would not help them) is manifest, from his opening his ears and lending his hand (in that very juncture) to persons of other Nations who owned the God of Is∣rael;
of which we have a notable instance in Izates (King of the Adiabeni) whose Mother (Helena) releived the Jews in the Famine, in the Reign of Claudius. After whose departure from her Son, his Nobles, understanding that he was circumcised, dissembled their displeasure against him, till they had the opportunity of engaging Abias the King of Arabia to assist them in dethroning Izates: but he, trusting in the God of Israel, put his Enemies to a total rout, and brought his Rebels to condign Punishment. And when af∣ter this his Subjects (still disgusting him, because he had embraced a Foreign Religion) procured Vologesus, King of Parthia to come against him with so numerous an Army, as he blasphemously boasted, the God of Israel (whom he had chosen) was not able to deliver him out of the hands of his men. I∣zates return'd him answer; [that he knew his Forces were not comparable to those of Vologesus; but God was stronger than all Mortals:] and prostrating himself before God, (having enjoyn'd to himself, and Wife, and Children, a Fast) with Ashes on his head, he pours out his Prayer: [Oh Lord our Go∣vernour! If I have not fruitlesly dedicated my self to thy goodness, and chosen thee for the high and only God; come to my aid, not so much to defend me from mine enemies, as to repress their boldness, who with impious tongue have boasted against thy Power.] This Prayer God heard, and that night the Parthian Arms are diverted from him, to the defence of their own Country; of the Invasion whereof Vologesus received the News, as Izates was at Prayer: so that it is most apparent that Izates was preserved by divine Providence, saith Josephus (Jud. Anti. l. 20. c. 2.) Israel's God was not asleep to any that in∣voked him, but his own Rebels. For the Date of these Contingencies, see the Story of Vologesus in Tacitus (Annal. lib. 15.) § 5. Their own Doctors observe; that the Psalmist in his Repetition of God's Title and the Churches Imprecation; (Psal. 94. 1, 2, 3.) [O Lord God of revenges, O God of revenges shew thy self: how long, Lord, how long shall the wicked triumph?] hath reference to the destroyers of the First and Second Temple; (to the Chaldean and the Roman Captivities) and so doubt∣less he hath. But what then is become of the answer there given to that Im∣precation? (vers. 23.) [The Lord shall bring upon them their own Iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness;] for what Nation hath incurr'd ex∣cision for its violence against the Captives of the Second Temple? Nay their own Prophets wholly overthrow the Foundation of that Fifth Monarchy, which they erect the Model of, in their Fancy (and some Judaising Mungril∣christians help them to daub it, but with untempered Mortar;) in their pre∣senting the Roman Empire (by which their second Temple was destroyed) with Iron-soles, and therefore to stand as long as the World lasts; (see Slei∣dan's Reflections upon Daniel's four Beasts in the third Book of his Clavis, and Tertullian's Apology contrà gentes, (cap. 32.) Sleidan's discourse I com∣mend to my Reader, for its strength of Reason: but Tertullian's, for its Au∣thority; for he lays it down not as his private Opinion, but as the Belief of the Universal Church (in those primitive and purest Times:) Upon which was grounded the Custom of praying for the Prosperity of the Roman Em∣pire, though then Pagan. [Est & alia major necessitas nobis orandi pro Impera∣toribus, etiam pro omni statu Imperii rebúsque Romanis, quòd vim maximam u∣niverso orbi imminentem, ipsámque clausulam seculi, acerbitates horrendas com∣minantem, Romani Imperii comeatu scimus retardari. Itaque nolumus experiri, & dum praecamur differri, Romanae diuturnitati favemus.] [Besides the Obli∣gation that the Command (of praying even for our Enemies, of putting up Suppli∣cations for Kings and all that are in Authority) hath laid upon us, we have a greater engagement, even that of necessity, to pray for the Emperours and the whole estate and prosperity of the Empire of Rome; because by the interposition of the Roman Empire, we know is retarded that greatest Calamity impending over the whole World, and the end it self of the World; threatning most dreadful ve∣ations, and such as we would not live to see; while, therefore, we pray for the
delay of those Calamities, which shall attend the last Fate of the World; we fa∣vour the Diuturnity of the Empire.] So wide do the Fools Bolts of Euthusia∣sticks fall of the primitive Mark, as they curse the world, in praying for the erecting of a Monarchy, after the Roman; and call for that Fire from Hea∣ven which will consume, not only their Hay and Stubble, but the whole Fa∣brick of this inferiour World. And no less wide of the Prophets sence falls the Jews Application of these Menacies to the destroyers of their second ma∣terial Temple, which manifestly belong to their own Nation, for destroying that Temple wherein the Godhead dwelt bodily, and which was raised up in three days; [for their gathering together against the soul of the righteous, and condemning innocent blood,] (Psal. 94. 21.) This cannot, with the least sha∣dow of Reason, be charged upon the Romans; for their Eagles (in the Jew∣ish Wars) gather'd together [to the Carcase,] to a People, whose high provo∣catious and rebellious attempts render'd them, fit to be a Prey to publick Ju∣stice, deservedly the Objects of the Revenger's Sword. Never was War more just than that of the Empire, undertaken for the chastising of most stur∣dy Rebels, and in the necessary defence of that power that God had set over them; as not only Josephus and the sober Party of the Jews, then confessed, but the thing it self and state of the Case speaks. [Non equidem recusabo dicere quae dolor jubet: Puto si Romani contra noxios venire tardassent, aut hiatus terrae devorandam fuisse civitatem, aut diluvio perituram, aut fulminum ac Sodomae incendium passuram; multò enim magis impiam progeniem tulit, quàm quae illa pertulerat: (Joseph. Bel. Jud. l. 6. c. 16.) I will not refuse to speak what grief compels: I think verily if the Romans had not come against those guilty Varlets that Jerusalem would either have been swallowed up off the gaping Earth, or over∣whelm'd with a Flood, or destroyed with Fire and Brimstone as Sodom was; for it harbour'd a Generation of men far more wicked than the Sodomites.] Briefly, the Romans were neither unrighteous in the vengeance which their Sword of Justice brought upon that Place and Nation; Neither hath God, or will God cut off that Empire as long as the World stands. But in the mean time, we have seen the Jews gathering together, against the soul of the righteous, a∣gainst the life of the Lord Jehovah (their Righteousness, while they were in the Bond of the Covenant) and we have seen the Lord cut them off; yea the Lord (sometimes their God) cut them off in, and for, this their wickedness. It is not therefore to be thought strange, that they should thus long, without audience, bellow out their second [quousque?] [how long?] that hitherto they have had no return of their Prayer to the [God of Revenges:] for while they stir him up to revenge his People, to render a reward to the proud, they do but mind him of their own sin and demerits, and solicit him to prolong their just sufferings, and never restore to them the departed Scepter. § 6. Of the departure whereof, as God hath given them all these De∣monstrations; So almost immediately before its removal, he gave them so fair a warning; as not only their own, but Gentile-historians took notice thereof; in that voice, [, Let us depart hence;] which was heard in their Temple; not, as St. Jerom mistakes (palpably in contra∣diction to that Text of Josephus, which himself quotes; as Scaliger observes and proves by undeniable Arguments) at Christ's Passion; but at Pentecost (Joseph. Bel. Jud. l. 7. c. 12.) before the desolation of the Temple: of which Tacitus (in the Pagan Style) thus writes (hist. l. 5.) [Expassae repentè delubri fores, & audita major humanâ vox, excedere Deos: the doors of the Temple open'd of their own accord, and a voice more than humane was heard, signifying that the Gods of that place were about to depart:] bating the Heathenishness of the Phrase, Tacitus his [deos] expounds the [migrentus] of Josephus: he rightly conceiving that voice to have proceeded from that host of Angels, the Cheru∣bins, who pitch their Tents over the Mercy-seat, betwixt whom the Shep∣herd of Isrel dwelt, while he kept his Court in that sacred Palace: but (in
the Gentile Idiom) miscalling them Gods, who were only his Courtiers: and therefore foreknowing that their King was about breaking up his Court there, they prepare to depart with him. For what should they (whose Of∣fice is always to stand before, and behold the face of God) do there, when he withdrew his Face from the Ark of the Covenant, and that was no long∣er to be the Ark of his Presence? By all this it is apparent, that the Prophecy of Jacob (concerning the departure of the Scepter from Judah, after that the Messias should be exhibited, and the Gentiles be gather'd to him) received its accomplishment at the demolishing of God's House; the place of his resi∣dence, amongst the Jews, while it stood;) and that therefore the Apostles were well advised in the account they give us of such Circumstances as relate hereunto: An account which so perfectly suits the mind of the Prophecy, as to the time prefixed; that our fixing it there hath the evidence of Reason, the Suffrages of Jew, Gentile, and a Voice from the Oracle, to warrant and confirm it. § 7. If yet the Sceptick will cavil, that not the Apostles, but the Statists of after times (who made a political use of their Simplicity) accommodated the Evangelical History, and the Occurrences of the Christian Age to this Prophecy, I can stop his mouth with these two Animadversions upon this surmise. 1. This Application was made (as appears by the Testimonies alledged out of Tertullian and Clemens Alexandrinus) before any of the Politicians own'd the Gospel; while the Statists of the World did, with all their might, endeavour the suppression of the Christian Religion. as conceiving it to be in∣sociable, destructive to Political Communities, and repugnant to Maximes of Government. 2. The Evangelists and Apostles themselves (before Tertullian, or any o∣ther furnish'd with Humane Learning, had commented upon the Apostolical Writings) did, in the plain Text of Scripture, apply the accomplishment of this Prophecy, and assign the departure of the divine Scepter from the Jewish Nation, to that Period of Time, when the Gentiles being gather'd to Christ, the fall of Jerusalem should happen. St. Matthew (chap. 24.) reports from our Saviours Lips, amongst the Signs of his coming to destroy the Jewish State and the Place of God's Residence among them (a thing to be fulfilled within one Generation, and therefore not applicable intentionally to the day of general Judgment:) this for one (vers. 14.) that, [the Gospel of the King∣dom should (before that) be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all na∣tions; and then shall the end come:] And this for another (vres. 15.) [When ye shall see the abomination of desolation stand in the holy place;] that is, as it is explain'd (ver. 28.) the Roman Ensigns, the eagles (let fly upon their Prey that Nation then ripe for Rejection;) or as St. Luke more clearly, and with∣out a Trope, lays down this Sign (Chap. 21. 20.) [When ye shall see Jerusa∣lem compassed about with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh:] Immediately after the Tribulation of which days (of Siege) the Jewish State is to be dissolved. Which Catastrophe of their Polity, Christ, in St. Mat∣thew (ver. 29.) expresseth in such Prophetical Phrases, as the Old Testament Prophets constantly used in their Descriptions of the Ruine of Kingdoms and Republicks; Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be dark∣ned, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken;] that is, that heavenly Polity establsh'd among the Jews shall wholly be dissolved. When the Gospel shall be preach'd in the Gentile World; or (as St. Paul explains this Text;) (1 Timothy, 3. 16.) when Christ shall be [preach'd to the Gentiles, and believed on in the world:] then shall Jerusalem be destroyed; and immediately after that, the Scepter departs from Judah; then shall Israel, after the Flesh, cease to be God's Dominion; and whosoever of them after that shall boast of the Covenant of Peculiarity, will, upon trial, be found Liars, not Jews (the
Portion of God) but the Synagogue of Satan (Rev. 3. 9.) they having left the Blessing of that name to another People of God (gather'd to their Messias out of all Nations, and called by a new name, [Christians] reserve the sound of it only, for a Curse to themselves, (Is. 65. 15, 16.) Could the Apostles, (in their assigning the time and other Circumstances of the Dissolution of the Jewish State) have thus comported with old Jacob's Prophecy thereof, had they been, such silly Animals as the Atheist pretends, and not persons of the deepest Reach, and solidest Judgments. Let the whole Tribe of them, who deride the Apostles for their Simplicity, put all their Heads together (and call in a Legion of Demons to be of their Council) they may study till they split their dura mater: and spill those few Brains they have, before they shall be able to make so solid and irrefragable an Application of this Propecy, to the time of any other Shilo, and the gathering of Gentiles to him, as the Apostles have made to the time of the Gentiles gathering unto Christ. CHAP. XI. The Prophecies of Daniel's Septimanes, and Haggai's se∣cond House, not applicable to any but the blessed Je∣sus. § 1. Porphyry and Rabbies deny Daniel's Authority: The Jews split their Messias. § 2. The unreasonableness of both these Evasions. § 3. Da∣niel's Prophecy not capable of any sence, but what hath received its accom∣plishment in our Jesus. § 4. Daniel's second Epocha. § 5. Christ the desire of all Nations fill'd the Second Temple with Glory. § 6. That Temple not now in Being. § 7. The conclusion of this Book. § 1. THat Prophecy of Daniel (chap. 9. 24.) [Seventy weeks are determi∣ned upon thy people and the holy City, to finish transgression, &c.] doth so precisely calculate the Time of the Messias coming, and so exactly (in every Circumstance) sutes our Saviour, as it cannot, with any shew of Probability, be applied to any other; nor be denyed to have received its Ac∣complishment in him. From which Text the Primitive Church made such clear Demonstration (to the Gentiles) of the Divinity of the Old, and (to the Jews) of the Divinity of the New; as Porphiry was forc'd to betake him∣self to this Reply to the Christians Arguments, [That these Prophecies fa∣ther'd upon Daniel, were writ long after his death (about the time of Antiochus) by some Jew; and are not Prophecies of things to come, but Naratives of things past:] (Jerom prefat. in Danielem.) Of which Surmise Eusebius, Appollo∣nius, and other Champions of the Christian Cause, shewed the unreasonable∣ness, by a two-fold Argument, (related not only by St. Jerom, in locum, but by our Sir Walt. Rawleigh par. 1. l. 3. cap. 1. § 2.) of the History of the World) viz. 1. The Seventy, above an hundred years before Antiochus, translated Daniel amongst the rest of the Jewish Prophets. And, 2. Jaddus the High Priest shewed to Alexander the Great that Vision of Daniel, (chap. 11. 3.) [A mighty King shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, &c.] where∣in Alexander is presented as the Subduer of the Persian and Erector of the Grecian Empire, as himself applied it, Joseph. Jud. ant. l. 11. c. 8.) It had been to small purpose to have shewed Alexander the Book, had it been un∣translated. I therefore, upon these Testimonies, rest so well assured, that the Seventy translated the whole Old Testament; as I conceive the discussion of that Question needless: and cannot strain my Invention, to find out, Ar∣guments to convince that Generation of men, who have Ignorance or Impu∣dence enough to resist the force of these Authorities, the least whereof
is able to weigh down all Prejudices to the contrary. Howbeit though the Churches Champions had hus baffled Porphyry; yet the Jew was glad to take take the like Subterfuge from the dint of this Prophecy, by ascribing to Daniel less Authority than to Moses and the Prophets; reckoning his Book among the Hagiographa composed by Ezra and his Synagogue. And when he was beaten thence, he had no way to ward off the force of the Christian's arguing, from this Prophecy, that our Jesus is the Christ: but by this distinction, viz. That Daniel's Prophecy (as also Zachary's) points to a Messiah in all points like to our Jesus. A Shepherd that was smitten, and not able to save himself, or Flock: a Messiah that was cut off, and ejected out of his Kingdom; not able to hold that Kingdom he usurped, (In Dan. vis. 8.) [—& non erit ejus popu∣lus, qui eum negaturus est: sive (ut illi dicunt) non erit illius imperium quod pu∣tabat se retenturum:] whereas Christ the Son of God (whom they yet ex∣pect) is described by the Prophets, as asking long Life of God, and obtaining it for ever; as asking, and receiving the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession; as one that will make his people willing, in the day of his power; and will come in that Majesty, as shall bear down all opposition before it. This Jewish Evasion Brough∣ton quotes out of the Talmud (in his Concent of Sacred Scripture, anno mundi, 3535.) A clear acknowledment, that Daniel's Text prescribes the Time of the Messias: and that that time so exactly sutes the coming of the blessed Jesus as neither Jew nor Gentile durst stand a Dispute with the Christian upon that ground: but, after some Bravadoes and light Skir∣mishings, retreated to such Boggy and Quagmire-fastnesses as these. Why do you urge us with the Authority of Daniel a spurious Prophet? (whose Book was not writ by him whose Name it bears; but by some false Jew (saith Por∣phyry) by Esdras's College of Elders (say the Jews:) and when the Jew is beaten hence, he grants the Argument, yields the Christian his Conclusion, and so leaves himself no way to escape a total Rout, but over the narrow and slender Bridg of this sorry Distinction: Our Scriptures foretell of two Messi∣asses; one base and mean, like your Jesus (the Son of Joseph the Carpenter;) another high and mighty, the Son of David the King; who shall repair the decayed Tabernacle of David, and sit upon his Throne for ever. These were the desperate shifts, which the Defenders of the Christian Faith put the Jews to; by their demonstrating (out of Daniel's Weeks) that the Fulness of Time (for the appearance of the Messiah) was then come, when our Saviour exhi∣bited himself; being put to this plunge, that they must either confess the Di∣vinity of Christ, or deny the Divine Authority of their own Prophetick Books, or split in two their Messias, whom those Books foretell. § 2. To shew the unreasonableness of both these Evasions would fall in, more methodically, in another place: yet that my Reader, while he is travel∣ling with me (through this Prophecy) in search of the Christ, may not fall under the least discouraging doubt of the Canonicalness of this Book, or un∣der the least fear of finding here a Messias; who is not the Son of David, as as well as the Son of Joseph; and the Son of God, as well as the Son of David: I shall now remove these stumbling-blocks. As to the first Evasion (viz. the debasing the Authority of Daniel) it was a mere Pretence, taken up to blunt the Edge of that Prophecy, the Dint whereof the Jew was not able to avoid: For before the Christian took that Sword into his hand for the Defence of Christ, the Synagogue had as high an esteem of him as any other of the Prophets: of whose Faith, touching this part of the Old Testament-canon, Josephus (who lived to see the last hour of Daniel's Weeks expired) is an impartial Witness; who makes this clear and full Confession: (antiquit. 10. 12.) viz. Daniel was a most happy man, and a most excellent Prophet,—and after death obtained eternal Memo∣ry: for his Books, which he left writ, are at this day read among us: (this was in the Reign of Domitian, after the accomplishment of Daniel's Weeks;)
being such as give full proof of Gods vouchsafing to have familiar Conference with him. For he did, not only as other Prophets, foretell things to come, but define the precise time, when they were to fall out: which have had that Effect (in the certainty of Events) as hath procured him credit among all sorts of mortal Men; there being those Circumstances in his Writings, from whence the certainty of his Prophecies may be more clearly gather'd, than from any other of our Prophets. For the proof of which, having instanc'd in his Vision of the four Beasts, in his Prediction of the rising of the Roman Empire, and the desolations it was to bring upon the Jewish People; he con∣cludes thus. All these things being reveiled to him by God, he committed to Writing, and left to Posterity, &c. Indeed had Josephus been silent, the Book it self speaks Daniel to be the Pen-man of it, where the Angel bids him seal the Prophecy; which sure was not a Blank, which Ezra and his Companions were to fill up! Nay the Jews silence (Mat. 24. 45. Mar. 13. 14.) when Christ quoted Daniel's Prophecy, gave Consent that he was the Author of that Book; which had they conceiv∣ed not to have been his Writing, but the Tradition of the Elders, they would not have failed to have bid our Saviour (who had so frequently rebuked them, for adhering to Tradition) wash his own hands of that Crime, which he objected to others. Touching their other Subterfuge (their distinguishing of Messias) a man (inferiour to Solomon in Wisdom) may judg it a sufficient Evidence that that Child is none of theirs, whom they would have divided. For, 1. This halving of Christ wholly destroys him, whom their Prophets de∣scribe; to be Mortal, and Immortal; a Man of Sorrows, and the impassible God, in one Person; and to be exhibited in both Natures, at one and the same Fulness of time. Jacob's Prophecies of the Nation's gathering to Shilo as their King, and of the tying of a Foal the Colt of an Ass (upon which this meek and lowly King was to ride in Triumph) are utter'd with the same Breath, and bear the same Date (Gen. 49. 9.) The servant of God (in Isa∣iah) who (in regard his Visage was mar'd more than any man's, and his form more than the Sons of Men) was to be looked upon with astonishment and to be rejected of men, as one smitten of God: was notwithstanding to be extolled and exalted as the most High; was to be so full of resplendent Majesty, as Kings should shut their mouths at him (Isa. chap. 52. 13. 14.) The same Messiah (in Daniel) that within 70 Weeks is to make Reconciliation for Sin, by his Death; is to bring in everlasting Righteousness, by his Life the same individual Person, that within that Term of Years is to be cut off, is Messiah the Prince, and the most holy (Dan. 9. 24. 25.) 2. The Messiah that came, at the time described by Daniel, gave as full proof of his Divine Majesty, as he did of his Humane Infirmity; was as ma∣festly declared to be the Son of God (by the Miracles he wrought in his own Name, by his raising himself from the dead, by his visible inflicting his threatned Sentence upon his Crucifiers, and by his subduing the World to his Obedience;) as he was declared to be the Son of Man, by his hungring, thirsting, fainting, weeping, sorrowing, and suffering death. So that, he whom the Jews reject as an abject Christ, hath left nothing to be done by him, whom they yet look for, of all those glorious and stupendious works which the Prophets assign to the Messias. 3. If that Messiah (that came according to Time limited by Daniel) be not that very same, of whose Glory and Greatness the Prophets speak; when is he to come? what Prophet can say how long the World must travel in expectation of him? can any thing be more incredible, than that the Spirit of the Messiah (that was in the Prophets) should (so punctually) foretell the time of the appearance of this Puny and Dwarff-christ (as they blasphemously stile the blessed Jesus) and never communicate one word to any of them, touching the time of the coming of that Gyant-christ, that they look for.
§ 3. Thus having proved the Authentickness of Daniel's Prophecy: and the Subject of it to be the Messias; and that Messias whom it presignifies, to be Prince Messias. and having heard both Jew and Gentile confess that what Daniel foretells, both as to Time and Thing, is applicable to our Jesus, and none but him. I shall supercede any farther prosecution of this Argument, saving what this Observation may contribute towards the strengthening of it. viz. That the Terms of this Prophecy are not capable of any rational Con∣struction, but what is applicable to our Saviour, and impossible to be applied to any other. 1. If we understand the Decree from the going out whereof Daniel's Weeks commence, to be the Decree of Darius the Son of Hystaspis for the building of the Temple, the last of them will fall at our Saviour's Passion, ac∣cording to the Computation of Vossius, grounded upon the Chronology of Josephus (Vossii Chronolog. sacra.) 2. If we conceive this Decree to have been the Decree of Cyrus the Great, as Calvin, Broughton, Finch, Piscator, Allen, &c. imagine; and reckon the years of the Persian Monarchy after a middle rate with Allen (i. e.) 130. years, Daniel's Weeks end about the death of our Saviour: (Allen's Chrono∣logical Chain, period 7.) If with Finch we follow the Rabinical account of the Durance of the Persian Monarchy, i. e. 70. years, the Septimanes expire at the Fall of Jerusalem. 3. If we interpret the Decree to be the Decree of Darius Nothus, with Bishop Hall, Constantine L' Emperour, &c. and assign the first seven to the time of the cessation of Temple-work, betwixt the Decree of Cyrus the Great and Darius Nothus, the middle of the last Week falls at our Saviours Passion, saith Con∣stantine L' Emporour (Annotationes in Paraphrasim Josephi Jachiade in Danie∣lem) and that upon probable Chronological Grounds, though out of the common Road. 4. If We begin the Account at the Decree of Artaxerxes Mnemon (assign∣ing the first Septimane to the time of the Cities Walls lying ruinous) and follow the common Chronology from the Era's of Salmanasser, the Olympi∣ades, and Rome built, the last week's middle falls at our Saviour's Passion. See Functius, Perkins, Powel, Pontanus, Lydiat, &c. 5. If with Scaliger, Mede, &c. we interpret Daniel's [seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon the holy City,] to import the duration of the Second Temple (which that clause does so manifestly, as every Child may perceive it; saith Scaliger, de emend. temp. l. 6. pag. 608.) and begin the com∣pute at the fixth year of Darius Nothus, when the second Temple was finish'd; following the most commonly received Chronology, we shall find saith Master Meed (upon Daniel's Weeks) that in all probability the Second Tem∣ple's desolation fell out precisely on the very middle of the last Week of the Seventy. 6. Lastly, If with Master Mede we make two Epochas in this Prophecy: the first of 70 Weeks beginning and ending with the Second Temple, the se∣cond of 62 Weeks and two Half-weeks; that is, 63 Weeks, beginning at the going forth of the Commission granted to Ezra and Nehemiah, and the middle of the last ending at our Saviour's Passion, we shall find an admi∣rable Correspondency betwixt the Prophecy and the Accomplishment; and and that Christ's Ministry began at the last of these Weeks, and continued precisely 3 years and an half: vide Meed upon Daniel's Weeks. § 4. The probability of which Conjecture appears. 1. From the bounds here fixed as to the beginning of this Epocha: [The going forth of a Command or Commission, to cause the Jews to return or reinhabit and to build: not the Temple (that part of Jerusalem whence in the former E∣pocha, of 70 Weeks, it is stiled the holy City) or some few houses only, but the whole Area, or Street, and the walls about it.] From such a Commission must
this second Computation be reckon'd; and that not only granted (for then we must begin the account at Cyrus the Great, who by Decree built not only the Temple but the City: (Isaiah 44. 28.) but taking effect as the Angel explains the former in the later words, [the street shall be built, and the wall.] 2. From the End or Period of this time, [unto Messiah the Prince;] that is, , (Luk. 23. 2. Mar. 15. 32.) or , as the Angel stiles him: for the Angel in this Text was the Precentor to that Choire, and put that Name of Christ into the mouth of the Angel, that declared his Birth to the Shepherds; there being no Prophecy (but this) in all the Old Testament. where that Name is directly given; or whence it could be ascribed by the Jews unto him, they looked for: and therefore Jerom deservedly taxeth that Whimsey of Eusebius (touching his Christos duces) as a singularity. 3. From the Angel's note of Attention prefix'd: [also know and under∣stand, that from, &c.] which as it speaks its passage to another Aera; so it implies that to be of more special note; the observation of that to be of more concern than the other; and that, not because it divides the gross Summ into parts (as some have thought;) but because, the Period there∣of falling earlier than of the former, it will sooner be accomplish'd, and prevent (if diligently observed) men's suspending their believing in the Messiah, till they see the other fulfilled (in the Ruine of Jerusalem) and therefore, that before the accomplishment of the first Prophecy (that ends there) men might have time to look about them, and to provide for their own safety (against that time) by embracing him that was to come: the Angel assigns a shorter Period, that should terminate in the mean while (to wit) at the Death, Coronation, and Covenant-tendring of the Mes∣siah; that men, by the Calculation of the time of this Branch of the Pro∣phecy, being convinc'd and throughly perswaded, that he that was to come, was come; might (by getting into the Ark) avoid wrath to come, save themselves from that untoward Generation, that was to be swept a∣way, with that flood and inundation of Judgments upon the unbelieving Jews. 4. From the Duration of Time intervening [shall be seven weeks; and sixty two weeks, &c.] that is (as Judicious Master Mede paraphraseth.) As from the building of the Temple, to its Destruction, there are to be many sevens of Weeks, even 70 Weeks; so from this After-Epocha (here men∣tioned) to wit, the Commission to build the Walls, and reform the Laws; unto Messiah there shall be likewise sevens of Weeks; even 62 Weeks. So that 62 Weeks are the full Measure of that time, that shall intervene be∣twixt those Terms; and the preceding Number [7 weeks] is not to be ac∣counted as a part of that Time: but to be taken distributively. For the Hebrews wanting distributive or divisive Numbers, (terni quaterni, &c.) supply their want thereof, most what, by Repetition, as septem septem; but not always; as may appear 2 Sam, 18. 4. [and all the people came out, , ad centum & millia;] that is, by hun∣dreds and thousands, 1 Reg. 18. 4. [Obadia hid an hundred prophets,] quinquaginta viros: here the Sept. retains the Cardinal Number, , that is, quinquagenos, by fifty in a cave: Gen. 6. 19. [of all flesh thou shalt bring into the ark (duo, i. e. bina) two's:] and therefore it is af∣terwards doubled, [duo & duo,] two and two. In all these Texts the Cardinal Number, in the Hebrew, is (in our Translation) rendred by the Distributive; and had not Noah put that interpretation upon the Divine Pre∣cept, in the last of them, a Vessel, of a very ordinary burthen, would have served his turn, as well; as his large Ark. And so must that Text be rendred: (Ezr. 1. 9. 10.) [Thirty chargers of
gold, a thousand chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives, thirty basons of gold, silver basons four hundred and ten: and other vessels a thousand. All the vessels of gold and silver were five thousand and four hundred;] or it, is im∣possible to reconcile it to it self: for the Parcels will not come near the Summ total, except we turn the Cardinal Number [a thousand] assigned to the other Vessels, into the distributive, and make this to be the sence; and the other Vessels (of smaller quality) they were reckoned by thou∣sands, and amounted to four thousand wanting one hundred: we must not therefore account that thousand as parcel of the Vessels, but a Deno∣mination of the value, which the other Vessels were numbred by. Of the Parcels of 0030 1000 0029 0030 0410 the Sum total is but 1499 To which if we add the other Vessels, 1000 The Sum will be 2499 which falls short of the Summ in the Text. 2901 Summ total of Vessels numbred by Name. 1499 Summ total of remaining Ves∣sels number'd by thousands. 3901 This makes up the Summ total in the Text. 5400 We want not then Parallel-texts, nor clear examples of that way of Interpretation; if we render the Angel's [seven] by sevens; and do not take it into the number of Weeks (as a Parcel thereof) but as a Denomi∣nation of that Proportion, by which the Weeks, both in the former, and this Epocha are reckoned: for as there are ten sevens in 70, so there are precisely nine sevens in 62 and two halves: that is in 63 weeks of years, And that the Septuagint retaining the Cardinal Number, in this Text, may not prejudice this Exposition; let it be noted that in all the places forequoted, except the first, it retains that Number. 5. From the Impossibility of making the Buckle and Thong meet, but upon this Hypothesis. For, 1. The Angel assigning a twofold Beginning of these Weeks (thirteen years distant one from the other) to wit, the going forth of the Command, to settle the Affairs of State, in the 7. and to rebuild the Walls of Jerusalem, in the 20. of Artaxerxes Mnemon, puts us upon a necessity of reckoning by different kinds of years (viz. Solar and Lunar) that the two Aera's (of that distance) may both meet, and end at the same Period. A distinction not of late Invention, but as old as Julius Affricanus and Clem. Alexandrinus; an evident Argument, that the primitive Church was solicitous, how to
reconcile the Periods of these two Commissions, so as they might termi∣nate at one, though they begin at divers Points. 2. If we comprehend, in this Epocha, seven Weeks and sixty two Weeks with two Half-weeks; (that is, the whole Summ of the seventy Weeks) the difference betwixt the Solar and Lunar years, in that distance, will amount to above 15. as Affricanus hath computed it, and is of it self manifest. 70 Weeks make Years 490 Which being multiplied by the yearly overplus of Days 11 Amounts to Days 5390 Which summ divided by the days of a Year 365 Make of those Years 14 With the overplus of 280 days, which with 122½ (the intercalar days) make up of those Years 15 And the remainder Days 37½ And therefore a less distance must be found out, wherein such a number of Years occurr, as in them the Solar may exceed the Lunar thirteen years: to which the Angel's Summ of 62 Weeks does so well accord; as the e∣vent argues the time therein comprehended to be, that which is pointed out in this part of the Prophecy. Clemens Alexandrinus makes the diffe∣rence betwixt Solar and Lunar Years in the space of 490, to be but 2300 Days; but doubtless he hath suffer'd prejudice by his Transcribers: for so great a Clark could not so far mistake. For multiply 62 Weeks of years, i. e. 434 years, by 11. which is the overplus of Days in the So∣lar, beyond what the Lunar Year hath (that consisting of 365, this, but of 354 Days) and the Product will be 4774 Days; which divided by 365, the Quotient will be 13 Years, and the Remainder 29 Days: and there∣fore no other number of Weeks but 62 can (possibly) be pitch'd upon; in whose compass, the difference betwixt Solar and Lunar Years will not ei∣ther exceed, or come short of 13. the space of these two Commissions: which admirable Concordance cannot be ascribed to Chance, but to Di∣vine Providence, so ordering it, that these two Commissions might (in point of Chronology) be one and the same: For there are as many Lunar Years from Nehemiah's Commission (in the 20) as there are Solar from Ez∣ra's (in the 7 of Artaxerxes Mnemon) unto the Messiah, to wit, 434. He that cannot see what is the Angel's mind, by the help of this confederate Light both of Sun and Moon, he that misseth it, in measuring the time here specified; when 'tis so manifestly lined out by the Courses of both those Luminaries, which God hath set in the Firmament for Signs and Sea∣sons: must be a person either of so low a Capacity or strong Prejudice; as renders him uncapable of learning what he knows not, or of unlearning what he has been mis-taught: and therefore here is the end of my Travel to give such wayward Idiots satisfaction. To them that are piously, or but humanely disposed, the Demonstration of the accomplishment of the Angel's Prophecy, upon our Hypothesis, will be evidence sufficient of the truth of it; for which I refer them to the excellent Treatise of Mr. Meed upon Daniel's Weeks. To be sure, none of these forenamed Prophecies can receive accomplish∣ment in any other; as Origen told Celsus his Jew, affirming that many Phanaticks (who said they were the Messias) alledged the Prophets appli∣cableness to them, as well as to Jesus; (lib. 1. calum. 24.) And there∣fore the Apostles in framing the Gospel so, as the History of it jumps thus exactly (in point of Chronology) with these Prophetick Weeks: wherein they present Christ's Passion, and the Preaching of the Gospel falling out,
at the very points of Time prefix'd so long before; and give us an account of Christ's foretelling the Fall of Jerusalem, at the time allotted by Daniel (which accordingly took effect.) This (I say) speaks them to have been Men in Understanding; that, of that Understanding, whereby they were led, there is no number (Psal. 147. 4, 5.) that they who could thus find out Number, had found out Wisdom (Eccles. 7. 25.) Wisdom it self joyn∣ing together Number and Wisdom as St. Austin observes out of those Texts, (de libero arbitr. lib. 2. cap. 8.) § 5. No less applicable to any but our Jesus are those Prophecies of Haggai; (cap. 2. 7.) [The desire of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory:] [The glory of this latter house shall be greater than the glory of the former.] (Malachy, 3. 1.) [And the Lord whom we seek, shall suddainly come into his Temple.] That this Prophecy denotes the coming of the Messias; is not only con∣fest by the Jews, but manifest from the whole series of the Texts. 1. From the appellation of him that is to come. [The desire of all na∣tions:] [He whom ye seek.] The whole World shall rejoyce at the coming and unction of Christ (saith R. David) in (Psal. 45.) and gives the reason thereof (vers. 18, 19.) because the Gentiles, in all Ages preceding his com∣ing, with a longing expectation waited for it; from whence that Psalm is stiled [A Song of Desires.] To this the Apostle hath reference (Rom. 8.) The whole creation groans and is in travel:] and the 70, in their rendring that passage in Jacob's Prophecy (Gen. 49.) [the expectation of the Gentiles [] as a Title of the Messias: not that they did, di∣stinctly, either know or look for Christ; but only that he was the general and indefinite Object of the implicite desires of all men; he being the only Mean towards the obtainment of that Communion with God, wherein consists man's ultimate and compleat Happiness, and toward which (as their summum bonum) all men radically have an inclination: he is that Truth, they were enquiring for; that Way, they were seeking; that Life, they were in pursuit of; that Door to it, they were groping after. That he was the Expectation of the Jews, is clear, from the Question of John's Disciples [Art thou be that should come, or do we look for another?] from John's Hearers being in an expectation and a muse, whether he were the Christ or not: (Luk. 3.) by the Woman of Samaria's Speech to our Saviour [we know that the Messiah cometh, and when he cometh he will tell us all things:] from the Rulers sending to Christ, to enquire; whether he were not he that was to come? and from that posture wherein the Religious stood at Christ's Birth [waiting for the consolation of Israel,] ex∣plain'd by Simeon's Revelation, to be the Lord's Christ, and that in their waiting for him, they expected to see him come into the Temple, is as clear, from Hannah's waiting for him there, and from Christ's Brethren advising him to go up to the Feast, if he had a mind to be acknowledged for the Christ. 2. From the Occasion of the Prophets giving the Builders this encou∣ragement. [Is not this house as nothing in your eyes in comparison of the glo∣ry of the first house? yet now be strong, let not this discourage you: for the glory of this later house shall exceed that of the former.] 3. From his explaining, how the Glory of this should be greater than the Glory of that; (viz.) by the coming of the Messiah, by his exhibiting himself in it, and filling it with Glory. For, in all other things, Solo∣mon's Temple transcended this; being so far superiour to it, in point of Magnificence, as the old men who had seen that, wept bitterly at the lay∣ing the Foundations of this; as not taking up an equal proportion of ground; for that was all the then apparent difference betwixt them:
[ampliore ambitu & huic conveniente celsitudine, Joseph.] though had they lived to see the Top-stone laid, that would have renewed and augmented their grief (if their Hope, grounded on this Prophecy, had not suppressed it:) for it was as much inferiour to the other in height, as in breadth (full 60 Cubits as Herod the great told them. [Templo huic desunt ad priscam altitudinem 60 cubita:] (Jos. 15. 14.) It's true indeed, upon that ac∣count Herod pull'd down this Second Temple, and built another answera∣ble to that of Solomon, both in Circuit and Height: but as this was not re∣puted another Temple from the Second (by reason, not only that the same Utensils, were in that he built, as were in that he pull'd down; but be∣cause he did not quite pull down the Second (Vossii Chron. Sacra;) for Josephus (Antiq. 15. 14.) tells us, that the Tower of the Maccabees (by name) was only repair'd and built higher; and so (doubtless) were other parts of the Temple, that were strong enough to bear his Superstructures, and did not stand in his way to straiten the Circuit.) I humbly conceive, that Josephus his saying, that Herod pull'd down the Foundations of the old Temple, is commonly stretch'd too far beyond his meaning; which is no more than this; the Out-side being corroded by the Teeth of Time, especially in the upper part of the Wall (that being most weather-bearen) he did not only lay new Stones, in the room of the decayed ones, upon those that were found (as the repairers of Bow-steeple did after the Fire:) But pull'd down the out side of the Wall with the very Foundation; and at that end where he lengthen'd it, the whole Wall and its Foundation was demolish'd. But to pull down the Inside, that was as good as hands could make it: (except where it hindred his enlargement of the Length;) as it would have been a fruitless expence, so I question, whether the Jews would have permitted it; and more how we shall maintain that House, into which the Desire of all Nations came, to have been the Second House, if we have no better Foundations to build upon than those of Scaliger's laying: (Joseph. ant. 15. 14.) So notwithstanding all these costly Re∣pairs; which God, in his gracious Providence, put Herod upon (he there∣by making out that Propriety he here challengeth in Silver and Gold: [the silver is mine, and the gold is mine] and providing for the more august enter∣tainment of the Messias therein.) This second never grew up to the state of the first: for beside that 20 Cubits of the height (by the yielding of the Foundation) fell, by that time Herod had finish'd his Repairs; the first was inlaid with Gold, thence stiled Gold; [How is the gold become dim, the most fine gold changed;] (Lament.) [The stones of the sanctuary are powred out] (by melting) as if they had been all Gold: the second had only golden Doors, which set Titus his Souldiers Teeth a watering after the plunder of the Temple; supposing it had been within all of one piece: but they found it only cover'd with Silver; (Joseph. B. J. 7. 9.) Much less did it equal the first in internal Endowments and spiritual Privileges (as the Rabbies say;) the First being filled with a Cloud at its Dedication, having its Altar-fire kindled from Heaven, the Ark of the Covenant with all its appurtenances, the holy Oyl, the Vrim and Thummim, &c. as the Jews themselves say: From their Concessions therefore we assume, that these Glories of the First were not in the Second, till Christ (in whom the Godhead dwells bodily; in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom; that precious Corner-stone; anointed with the Oyl of gladness, above his fellows) presented in his own Person, the Substance of all those in that Temple: in respect of which his coming into it, and honouring it with his blessed presence, it exceeded the former House in Glory, the coming in of this King of Glory hath lift up the Gates of the Second Temple, in Glory, above the first. [Rex gloriae, id est, Arca, quia super eam habitabat Dominus gloriae inter Cherubim.] When the Ark removed, Moses said, Arise,
O Lord, and when it stood still, he said, Return, O Lord; (R. Da∣vid in Psal. 24.) Aben Ezra observes, that by that Repetition is intimat∣ed, the coming of the Ark into the First, and restoring the Ark (the true Ark of God's presence) unto the Second Temple, by the coming of the Messias: who is therefore called (in the later answer) [the Lord of Hosts,] without the addition of [mighty in battail,] because in the Reign of Christ men are to learn War no more (Is. 2.) § 6. But where is now this Second House that the Prophet points at (and even toucheth with his Finger) in this Prophecy? is it not long since laid in the dust, and made so desolate, that Travellers by, can discern no sign, that ever there was any such Fabrick? [] (Jos. Bel. Jud. 7. 18.) Titus levelling the Temple and whole City to the ground except three Towers, (Phaselus, Hippicus, and Mariamne,) and that part of the Wall that en∣compassed the City on the West side; this last to be a defence for the Garrison he left there: the Towers, that they might indicate to Posterity, how well fortified a City the Roman Prowess had subdued: And Turnus Rufus, the same day Twelvemonth, ploughing up the place where the Temple stood to make good that Prophecy [Sion shall be ploughed as a field,] as appears by the constant and copious Testimony of the Jews them∣selves, quoted by Dr. Lightfoot —fuit Illium, & ingens, Gloria Teucrorum— Jam seges ubi Troja— Jerusalem's best days are past, now that her sacred Temples Area is be∣come a Corn-field: If she has not already, she never will, attain this Glo∣ry. If one knew where to find her rubbish, he may write in the dust thereof [Icabod Glory is departed.] It hath had all the Glory it is like to have. It is absolutely impossible, it should be fill'd with Glory, now that 'tis emptied of its self, of its very Being and Existence, I know the Jews expect the rising of this Phaenix out of its ashes, and dream of a Third House; wherein this Prophecy shall receive its accomplishment: [in domo tertiâ stabunt ad honorem Dei in aeternum:] (Aben Ezra, in Psal. 24.) But 1. The Comparison here (in point of Glory) is betwixt Solomon's Temple (called the First House) and this of the return'd Captives build∣ing, called the Later House. 2. That Temple in the Air they build to themselves, is to be raised up (as they conceive) by their expected Messiah. But that Temple he was to fill with Glory, was to be in being before he comes; he is not to build it, but finds it built to his hand, and comes into it. 3. Say a Temple should again be erected in the place of this, it would not be this the Prophet speaks of, any more than this, was that which So∣lomon erected; but another (a Third House) essentially differing from this Second: for as this was called the Second House, because that of Solo∣mon's was utterly destroyed and brought to annihilation by the Babilonians, and this built anew from the lowest Foundation; [The hands of Zorobabel
have laid the foundation of this house:] this word (saith Isidore Peleusiota) of [laying the foundation] demonstrates, that the Babylonians, had razed the Foundation of the former (Epist. lib. 4. epist. 17.) So it being as ma∣nifest, that the Romans have not left one stone upon another, in this House; whatever House shall be built upon the Premisses, will be a new House, and specifically different from it, the Second being never to have a new birth as the same Isidore saith: [—] 4. After such ploughing, the Jew hath no ground to hope for such a Crop: for the Prophets stile this [the last] and, that which is to continue for ever; that is, the ever of their Law: and that wherein the Sons of Aarou shall stand ministring, during the limited Eternity of Mosaical Ce∣remonies: till Messiah comes and renews all things, makes all old things pass away, introduces a new World, a new Heaven, and new Earth: [.] (Is. Pel. lib. 4. ep. 17.) And therefore Vespasian's Reply to the Jewish Priests (suing for their Lives, after their Temple was sack'd) was more pertinent, and pat to the Idiom of the Old Testament, than (I believe) he was aware of: when he told them, that now their Temple was gone, it was fit they should perish with it; as be∣ing become wholly useless Creatures; that being destroyed, for whose sake only, they could desire to live: (Joseph. Bel. Jud. 7. 13.) § 7. The Conclusion of this Book. These Arguments are commonly urged to prove the Divinity of our Religion; and they might pass for good Mediums still, in that Question; were not our modern Atheists grown to that degree of Ingenuity, in con∣triving their own everlasting perdition; as to put in all Exceptions ima∣ginable against the Evidences, brought for the Probate of the Common Salvation, and the Way to it (the Common Faith.) I have therefore so far gratified the delicate Scepticism, the versatile Wit of these Pretenses; as to draw no other Conclusion from these Premisses, but this: That the Apostles were men of sound Intellects, and not such silly Animals as they deem them. And seriously, if they deny me the Validity of this Argu∣ment, they will very much impair the Repute the World hath of them∣selves as men of Reason, and dis-enable themselves of all possibility of mak∣ing Indication of their own Wit: For if the Apostles notwithstanding their contriving the Gospel in such an admirable Compliance with whatso∣ever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, venerable, (as the Phi∣losophers esteemed Virtue) whatsoever things are just, pure, lovely, of good report, whatsoever things can be thought on as praise-worthy (Phil. 4. 8, 9.) (all which the Apostle affirms, the Philippians had learned, and received, and heard, and seen in him) must still pass for Fools: do they not teach the World to think themselves such, for all their witty contriv∣ed Plays and Romances. Sophocles was accused by his Children to have been grown into Dotage; but absolved by the Judges (when he produc'd a Tragedy which he then made) saying, Is this the work of a man besides himself? Good God! must he that can make five Acts of a Comedy hang together (and yet not all out so exactly, but that he is forc'd (ever and anon) to call down some God upon the Stage, to help his Invention at a dead lift) be writ A WITT With a double W, and double T, and a great A; and those men presented as Fools, that acted upon the Stage of the great World, that have made Mercy and Truth meet together, Righ∣teousness and Peace kiss each other; that have made all the Results of true Reason and Religion, that were in the World before them, scrape acquain∣tance
with, and take knowledg of one another; and, by joynt consent, do obeysance to Christian Philosophy. Shall the Fame of those Scavinger-in∣ventions go rumbling like a Wheel-barrow, that can scrape together the Obscenities of Aristophanes, the Impieties of Lucian, and lay their Dung on orderly heaps, before the Noses of their applauding Spectators: who, as also Alcaeus writ their Poems when they were drunk, saith Athenaeus in his Dipnosoph. lib. 9.) And the memories of these be turned into the silent Grave (with the Burial of an Ass) who have gather'd all the Daisies and Lillies of the Vallies (the natural Emanations of every vulgar Soul) all the rarer Flowers of the best cultivated Gardens (of the most refined and abstruse Philosophy) and bound them into one Posie, a Nosegay for the Bride of the King of Kings! Shall the more civilized Atheist (for the Steam of that Augean Stable, where those neighing Stone-horse-men stand; of that Hog-sty, where Epicurus his Herd wallow, does almost stifle me, and I hasten out of it) be stroak'd upon the head (as a person of a deep reach) who can frame his maximes of State sutable to theirs in St. Austin: [Nolunt stare rempublicam firmitate virtutum, sed impuritate vi∣tiorum:] (August. Volusiano, ep. 3.) to the humours of the half-witted Vulgar, of one Age, of one Province; and by temporizing therewith, keep the Cart on Wheels for a while; that is, till the Team find the Reins loose upon their Necks, and an opportunity of bringing the Wheel over their ungodly Drivers: for when the Horse comes to find his own strength (and he will quickly learn that if he be not kept in with Bit and Bridle) off goes his Rider: and give me leave to give our modern Statists this I∣tem; that there are a Generation of men in the World, that are subject not for Conscience sake, but Fear; and with these no Governour shall be longer good, than he has power over them, and they awed from calling him all to nought. Shall then (I say) these Tinker-Machiavilians (who in stopping one hole make two) pass for great Head-pieces? And the A∣postles be reputed to have had heads no better than that, which the Mon∣key played with in the Carver's Shop, who have laid down such an abso∣lute Model of Polity; so fitted to the universal, eternal, Rules of Rea∣son; so perfectly complacential to the Dictates of all men; so exactly li∣mitting Superiours and Inferiours, in all Ranks, of all sorts, to their pro∣per Bounds and Vocations: as it is impossible for any State, Kingdome, Empire, Corporation, Family, not to prosper and flourish under the due observation of it; or to subsist, under the neglect of it (execpt it be in judgment to themselves or others.) [Advertit Plato in omni sermone suo de reipublicae institutione proposito, infundendum animis justitiae amorem: sine qua non solum Respublica, sed nec exiguus hominum caetus, nec domus qui∣dem parva constabit:] (Macrobius in Som. Scipionis, lib. 1. cap. 1.) where he gives that, as the reason, why Plato and Cicero preface their Treatises of the Commonwealth, with the discourse of the Soul's Immortality and eternal Rewards. Shortly; say the Gospel be a Fable, it is the most profitable one that ever was devised, and the most cunningly devised, that ever was shown to the World; and shown to the World at its Age of best Discre∣tion. Let the whole College of Atheists frame such another piece of Work∣manship; a piece made up, of the Perfections of all other Writings: (as the Painters Venus, of all other Beauties;) in so perfect a Syme∣try of parts, as they cohere better in this Copy than they did in their several Originals. Celsus, indeed, made a faint offer to shew ma∣ny things in Christ, that speak him unlike that Messiah whom the
Prophets delineate: but this was but a Copy of his Countenance, a Flourish of his Pen (as Origen tells him) for he pulls in his Horns, as soon as he had shown them; and is content to wave that discourse; (Orig. Con. Cels. lib. 2. cal. 8.) In the date of whose Face, Times past, present, and to come, (Prophecy, History) bear that admirable propor∣tion; as the oldest age shews no wrincles, but only shadows youth: and the greenest Youth represents the sober look of gravest Age: where yesterday and to day, are the same. Let the whole brood of Helicon's Brats, the whole Fraternity of the Muses Sons compose such a Poem, and (with me) they shall be no longer Semi-pagani, half-witted Scio∣lists; provided that till then, the Apostles may not be such with them.
Christian Religion's APPEAL To the BAR of Common Reason, &c. The Third Book. We have as good Grounds of Assurance, that the Matter of Fact, and Delivery of Do∣ctrine contain'd in the Gospel, were done and delivered as they are reported there, as we have, or can have, of any the most unquestionable Relation in the World. CHAP. I. The Universal Tradition of the Church, a good Evidence of the Gospels Legitimacy. § 1. The inconquerable force of Universal Tradition. § 2. No danger of being over-credulous in our Case. § 3. Reasons interest in Matters of Religion. § 4. We have better assurance, that the Evangelical Writings and History are those mens Off-spring, whose names they bear, than any Man can have that he is his reputed Father's Son. § 5. The Sceptick cannot prove him∣self his Mothers Son, by so good Arguments, as the Gospel hath for its Legi∣timacy. § 6. Bastard-slips grafted into Noble Families. The Sceptick in Religion, is a Leveller in Politicks. § 1. ANd doubtless nothing can hinder any man in his wits, from giving assent to this Proposition; That the Framers of the Gospel were Persons endowed with Reason. But then the Atheist puts in this Bar, a∣gainst his own and others Belief: That Christianity, possibly may have been lick'd into this form, wherein the Scripture presents it, after the Age of the Apostles, by such Politicians, as conceived it a good Epedient to keep men in Order, out of an awe and reverence of Religion. For the removal of this Scruple, I shall prove in this third Book; That we
have as good Grounds of assurance, that the Matters of Fact and Doctrine, contain'd in the Gospel, were done and delivered by Christ and his Apostles; as we have (or can have) of any other (the most certain and unquestiona∣ble) Relation in the World. Though we (who live at this great distance from the Time, wherein those Occurrences fell out) are so far disadvantaged, as 'tis scarce to be hoped that obstinate and captious Gain-sayers, who hate the Gospel for its Holiness and Strictness, will acquiess in the clearest Demonstration we can lay before them: [Necsi solem quidem ipsum gestemus in manibus, fidem accomodabunt ei doctrinae, quae illos jubet, &c.] (Lactantius de divino praemio, l. p. c. 1) Debaucht persons will not yield assent to a Doctrine that commands Holiness, Justice and Temperance, though for demonstration of the truth of it, we should carry in our hands the Sun it self. Before I make my defence (saith Origen against Celsus) (lib. 1. calum. 23.) let me premise this; That to vindicate the Truth of any History, though never so true, is a matter of exceeding difficulty; and in some cases impossible. If a man be frowardly bent to deny, that the Grecians fought with the Trojans; that Oedipus married his Mother Jocasta, &c. there's no convincing of him: there's no remedy against the biting of a Sycophant: Yet the abovesaid disadvantage, hath this convenience attend∣ing it; that it necessitates us to the use of soberness of Mind, in seeking and receiving satisfaction: For the things in question being done many generati∣ons before us, it were the highest act of unreasonableness imaginable, to expect or demand any other grounds of satisfaction, than such as all men, (that are not besides themselves, and incapacitated for rational Discourse) in all other the like cases acquiess in, without the least hesitancy; that is, Universal Tra∣dition, which is of that force, as to leave all wise men as much assured of those Matters, that are so communicated to them, as of those they them∣selves are eye-witnesses of. I can no more force my self out of an assurance, that there were such men as Caesar, Pompey, Alexander; such Cities as Troy, Carthage, Jerusalem; than I can perswade my self to believe, that I am not now writing. Nay, I should sooner be brought to doubt of this than that: for I may perhaps (for this once) be but in a Dream; but that the whole World of Authentick Historians, (who have conveighed the Tradition of those things to us) should dream waking, for so many Successions of Ages, bids that manifest defiance to Reason and common Sence: as I must grow blind on both these eyes, before I can swallow that Flie. When I sift my Mind to find out the bottom of this invincible Assurance, such thoughts as these comes to hand: It is not any way my own Interest that byasseth me; whether there ever were any such Men or Cities, or no, (mihi nec seritur, nec metitur) I am no way concern'd in it; I cannot possi∣bly discover the least Atom of self, in my tenacious (and even obstinate) ad∣hering to such Propositions. It must be therefore some pure Beam of refined Reason, by which I clime up, to this degree of Confidence: I take up, and hold to, these Conclusions, meerly as a Man, as a reasonable Creature; with∣out circumstantiating my self with those moveable, those separable Attri∣butes; of poor, of rich, wise, foolish, &c. But find all Men, in all Ages since, have (with one mouth) either reported, or assented (by their si∣lence) to these Stories; and Vox populi, vox Dei, The common vote of Man-kind, is the voice of God: If I deny the validity of such Testimony, I banish all humane Converse out of the World. It may here perhaps be objected; that, in these cases, we suffer our Reason to be captivated to the general Vogue, by slender presumptions; and because we may, without any considerable detriment, ride with the stream, we are willing to save our selves the labour of rowing against it: but in Matters of so high a Concern (as Religion) Prudence should dictate to us the use of more Caution, than to be born down with the Current. But what we take up (in trust of the Publick Faith) upon such Univer∣sal Testimonies, is not credulously imbraced, but forceth it self upon us with
main force of common Reason (I was almost saying) of demonstration; for else these Confidences might possibly be dismounted. If these assurances were not built upon the firmest Grounds, they might be undermined: if they were not mann'd and garrison'd by the strongest Reason, other Reasons might enforce to a surrender, as we see it daily happens in questions de Jure, and all Propositions built upon articifial Arguments. A man may be perswaded of the Truth of the Affirmative to day, and to morrow be confident of the Nega∣tive, if that come arm'd (to his thinking) with better Reasons. But now in Matters of Fact, delivered by the Universal Tradition of those that were up∣on the place, we cannot acquit our selves of the belief of them; we cannot extricate our selves out of those Chains that are clapt upon our judgement, by the most Proteus-like change thereof, though into an hundred forms and shapes. Let one (for instance) that upon such an account is perswaded, that King Henry the Eighth is dead, try if he can writhe himself out of the belief of it, by all the versatile windings, which the most serpentine invention can prompt; if he can hale that Conceipt out of his Mind, with a whole Team of the strongest Arguments he can yoak together: he will find he labours as much in vain, as the Sea-men did, in their attempts to bring the Vessel that was freighted with the reputed Mother of the Gods to shore, after she was faln a ground. The Hair-lace of the vestal (though under a suspition of inconti∣nency) did more than all their Cables could. But in our Case the single twine of current Tradition (the votary of the never-dying Flame, the pre∣server of the immortal Memory of things past) will draw the mind to a full irreversible Assent, against all contrary halings of the Cart-ropes of artificial Reasonings; notwithstanding our jealousies of a possibility of Error, or Adul∣teration. Nay, Universal Testimony forces the belief of those things upon us, which we would not believe, could we any way baffle the Evidence; when it informs us of the death of Friends, of the defeating of our Armys, of the loss of our Garrisons, of the sinking of our richly-laden and home∣ward-bound Vessels, (though we could wish to keep St. Thomas his Resoluti∣on of not believing, till we see and handle the truth of those Relations, though we put in an hundred caveats of hope, that its otherwise) yet there's no resisting the evidences of such a Testimony: It lays our tatter'd Ships, our dismembred Soldiers, the pale-fac'd Corps of our Relations (though at ne∣ver so great a local distance from us) so manifestly before us, as we cannot but hear their dying groans, handle their wounds, and see them laid out: In this Magick Glass we behold our Sea-men pinion'd, our Goods rifled, our Tackling torn, our Masts floating; and whatever we would not see nor hear, as sensibly as feelingly, as if we were upon the place. It begets in us a belief of (otherwise) most unlikely, incredible things; of such occurrences, as without this, all the Reason imaginable could not have perswaded us to assent to. Abstract Caligula's causing the way to be swept from Rome to Belgium, before that Army, wherewith he furiously charged the Sea, from that Reason, which the Currency of that History commends it with to our Belief; and then should we muster up all the Mediums in Aristotles To∣picks to assail and conquer our Minds to a perswasion; That a person ad∣vanc'd to such honour, in so wise a State, might possibly be so pompously mad, as to play such freaks: or that those Sons of Mars (at whose prowess the World trembl'd) should be such tame Fools, as to be commanded (by him) to play such Munkey-tricks; the issue would shew that to be as vain and fruit∣less a Charge upon our Judgements, as his was against the Ocean. But yet the Validity of the Historical Testimony hath (in spight of all unlikelyhood) gain'd Universal Credit for these Stories. It was Heresie at Rome (a while ago) to assert there were Antipodes; the Mathematicks (those demonstrative Sciences) could not convince the sacred Colledge, but that men must fall into the skie, if their feet were opposite to ours: The Books that made offer to make proof thereof, by the strongest Reasons imaginable, were (as heretical) committed to the devouring Flames.
(Aventinus annal. Boiorum, lib. 3.) And in a more knowing Age this Opi∣nion of the Earths globous Form was derided by Lactantius [est quispiam tam ineptus qui credat homines esse, quorum vestigia sunt superiora quam capita? aut ibi quae apud nos jaceat Universa pendere? fruges & arbores deorsùm versùs crescere, pluvias, & nives, & grandinem, sursùm versús cadere in terram? & mira∣tur aliquis hortos pensiles inter septem mira narrare, quum philosophi, & agros, & maria, & urbes, & montes pensiles faciunt?] with more shew of Reason than can be brought against the Evangelical History (Instituti, lib. 3. cap. 24.) Can any man be so egregious a fool as to think that there are men who walk with their feet higher than their heads? or a place where such things as here lay upon the ground, hangs in the Air? that Plants grow with their tops downwards: that Rain, Snow and Hail fall upwards upon the earth? why should we wonder at the pensil Gardens of Babylon, one of the seven wonders of the World; seeing Phi∣losophers make pensil Fields, Walls, Cities and Mountains. But I presume (for all this show of reason to the contrary) men are now as verily perswaded that the Earth is round, and that there are Antipodes, as they are, that there is an Heaven What hath conquer'd them to this belief? have better Reasons been laid before them? none but this of Universal Tradition: Since the im∣provement of Navigation, men daily make voyages thither, and learn by the report of the Inhabitants of that lower Hemisphere, that that part of the World is not grown up of late (as a bunch upon the back of ours) but of as long a standing as it: and hence springs the undoubted confidence of its Existence now, and its Pre-existence to our knowledge and discovery. § 2. To the other part of the Objection I make this twofold reply. 1. In our present Case we are out of danger of receiving damage by being over-credulous: were that Testimony, which commends to my Belief Go∣spel-matters of Fact, less credible than it is; my acquiescing therein would be transcendently advantageous, but no way possibly prejudicial: a Report goeth abroad, that some great Prince (upon the motion of his Son, who by certain condescentions has promerited the King's favour for them) hath sent out his Declaration to his Subjects; wherein he proclaims liberty to Captives tenders to those that will embrace his Son, and deport themselves as becomes Men, advancement to the highest honours; and menaceth to such, as will not by such inducements be reclaim'd from a bestial Life, the most exquisite Tortures that can be invented by abused Love: who but short-reason'd Idi∣ots would be over-curious, too nice in believing such a Report? which if it prove true, he is made, that conforms to it; he undone, that does not: however, the Terms are but reasonable, complying therewith (at present) prefers a man to the Lordship of himself, (and he's put to no expence, but what he may well disburse out of that Lordship) and for the future he is in a more promising way to Happiness, than any other course he can stere can bring him to. Hereto assents to that of divine Plato: (Phaedone;) . If these things (touching the happiness of the Soul in a state of seperation) which I say be true, we shall do our selves a pleasure by believing them, but if there remain nothing either of a man or for a man, when he is dead; yet however the Contemplation of these things will make my present life more comfortable. To which is a kin that of Cicero; (Tusculan) preclarum autem nescio quid adepti sunt, quod didicerunt se, cùm tempus mortis venisset, to∣tos esse perituros: quod ut it à sit (nihil enim pugno) quid habet ista res aut laeta∣bile aut gloriosum? They think they have obtain'd an excellent point when they have learn'd that by death they will be wholly dissolved: say it were so, what is there in this thing either joyous os glorious? All the danger here lies on the o∣ther hand, in not believing: hereby we may possibly incur the pain threat∣ned; to be sure, lose the reward promised: but what detriment can we sus∣tain by embracing the Gospel, save of a little beastly Pleasure of Sin for a
season? What danger can we become obnoxious to, but a little suffering, for as short a season? which yet will be recompenced, an hundred fold, even in this Life, not only with the Hope of the Recompence of Reward, which made the Martyrs rejoyce more when they were condemned, than when absolved, [Magis damnati quàm absoluti gaudemus. (Tert. ad scapul. cap. 1.) Nay, such were the expressions of the Märtyrs Joys under the most painful sufferings, as made whole multitudes of Christians offer them∣selves without summons, to Pagan Tribunals, there to receive the sentence of Death: insomuch as Tertullian urgeth Scapula to forethink what he would do with so many thousands of Men, Women and Children, as in Carthage pro∣fess'd the Gospel, if they should offer themselves to him to be crowned with Martyrdom, as the Christians in Asia had done to Arrius Antoninus. (Id. Ib.) Sufferings, I say, for righteousness sake will be counterballanced, not only by the Contemplation of future Glory, but with the peace of Conscience, and the calm quiet of a Mind, not conscious to its self of any base Act, or Disposition unworthy of Man. And when we die, suppose the Gospel should prove a Fable, as that Pope, unworthy of name, stiled it (quantum nobis profuit haec de Christo fabula!) yet our having observed the Rules of it, will put us into a fairer capacity of Happiness in the other World, than the Rules of any other Religion, than our following the conduct of our bruitish Lusts, and untamed Passions can (in common sence) be presumed to do. For certain∣ly if Man exist after death, his having habituated himself to the life of Man, to intellectual Pleasure, (on this side of it) must render the Life of Reason (and that's the lowest degree of life we can be imagin'd there to live) more familiar, more complacential, and satisfactory on that side of it. If Man's proper and peculiar Felicity stand in his enjoyment of Communion with God (as it must do if there be a God, for to desire the possession of the very best, is a Quality radically adhering to an humane Soul) certainly our inuring our selves to Acquaintance with him, and Conformity to him here, must make way for our more clear beatifical Vision of him, and Converse with him hereafter: Should then our Christian Faith prove Credulity; yet that Credulity will prove our Wisdom, our way to Happiness: and therefore is not so much to be feared in our case, as the Objection implies. Be it an Er∣ror, 'tis the happiest and most profitable Error, that Mankind can possibly fall into, though many men (saith Origen against Celsus) are set free from the slave∣ry of their own Passions, from the Colluvies and filthy slud of beastly Vices? how many have got their savage Manners tamed and charmed, upon occasion of hearing the Gospel preach'd? which (if we were wise) we would with all thankfulness embrace; were it but for this, that it is so soveraign and compendious a Remedy of all Vice: we should give it our grace and approbation to pass, if not as true, yet as most advantageous to humane kind. (lib. 1. cal. 30.)—[Et probanda si non ut vera, certè ut humano generi utilis∣sima—] The truth is, all the hurt that the VVorld has received by Christi∣an Religion, is the turning of Beasts into Men, and Men into Heroes and petty Gods: and all the benefit it reaps by rejecting the Precepts of it, and sipping the Circean cup of Atheism, is the transmuting of Men into Lyons, Tigers, VVolves, Hoggs, Harpies, Ravens, and as many kinds of wilde Beasts, and unclean Birds, as enterd Noah's Ark: Iniquity and injustice to∣wards Man hath ever attended Impiety towards God. Dionisius the Atheist, after he had rob'd Jupiter of his golden Robe, as being too heavy for Sum∣mer, too cold for VVinter; Aesculapius of his golden Beard as not becoming the Son to wear, while his Father was beardless; and spoil'd the Temples of what was worth taking away, and made sale of his sacrilegious Booties, commanded those that bought them, to restore every man the things he had bought within a set day to the Temples, whence they were stoln: [ità ad impietatem in Deos, in homines adjunxit injuriam.] Haud unquam tulit docu∣menta sors majora—Never was more feeling Proofs given of this sad Truth than this Age hath produced; nor can a clearer demonstration be made of any
thing, than the Primitive Times made of the Truth of the former Branch; when the Discipline of Christianity bound its Professors, to the keeping of the Peace, to a modest, meek, and good behaviour of Heart, Tongue, and Hand, towards all men, under the greatest temptation to the contrary, that the bloodiest Persecution could suggest; though the sufferers were the more numerous party almost in every City. [Ex disciplina patientiae divinae agere nos satis manifestum esse vobis potest, cùm tanta hominum multitudo, pars penè major civitatis cujus{que} in silentio & modestiâ agimus] When Christians were not otherwise discernable from other Sects, but by the badge of emendation of Manners: [Nec aliundè noscibiles quàm de emendatione vitiorum pristinorum.] (Tert. ad Scap. cap. 2.) Nor could be branded with any vice, but that sup∣posed one in the name of Christian. [Bonus vir Cajus Seius, sed malus tan∣tùm quòd Christianus.] (Tert. apol. cap. 3.) When they durst challenge the Ad∣versaries to shew (if they could) among all the Christians, which their Pri∣sons were thronged with, one High-way-man, one Cut-purse, one Robber of Temples, one Cheater. (Tertul. apol. 44.) [De vestris semper aestuat carcer, de vestris semper metalla suspirant, de vestris semper bestiae suginantur—nemo illic Christianus nisi planè tantum Christianus, aut si & aliud, non jam Christianus.] Malefactors condemned to perpetual imprisonment, to the Mines, and to the Beasts are of your own (the Pagan) Religion; among such there is not one Christian: or if there be, he is there for no other Crime, but only that of being a Christian; for if he be an Offender in any other point, he is no longer a Christian. A seditious, a factious, a traitorous Christian, was then a non-ens, that could no where be found. When they could maintain that [nunquam vel Nigriani, vel Albi∣niani, vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani] (Tert. ad scap. c. 2.) No Chri∣stian had been a Traytor to his Prince. When the worst effect of Christian Faith appear'd to be, that it procur'd the Husband a chaste Wife, the Father an obe∣dient Son, the Master a faithful Servant. [Vt domi habeat uxorem jam pudicam maritus non jam zelotipus, filium subjectum pater, famulum fidelem dominus.] (Tert. apol. cap. 3.) Of the same importance is that of Rab. David Chimchi (in Ps. 1. 3. 4.) [Mundus documentum à viro bono recipit, per umbram viarum, & fructum operum ejus, non sic impii: nullum commodum per eos venit, sed dam∣num, velut gluma per ventum in occulos hominum pulsa, vel super hortos & domos cadit (Vicars Decupla.) The World receiveth good Instruction from a good man (grown good by meditating in Gods Law) by the Tract of his Ways, by the Fruit of his Works: But as for the ungodly, it is not so; there is no benefit to be reapt of them, but incommodity; they are like the Chaff which the Wind scatters, and beats into mens eyes to afflict them; or into Gardens and Houses to annoy, to foul and disfigure humane Society. § 3. Reply 2. Though humane Testimony (in Religious Matters) be the feeblest of all Arguments, to prove or disprove the Truth of Doctrine de∣livered, or the goodness of things done, yet it is of as much validity to e∣vince the delivery of Doctrine, the Doing of such Things, in this case, as in any other: we must not (indeed) so much as admit it into the Juries Chamber, much less into the Judges Seat, to give sentence, what is de jure: but yet it must be allowed, even in the Lords Courts (a place among the Witnesses) to declare what it knows de facto; to give in evidence, whether the Action un∣der debate was done or not: whether an Action be legal or criminal, is the Judges Office to declare; but whether the Actions which are brought before him were done or no, is the Witnesses Office to discover. If the question be, What Doctrine was delivered hy Christ, Moses, Mahomet? what Orations were writ by Tully? what Poems by Homer? humane Testimony, and undoubted Tradition must umpire this: but if it be, what-like Doctrine, Orations, Po∣ems, those are? Reason (regulated by the Maximes of every such Art or Sci∣ence, whose subject is under debate) must cast the scales, and determine that Controversie. Reason (I say) may and must be exercised about Religion, in discerning the true from the false: we must not chuse our Religion, as men
draw lots, unseen: nor as Children, in that Libian Province, where women were promiscuously and in common frequented, drew Fathers, each of them taking him for Father, to whom in a great assembly chance, or instinct directed their first steps (Herodot) He that's a Christian, but perchance, may perchance be no better than no Christian, the blessed Jesus is well content, that Mer∣chants who deal with him, should see his Ware, before they buy. Indeed that God should endow our Souls with Reason, and make us differ from Brutes, only that we might rule them and not our selves; in what highliest con∣cerns us; that he should put a golden Mattock into our hands, on purpose that we should digg Dung hills; and not rather, for hid Treasure, that he should communicate to us a Ray of the invisible World, only that we may contemplate the visible, and employ that Light (that Candle of the Lord) in the search of things, only on this side of Eternity, hath not the least con∣gruity with that Decorum, observ'd by him in all his Works, which are fram'd in Number, Weight and Order. And those Morning Stars, which the Divine Goodness hath fixed in the Orb of our body, are (from the height of their Native Heaven) faln into the lowest Abyss of Reptile-spiritedness; if they be content with, and submit to such drudgery, such Gally-slave∣work; and not exert their noblest Powers, upon the noblest Objects, in the stu∣dy of God, and the way to the eternal Possession of him. In which Case though we make it Reasons duty, to judge of the Religion which is true; yet we set not Reason above the true, but only the Unreasonableness of the false. The King of France set not Joan of Acres (that holy Maid of France, as the Pri∣mitive Rebel-covenanters stiled that their Enthusiastick Sister) as a Judge o∣ver himself; nor our King Henry the Eighth (of glorious memory) the Cardinal and his guests over himself: when they put them to it, to judge which of those Gallants was the of King France? which of these Guisers was the King of England? Reason may (without the least suspition of usurping the Office of a Divider, or the Authority of a Judge over him) determine which is the King in a crowd of Guisers; provided, that when she has discover'd him, she give him the Chair of State. I mean Reason in her Debates about the true Religion (after she hath, by Principles of common Sence, discover'd it to be of divine Revelation; from those manifest Impresses of its sacred Original it brings with it into the World) must be regulated by Maximes of that, now acknowledged, heavenly Science. We allow her to walk round about Sion, to mark well the Bull-warks, and count her Towers: but in judging of their Strength or Comeliness, she must not walk by the exotick, and forreign Rules of inferiour Sciences, but by the Domestick Principles of that Architectonick Art, the Municipal Laws of that holy State: while she sojourns in the City of God, she must conform to the Customs thereof. That may be a good Reason in one Science, that's a grand Solecism in another. The Asses adjudging the Palm to the Cuckow, from the Nightingal, was therefore absurd; because it was not grounded upon Principles of Musick (the Art wherein they strove for preheminency) had he past the same Sentence (upon the same reason he did that) in case of contest betwixt two publick Criers, the Determination would have been grave, substantial, and becoming a wiser A∣nimal. But to return from this Digression: Humane Testimony, (as to Matters of Fact) touching Religion, is of as much validity, as in any other Subject. For although the Actions relate to Religion, they are not reported under that consideration; but barely as Actions that have past over the Stage of the World: and, as such, the Spectators are as competent Judges of them, as of any that are brought before them. All that is demanded of Tradition is, whether it saw Christ and his Apostles doing such things? whether it heard them deliver such Doctrines? or what it ever heard or saw tending to the disproof of that Relation? we call her not to pass judgement upon the Na∣ture or Quality of either Words or Works; we summon her to do the part of an Historian, not Commentator: And what hinders but that she may gra∣tifie
us in this, as well as in any other Case? were not Christs Actions as visible as Caesar's, his Words as audible as Cicero's? § 4. Having thus stated the Question, and assigned to the Witnesses what we expect from them, as to the Resolution of it, we will call them in, and take their depositions. 1. Had we nothing to produce but those almost numberless Copies, and Translations of the Text into most of the Languages of the anciently∣known World; those Cart-loads of Commentators, Paraphrasts, &c. upon the Text (all agreeing in substance, and out of which we may with facility gather, not only the Matter, but the very Words (and every Word) of the Gospels) this would be a full-measure Proof, that the Books of the New Testament, as they stand now in the sacred Canon, are as faithful a Repository of the A∣ctions and Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, as any Writings whatsoever can be of the Subjects contain'd in them. This would be a better Evidence (for instance) that the History and Doctrine therein contain'd is the genuine Off-spring of those whose Names they bear, than any man living can pro∣duce, to prove that the Books going under the Names of Virgil, Horace, Ci∣cero, are those mens Works, whose Names they bear: That the Deeds and Conveighances whereby he holds his Estate, are those mens Deeds whose Names and Seals are affixt to them: or that he is that Man's Child, whom he calls Father. This comes near enough to the state of the Question: and one would think it concern'd the VVorld to repute that Generation of men the bane of Mankind, who with their insociable infusions of Suspitions into mens Heads (that possible it might be otherwise) deprive all men, Princes and Peasants, of power to make a rational Proof of their Title to what they hold from their Ancestors, as their Heirs at Law: And the Sceptick cannot in reason expect a more satisfactory Answer to his Misprisions, than such like as Plutarch (in his Apothegms) reports Cicero to have given his Nephew Metellus: to whom, demanding of Cicero to tell who was his Father, it was replyed, thus: It would be a far harder thing to tell, who was thy Fa∣ther; for thy Mother was accounted an errant Strumpet; and mine, an ho∣nest Matron. The truth is, all the claim that any body can make to him, whom he calls Father, depends wholly upon the single twine of one VVo∣mans Honesty; which, be it never so apparent, is not to be cast in the Scales with the Fidelity of the immaculate Virgin-spouse of Christ, the Apostoli∣cal Church. But I will wave this odious Comparison; partly because I would not create jealousies) of this Nature, in the Ranters Head, to harden him a∣gainst his poor Mother (to whom it is affliction enough, to have been the Pa∣rent of such a Son;) and partly that I may not cast the least suspition of disho∣nour upon our Female-Gentry, whose inconquerable Vertue necessitates our Goatish Males to turn Channel-rakers, and to scrape off Dung-hills (fuel for their Lusts) the scum and off-spring of the fordid and Rascal vulgar, the scrapings and garbish of the Body Politick: such as that Nobleman of the East would hardly have set before the Dogs of the Flock. How many courses of Purification must such Lumps of Dirt mixt with the Dregs of English Blood undergo, before he that values the Nobility of his own, can think them fit for his touch, even by the proxy of a pair of Tonges. The Bawd washes the Cats face, pares her Claws, by the transforming power of the exchange dubs her a Gentlewoman: and then (though all the Castle-sope in Christendom cannot wash out Pusse's stains (contracted in the Chimney-corner;) nor all the perfumers Shops in Level-land take away the Nautious scent of her rank Blood) presents her, as the great Beauty of the Land, an Helen, a Venus, a Peer for a Prince, a Bed-companion for a Peer. Issa est purior osculo columbae; Issa est blandior omnibus puellis;
Issa est carior Indicis lapillis; Issa est deliciae catella Publii. Issa Bills sweeter than a Dove; Issa's more blith, than Mal or Siss: No Pearls equal Issa's love: What Issa's this? Publius his Bitch. If there be no difference of Blood, why do we boast of Nobility? If there be, why does it not recoil (even in spight of the most lustful Titillations) in∣to those Vessels we extracted from our noble Progenitors, or at least, (for shame,) into our Faces; fitter Receptacles of it than such common Jakes? such unequal mixtures, are a kind of Buggery: For though in Religion there's none, yet in Nature there's as great, and in Politicks a greater di∣stance, between the Cream of Nobility, and the Sediments of Vulgar Base∣ness, than there is betwixt this and some ingenious Animals: And in E∣thicks 'tis a less Indecorum, to see a Ladies Dog in bed with her, than her Groom: Publius commits a less Solecism in dallying with his Bitch, than with his Laundress: Catullus may with less Absurdity bill with his Sparrow, than his Maid. That our delicate and spruce Gallants (who cannot relish Prayer and Fasting which would cure them of this Canine Appetite after strange Flesh, of this Orexis after dirty Puddings) should be brought to this necessity, of feeding their Wolf with such course fare, at such three-penny Ordinaries; That they who will not lose so much of their height, as the bending of their Knees (to him who has promised to give his holy Spirit to them that ask) would put them to the expence of; should (by an unclean Spirit) be precipitated from the top of Honour's Scale, to the foot of the Hangman's Ladder, with that Wanton in Petronius. [Vsque ab Orchestria quatuordecim transilit ut in extre∣ma Plebe quaerat quod diligat: & amplexus in crucem mittat.] He leaps down at least fourteen steps from the top of the stairs of Nobility; that he may seek a Mistress amongst the basest of the Vulgar, and obtain the Embraces of one of Mal-Cutpurse-Nymphs, who last Assizes held up her hand at the Bar, and hardly e∣scap'd the Gallows. That our fine-nosed Gentry (who can smell State-plots and humane Inventions in the most sacred Religion) should not smell the Plot which their own lusts have upon their Honour, nor how rank their Mistresses smell of the Dunghill; can proceed from nothing but their habituating themselves to such Carrion, for want of better fare. And that they are fain to feed the Flame of their Green-sickness-lusts with Coal and Cinders, must (with all thankfulness) be ascribed to the Chastity of our English Matrons: for if the Ladies honour had not been impregnable, Joan had never come in such re∣quest. Such Mushromes would never have been meat for the Gods (to bor∣row Nero's Phrase;) such Lettice would never have pleased their lips, If the Garden of truly-noble Virginity had not been shut up against their Importu∣nities. Let this be engraven (in perpetuam rei memoriam) to the eternal praise of our English Ladies; that in the hour of temptation and laying seige to their Honour, they have not given up the Fort. And therefore, though the off-spring of Females of profligated honour, should follow the Dam (there being no sufficient presumption, whereby the Father can be indicated: upon which is grounded that of Vlpian: [Lex naturae haec est, ut qui nasci∣tur sine legitimo matrimonio, matrem sequatur;] (Grotii de Jure 3. 7. 5.) and that of Cotta in Tully (de nat. deor. 3. pag. 133.) where he gives this Reason, why those Heroes, whose Mothers were Goddesses, were canonized Deities, and not those that had a God for their reputed Father; because the former were of the surer side: (ut enim in Jure Civili, qui est de matre libera, liber est: item Jure Naturae, qui de Dea matre est, Deus sit necesse est.) Yet for those that are born in Wedlock, the common sence of Nations presumes the Father is sufficiently pointed out. And as to our English Ladies, the respect
they have to their Honour, is next door to a Demonstration of the Legiti∣macy of their Issue; and that their Partus [non minùs sequeretur patrem quàm matrem] is as sure on the Father's as Mother's side (Grot. de jure 2. cap. 5. 29.) Nay (to give that whole Sex of all Ranks its due) though the Chil∣dren of Servants in Wedlock, among the Lombards, Saxons, and most Na∣tions, follow the Mother: yet so famous have our English Women been for Conjugal Fidelity; as the Law here is: [Francus, qui est aut villanus, ex pa∣tre, idemque in aliis conditionum discriminibus observatur, Littleton de villanis,] (referente Grotio ibid.) I will therefore wave this Comparison; and fall upon the proof of that, that's less Odious, and yet will shave the Seeker's Preju∣dice (against the Faith) more close, and come nearer the quick. § 5. That the Gospel gives better evidence for its being rightly father'd on Christ, than he can produce, to convince such a captious Gainsayer as himself, that he is that Woman's Son, whom he calls Mother. 1. If the Depositions of Gossips, Midwives, &c. the Evidence of a Pa∣rish-register, be valid Proofs; that at such a time, such a man was born, of such Parents, &c. which of all these are wanting in our case? The things reported in the Gospel have been attested by many Eye and Ear-witnesses, who were upon the place when these things were brought forth; have been ingrossed in Parchment-rolls; deposited in the Archives of those Churches, to which they were originally directed: whither they were immediately con∣veighed by the hands of the Evangelists and Apostles Messengers, under known Seals, Marks, Tokens, Hands. 2. If not withstanding these Evidences, the bare possibility of Fallacy (ei∣ther active or passive) (from both which we have freed the Apostles in our first and second Books) may administer, to a considerate Mind, ground of doubting; whether the Works and Doctrine reported of Christ, be indeed his, and not wrong father'd: will not that Principle much more warrant me to doubt, whether thou art thy reputed Mother's Child? For might not Mother, Midwife, Gossips either deceive, or some of them be deceived (far more probably than Christ, his Apostles, or Primitive Church) and combine to impose a suborn'd Child upon the Father, rather than they a suborn'd Go∣spel upon the World. 1. Put case thy Mother had suspected her Husband would have thought her unfaithful by reason of the disparity of thy Complexion to that of both thy reputed Parents, and had question'd whether her alledging, that in the time of Conception she had in her Eye some Picture of another Complexion resembling thine, would have removed the scruple; might the not rather than put a point so tender to hazard, have put thee out secretly (as Persina (in He∣liodorus, Ethiop. 10.) did Characlia upon the like account, fearing that her Child, resembling Andromeda whose Image hung before her while she con∣ceived, would not be thought to be the Off-spring of an Aethiopian.) Say thy Mother, upon such a surmise, had put thee out to her whom thou callest Mother; by what prints couldst thou prick out thy way back again to thy true Original, or prove to a captious pretender that this is not thy lot, to mis∣take thy Nurse for thy Mother? 2. Put case thy reputed Father's Estate was intail'd upon Heirs Male, or that he passionately desired a Son, and his Wife as passionately desired to gra∣tifie his importunate Longings; how many ways might she invent to deceive him into an Opinion, that she was teeming with a Son, when she was not so much as with child? We have frequent examples of Women cheating them∣selves (through their extremely impatient desire to have it so) into a most confident beleif, that they are near the time of Delivery, when they have not so much as conceiv'd. It is not long since I knew one so big with a Mi∣nerva (a Brat of her own Brain;) as when her own appointed time of labour came, she cryed out for the Midwife and her Neighbours; who, though at first they had much ado to with-hold laughing out-right at the Woman's appa∣rent
folly; yet, as her pangs and visible child-bearing pains grew upon her, her Opinion grew upon them. In short, she could have no case, nor would allow them rest, till by the Midwive's advice they had fairly laid a bed, with all the Formalities appertaining to a Woman in that condition, into which she had fancied her self; and perswaded her she was delivered of a goodly Boy; at the news whereof her Travelling throws surrendred their place to a sound Sleep. I was christning a Child, in peril of death, over the way where this Comedy was acting, and some of this new laid Woman's Gossips came over to us; to whom telling this strange Story, and withal their fears, that upon her awaking (finding her mistake) she might fall into the like or worse Pangs; some advised, that the Child I had then Christen'd might be carried and shewed to her; that so time might be gain'd for the allaying of her Passion. Had now the Parents of this Child been content to forego it; it might have found a Mother, who would as verily have believ'd it to have been her Child, as thou believest thou art the Son of thine own Mother, or as thy Mother believes thee to be her Son. And had the Company been bound to keep si∣lence, he might have rock'd the Cradle, whose own the Child was not; and the Cobler's Son, on the surest side, might have proved the Gentleman's Heir. If Women's Fancy can thus impose upon their Wit, how much more easily may their Wit impose upon our Fancy; when they set their Inventions on work, how they may (in case of Barrenness, Abortion, &c.) free them∣selves from the frowns of their (upon that account churlish) Husbands; or gratify the longings of their otherwise repining and dis-satisfied Mates, with the joyful Acclamations of [God give you joy of your Son.] Canst thou give any other kind of Proof, that this was not thy case, than we alledg to prove it was not the Gospel's case. To be sure thou art not able to imagine any such Temptations to have pressed the Apostles, to the use of such Legerde∣main; as not only may rationally be supposed, but are actualy recorded, to have induced some Women to such like Practices. 3. Say thy mother used none of this craft, but was really delivered of a Son; What Evidence can she her self have, or those who were then about her give, that thou art that Child which was then born, [Verum est de factis nullam esse certam perceptionem; sed ea quae solent in conspectu hominum fieri sui generis certitudinem habent extestimonio: Quo sensu mater certa esse dicitur, quia in∣veniuntur qui quaeve partui & educationi adsuerunt:] (Grot. de jure, 2. 7, 8.) We cannot have a certain perception of matters of fact, but such things are done in the sight of men have that Certitude, is proper to them, by Testimony: in which sence the Mother is said to be certain, that such an one is her Child, because o∣thers were present at the Birth and Education of it, &c. Hence Menander saith, Mothers love their Children more tenderly than Fathers; because Mothers know them, but Fathers only deem them, to be theirs. Yet how many Miles does thy Mother's Grounds of this Certainty fall short of those, upon which the Belief of the Gospel's Legitimacy is grounded? What privy Mark could she give thee (at thy coming into the World) whereby she can assured∣ly know, that that Babe which the Midwife wash'd, and swadled, and pre∣sented to her was that which she was delivered of? Or if we presume the Midwife did honestly restore the Pledg (for our prudent Fore-fathers, to pre∣vent that collusion, which they providently foresaw might be used here, took the Midwives sworn: and perhaps when thou wast an Infant (and had not learn'd to discourse the World into a contempt of the Deity) Oaths were accounted sacred and obligatory;) yet what privy Mark did she take to know thee by, 10 or 20 Years after? (Sebastian King of Portugal was be∣holding to such a Mark, for his release out of the Goal of Venice, and for his restauration to his Crown;) and nothing would convince the sagacious Hy∣daspes that Characlea was the Child of his Queen, till Sisimithres made her strip her arm, and shew the print of an Elephant stamp'd thereon; a Mark which she brought with her into the World (Heliodor. Aethiopic. l. 10. cap. 15.) To whom did she communicate the knowledg of that Mark; for she
her self is but a single Testimony: whereas we have four, and all agreeing in the same Circumstances of every Story, better than any two ever did, in an History of such length and variety. I will not here urge that thy Mother might do all this, and yet not know who begat thee (and yet be an honest Woman, and true to thy Fathers Bed for ought she knew.) For such an ac∣cident might perhaps befall her, as befell the Widow of Burdeaux; of whom the Lord Montagne (l. 2. ch. 2. of his Essays) tells this story, that she was got with child, she knew not when, nor where, nor by whom; and therefore got the Parish-priest to cry the Father of it: and to publish in the Church, That whosoever he were that was guilty of that Fact, she would for∣give him, and (if he pleased) make him her Husband, &c. I doubt not but had her Husband been then living, she would have father'd it upon him, with as much confidence as thy Mother father'd thee upon hers. But say this was not her hap, to be taken asleep in the Chimney-corner: Wast thou chain'd to thy Cradle; and a Padlock hung at each end of the Chain: and the Keys deposited in the hands of sufficient Persons, of known Diligence and Integrity: for else, for ought that thou knowest, thou maist be a Fairy-Elf chang'd in thy Cradle. And verily, except thou canst disprove the truth of that Maxime, that [the Baptismal Character is indelible,] thy renouncing of it is a stronger presumption that thou art a Changeling, then any of those, than all those thou alledgest against the Gospel's legitimacy. And when thou wast loosed from thy Cradle: was a Chain (with the like Caution and Cere∣mony,) put about thy Neck and the Wrest of one or more Guardians, who led thee up and down like a Monkey, till thou came to Puberty (not to fix thee, that term of thy Walk, thou hast not yet attain'd to, years of discretion;) for else the Child that was then born may be secretly conveighed or made a∣way, and thou be nothing but a supposititious Perkin or Lambert (as it happen∣ed to the Duke of Clarence, and Edward the fourth's Children.) § 6. Besides, art thou the none-such of the World? may not another so near resemble thee, as a third man cannot discern which of the two thou art? Vi∣bius and Publicius were so like Pompey the great, that they were usually salu∣ted by one another's Names; and wheresoever either of them appear'd, the People stood up, as if Pompey had been in presence: this was Fortunes Play (saith my Authour, Valerius Maximus) with that Family; but she played fairer with him than she had done with his Father; for of him Menogenes his Cook was so perfect a Copy; as he could not (with all his Courage, or the Forces he commanded, repell the fastening of his Cook's name, upon him∣self; or of his honour upon his Cook. Neither the probity of Cornelius Sci∣pio his Manners, nor the reverence of his Ancestors, could hinder the insert∣ing, among the illustrious names of his Family, that of Serapion, the Sut∣ler; such was the resemblance betwixt them. Rome had two Consuls toge∣ther, who, when they sate in the Theatre, had as many Spectators as they that were upon the Stage; by reason of their resembling two Players: of one of which, [Spinther] Lentulus was sirnamed: and Metellus his Colleague had been branded by the name of the other, [Pamphilus] if he had not, in imi∣tation of his Nephew, repulsed it. But Mesalla his Consular Dignity and Office of Censor could not teach the People better manners, than to be-spat∣ter him with the Nick-name of Menogenes: nor Curio his many honours prevent his being called Burbulius: blots inured upon them, for their resem∣bling two Actors of those names. Artemon was so perfect a Samplar of King Antiochus, as Laodice having slain the King, placed him in his bed, where he so well acted the part of dying Antiochus, as the People admitted (in pretence) to here the last words of their departing Prince, believed verily they heard and saw the King himself committing, at his last gasp, Laodice and his Chil∣dren to their Fidelity. Hybreas the Oratour, in lineaments of Face and whole Body was so peer'd by the sweeper of his School, as the eyes of all Asia did as good as point him out for his Brother: all the mark of difference betwixt
them was the Oratour's fluent Tongue; (never was that of the Philosopher more seasonable then here [Loquere, ut te videam:] Speak that I may see thee.) The Proconsul of Sicily found a fellow of that Province, so perfectly like himself, as he could not imagine how that Oneness of shape should happen, seeing his Father never came into that Island; till the Sicilian quicken'd his fancy, rub'd up his invention, by telling him that his Father had often been at Rome. By means of this coincidence of outward Features, Speech, Garb, Port, &c. (improved by the art of palliation and personating) how many base fellows have insinuated themselves into noble Families, and Estates they were never born to. Equitius Firmianus (of no better Bran then the Picene Smelt-mills ground) made the people of Rome so verily be∣lieve he was the Son of T. Graccus, as they prefer'd him to the Tribuneship. Herophilus (a Horse-leech) by giving out himself to be the Grand-child of Caius Marius, obtain'd that repute; as many of the ancient Roman Plantati∣ons, the fairest Corporations, and almost all Societies within the Empire, chuse him their Patron: insomuch as he began to vie with Caesar in his great∣est glory (even after the Conquest of his Rival Pompey) in the point of Popu∣larity; and concluded with an attempt (after Caesar's murder) to send the Se∣nate after him. The sacred Majesty of the great and fortunate Augustus could not shield it self from this kind of injury: for a sawcy knave had the bold∣ness to fain himself the Son of his Sister Octavia; who had (as he said) for his exceeding deformity exposed him to a poor Woman, and taken her child in exchange for her own. Another had the face, to assert him∣self the Son of Q. Sertorius, and the luck to be believed; notwithstand∣ing that Sertorius his Lady could by no force be compell'd to own him; any more than all the Arguments we could use (from the Testimony of the Pa∣rish whence he was sent, from his wanting an eye and his having all the o∣ther marks which her Child had) would prevail with one of my reverend and religious Father's Parishioners, to acknowledg a Child for hers, which was sent to her out of Ireland, where she had formerly lived with her Husband. Trebellius Calca had so far insinuated into the People a belief, that he was the Son of Clodius; as Clodius his right heir had much ado to keep his Estate out of his clutches. In Sulla's Dictatorship, a rude Clown burst into the house of Cn. Asinius Dion, and casting his Son out of doors, took upon himself the name of Dion's Son, and the possession of his goods: which he kept till the Reign of Caesar. Smerdis, the Magus, might have passed still for Smerdis the Son of the great Cyrus; had he not been detected by his Ear-mark. That Jew of Sidon whom Josephus mentions (antiq. 17. 14.) did so perfectly re∣semble Alexander the son of Herod) (whom his Father had slain) as he per∣swaded all the Jews of Cyprus, yea all that set eyes upon him (every where) who had seen the true Alexander (and those most, that had been best acquaint∣ed with him) to believe, that he was the very Alexander; one of whom Celenus (a Freeman of Augustus) being sent by the Emperour to take a view of him, though he had been the play-fellow and most familiar acquaintance of Alexander, yet he could discern no difference betwixt him and this his Counterfeit: nor had he been detected, if the sagacious and Eagle-eyed Au∣gustus had not perceived wanting in him that softness of Hand, and grace of Body; which to persons of noble extract and delicate breeding, is heredita∣ry (Joseph, Antiq. 17. 18. Bel. Jud. 2. 5.) Examples are numberless of strange and base Slips that have been ingrafted into noble Families: infinitely more Persons have been suborned than Religions: and therefore if those presum∣ptions, which the Sceptick brings against our Religion, be applyed to Poli∣ticks, (and 'tis all the reason in the World that he should be forc'd to buy and sell by the same Bushel) down goes Nobility and Gentry, all distinction of Lines and Families, and all possibility of making good our claims of Honour, Patrimony, or whatever we hold by our Birthright: for upon his may-be-Principles, wherewith he militates against the Faith divine, he destroys all humane Faith, turns the World into a Chaos, and renders it disputable,
whether Augustus may not be a Baker's Son; our most famous God-born Heroes, the Sons of the Earth: the most splendid Princes and illustrious No∣bles, the Off-spring of Grooms and Muleters. I prostrate my self at the feet of his most sacred and serene Majesty, the Princes of the Royal Blood, and the rest of the honourable Nobility, for their favourable Interpretation of this freedom of Speech. To whom I will not make that Apology which St. Ambrose made for his to Valentinian; (lib. 5. Epist. 29.) neque imperiale est, libertatem dicendi negare; neque sacerdotale, quod sentiat, non dicere: (neither would it sute my case, with which St. Ambrose his [sentiat] will not comport: for I speak not what I think, but what the Atheist's Argu∣ments against the Scriptures would tempt Men to think.) But this, that my Parrhasie proceeds (next to the service I owe to the Blessed Jesus, and to the Souls for which he died) from the regard I have of their Honours, and that deep resentment of a design the Atheist is carrying on, to disseize them of their most deserved and indubitable Birth-rights; while he puts in these fee∣ble Exceptions against the Legitimacy of the Gospel, as may (with far more colour) be alledged against the Legitimacy of the most undoubted Heir appa∣rent. This Pillar and Foundation of Truth, [the Testimony of the Church primi∣tive and Universal,] taken from eye-witnesses (for Eusebius saith that Qua∣dratus made proof (to Adrian the Emperour) of the truth of Christ's mira∣culous Cures, from the testimony of many of those, upon whom they were wrought: who lived long after Christ's Ascention, and numbers of them unto that very time, when he wrote his Apology, Eus. hist. 4. 3.) This Pillar (upon which these Sampson-wits are leaning, with all their strength, to pull it down) cannot fall, but all our Birth-rights fall with it; as having nothing else to bear them up, but Pegs fasten'd to those Pillars, Stones built upon that Foundation [the testimony of particular and private Christians:] which if it be exauctorised, welcom that of Homer, in its most levelling sence. . And that of Menander . No man shall know where to find Father or Mother: we must draw lots for both Parents, as the Lybians did for the Father. We must be baptized after the Marcionist's form in the Name of the unknown Father (Irenae. l. 1. c. 18.) or each man know his own by presensation, as Jarchus (the Indian King) did the Parents of Apollonius (Philostratus lib. 3. de vita Apollonii.) Except being by this levelling Policy turn'd into. Terrae silios, we be resolv'd (with those Earth-born Brethren in the Poet) to destroy one another by end∣less contending. Tantum irreligio potuit suadere malorum. The irreligious imperswasibleness of the Sceptick, which inclines him to cavil at the Churches Testimony to the Truth of Evangelical History, and to question his own Christian-name; will, with more shew of reason, induce the World into a disbelief of every man's Sir-name, and bury all, men's Birth-rights in the rubbish of buzzing Exceptions: which strike their venomous Sting deeper into the sides of the State, than the Church; her Testimony be∣ing a better proof of the Gospel's Legitimacy than any man can produce of his own. [Audacter dico quòd sine fide neque infidelis vivit: nam si ab insideli per∣cunctari voluero quem patrem vel quam matrem habuerat? protinùs respondebit, illum atque illam: quem si statim requiram utrùm noverit quando conceptus sit, vel viderit quando natus? nihil horum vel se nosse vel vidisse fatebitur, &c.]
(Gregor. Dialog. l. 4. c. 4.) I affirm confidently (saith Gregory the great) that the very Infidel himself doth not live without faith; for if I ask an Infidel, who is his Father or Mother, he will forthwith answer, such a man, such a wo∣man: and if I then demand of him whether he knew when he was conceived or born, he will confess that he knew neither of these, but believes that he was begot∣ten by that man whom he calls father, of her whom be calls mother, upon the account of probable Testimony.] In se spuit qui in caelum spuit, he spits in his own face who spits in Heaven's face, as Seneca of old observ'd (consol. ad Polyb. c. 21.) and from him our Companella in his Atheismus triumphatus. CHAP. II. The Suffrage of the Adversary to the Testimony of the Church. § 1. Pagan Indictments shew what was found Christianity in Pagan Courts. § 2. Christian Precepts and Examples civilized the Courts of Heathen Emperours. § 3. Pliny's Information concerning Christians to Trajan. § 4. What it was in Christians that Maximinus hated them for. § 1. 1. TUrn over the Examinations, the Confessions, of Christians, in open Court, before Pagan Tribunals; where the same thing was done before the face of the Heathen World that was done at Baptism in the face of the Church. [Excepto martyrio, ubi tota Baptismi sacramenta complentur. Baptizandus confitetur fidem suam coram sacerdote, & interrogatus respondet; hoe & martyr coram persecutore facit: ille, post confessionem, vel asper∣gitur, vel intingitur; & hic vel aspergitur sanguine, vel contingitur igne: ille confitetur se mundi actibus renunciaturum, hic ipsi renuntiat vitae:] For this cause the ancient Fathers believed Martyrdom to supply the want of Water-baptism; because therein were performed all the Rites of Baptism: the Martyr confessed, before the Persecutor the same Faith, which he that was to be baptized confessed before the Priest: he, after Confession, was dipp'd or sprinkled with water; the Martyr either sprinkled with blood, or plung'd over head and ears in fire: he pro∣miseth that he will frsake the life of the World, the Martyr renounceth life it self; (Gennadius de eccles. dogmat. in appendice ad 3. tom. operum sancti Augu∣stini, pag. 384.) Let us, I say, examine the Confessions of Martyrs and in them you may find the Substance of the Gospel: peruse their Indictments against the Martyrs, examine what Crimes they charged Confessors with, what it was for which they raised against Christians those Out-cries [Christi∣ani ad Leones, away with these fellows to the Lyons;] they are not fit to live: they will not worship our Gods; they will not sacrifice for the Emperour's health; they worship for God one Jesus, who was born in Judaea, whom Pilate (at the request of his own Nation) put to death as an Impostor; who gave his followers a Law destructive to humane Societies, set up an unsocia∣ble, an unpracticable Religion, &c. And there we meet with the Sum of Christian Religion. St. James his Crime, for which Ananas the younger (the high Priest and a Saducee) put him to death, in the vacancy of a Go∣vernour (betwixt Festus his death and the coming of Albinus) was, that be∣ing ask'd, what he thought of Jesus that was crucified? he answered; why ask ye me of Jesus, the Son of Man, when as he sitteth at the right hand of the great Power in Heaven? and his asserting the Resurrection; (as saith Ae∣gesippus in Eusebius Ec. hist. 2. 3.) which the story, that Josephus gives, of his death, confirms; not only telling us that the Jews imputed the Fall of Je∣rusalem to their sin, in slaying that just Person; but that the whole body of the religious Jews moved Albinus to put Ananas from the High-priesthood,
for imbrewing his hands in the blood of so just a man; a title conferred up∣on him by that Party out of an Odium to the Sadducees; and because he died in witnessing to those Articles of Christian Faith, which oppose Saduceism (upon the very same account that they sided with St. Paul.) The questions upon which Domitian examined the reputed Kinsfolks of our Lord, were, concerning Christ and his Kingdom: in what manner, and when and where it should appear: to which they answered, that it was not Worldly or Earthly, but Celestial and Angelical; that it should come at the consummation of the World, when that he coming in glory shall judg the quick and the dead, and reward every man according to his works: (Eus. ec. hist. 3. 19. out of Aegesippus:) which story, together with that of the noble Flavia's banishment for the same Doctrine, he tells us, he found recorded in the Pagan Histories of that Age. In the persecution of the Gallican Church, under Antoninus Verus; his bloody Lieutenants writ the cause of their process against those Christians, to have been their professing Christ to be God; their refusing to give divine Worship to any but God, their believing the Resurrection, their communi∣cating in the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood: In their solicitating them, to renounce Christ, to adore their Pagan Gods; In their calumniate∣ing them with Thiestian Banquets (for which they had no ground, but the confessions of some that fell (under the weight of that intollerable Persecu∣tion) informing their Examiners, that in their sacred assemblies they ate and drank the Body and Blood of our Saviour: in answer to which misprision the Martyrs would usually argue; that it was extremely unlikely, that they should devour Infants, when their Religion did not suffer them to suck the blood of Beasts, nor to eat any Flesh with the Blood; (Tertul Apol. adv. gen∣tes:) taking that for their Medium, in their Disputes with Heathens upon this point, as a thing famously known.) And lastly in their burning their bodies to ashes, and throwing the ashes into Rhodanus; (when yet the Em∣perour himself bestowed an honourable Burial and Sepulchre upon his Horse Panasinus: (Julius Capitolinus in vero Imper.) whether in affront to our Christian hope I know not. But his Lieutenants did dissipate and drown the ashes of Christian Martyrs on purpose to prevent their Resurrection: whereof (say they) the Christians being fully perswaded, contemn Punishment, and hasten themselves chearfully to death: Now let us see whether they can arise, after this dissipation of their Bodies. All which the French Church hath left Re∣cords of (taken in open Court) in their Epistle to the Asian and Phrygian Churches: (Euseb. Eccl. hist. 5. 1.) § 2. If the Scepticks except against these Allegations; that we have them but at second hand, and not immediately from Pagan Records, and demand to see the Original; (though that be a request not all out so reasonable, as if a man, pretending to dissatisfaction in a Copy taken out of the Parish-re∣gister, certifying his Parentage, and attested to by the Incumbents hand; should demand to see the Register-book it self) we can gratifie his utmost cu∣riosity. For we may gather what kind of people Christians were, by taking out those Characters of them which Secular Historians give, while at once they describe the temper of those civilized Emperours who indulg'd them; and give in that Indulgence as the reason, of others raising persecution a∣gainst them: Alexander Severus (saith Lampridius) [Christianos esse passus est] permitted Christians. This he would not have done, had their Religion tole∣rated Theft, Uncleanness, Lying, Bribery, &c. which the Emperour so far hated; as he made Proclamation to forbid all such Criminals to salute either himself or Mother or his Wife, prohibited mix'd Baths; would not allow [Lenonum, & Meretricum & exolotorum vectigal in sacrum aerarium inferri,] the Tribute of Brothel-houses to come within the sacred Treasury. And yet his Court was so frequented with Christians: as Maximinus, his Successor, raised Persecution against them, out of that grudg he bare to the Family of Severus:
(Euseb. l. 6. c. 21.) And his Mother Mammea sent for St. Origen, and entertain'd him in the Court as her Chaplain (Id. Ib. c. 15.) to whom her son was [unicè pi∣us] above measure dutiful, and built in the Roman Palace Dining-rooms for her (Lamprid. Alex. Sever.) [Places (I suppose) separate from common use for the celebration of the Christian Feast.] He caused the sinews of the fingers of a No∣tary, who had delivered into the Court a false Breviat of a cause depending, to be cut off, that he might be disenabl'd ever afterwards to write; and yet he per∣mitted Origen, and other Christian Doctors, who gave in to the World a Bre∣viate of Christs Cause to reside in the Palace; an Argument that they were not in the least suspected of forgery: When a Nobleman of a sordid life, and given to bribery (who had procured some Kings to intercede to the Emperor for him, that he would bestow upon him some Military promotion) was admitted into his presence; he was in the Presence of his Patrons, convict of Theft (that is bribery) and by their sentence condemn'd to the Cross. Had the Preachers of the Cross been under suspicion of that, or the like Crime, they would have sped no better. He caused Turinus for lying, to be smoak'd to death in a fire of green wood, while the Cryer made this Proclamation [Fumo punitur, qui fumum ven∣didit,] Would so great an hater of Lyars have tolerated Christians, had they been guilty of that vice: Would he have honoured our Saviours Image, with a place in his Chappel (amongst those of Apollonius, Abraham, Orpheus, and others, whom he deemed choice men, and holiest Souls;) if the Doctrine he taught had been any other than pious, any other than what the Gospel com∣municates? Would he have taken up thoughts of building a Temple to Christ, and receiving him into the number of the Gods, but that he was ad∣vised, that the whole Empire would then turn Christian, and desert the Tem∣ples of all other Gods? If the Christian Religion had not exceld all others, and been then presented, according to the Evangelical pattern now in be∣ing? If the custom of Ordaining Christian Priests after trial (according to the now extant Evangelical prescript) had not been then in use in the Church? Would he (by name) have commended that Custom of Christians to the imitation of the Romans, in the appointing of Provincial Governours and Civil Officers. [Cùm id Christiani facerent in praedicandis sacerdotibus qui or∣dinandi sunt.] (Lamprid. Alex. Severus.) Had not the Christian Religion, then profest, been (as it is now) against serving the Belly? Would he have adjudged the benefit of a publiek place, which they had taken possession of, for Divine Service, rather to the Christians than to the Cooks? Whence learn'd he to offer those incomparable Jewels, which an Ambassador pre∣sented, to sale; and when he could not meet with a chapman would give the price; to hang them on the ears of Venus, rather than his Wives: but from that of St. Peter [whose adorning let it not be that outward of wearing of gold] This he did (saith Lampridius) to prevent the Queens giving bad Example to other Matrons, by this excess of costliness in Attire: who also (being a Pagan Histo∣rian) writes, That if any of his Soldiers had in their march, offered violence or done injury to any man, this Pagan Emperor would see him beaten before his face with cudgels orrods, or more grievously punish'd, if the offence deserv'd it: ingeminating to the offender, this expostulation [Wouldst thou have this done to thy self, and thy own possessions, that thou dost to another] (And that he was wont, while he was giving correction to the culpable, to cause proclamation to be made by a Cryer) [What thou wouldst not have done to thy self, do not to another] (quod à quibusdamsive Judae is sive Christianis audierat) which he had heard, either from some Jews or Christians. Thou mayst learn by this, Reader, that Lampridius was a Pa∣gan: for otherwise he would never have made such a dis-junction, as ascribes that saying to the Jew, which never came in his mouth: but downright have affirmed (as other Heathens did, who studied the Case of the Christians on pur∣pose to oppose it) that this was a Christian Proverb. Though that other Precept was originally Judaick which he walkt by, when in judging that Widows Cause, whom a Soldier had plundered of more than he could restore, he disbanded the Soldier, & made him work (at his carpenters trade) for the relief of the Widow. In
the History of this our Emperour, here are sufficient intimations given us of those Qualifications of the Christian Faith and Professors, as speak it, and them to have been such then, in the apprehension of Pagans, as they are given out to be in the Gospel at this day, viz. A Religion instituted by, and a Sect named from Christ, a Person of such holiness, as he deserved to be numbred in the rank of the best and divinest Philosophers, and would have been enrolled amongst the Gods, but for fear that the Religion of his Institu∣tion would put down all others; it containing those excellent Precepts, which so civilized the followers of his Doctrine, as they were permitted in the Court of this Emperour, whence all vicious persons were prohibited; and were of that use in the administration of the Affairs of the Empire, as this very best of Heathen Emperours took those Rules and Practices of Christi∣ans for his Pattern, which the Gospel exhibites. Should I prosecute the Reigns of the rest of the Emperours, who had a favour to Christians (though themselves were none.) It would swell my discourse to too great a bulk, I will therefore content my self with two instances more. § 3. One out of Pliny, who in laying down the Reason why Trajan remitted that persecution which his Predecessors had raised against Christians, presents them in their religious Assemblies and civil Converse, walking by that Rule of Faith and Manners, which is extant at this day in the Evangelical and Apo∣stolical Writings. This great Agent of State under Trajan informed the Empe∣rour, that by examining those that were brought before him, and accused as Christians, he had learn'd this to be the sum of their Religion (of their Crime or Errour, as Pliny calls it) [That upon stated days, they were wont to as∣semble before day to sing Songs, and make Prayers together to Christ, as God. To bind themselves by the Sacrament, not to any mischievous or dishonest action, but that they should not commit Thefts, Robberies, or Adulteries, that they should not break their word, betray their trust, or falsifie their promise; that they should not with-hold or deny the pledge, when they were call'd to restore it: That after the performance of Divine Service, their custom was to depart every one home, and afterwards to meet together again to take meat in common, to keep harmless Love-feasts.] This (saith he) I extorted, (and this was all I could learn by racking them to know the truth.) In the same Epistle, he testifies the won∣derful growth, and prevailing of the Christian Religion, through the perse∣verance of the Martyrs; multitudes professing it, of all Ages, Orders, Sexes in Cities, Villages, Hamblets; [Insomuch as the Idol-temples were almost left desolate, their Solemnities of a long time intermitted, the sale of Sacrifices and Victims, in a manner given over, by reason there were so few buyers.] (Plin. lib. 10. Ep. 103. Trajano) A description of the Religion and State of the Christian Church, (so exactly answering that which the Gospel gives, as if it had been transcribed thence,) is here drawn out to the life, and transmitted to us, by the Pencil and Pen of an Heathen, employed (by the Roman Em∣peror (to take an account of the Religion profest by Christians; to inform him∣self what it was, wherein they, so far differ'd from the Religions establish'd or allowed, by the Imperial Laws, as to be therefore universally hated: and taken from their mouths, that were [cognoscendis causis Christianorum] (Plin. ibid.) appointed to take cognisance of the causes of Christians (as such) brought before them. § 4. My last instance here shall be, the account upon which Maximinus raised the sixth Persecution, as it is laid down by Eusebius, (and proveable out of Lampridius and Capitolinus) [Maximinus, by reason of that grievous envy wherewith he burned against the Houshold of Alexander (where very ma∣ny Christians converst) stir'd up a bitter tempest of persecution against the Chri∣stian Pastors: because they had taught that Doctrine whereby the Imperial Court had been so much civilized] (Euseb. Hist. l. 6. c. 21.) This Beast (saith Capi∣tolinus) who was so cruel, as some called him, Cyclops; others, Busiris;
others, Phaleris; some Typho; (and the Senate inade publick, and the whole City private supplications, that such a Monster as Maximinus, might never be seen at Rome.) so Mortally hated Alexander for his severe Virtue, and the strictness of his Court: (to which he had brought it by converse with Christi∣ans, and by conforming his Government to their Precepts, (saith Lampridius in his Alexander) as the Vulgar charged him with the murder of Alexander: and moreover, he put to death all the Ministers of State, and Familiars of A∣lexander. [Dispositionibus ejus invidens] grieving to see so good men in place. If now thou wilt seek (Reader) what kind of Men and Courtiers they were, for whose Christian Manners this Monster hated them, and persecuted the Christian Doctors, for introducing this civilty into the Roman (then Pagan) Palace (and therewithall learn what went for Christian Virtue above 1400 years ago) thou wilt find that Maximinus persecuted as Christian those E∣vangelical Precepts which the Apostolical VVritings commend to us, and are not to be found, but there, or in Books derived from thence. And thou needest not go far for a resolution of this enquiry: for Lampridius will resolve thee, who in answer to that Question of Constantine [How Alexander a stranger born of Syrian extract, became so excellent a Prince?] tells him, That though he could alledge the indulgence of Mother Nature (who is a Step∣dame to no Country) and the fate of Heliogabalus (which might have terrified him from vicious living) yet because he would suggest to him the very truth, he commends to him what he had already written, and Constantine read (I sup∣pose touching the favour he had to Christians, and his sucking in their Pre∣cepts) upon the perusal whereof, and reflexion upon that saying of Marius Maximus [It is better and more safe for the Republick, that the Prince himself be evil, than that his Friends and Counsellors be so; for one evil man may be over∣sway'd by a multitude of good men; but a multitude of bad men can by no means be brought into order by one, though never so good a Prince.] And that An∣swer, which Homulus gave to Trajan, when he said, that Domitian was the worst of men, but had good Friends and Agents. [He must needs be a worse Prince than Domitian, who being a better man than he, had committed the administra∣tion of publick affairs to men of a bad life.] He presents it to Constantine as a thing not at all strange, that Alexander should prove so good a Prince; se∣ing by following his Mother Mammaea's instruction, (which she had learnt of her Christian Doctors) he himself became the best of men. [Optimus fuit, optimae matris consiliis usus] and had constituted his Court, and adopted fa∣miliars of men, [not malicious, not ravenous, not thievish, not factious, crafty, con∣senting to evil, haters of goodness, lustful, cruel, circumventors, scorners: But ho∣ly, venerable, continent, religious, lovers of their Prince, who would neither re∣proach him, nor be a reproach to him, who would take no bribes, would not lye nor dissemble, nor betray their trust, but love their Prince.] such singly as one of them (Catilius Severus) he stiles [vir omnium doctissimus,] another, (Aelius Serenianus) [vir omnium sanctissimus;] another (Quintillius Marcel∣lus) [quo meliorem nè historia quidem continet] another (Fabius Sabinus [Cato sui temporis, &c.] And altogether, such, as gave occasion to the Senate (af∣ter that, by the overthrow of Maximinus, the affairs of the Roman Empire were brought to that state, wherein Alexander left them) to congratulate the new Emperours (Maximus and Balbinus) with the wish of Scipio Affrica∣nus [ut in eo statu dii Rempublicam servarent in quo tunc esset, quòd nullus me∣lior inveniretur] (Julii Capitolini Max. & Balbin.) That the Gods would pre∣serve the Common-wealth in that State wherein it was, there being no better imagi∣nable than that which Alexander following those Evangelical Precepts (which are at this day given out as the peculiar Doctrine of our Saviour) had reduc'd it to: for the publishing of which, Maximinus hated and persecuted to death the Christian Doctors. So that as our ruled Law-cases inform us what is Treason, Felony, &c. So we may inform our selves of the great things of Christs Law, by observing what Pagan Judges found to be Christianity, and censur'd in them as criminal. This is one most unsuspectfull way,
whereby it hath pleased God to hand down Religion to us, upon which gracious Providence let me make these Reflections, to enforce it upon our Minds. 1. What we meet with in such Records, is Christianity confest with a witness; tis Christianity writ in the blood of the Professors of it; It is Christs Name in Capitals superscribed over his Cross, (the truely venerable Relicks of Martyrs) whose Tombs would speak, were the Scriptures silent; the preaching of the Cross by men not coming from the dead with it, but (what is more powerful) going to death for it. 2. As the Original Testimony of Christian Confessors, is in this case very venerable; so the Transcript of that Testimonie is very credible: it being conveighed to us from them by the hands of most malicious enemies; whose wrath the Lord so far restrain'd, as to make the remainder of it praise him, and serve his Church. Had Rome Heathen not been more ingenious than Rome Papal; she might either have thrown the Confessions of Martyrs into the fire with their Authors, or have left them to Posterity so mangled and dis-figured, as we should not have been able to have pick'd one word of the Gospel Religion out of them; nor have known any whit better for what they suffer'd, than we can now know out of Popish Records, what Jerom of Prague, John Huss, Wickliff, and the Waldenses suffer'd for; scarce one of forty of those Articles they are charged with, being to be found in their own Writings, or the most authentick Histories of them. This is one part of that Mystery of Iniquity (to put Saints into Devils-hoods, Fools-coats, and Wild-beasts skins, that they might have some colour for bayting them;) which was not working so early as Pagan persecution; And through Gods thus restrayning the Heathens malice, it comes to pass, that we have a true account out of their own Court-rolls, what they charged Christians with, the Life-blood of the Gospel conveighed to us from the heart of the Martyrs, by the hands of Persecutors. CHAP. III. The Substance of Christian Religion, as it stands now in the Gospel, is to be found in the Books of its Ad∣versaries. § 1. The Effigies of the Gospel is hung out where it is proscribed. § 2. Hiero∣cles, attempting to out-oye Jesus with Apollonius, hath presented to the World the Sum of Evangelical History. § 3. More Apes of Christ than Apollonius. § 4. Christ's Doctrine may be traced out by the foot-steps of the Hunters who pursued it. § 1. 2. THe Substance of the Gospel is delivered to us in the Polemical VVritings of such as did most hotly and cunningly oppose it. As we may learn, out of the Thomists confutations of them, what are the opinions of the Scotists: and out of the Scotists opposing of them, what are the opi∣nions of the Thomists (bating their mistating the Question, and their wrest∣ing the Terms of it, to serve their own turn:) so we may gather the main Points of Christianity out of those Authors, who set themselves to oppose it (saving that here and there they pervert its sence, to make it more odious.) The Effigies of the Gospel (though bespattered with their dirty misinter∣pretations) is hung forth there, where it is proscribed, in those Books, where it is condemned. I am perswaded, by that little I have read, and that much I have observed, in that little reading, looking that way; that a man furnish'd with leisure, and the conveniencie of Libraries, might find
out, not only the general Sum of the Gospel, but the Contents of every Book, comprised in the undoubted Canon, under the Rubbish of Pagan Controversies and Calumnies against the things therein specified. The Roots of every material Gospel-truth (that flower and blow within the Pale of Christ's inclosed Garden) may be found (if we dig there for them) in the outward Court or VVaste that has been troden down of the Gentiles. The Tables of Christ's Royal Law (that hang out bare, and to open view, on the Pillars of the Church) lie buried under the earth (tepidae & trepidae con∣tradictiuneulae, to use St. Austins phrase) Of Pagan tepid and trepid Contradiction, in the very Temple of the Idolaters, in the strong holds of those that have captivated them (but as the Philistines did the Ark) till we fetch them thence. Did we mistrust all the Copies of the Gospel in our own hands, we might fetch an undoubted one out of the Enemies Tents; and as intire as the Ark, and its appurtenances were (when David brought it back out of the Land of the Philistines) not a Pin wanting in the Tabernacle, not a tittle wanting in the Book of Testimony. 1. We have a compleat History of the Miracles mentioned in the Go∣spel, in those Pagan Writers, whose drift is, either to paralel or out-vye Christ and his Apostles, in those mighty VVorks were done by them (as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses) by presenting, to the fascinated eye of the mind, shadows of those substantial VVonders, which Christ and his A∣postles wrought: In their VVritings you may see the Star that guided the Wisemen to our Saviour, hear the Angels singing his Genethliacum; here you meet with Persons of mean Extract and Education, arrived (ex tempore) to that height of knowledge, as the greatest Philosophers have been silenc'd by them (as the Scribes, Pharisees and Lawyers were by Christ) here you have produced Examples of men, that have cured the blinde, lame, possest; with a touch, with a word, with a nod; that have raised the dead, that have themselves been restored to life, after they had been dead, not only days, but years, have been taken up into the Clouds; have obtained divine Honours, Temples and the repute of Gods. This is a manifest Argument of the Pa∣gans assenting to the Truth of Gospel-history, of their acknowledging Christ to have done those wonders the Gospel reports of him. Else what needed this waste of like Narratives? VVhy did the Aegiptian Sor∣cerers make shew, that they could turn a Rod into a Serpent, if they had not seen Moses his Rod first turned? the Truth always goes before the coun∣terfeit. VVhile I lead my Reader (that I may give him a prospect of this Truth) into those places which are most infested with pestilential Airs: to secure himself from the malignity thereof, let him take this Antidote, made up of these cautionary ingredients. 1. As to Matters of Fact, there is as wide a difference betwixt our and their reports (in point of the credibility of the evidence) as is betwixt the Fables of Tom. Thumb, the Tales of Robin Hood; and the most authentick Chronicles. Ours being of things done before many VVitnesses, in the open Sun; their's in a corner, and for which we have nothing but the bare word of him that did them, or his that reports them. Diocles his Author, Phi∣lostratus, grounds all his whole stories upon the report of Demaris, the Disci∣ple and Servant of Apollonius: most of which happened before Demaris saw Apollonius his face, and many of which were done behind Demaris his back, in his absence from his Master: So that all depend originally upon Apollonius his own Testimony of himself. 2. As to the Pagans exceptions against the Articles of the Christian Faith, they proceed upon these Fallacies. 1. Upon their misunderstanding some words, which we use in a peculiar sence, or they wrest from their common sence. 2. Upon their confounding [the divine Oeconomy,] the distinction of
the two Natures, in the person of our Saviour; concluding he is not God, from such things as he did or suffered, on purpose, that he might declare him∣self Man. 3. And for their Cavils against our Christian Morals, they are raised. 1. From their not distinguishing betwixt God's changing of his Me∣thods of Providence to us, and his changing of his own mind in himself: Or, 2. From their mis-applying, to the external Court, those Laws Christ in∣tended for the Court of Conscience. What falls not under these I shall solve as I meet with them (if I think them worth answering.) In the Interim, having thus secur'd my Reader from mortal danger, I shall venture to give him a sight of Christ, in the High Priest's Hall, before Pilat's Judgment-seat, in the crowd of those that cried [crucifie him.] Vo∣piscus (in his Aurelian) hath this Story: When Aurelian found the Gates of Thiana shut against him, he said in a rage, that he would not leave a dog a∣live in that Town: but the Town being taken, when his Souldiers (think∣ing to gratifie his fury) ask'd him if they should depopulate that place: he bid them kill all the Dogs they found there, but not a man save Heraclom∣mon, who betrayed his native place, and therefore would never be true to him This alteration of the Emperour's mind (saith Vopiscus) is reported by some grave men, and recorded in some Books of the Ulpian Library, to have been occasion'd by Apollonius Thyanaeus his Ghost's appearing to him, and saying, [Aureliane, si vis vincere, nihil est quod de civium meorum nece cogites: Aure∣liane, si vis imperare, à cruore innocentium abstine: Aureliane, si vis vincere, cle∣menter age.] who was there amongst men more holy, more venerable, more august, more divine than this Apollonius? he raised the dead to life, he did and said many things beyond humane Power, upon the account whereof, he was worshipped as a God, &c. But, as such things would never have been invented of him, if they had not seen such things done first by Christ: So Vopiscus hath no Author for all the strange stories of Apollonius, but Philostra∣tus; I shall therefore wave reflecting upon him, till I have shewed how § 2. Hierocles (out of the History of Philostratus) attempts to compare A∣pollonius to our Saviour, in the point of Miraculous Works, and stupendious Occurrencies. (Upon the account of this conceited resemblance Alexander Severus had his Image, together with Christ's, in his Chappel, amongst the Images of the chief Gods:) (Lampridius.) The Angel Gabriel appears to the Mother of our Lord; to his, a Fantasm that called himself the Egyptian Proteus. Angels sung at Christ's Birth; at his a Flock of Swans: (Philo∣strat. de vita Apol. lib. 1.) Christ was not brought up in the Schools of the Prophets, yet attain'd that height of Knowledg, as he understood more than all the Doctors; knew what was in the hearts of men. Apollonius (as Phi∣lostratus reports from Damaris) told Damaris at their first congress, that with∣out artificial instruction in the knowledg of Tongues and Sciences, he was naturally endowed with a presention of things, could understand all Lan∣guages, the voices of Birds (so as he would ordinarily discourse with them;) yea the secret thoughts and conceits of men. Appollonius understood a Spar∣row, that came to inform a Flock of Sparrows, that at the Gate an Ass was fallen down under his burden, and had spilt the sack of Wheat. Porphiry triumphs in this story, and would prove its likelihood by two others (Tiresias and Melampus) who understood the voices of Beasts (in 3 de abstinen.) but Lucian (in his Alexander) affirms this Apollonius to have been an arrant Cheat∣er saith (Vossius de orig. idolat. lib. 3. cap. 44.) Christ made an escape through the throng of his enemies, unseen, unobserved by them; Apollonius could convey himself out of prison, out of the closest chains: Christ was transfi∣gured before the Apostles; Damaris observ'd Apollonius frequently to have assumed a form more august than humane, to have been elevated two cubits
above the Earth, and to have hung as a glorified body in the Air, by an art he had learn'd of the Indian Brachmans: (Philostratus, lib. 1. & 3.) Christ fed many thousands with five Loaves, and at another time four thousand with se∣ven Loaves: Apollonius was present when the Indian Brachmans entertain'd King Jarchus with a Banquet upon the ground: where the earth (ex tempore) brought forth grassy Beds, for the Guests to sit down on; where they were served by four brazen Statues (in stead of Cup-bearers) with Wine and Wa∣ter, flowing from four three-footed stools, as so many living Fountains: (I∣dem Ibidem.) Christ foresaw the Earthquakes, Pestilences, &c. that forerun the destruction of Jerusalem: Apollonius foretold the Pestilence that Ephesus was afflicted with: (Philost. lib. 4.) of which being accused unto Domitian (as proceeding from his practising of prohibited Arts) he excused it, by this Apology for himself; that he using a more fine and sober diet than other men, his spirits were thereby so refined, as he could perceive the corruption of the Air, long before others felt the mortal effects of it: (Philost. lib. 7.) But could he sent at that distance that Daniel or our Saviour set the Roman Eagles? Moses and Elias confer'd with Christ in the Mount, in their glorified forms: Apollonius had discourse with the Ghost of Achilles arising out of his grave, apparel'd in a Souldiers coat; and of the stature of five at first, after∣wards of twelve Cubits) about Homer's History of the Trojan War; till the Lyon-like apparition was, by the crowing of a Cock, frighted into his hole: (Idem ibid.) Christ cast out Devils, so did Apollonius, and that of both Sexes; one a Male, out of a lascivious Youth; another a Female, which Phi∣lostratus calls Empusa (for he must be feigned to make the Devils confess their names, as well as Christ did that Legion, wherewith the Gaderene was pos∣sessed.) He is said to raise a Roman Damsel from death to life: Which if they were any thing but mere Fictions, his emulous Rival in Philosophy (Eu∣phrates) then living in Rome, would (without doubt) have put them in a∣gainst him, among those Articles he prefer'd to Domitian. Our Saviour told the Woman of Samaria all the Occurrences of her life: Apollonius is brought upon the Stage by Philostratus (lib. 5.) telling a Piper his Pedigree, Estate, and all the Fortunes he had passed through, &c. Because Christ saith of himself, By me Kings reign: Vespasian is introduc'd begging the Empire of Apollonius, and Apollonius returning him answer, that he had already decreed him Emperour. Christ knew what was in man; and therefore this Ape must be reported, to understand what the sufficiencies of all men were: in∣somuch as his Censures past for Oracles with Vespasian; who merely upon A∣pollonius his assuring him (from a gift of seeing into men's hearts) that they were wise and honest men, retain'd Dion and Euphrates into his Council, and most secret designs: though in the sequel of the story, his memory fails the Fabler: for him whom Apollonius had commended to the Father (Ve∣spasian) as a just and wise man; he declaims against to the Son (Domitian) as a flattering Parasite, &c. [Caupo est, cupedinarius, publicanus, faenerator, &c.] But that was after Euphrates had cryed out first, and accused him as a Wizard. However this is enough to spoil his Divination, and to evince that he could not foresee that Euphrates would become his enemy, any more than he could foreknow that Domitian would not permit him to repeat that elaborate Oration, he had with so much pains pen'd and prepared: (Euseb. in Hiero. Clem. lib. 7, 8.) Had the Children held their peace, the stones would have cryed, Hosannah to the son of David. This was it that put words into the mouth of that Elm, that in an articulate and womanly slen∣der Voice, welcom'd Apollonius to among the Egyptian Gymnosophists. (Philostrat. lib. 6.) By the invocation of Christ's name after his Assension, Miracles were effected: That they might make Apollonius vye in this particu∣lar, with the blessed Jesus; there were some who affirmed, they had experienc'd a Magical Virtue in his name towards miraculous Operations. And lastly, (for I am weary of tracing him () foot by foot, where he is made to tread in Christ's steps) As Christ ascended into Heaven; so did he (if Philo∣stratus
be to be believed) whither he was invited and taken up by a chore of Fe∣male-angels, or Virgin-nymphs: his Tomb being no where to be found, though Philostratus sought for it, through the whole World: though with∣al he tells us, he knows nothing touching his death, nor do Authors (saith he) agree touching his departure; some saying, it was at Ephesus; others, in the Temple of Minerva Lindia: others, in the Island of Crete: and him∣self (a little before) (lib. 7.) at the Bar, where he stood indicted of Witch∣craft, before Domitian: to whom after he had proclaimed that petulant and boasting bravado: [thou canst not keep my body bound, nor kill me (Caesar) for I am death-less:] he presently vanish'd out of humane sight. § 3. Hierocles was not the only man that made those odious Compari∣sons, neither was Apollonius the only man that was compared to our Jesus; but Apuleius and others, as Marcellinus tells St. Austin. [Apollonium siqui∣dem suum nobis, & Apuleium aliósque Magicae artis homines in medium profe∣runt, quorum majora contendunt extitisse miracula:] (Marcel. Augustino ep. 4.) The Pagans, (saith he, of whom we have great store in this City) set before us their Apollonius, Apuleius, and other persons; who by the help of Magick have done greater Miracles than Christ. Insomuch as that question was then worn thread-bare, and managed on their part with all subtilty, and patronized by great men and Wits, who moved every stone, ransack'd every corner, of Divine and Secular History, that they might parallel Christs migh∣ty Works, and that no line in Christ's face, no lineament in his whole body, might pass without a parallel. Upon this subject, saith Celsus (in Orig. l. 7. cal. 76.) If you have a mind to believe stories of men being made Gods, and to fasten that Privilege upon any one, whose life and death make them wor∣thy of that honour; had not Hercules or Aesculapius pleased you, you had Orpheus; who without doubt was inspired with a divine Spirit, and died a Martyr to Philosophy, by the hands of the enraged frows of Bacchus. And if the cause of his death mislike you: (and truly who but a sorbid Epicure can like it?) for he deservedly contracted the just hatred of all Womankind, by his singing the flagitious brutishness of the Gods, in their unnatural Gani∣median Lusts: [nonnulli aiunt quòd Orpheus primus puerilem amorem induxe∣rit, mulieribus visum contumeliam fecisse, illis, ab haue rem interfectum, &c. (Higini poetic. astron. Lyra.) some say Orpheus first introduc'd the unnatural love of boys, which women taking as a reproach to their Sex did therefore slay him.) However had not Orpheus pleased you (saith Celsus) you might have pitch'd up∣on Aristarchus, who (being cast into a Mortar) in the midst of his pains utter'd this egregious speech, the result of a truly divine spirit; [pound, bray Aristar∣chus his pelt, for thou canst not bray Aristarchus himself.] Or Epictetus, who when his master was racking his Thigh, (smiling, and without fear) told him, [if he did not take heed he would break his Thigh:] and when he had broken it, did I not tell thee (saith he) thou wouldst break my Thigh. What did your God utter (saith Celsus) in the time of his suffering comparable to these men? (Ans. he prayed for his enemies and prevented the breaking his Thigh or one of his bones.) The same Celsus (in Orig. 1. 21.) Does as good as assent to the truth of the Evangelical History that gives an account of Christ's Miracles; confessing, that by reason thereof many believed in him: and calumniating them, as proceeding from Magick: in which point he had been equall'd if not exceeded by many, who never gain'd thereby the repute of being Gods. [Deum Deique Filium nemo ex talibus signis & rumo∣ribus tàmque frigidis argumentis approbat:] (2. 24.) Xamolxis, Pythagoras, Rampsinitus, who is said to have played at Chess with Ceres, and to have brought away from the dead, her golden Mantle as a prize: Orpheus, Prote∣silaus, Theseus, Hercules (cal. 41.) I have often wonder'd that the blessed Jesus would sit still, while his picture was drawing by such cursed hands, to such a contumelious end, against his sacred person. But his omniscience foresaw, that an Age was approaching, when it would be disputed; whe∣ther
that be his true portraiture, that is drawn in the Gospel? whether he was such an one, and did those miraculous Works; as he is there described to be, and declared to have done? And his mercy provided for the satisfaction of all (that are not peevishly captious) by permitting the Heathen to draw one after that, in all points so like it, as the most curious eye can find no more difference, betwixt that which the Church hangs forth (to be worship'd) and that which the Heathen World hung out (to be scorn'd) than there was (from it self) in that homely piece, which the Sexton hung up (for the Image of our Saviour▪ over the Altar: and the Priest caused to be taken thence, and hung in the Belfry (for the Picture of the Devil;) if I may use, in so sacred a business, so homely an illustration. That which the Pagans drew and hung in the Belfrey, is the same with that which the Church drew and set over the Altar: not one prodigious Circumstance in this that is not in that; the Clay presents as full a proportion of the golden Key, as the Wax. So that had we lost the impression of it in the Churches Wax (in the sacred History) we mightmake another, by taking the Pattern of it that's drawn in the Clay of Pagan Fables, which emulate and counterfeit the sacred stories of Christ's mighty Works. § 4. 2. We may infallibly know which way the Lamb of God has gone, by following the steps of his pursuers, where they have been hunting to death his Doctrine, as well as works. There being not one Branch of Christ's Roy∣al Law planted on the Tree of Life (in the midst of the Garden:) that the Pagan Antagonists have not attempted to graft, upon the Wildin of the For∣rest; or transplanted grafts of, into their Discourses against that Law. Can any man question whether Christ preach'd that Sermon in the Mount (that Breviate of Christian Morality) in that very form wherein the Evange∣lists record it, that observes, how many exceptions the World made against Christianity, upon the account of that Sermon, of which Marcellinus thus complains to St. Austin: (Epist. 4.) The Pagan Philosophers in this place (saith he) perswade those, that are not well setled in the Christian Faith, to waver; by propounding such like Scruples. How can Christ's erecting a new Law, stand with the goodness of the old? if they of old said well, why does he come after them with his; [but I say unto you:] How is it consist∣ent with God's Immutability, to command one thing by Moses, another by Christ: [Ista varietas inconstantiae Dominum arguit.] Respon. Their Fellow∣philosopher, Jamblicus, will tell them. [Deus diversos suppeditat modos, non quidem distractus ipse, sed individuo nutu, formâque simplici suggerit omnes: & diversis temporibus suggerit diversos, non ipse per tempora varius:] (de mysteriis, pag. 74, 76.) God vouchsafes several ways to reveil himself; not that he is di∣stracted in mind, but he suggests them all by one individual will and simple form, divers in divers ways, in divers times; but he himself is not various, but one in all times. having so good an Antidote prepared by a Pagan Philosopher's hand, I shall venture to lay before my Reader the discourse of that grunting Philosopher Celsus; who upon the same Instances calumniates Christian Re∣ligion, as charging Mutability on God. [How comes it to pass that God by Moses should commend the getting of wealth and of power, to fill the Earth with Progeny, to extirpate whole Nations, &c. but his Son makes Laws directly contra∣ry: not so much as allowing access to the Father to any man, that shall seek to grow rich, or aspire to greatness, dominion or honour in the World: and command∣ing us, to take no more thought for food, than the fowls of the Air; for cloathing than the Lillies of the Field, &c.] [Uter mentitur, Moses, vel Jesus? an forte Pater, cum hunc mitteret, oblitus erat ejus, quòd Mosi priùs mandaverat? an damnatis propriis legibus mutavit sententiam, & cum contrariis mandatis misit nuntium?] (Orig. con. Cels. 7. 7.) But let's hear the remainder of the Phi∣losopher's Exceptions, in Marcellinus, who thus proceeds. How destructive to Commonwealths, how unpracticable among men, is that Law of Christ which commands us, [not to return evil for evil; to turn the other Cheek to
him that smiles on the one, to give our Coat also to him that takes away our Cloak, to go two miles with him that constrains us to go one?] For who can endure that any thing should be taken from himself by an enemy, and not seek re∣paration? that the plunderers of the Roman Provinces should not be forc'd (by right of War) to make restitution? &c. Here the Philosoper mis-ap∣plies to publick Justice, what Christ enacted against private Revenge. Deo gratias informs the same Father, (St. August, Epist. 49.) that the Disci∣ples of Porphyry made these Exceptions against the Evangelical Precepts. [If none but he that does these sayings of Christ lays a sure foundation of hope for e∣ternal life, what became of those that lived before Christ? must we exclude our Fore-fathers from hope of salvation? If there was a door open for them what need any other now?] This hath been answered before out of Jamblicus. But thus the Platonicks proceed. [Does not your Christ ridiculously contradict him∣self; when in one place, he threatens eternal punishments to them that believe not in him; and in another saith, [with what measure men mete it shall be mea∣sured to them again?] for if punishment be to be proportion'd by measure, and measure be circumscribed by the bounds of time, what mean his threats of infinite suffering? The Platonick's Falacy here lies in two things. 1. In their wresting Christ's saying [with what measure] into a compli∣ance with their Master's Placit. That all penal Purification (as they call'd it) was limited to certain Periods of Time; after the expiration whereof the Soul was to be restored into the state wherein it was, before it contracted guilt: in pursute of which Placit St. Origen thought the Devils should be dis∣charged after a long imprisonment: 2. In their making Christ's expressions of [eternal fire] of [the worm that never dies, &c.] to contradict that former notion of receiving by measure; whereas it is manifest, that Christ speaks not of measure of time, but pro∣portion of kind and degree, betwixt doing and receiving good or evil. To return to Pagan Testimony, for the truth of Christ's delivering that his Royal Law, which the New Testament hangs out the Table of; we find the Adversary attesting to Christ's dispencing of it, as to several other heads of it. While Celsus will needs make the Royal Law useless and needless, as to the most part of it; There is nothing (saith he) in the Christian Discipline new, or worthy of commendation, but is common to it and the Philoso∣phers; who, before Christ, have taught [that there is to be expected Rewards of Virtue, and Mulcts for Sin, in the other World:] (Orig. contr. Cel. 1. 4.) Christ tell us (saith he) we ought not to worship Gods made with hands, that the Father is to be worship'd in Spirit. Why? we Philosophers account not I∣mages of the Gods to be Deities (we know that the Workmanship of wicked Artificers and villanous men (as many times they are that grave these Ima∣ges) cannot be Gods;) we have learn'd of Heraclitus, that they who adore liveless Statues do as simply as they that talk to Walls: of the Persians, that the Deity is not comprehended within any Structure made with hands: and of Zeno Citiensis (in his Book of the Common-wealth) that he need not build Chappels, that prepares the Temple of his own Soul, for the enter∣tainment of God. Those very Laws, which the Madaurencian Philosophers blamed (as destructive to humane Societies) Celsus mentions with Commendation: as far more ancient than Christ. They have also (saith he) these Laws: [Thou must not repel injuries: If any man smite thee on thy cheek, turn the other to him:] this is an old Dictate, long since utter'd by Socrates, when he was disputing with Crito, and mention'd by Plato in his Timaeus: (Orig. contr. Cel. 7. 17.) upon the same account he mentions the commendations which Christ gives to Humility, Purity of Heart, Pacateness of Spirit, &c. as bet∣ter expressed by Plato; (in his Books of Laws) advising him that would be happy, to pursue Righteousness with an humble, pure and pacate Mind: (Id lib. 5. cal. 8.) And the Caution that Christ gives against Covetousness, Celsus (in the same place) affirmeth to have been derived from Plato; whose saying,
[that it is impossible, for any man to be very rich, and very good.] he paral∣lels to that of Christ: [It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.] (The mortiferous∣ness of these Waters is to be cured, by casting in that cruze of Salt, which I have already exhibited, and brought to hand in the second Book; where I shewed, that whatsoever points of abstruse knowledge occurr in the Schools, they are beholding to the Temple for, and are but Beams of that Light, which Christ (or his Spirit in the Prophets) communicated to the World, the last of which Prophets Writings, are near as old, as the first of Gentile Philosophers.) It were endless to enumerate the ecchoes of Christs Law, which those Rocks that oppose it, so articulately reverberate; as a steadily listning. Ear may take in the beginning, middle and end of every Evangelical Precept, from those mock-sounds in Heathen Authors. I shall not therefore enlarge this Section with more Instances: but conclude it with this Observation; That the Adversaries, in making reply to our urging them with the excel∣lencie of Christs Law, would not have taken that course, as puts them upon such self-contradictory Salvoes; if they durst for very shame (the contrary was so palpable) have denied them to be Christs. Briefly we find in the Pagan Writers, what they took to be Christ's Law; and that which they opposed (as such) is the very same with that, that the Gospel presents, as such; not one Egg is more like another, than that Bracelet of Pearls, which our Saviour fitted to the necks of his Disciples, is to that, which these im∣pure Swine trample under their feet. CHAP. IV. Every Article of the Apostles Creed to be found, as as∣serted by the Church, in those Writings which opposed Christian Religion. § 1. Maker of Heaven and Earth. § 2. His only Son. § 3. Conceived by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary. § 4. Suffered under Pontius Pi∣lat, &c. § 5. Rose again the third day. § 6. Ascended into Hea∣ven: thence, &c. § 7. The holy Ghost. § 8. Holy Catholick Church, &c. § 1. 3. THe sum of the Christian Faith, taught by Christ and his Apo∣stles, is intirely (and in every branch of it) recorded, as such in the Authors that disputed against it. For order and brevities sake, I shall here instance in the several Articles of it, comprised in (that most admirable Compendium of it) the Apostles Creed; which, as it has been taken for such by all Christians, so it has been op∣posed, as such, by all Adversaries. Article 1. [I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.] That this Article, as it is now profest by the Church, and laid down in the New Testament, was from the beginning held forth, as a point of that Doctrine, which Christ and his Apostles Preach'd (and therefore not wrong∣father'd upon them) is manifest from those quotations out of Pagan Au∣thors, who affronted it, upon that very account and only Reason; because it was Christ's Doctrine.
Celsus, from the practice of the Ophiani (Hereticks who worship'd the Serpent, as bestowing upon our first Parents the knowledge of good and evil, a gift which God envied them, as they blasphemously speak) objects; that Christians (contrary to that faith which they profess) worship another God than the Creator of all things, to wit, the Serpent (Or. Con. Cels. 5. 16.) (As Celsus doth here confess, that that Doctrine which our Bible exhibites, touching Gods prohibiting Adam to eat of the Tree of Knowledge, and the Serpents prevailing with Adam to eat of that Tree, and the opening of Adam's eyes thereupon to discern good and evil, and the Serpents infinuating to Adam, that God envied him that knowledge, &c.) was the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; so his charging upon the Church that impious Practice of these Heriticks misgrounded upon the Churches Faith, and which the Church exprest her abhorrencie of, was no more equal dealing than that which the Romanists measure out to the British and other Protestant Churches, when they lay to her charge the practices of such as are at as great a distance from Communion with her, as with them.) You Christians (saith Celsus) profess you believe in, and worship God the Creator of this Uni∣verse; but since Plato saith, it is hard to find out and know that God, and impossible to communicate the knowledge of him to another, is it like that you (of all other men) should attain to the knowledge of this God, being fast bound in chains of ignorance, so as you cannot see what is pure (Idem. 7. 14.) (Compare what the Christians teach, with what the Philosophers guess concerning God; and the controversie, which of us have attained to a more perfect knowledge of God? will easily be determined.) That God created man after his own Image, was the Doctrine of Christ and the Pri∣mitive Church; appears from Celsus his arguing; that if the Christans de∣nyed, that God was first to be represented by Images made like man: they overthrew their own Doctrine, [that man was made after the similitude of Cod.] (Id. Ib. cal. 19.) The Son is the only express Image of the Fathers Person, and therefore we worship him by that Image only.) Nay, he ar∣gueth for the worshipping of Angels and Daemons, from what Opinions Christians hold touching the Creation: you profess (saith he) that all Crea∣tures are governed and order'd by the appointment of God; that Angels, Devils, Men, and all Creatures have assigned them, powers allotted (by him) such as he thinks meet to confer upon them; why then may not we worship them, as Creatures endowed with power to help or hurt us, as the Princes Favourites. (Id. lib. 7. cal. 20.) (as if we could not honour them as Gods friends without imparting to them (their Masters due) divine honour. He gives still further and clearer evidence of the delivery of this Article of our Christian Faith, while he indulgeth himself the liberty, to deride that Truth which was once delivered to the Saints. The Jews (saith he) in a corner of the VVorld (Palestine) conspiring together, invented the Fable of Gods forming Man, and breathing into him the breath of Life; of VVoman brought out of his side; of man's receiving a Precept from God, and pre∣ferring the Serpents Precept above Gods; of Gods casting Adam iuto a sleep, and taking Eve out of Adam's rib, &c. (Orig. Contr. Celsum. lib. 4. cal. 15.) (It is easier to call this Sacred History a Fable, than to prove it one.) This same Epicurean Hog thus grunts out Calumnies against the Circum∣stances, of Gods making Heaven and Earth (lib. 6. 23. 24. &c.) [God said let there be light.] Did the Maker of all things borrow Light to work by, as we light our Candle at our Neighbours? God did not borrow, but made Light, not for himself to see by, but to illustrate his Creatures. Can any thing be more ridiculous, than to assign certain days to the Creation of the World; in the first whereof, God perfected one kind of being; in the se∣cond, another; in the third, another, &c. and in the sixth and last Man? The Matter of visible and invisible things God created in a moment, and in the same moment educ'd the invisible World out of that Matter. But that he should (for instance) create a Natural Day (which was his first days
work) consisting of twenty four hours, in less than twenty four hours, im∣plies a Contradiction; and that day being the first, and pattern of all the rest (that is) consisting the first half of it of night, and the other of day, it was impossible but that Darkness must be upon the face of the Deep one twelve hours, and Light in the upper Hemisphere other twelve hours. Or that he should (to instance in the fourth days work) make Sun and Moon, and set them in the Firmament of Heaven, and make them successively make a day and night in less time than twenty four hours, does equally imply a Contradiction. And for the rest they being more gross bodily substances educ'd out of the first Matter, it implies a Contradiction that they should move in an instant to those forms the Divine Power first bestow'd upon them; and it was most congruous (seeing they could not be made but in some time) to perfect them also in such a proportion of time (by his own free choice) as the nature of the things themselves required which were made the first and fourth day. Besides, the Light created on the first day (which must necessarily move sphaerically, or it could not have made a natural day) might be instrumental towards the producing those powers, which God (by his Fiat) gave the Matter, into effect: and then before the earth was all over-spread with Grass and Cattle, and the Sea with Fish, &c. that Light must shine upon them from one end of the Heaven to the other; which could not be done in less space than twenty four hours. And that God should rest on the seventh day, as if like a lazie Artificer he had been tyred, and must then keep holiday? Could there be days before the Sun was made; whose Motion measures Time? that lucid Cloud, created the first day, had a circular Motion, and thereby measured time, till on the fourth day God made the Sun. (Vide▪ Zanch. de operibus Dei par. 1. l. 1. c. 2.) There is nothing (saith he) in the whole History of Gods making the World (according to the Christian Hypothesis) but what is incompetent to the Divine Nature: but their credulity proceeds from their believing that God made Man after his own Image; an opinion as absurd as any of the rest: for he is not at all like us, but incomprehensible, innominable, wherein he contradicts, not on∣ly his own late recited opinion, but his own Sect (for Apuleius the Epicu∣rean (in Tull. de Natura deorum. lib. 1.) shapes God in all points even of bodi∣ly Members like to Man:) And manifestly wrests Moses, who discourseth of the Creation in such borrowed Terms as are most familiar in vulgar use, and introduceth God resting, not out of lassitude, but in complacencie with the Goodness and Beauty of his Work; and that for our imitation, that we might rest in contemplation of that eternal Wisdom in which he made them: neither did God in that rest cease from work altogether but from Creating∣work. § 2. Article 2. [And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.] If the Christians (saith Celsus) worship'd no other but God the Father, Maker of Heaven and Earth, they might without blame contemn all our Gods: but who can endure, that they should despise those whom the whole World (in a manner) do worship for Deities, and in the mean time cry up Christ for God: who (we all know) was but born the other day? (Christ as to his Man-hood, was born in the fulness of Time, assigned by the Prophets: as he was God, his Generation was from Eternity.) Nay, that they should not worship the Father, but together with this Author of their Religion, whom they call the Son of God? (Orig. con. Cel. 8. cal. 3. 4.) (The Christians worship the Father through the Son; and whosoever ex∣pects acceptance with the Father, but through the Son worships an Idol, a God of his own framing.) They avoid our Altars, Statues, Temples, sacred Rites, that they may keep untainted that Faith they have plighted to Christ: they will not (with  worship the one God, the common God of all Na∣tions, that they may (among themselves) worship Christ as God. (Id. Ib.
cal. 6.) To which Pliny gives his suffrage (in the place fore-quoted) [The Christians sing Psalms to one Christ, whom they repute to be God. And Licinius (in his Speech to his Soldiers) encouraging them to the engagement against Constantine; with this Argument, that he had cast off the Gods of his Fa∣ther and Country, and put his trust in a new and strange God, one Jesus of Nazareth (Euseh. de vita Constant. l. 2. c. 5.) but this new God of Constantine, was too hard for all Licinius his old Gods; insomuch as being disappointed of their aid, he exauctorated them, and run about seeking other Gods to re∣lieve him. (Id. Ib. c. 15.) Touching Christ's Title [the Son of God] attri∣buted to him by Christians, Celsus his Jew (lib. 1. cal. 26.) thus expostulates with the blessed Jesus: Seeing thou sayest, that every man is the Son of God, by Providence or Creation; and that Persons so and so qualified are his Chil∣dren, by Favour or Grace; wherein dost thou excel all other men, who givest out thy self to be his Son after a more excellent way? (Resp. He was begotten of the Substance of his Father, we are born again of the will of God.) The blasphemous Familists and Quakers may here learn into whose Tents they are removed. And in the same Book (cal. 33.) thus he descants upon Gods calling his Son into, and out of Aegypt: What need was there, that (when thou wast an Infant) thou shouldst be carried into Aegypt, to escape the fury of Herod's Sword? for fear of death cannot fall upon God. Was it in obedience to thy Father, who sent his Angel to call thee thither? Why! could not that great God (whom thou calls Father) with as little trouble have secured thy life at thy own home, in thy native Country; as he put himself and his Angels to, in sending first one, to call thee into a strange Land; and then another, to recal thee into thy own? This was done that the Scripture might be fulfill'd [Out of Aegypt I have called my Son] that the Reality of his Humane Nature might be evidenc'd; that his glori∣ous Deity might be demonstrated by the Angels attending upon him, as the only begotten of the Father. Upon Herods murthering the Innocents he descants (lib. 4. cal. 27.) ridiculum cùm Herodes irabundus occidit infantulos;] [Could not he whom thou calls Father have secur'd thee from Herod?] He brings in (in his first Book) the Jew calumniating Christ to have learned Ma∣gick in Aegypt; by the improvement whereof, after his return into Ju∣daea, he attempted to make men believe he was King Messias, (cal. 20.) and (in the 28 cal.) he repeats the whole story of the Wisemens coming to worship Christ; of their telling Herod, the King of Israel was born; of Herod's slaying the Bethlehemitish Insants, &c. And thus casts his scoffs (cal. 23.) upon the voice that came from Heaven at Christs Baptism. Thou sayest the form of a Dove lighted upon thee, and a voice (then) came from Hea∣ven, saying, This is my Son: What VVitness is there of this, worthy of cre∣dit? who, beside thy self, and thy Companions, saw this Vision, heard this Voyce? The mighty VVorks wrought by our Saviour, were so many Wit∣nesses, that he was the Son of God, and that God was with them, in all they said and writ. And why doth not Celsus make the like Exception against the reports of his healing the Sick, casting out Devils, and raising the dead, &c. but be∣cause those Miracles were wrought in the sight and hearing of multitudes un∣interested. And yet, even here, John the Baptist saw and heard all; whom not to have been Christs Disciple, (but to have been murdered, by the com∣mand of Herod, not for following Christ, but reproving Herod) Josephus testifieth, who also affirmeth, that multitudes flocked to John's Baptism: and the sacred History tells us that Jesus was baptized when all the People were baptized (Luk. 3. 22.) and that he came to John to be baptized of him, while John was exhorting those multitudes that came out of Jerusalem, Judaea, and about Jordan (Mat. 3. 5. 13.)
§ 3. Article 3. [Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary. Celsus in Orig. (4. cal. 1, 2, 3, &c.) thus states the Controversie betwixt the Christian and Jew, touching the coming of the Son of God down from Heaven, for us men and our salvation, (as the Nicen Creed prefaceth this Article:) The Christians say, there is already descended: the Jews say, there is to descend from heaven, a certain God, or Son of God, who is the Justi∣fier and Saviour of mortal men. A Conceipt (saith he) so absurd, and un∣beseeming the Deity; as it needs no other Confutation, but its bare men tioning. (Resp. Celsus here verifies that of the Apostles, the Gospel is foolish∣ness to the Greeks; but to them that believe the Power and Wisdom of God) and yet this Hypothesis; that God would descend into this dungeon of the Earth, for the salvation of Mankind, was held by the Platonicks,  hath been proved. But hear we how Celsus cavils against it. [For what new thing could come into Gods Mind, that he should now, at last, descend to us? Did he come to know how the affairs of mnstood here on earth? Did not he know all things without coming to see? or if there had been any thing amiss, could not he have rectified it, by his Divine Power, without sending his Son, (what pity it is, that Celsus was not of Gods Council!) to be born amongst us? he must, of necessity, desert his own habitation above, if he descend to us] The Porphyrian Scepticks in St. Austin (Epist. 2.) speaks in the same te∣nour [Mundi Dominus & Rector tamdiu à sedibus suis abest, at{que} ad unum cor∣pusculum totius mundi cura transfertur] [The Lord of the Universe was so long absent from his own seat, and the care of the whole World is transferr'd to the body of one Woman] [Novit ubi{que} totus esse, & nullo contineri loco, novic venire non recedendo ubi erat; novit abire, non deserendo quà venerat.] [God is altogether every where, and contain'd in no place: he can come without for∣saking the place where he was: he can depart without deserting the place from whence he came. But Celsus proceeds. Did God or the Son of God therefore come down from Heaven, and dwell among us; that he might make him∣self known to the World, that had been ignorant of him before? (as Princes go on Progress, to shew their Magnificence to their Subjects in the Country:) Did God then, now at last, (after so many Ages laps'd) think of justifying men, whose Salvation he neglected, for so long a time before? St. Austin (Epist. 49. quest. 2 da.) proves, that pious persons before Christs coming were saved by Christ, whose Grace was at no time wanting to any Nation; and that the varying of the Mode of Worship, according as the di∣vine VVisdom thinks expedient for mens salvation, does not make a vari∣ous Religion. But hear we Celsus confirming the Tradition of this point of Christian Faith, while he objects against the Doctrine delivered. If the Christians be in earnest, when they say they believe: that [God so loved the World, that he sent his only begotten Son into the World to save it] what other arguments than what are drawn from that Love, need be urged, to constrain men to love God, and live unto him? and therefore Christ did foolishly in frightning men to obedience, by menacies of Hell-fire, &c. But all will not be won by Love: the fear of approaching death was of more avail to perswade Celsus his Master Epicurus, that there is a God, than all the sweet morsels he cramb'd his belly with. Let the Antinomian here acknowledge his first Father. Besides, saith he, (lib. 6. 19) Do not the Christians charge God with want of Power, or Foresight, in his permitting the Serpent, so far to deface his Image in Man; as that (in order to the restoring of it) he is forc'd to send his only Son to become Man's Advocate? God knew how to use his Power and VVisdom better than in prevention of that evil, viz. by bringing a greater good out of it.
[Conceived by the Holy Ghost.] Touching the Christian's belief, that Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost: he hath this Animadversion: (lib. 6. cal. 35.) What need was there that the Holy Ghost should over-shaddow the Virgin, and frame Christ a Body in her womb? could not God have shaped him a Body, (he could not have a Body of the Seed of the Woman without the Seed of the Woman) without immersing his own Spirit into so great contamination? Celsus might have learn'd better Language of Proclus the Pagan Philosopher: (Secundum, nihil omnino providentiam ex gubernatis accipere, nec eorum natura repleri, nec eis alicubi commisceri: non enim ex eo, quòd omnia disponit, admiscetur prop∣tereà gubernatis: (Proclus de anima & daemone tit. [providentia per singula per∣currit, & interim nullis addit:] pag. 191.) If he had been conceiv'd by the Holy Ghost, his Body would have excelled all othets in Stature, in Form, in Strength, in Voice, (nec vox hominem sonat) in Majesty, and in Elocution: for it is incredible that he who had so much Divinity, who was formed by so divine an hand, should not surpass all men: but Christ (as the Christians con∣fess) was but like to (if not inferiour to other men:) His face (according to Prophecy) was to be mar'd more than any man's:) low, mean, humble, yea deformed. Why should the holy Spirit be sent to one in a corner of the World, in Judea; and not be inspired into all men, (man must let the work of Re∣demption alone for ever,) if God have a purpose to save all men? As to the last clause of this Article, he brings in a Jew (lib. 1. cal. 20.) thus scoffing at Christ for chusing to be born of so mean a Woman, at so mean a Town; (he was to be born in the form of a servant, and Bethlehem-Judah was the least of the Cities) of Judea as Bethlehem, &c. did her beauty (her inward Beauty (being full of Grace) invited God to chuse her for the Mo∣ther of the Son of God before others) invite God into her embraces? how could she conceive and bring forth a Son without the knowledg of man? &c. which Origen retorts thus: how do the Vultures breed (as your own Pagan Writers report) without companying with the Male? why could not God make the second Adam without a Father, as well as the first without either Father or Mother? and lastly, that we Christians are not the only men who embrace such admirable stories is manifest, from your believing that Plato was conceived by Apollo, and born of his Mother Amphictione yet a Virgin, before her Husband Aristo had knowledg of her, being prohibited by a Vision to touch her: At the same point the Seeker, whom Volusianus mentions, strains: (August. ep. 2.) Who is there among you (saith he) so well versed and e∣stablished in the Christian Religion as can resolve me, where I stick; [I won∣der how the Lord of the Universe could take up his lodging in the body of a spotless Virgin! how she could go out her ten Months, and then bring forth a Child, and after that continue a Virgin! how could he lurk in the little body of a Vagient In∣fant whom the Heavens are not able to contain? how could the Ancient of days endure to undergo so many years of Infancy, of Childhood, of Youth, of Man-hood? or the everlasting God that faints not, neither is weary, submit to sleep, to hunger and thirst, to cold and wearisomness, and the rest of humane weaknesses?] cease this wondring, man: Christ did all this, to make it manifest that he was the Son of Man, as well as of God (Jam illud, [quòd in somnos solvi∣tur, &c.] hominem persuadet hominibus, quem non consumpsit utique sed assump∣psit) (August. epist. 2. Volusiano:) and as to her continuing a Virgin St. Au∣stin answers; [Ipsa virtus per inviolatae Mariae virginea viscera, membra infan∣tis eduxit, quae posteà per clausa ostia membra juvenis introduxit:] that power which brought Christ through the shut door, did bring him out of the shut womb. It is St. Austin's Observation, that the Philosophers, in questioning the truth of the Church touching the Incarnatlon, overthrew their own Princi∣ples. It is their Assertion, saith he, (de civit. 10. 29.) that the intellectual Soul may by purging become consubstantial [paternae menti] with the Father's
Mind (which they confess to be the Son of God) what absurdity then can there be in the Christian Belief; that one individual soul, being the purest that ever was created (for the salvation of many) was assumed into Union with the Son of God? Now that the Body must adhere to the Soul, that he may be a perfect man, we learn by the Testimony of Nature it self: which Union of Body and Soul, if it were not usual, would be less credible than the union of an Humane Soul to the Mind, Word, or Son of God. For 'tis casier to be believed, that an incorporeal should be united to an in∣corporeal, than that a corporeal and incorporeal Being should conflate into one. And Tertullian observes (Apol. priùs citato) that nothing was more common in the Heathen World, than Virgin-births of divine Conceptions; and yet they had been more common, if some like Olympias had not been jealous of Juno's Jealousie: after whose Copy she return'd this answer to her son Alexander's Letter, thus superscribed, [King Alexander the Son of Jupi∣ter Hammon to his Mother Olympias all health:] I pray thee Son do not tra∣duce me and accuse me to Juno as one that had been naught with her Hus∣band: for I shall never be able to bear the burden of that her spightful jea∣lousie which she will conceive against me upon thy writing thy self the Son of Jove, and thy insinuating me to be his Whore: (Agellius Noct. Attic. lib. 13. cap. 4.) This Text of St. Austin, (Ep. 2.) beside that that I quoted it for, points to a great many Circumstances in the History of the blessed Jesus, mention'd in the Gospel: all which are, from this allegation of the Adversaries, ac∣knowledged to have been the Doctrine of the Apostolical, as well as Mo∣dern, Church. § 4. Article, 4. [Suffered under Pontius Pilat, was crucified, dead and bu∣ried: and descended into Hell.] The Jew in Celsus (lib. 2. 6.) upbraids the Christian, for believing in him that could not avoid or evade those dangers, that Death, he was brought to, by the Treason of his own Disciple; but suffer'd himself to be apprehended, arraigned, condemned, and crucified; for all that he fore-knew, and fore-told his Disciples of those things that befell him. And that they put their confidence in Jesus, who not only in appearance suffer'd these things, but really, openly, before many Witnesses (as themselves say;) what God, An∣gel, or but wise Man, would wittingly and willingly have been taken in those snares, which were laid in his sight, if he could have help'd it? Is it not a wonder, that Christ by telling Judas of his Treason, Peter of his De∣nial, should not have been so far revered (they believing him to be God) as to prevent the Apostacy of the one, the Lapse of the other? or did he not by foretelling it, teach them to do it, and lay snares for the Companions of his Table? God is impassible; why then did Christ, if he were God, suffer such an Agony for fear of death, as made him sweat like drops of Water and Blood, and cry out to be saved (in the Garden) in these words, [Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me:] and complain (on the Cross) in these, [My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?] The Christians (after all their Promises) produce, for the Son of God, not a pure and holy Word (as they term Christ) but a man affected with most ignominious suffering; beaten with stripes, spit upon, and nailed to the Cross; whence he could not descend, though provoked to do it. It was then (sure) high time for him to declare himself God, when the Jews insulted over him before Pilat, when in mockage they put on him a purple Robe, put a Reed for a Scepter into his hand, and set a Crown of Thorns upon his head; with the pricking whereof, as also of the Nails and Spear, Blood issued out from him. I pray, what kind of Blood was that that flowed from your crucified God? was it not like that which issued from the wounded hand of Venus?
Cruor qualis divis manat ille beatis. Can you blame us Jews, for not embracing (for our Prince Messiah,) one that while he lived could not get above eleven or twelve Disciples, and those Fishermen and Publicans (the most dis-ingenuous kind of men, and most easie to be seduc'd:) who, rather than they would run the hazard of suffe∣ring with him, did with most fearful execrations deny him. One who (while he was upon the Cross) was so impatient of pain; as he thirsted, and greedily gulp'd in a draught of Vinegar; and discovered more impati∣ency, than an ordinary man would have done. You say (indeed) he de∣scended into Hell: (Observe, by the way, that our over-wise Disputers, who question the Antiquity of the Article of the Descent, are more ignorant of the Christian Faith than this dull-pated Epicurean Philosopher: this Article was so obvious to Celsus, as he made it the subject of Derision; and yet is so dark to men that can see through a Mill-stone, as we must take it for a cour∣tesie, if they will allow us to make it the Object of our Faith.) Was it to get Disciples there, seeing he could get so few among the living? (lib. 2. cal. 41.) the Jew mentions Christ's last words at giving up the Ghost, the Earthquake and Darkness that attended his death. On these Scenes, Celsus as he discovers the truth of the delivery of these parts of the History of Christ, and his knowledg of that History; so it bewrays his ignorance in the Contents of the Old Testament; wherewith if he had been acquainted, he would never have brought a Jew upon the stage thus to flout at the blessed Je∣sus for suffering those things which their own Prophets foretold were to befal their Messias: to wit, that he was to be apprehended, arraigned, and con∣demned, as a Lamb not opening his mouth, that he was to have Vinegar giv∣en him to drink, that he was to be betrayed by Judas, forsaken of his Disci∣ples, denyed by Peter, &c. So that Celsus could not have devised how to e∣vince the Jew more effectually, that Jesus is the Christ, than by these very Arguments that he puts into his mouth against him: nor more manifestly have confirm'd the Truth of that Evangelical Assertion. That the Jews stumbled on this stone of Christs outward Meanness: they dreaming of a Messias who would come in external Pomp. While you Christians (saith Celsus unpersonated, (lib. 3. cal. 9.) worship for God, one that was apprehended, and condemned, and put to death; you are but Apes of the Getae, who worship Xamolxis; of the Cylicians, who adore Mopsus; of the Acarnanians, who give divine honour to Amphilochus; of the Thebanes, who revere the Deity of Amphiaraus; and of the Lebadi∣ensians, who repute Trophonius a God. Upon this point he beats again (lib. 6. 12.) You contemn our Jove, be∣cause the Cretians shew his Sepulchre in their Island: why do you then wor∣ship Jesus, who was buried? (Their Jove never declared himself to be the e∣ternal Son of God by his Resurrection from the dead as our Jesus did.) And (lib. 6. 18.) that prophane Wretch thus scoffs at the Christians using these words, [The Tree of Life, the Blood of the Cross, &c.] such words are often in their mouths; I suppose, because Jesus was crucified, and his Father Joseph a Carpenter: sure, had he been thrown down from a Rock, precipitated into a deep Dungeon, or strangled in an Halter; had he been a Currier, a Brick∣layer, or a Blacksmith, we should have heard the Christian extol to the Hea∣vens the Rock of Life, the Dungeon of Resurrection, the Halter of Immor∣tality, the blessed Stone, the Iron of Love, the holy Pelt. So much foolish∣ness was the Cross of Christ to this Grecian.—But these Scoffs Lactan∣tius well answers: [tot latrones semper perierunt, & quotidiè pereunt; quis e∣rum post crucem suam non dico Deus, sed homo appellatus est?] (de justitia, l. 5. cap. 3.) And he must be a weak Christian that needs any other help to get over these Blocks without stumbling, than what Christ hath afforded in his Resurrection: for as in these he declared himself Man, made under the
Law, and pointed out by Prophesie; so in that he demonstrated himself God. This Article was opposed (as Apostolical) by the Affrican Gentiles, as well as European; the sound of it went over the Sea: But what need we more, than the Jews reproaching us with it, in stiling our Saviour [Su∣spensus] and the confession of Benjamin Tudelensis (in itinerario) that Jesus was put to death at Jerusalem: (Grotii annotat. ad lib. 2. pag. 153.) and the Vote of Tacitus, annal. l. 15. that Christ, of whom the Christians are de∣nominated, suffer'd by Pontius Pilate, the Governour in the Reign of Ti∣berius. § 5. Article 5. [The third day he rose again from the dead.] You therefore believe Christ to be God (saith Celsus his Jew, in Orig. 2. 41.) because, according as he had foretold you, he that could not save him∣self from Death, did arise from the dead, and shewed the prints of the Nails (wherewith he had been fastned to the Cross) to a simple VVoman, and one or two more of his Disciples; who, if they were skill'd in the Magick Art of their Master, were willingly deluded with vain Spectrums: if not, Christ astonish'd them with such like Prodigies, on purpose that they might afford matter for lies to the rest of the Tale-bearers, by reporting those things with confidence. This was, then, the report of the Disciples, this their Faith; And that Report and Faith so grounded; as Celsus, though while (with the Ape) he uses the Cats Claw to pull the Ches-nut out of the fire; he puts the Jew upon this desperate piece of service, to storm the likelihood of this Re∣port (lib. 2. cal. 40. 41.) yet when he enters the lists in his own Person, he has more regard of his own credit, than to forfeit it (with all men) by que∣stioning the truth of a Fact was so well known to Friends and Foes; and therefore attempts to ward off the dirt of it, by introducing examples of many, who have risen from the dead, and yet have not been reputed Gods. (lib. 3. 8.) The first Story he brings to parallel this, is (out of Pindar, and Herodotus his fourth Book) of Aristaeus Proconesius, who going into a Fullers Shop, there departed this Life: The Fuller, shutting the door upon the Corps, goes to acquaint his Relations with this sudden accident: upon which, as they were discoursing, in comes a Cyzicene, and tells them, that in his travelling homeward, he met with the Ghost of Aristaeus travelling to its long home, trudging (as fast as it could) into the other VVorld: which he confidently affirming, his friends (with preparations for his burial) enter the Fullers Shop, where no Aristaeus appears, either alive, or dead: nor was he seen or heard of, till that seven years after, he shewed himself to the Pro∣connensians, and having made that Paper of Verses which are called Ari∣maspaei, he again disappeared. This (saith Herodotus) I have from the Re∣lations of his Citizens: But this I know, that he was seen alive, by the Me∣tapontines, in Italy, 340 years after his second disparition: where (after he had play'd thus long at boe-peep with Death) by the appointment of the Ghost, and the confirmation of that his VVill by the Pythian Apollo, he had his Statue erected, by the Altar of Apollo: which was not made of such run∣ing Leather, as was its Prototype, that was standing, where it was first erect∣ed, in Herodotus his age. Besides the incoherence of this Story, and the unlikelihood that a Squire of Apollo should be so many years in making one poor Paper of Verses, &c. Agellius reckons this Aristaeus, for one of the Gre∣cian Fablers, deserving the Whet-stone (Noct. Attic. l. 9. c. 4.) The next Parallel that Celsus brings of our Saviours Resurrection, is Cle∣omenes Astypulaeus, who to avoid the hands of his enemies, hid himself in an Ark; which when they that sought for him looked into, he was not found there, but, by some Divine Fate, had made a cleanly conveyance of himself out of his enemies clutches: but did they set a watch upon the Ark, as the Sanhedrim did upon Christ's Sepulchre?
The third story of Celsus, is of Clazomenius, whom he brings in as a Paral∣lel of Christ; in that he had power to lay down his life, and take it up again: for Clazomenius his Soul would often leave its body, and walk naked up and down; and, when it had taken the Air, return home again to its old Lodge∣ing. But I suppose it never took a three days journey, nor was so long ab∣sent; as to let the vital Fire go out, before its return; or the warmth of its Apparel be extinct, before it put on its cloaths again. The Story of Zamolxis is alledged by Celsus to the same purpose; though his Author He∣rodotus not only questions the truth of it, but relates it thus (which makes nothing for Celsus:) that he only withdrew himself three years into a sub∣terraneal house he had built, and that on purpose to deceive the Scythians in∣to an opinion that he had been so long dead, and to the embracing of that Doctrine of his Master Pythagoras, which he taught amongst them, that the soul of man was immortal (Herodotus Melpomene.) Celsus vies Christ's shewing his Hands and Feet with Pythagoras his shew∣ing, in an assembly of Grecians, his Ivory Shoulder and Thigh; to convince them that he was that Euphorbus, who was famous in the Wars of Troy, and whose Shield and Coat of Arms he challenged: (lib. 5. cal. 5.) And in the same Book (cal. 11.) mentions the Angels rowling away the stone from the mouth of the Sepulchre, not without this Sarcasm: [as if the Son of God was not able to do it himself, but must have it done for him by some other.] (but if he had minded what he read, he might have learn'd that it was not rowl∣ed away for Christ's sake, that he might come out; but for the Women and Disciples sake, that they might look in) and not omitting so much as the variety in the Evangelists story; one, mentioning one; another, two An∣gels. One sitting upon the stone, two sitting, when the VVomen first lookt in; but standing, when they spake to the VVomen, one at the head, the other at the feet of the Sepulchre: (August. de consensu evan. lib. 3. cap. 24.) Deogratias, mentions Christ's eating, and shewing the prints of the Nails, after his Resurrection (as points of Christian Faith) and argues from those Points as Christian principles (of which more anon.) as that Bishop informs St. Austin. (Ep. 39. quest. 1.) Nay, the Adversaries of the Christian Faith have not only mention'd Christs Resurrection, as an Article of our Faith (which is all I need to prove now) but have been forc'd to confess the Truth thereof, and to acknowledge that Christ did indeed rise from the dead: by name, R. Bechai (as he is alledged by Grotius de veritate Christan. rel. lib. 2. pag. 89.) [Satis magnis testimoniis convictus, Judaeorum magister Bechai, veri∣tatem hujus rei agnoscit:] But I shall hereafter alledge more Authorities for the proof of this Article from the confession of Adversaries; and shall now therefore make only this Reflection upon these Mock-resurrections. Be those Stories true or false, they are a good argument that the ancient and best Philosophers did not think the Resurrection impossible: for Plato (de repub. 10.) (quoted by Eusebius de praep. evan. 11. 35.) and mention'd by Va∣ler. Max. (lib. 1. c. 8.) and Plutar. (Symposiae 9. 5.) and Macrobius (Som. Scipionis initio) reports, that that happened to Eris an Armenian. Hera∣clides Ponticus, whom Pliny mentions (l. 7. 32.) writ a Book of a Woman who was raised from the dead after the seventh day, saith Pliny; after the thirtieth day saith Diogenes Laertius (Proaem. & Empedocle.) Plinius sic. [nobile il∣lud apud Graecos volumen Heraclidis, septem diebus feminae exanimis ad vitam revocatae.] The like does Plutarch report of Aristaeus; (in his Romulus) and of The∣spesius, (de sera numinis vind.) We have here supererrogated, having pro∣duc'd Pagan Testimony, not only for the proving of matter of Fact, to wit, that this Article which we now profess, was delivered by the Apostles to the Primitive Church; but also their Confessions of the possibility of the thing believed.
§ 6. Article 6. [He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God.] The Argument of Christ's Divinity drawn from his assumption into heaven, they darken with so great a volly of Examples of their own Hero's; as it would tire me to take up those Arrows one by one. But that he ascended with that body that was crucified: Celsus one while attributed to to delusion, it being impossible (as he argues) that a body can be made immortal, that being the Creature of inferiour Nature; not of God, as the soul is, and all other immortal beings. This Principle he borrows of the Manichees, out of the dispute betwixt Jason and Papiscus concerning Christ (lib. 4. cal. 22. 23.) Another while granting it true, he denys it to be a sufficient proof of Christ's Deity; because Cleomenes had (by what Art God knows) obtain'd that agility of body, as he could fly up as fast, and as far, as a dart could, even out of sight; and that was as far, as the Dis∣ciples could see Christ ascend. But the gift, which Christ shed forth after his Ascension, spake him to have ascended far above the highest Heavens. And as to the truth of this assertion [That this was an Article of the Aposto∣lical faith, that Christ did ascend into heaven] This Epicures carping at it, is proof sufficient; and his not daring to stand to his first Cavil; [that it was impossible,] but flying to another Salvo [But it was no more than others be∣fore him bad done, who yet thereby obtained not the repute of their deserving divine Honours] is a tacit Concession to the Truth of the thing it self: which is more than I here need to prove. I will therefore hasten to the next Article; which, because of its relation to this, I shall annex to the same Section. Article 7. [From thence he shall come, to judge the quick and the dead.] The Epicurean Beast runs full mouth upon this Article, and raiseth this crie. It is the common guise of all Fanatick Prophets; to profess them∣selves God, or the Son of God, or the divine Spirit: and to give out such pretences, as your Jesus made: [I am come into the world to save it, (from those impending judgements, that are ready to fall upon it, for its sins) happy they that believe in me! I will appear for their salvation, when I come again in glory and great power, with the heavenly host; at which my coming; I will adjudge all that reject me to everlasting Fire; and they that now despise my me∣nacies, shall then (when its too late to repent) mourn and lament:] No Chri∣stian Catechist can better express the mind of this Article, than this Philoso∣pher here doth (lib. 7. cal. 3.) A man of greater Reading than Celsus will be hard put to it, to find one man, before Christ's coming, who did so much as pretend to his being appointed of God, to be the Judge of all men. And for those Mock-christ's, who afterwards would have rob'd the blessed Je∣sus of this Prerogative, and challeng'd it to themselves: not one of them could shew their Commission under Gods hand, as he did. § 7. Article 8. [I believe in the holy Ghost.] 1. As this implies the Equality and Consubstantiality of the Spirit with the Father and the Son, and his being, therefore, together with them to be wor∣shipped (as the Nicen Fathers expound it.) Porphyrie, (who, for all Celsus his brags, that he himself understood the bottom, top and middle, of our Reli∣gion; was the best acquainted with our Scriptures, (both old and new) of any Heathen Philosopher) parallels it with his Master Plato's Opinion (in St. Austin de Civitate 10. 23.) quoted by R. vives, and thus exprest by Por∣phyrie (as St. Cyril contrà Julianum relates it) [Plato as well as the Christians held three Subsistences in the divine Essence: to wit, the All-Good and All-Great
God (the Father;) then the Creator God the Son, and the third, the Soul of the World, the holy Ghost. [Tres Substantias in Essentia divina statuit, Deum Opt. Max. deinde Creatorem, tertiam, Animam Mundi: to wit, that which moved upon the Waters; the Lord and giver of Life, as the abovesaid Fa∣thers describe him. What Beetle-brow'd Novices in Christianity are the So∣cinians, who will not acknowledge the Revelation of the ineffable sacred Tri∣nity to be communicated in these Evangelical VVritings: wherein the Atheni∣an Owls, the Pagan Philosophers, saw it so plainly exhibited; as they not only take notice of it, as an Article of our Religion, in their Polemical Animadversions; but offer to make proof, that this point of Doctrine was embraced by their Wisemen, even before it was attested by those wonders which God set as his seal, for the confirmation of the Gospel. So little did they deem it to be against Reason, as by the conduct even of Reason they stumbled upon that Divine Notion, which the Socinians will not submit their vain Reason to the belief of, upon (the strongest of all Reasons) Di∣vine Revelation: proved to be so, by the clearest of all evidences, the de∣monstration of power, exerted at the first manifest revelation of this Myste∣ry, at the Baptism of Christ; when the heavens were opened, and the Spi∣rit descended upon the Son, and a voyce was heard from the Fa∣ther. 2. As it implies (still to go along with the same Father) the Churches confession of her belief; that the holy Ghost spake by the Prophets, It is thus assronted by Celsus (lib. 8. cal. 16.) what you boast of the Spirit speak∣ing by your Old and New Testament-prophets, we can out-vie, if we had a mind to repeat those many Oracles of our Prophets and Prophetesses, (who sung future things with a Prophetick voice, which they suck'd in from the Recesses of the Gods) those many which were delivered from the En∣trails of Sacrifices, and premonstrated from other Prodigies; or reveiled by the vive-voyce of the Gods themselves, appearing in visible forms. How many Cities have been founded by the advice of Oracles, and been freed from Famine and Pestilence, by following their direction; or brought to ut∣ter ruine, hy forgetting or despising their Counsels. How many Colonies have been sent forth upon their Order; thriving exceedingly, while they fol∣lowed their counsel? To how many Princes and private men has it been fortunate or fatal, to observe or sleight them? How many barren Women have become fruitful? How many maimed persons have recovered the use of their Limbs? How many distracted persons, the use of their Reason, by following the advice of Oracles, &c. What a vast distance there is be∣twixt these and Scripture-prophecies is discovered in my fourth Book, pag. 8. 3. As it imports his working of those Miracles, which God hath set as a Seal to the Gospel: It has already been shew'd, what attempts the Hea∣then made, to out-vye that point of the Church's Faith, and the Operations of that Spirit (recorded in our Scriptures) by tbe impostures and shadows of Miracles wrought amongst them: To which I shall here add the confession of Celsus. (in Origen. 2. lib.)  [Ye believe he is the Son of God, because he cured the lame and blind.] And that of Julian (in Cyril. lib. 6.) except a man should reckon amongst great works [—] the curing of the lame and blind, and the relieving them that were possess'd with Devils in Bethsaida and Bethanie. What did Jesus do? Here the most bitter Adversary of the Christian Cause bears witness, that the Apostolical Church urged the World to a belief of the Gospel, from the consideration of Christ's great works, to wit, his curing the lame, blind, possessed, &c. And makes open confession, that Christ did do those great works which the Evangelists mention; so that he hath nothing to say against the validity of the Churches Argument, but only this, That such
works are not indications of a divine Power. It is therefore incumbent upon him, and his party to shew, what other man did ever do such works, or by what power less than divine they can be effected? § 8. Article 9. [The holy Catholick Church, the Communion of Saints. How can you call your society, Catholick: either as to time, since it was but erected the other day (saith Celsus, lib. 1. cal. 19.) or place, seeing, till of late, it was shut up in Judaea, a corner of Palestine (lib. 4. 14.) and since it peeped out into other parts of the World, its celebrated clandestinely and in holes (lib. 1. cal. 1.) That so inconsiderable a part of Mankind (as the Jews and Christians) should boast themselves to be the whole Company of Mortals acceptable to the Gods; is just, as if a company of Bats and Emits, or of Frogs and Worms should contend for preheminence, in point of the Gods favour to them; and say, that they are the only creatures, to which God vouchsafes to reveil his mind; and that neglecting the whole World beside, he only takes care of their welfare (lib. 4. cal. 11.) Lastly, how can your Church be Catholick, in point of Doctrine? seeing you dissent and rend your selves, as a Sect from the Catholick Religion of the whole World (lib. 8. cal. 1.) The truth is (saith he, lib. 1. 5.) And are rent your selves into so many sects (lib. 3. 4.) We could allow your Religion to be acceptable to the God of Judaea, and your Society (upon that account) in favour with that God. But we cannot endure that pride, that you will either be all, or none: that you applaud your selves, as the All of the Universe, which God respects; and exclude all, but your selves, out of the divine favour: that your Church should be the Catholick Receptacle of the whole Community of Saints, and your Religion the Universal way of Soul-cure (a thing never heard of be∣fore, either among the Traditions of the Magi, Gymnosophists, or Philo∣sophers) this is that we cannot but with abhorrencie disgust. That the Jews (for Christian Religion is orignally Judaick) that inconsiderable People, (and so much hated of the Gods, as they cannot obtain of any of them, so much room upon Earth, as to dwell upon together) should prescribe, in matters of Religion, to the whole World, and not permit to other Nations their own, as best for them: but break the bond of universal Peace; decry that National Independency, which (till this universal way of Salvation, this common Faith was obtruded upon the whole World) kept all Nations in a friendly Communion of heart, in a charitable correspondency among them∣selves: each one allowing other that Religion they esteem'd most convenient for themselves. The Evangelical way of Salvation, the Christian Faith; and Christian Church are therefore called Common, Universal and Catho∣lick; because it is that way of Salvation, which God hath from the begin∣ning propounded to all Mankind, and been intirely embraced in all Ages and Places, by all Persons, who have preferr'd divine Revelations before their own Inventions: who are therefore collectively stiled the Catholick Church. 1. Celsus therefore equivocates in saying our Religion and Church were but erected the other day: for though the Gospel, as it is an History of the exhibition of the promised Seed, could not commence before that Fulness of Time, when Christ came into the World; yet, as it is the glad tydings of Salvation by that Seed, it was preach'd in Paradise: in which respect Je∣sus Christ is yesterday, and to day the same Rock upon which the Church hath been built in all Ages. 2. This Religion and Church was not shut up in Judaea, a corner of the World, but proclaim'd and establish'd in Eden, first, by God himself, to and in the old World: and next by Noah, to and in the new World, in the hearing and sight of all Mankind: from whence, as from the Center, their Lines went to the utmost Circumference of suceeding Generations: a∣mongst whom whosoever retain'd the fear of God, and wrought righteous∣ness, were accepted of God.
When indeed men grew weary of waiting for the Seed promis'd, and became so vain in their Imaginations, as to frame Gods, and Saviours, and Religions to themselves. God preach'd the Gospel anew, and repeated the old and Catholick Religion to his friend Abraham, annexing thereto the Seal of Circumcision, as a sign that the Seed was not yet come, and that it was to come out of his Loyns by Isaac.) This was not only a peculiar Priviledge to his Posterity, but a general advantage to the whole World: For whither could men, in common reason, think themselves obliged to look (when they found themselves at a loss in point of Religion;) but to Sem's Family, to which they were directed by Noah's blessing the God of Sem: And to which of Sem's stock could they repair, but to Abraham whom Sem himself (that King of Salem, and Priest of the high God (as some think) had blessed in the name of that high God. So that Abra∣ham, and his Seed by Isaac, were Gods Standard bearers, to lift up Christ as an Ensign to the Gentiles: And to make these Standard-bearers higher by the head, than all other Nations, and the Ensign more conspicuous. God lifted that People up above all others, by signal favours while they walk'd in that way that he had appointed them, punish'd them double to any other trangressors, when they cast off the fear of Isaac, he built his glorious Tem∣ple amongst them upon his own Hill, adorn'd his Worship with such Cere∣monies, as at once rendred it august in the Eyes of Gentiles, and instructive to their minds: august as out-vying their Inventions in multitude, in mag∣nificence: Instructive, as pointing to the bruised heel of the Womans Seed; as being so chargeable and toilsome, as it was not credible that any Nation should (by their own free choice) encumber themselvs with so burdensome a service, nor possible they could be induc'd to the embracing of it, by any Mo∣tives inferiour to those dreadful appearances of the divine Majesty (at the promulgation of it) and Menacies annext to it. Add to all this, their so∣journing in Aegypt (the Nursery of Idolatry) so many hundred years: Their settlement in Canaan; where the worship of Devils had taken deepest root; so near to Caldaea, where the Primitive Tradition had been first corrupted; The improvement of the Art of Navigation by Solomon; Their several dispersi∣sions into the utmost parts of the inhabited Earth, &c. And it will appear; that as the Earth was over-spread by degrees with people, and people grew to apostatize from the Catholick Religion; God sent this (then last) Edition of the Gospel after them; by the hand of Abrahams seed, bringing to their remembrance the almost forgotten Promise of the Womans Seed: And that therefore the Divine Grace administred to all men an occasion to seek after God: whom they might have found, if they would have sought him where he directed them: and whom all did find, who did not maliciously shut their eyes against the Light, shining in Judaea, in its full body (as the Sun in its Orb) and thence transmitting its Beams into the utmost Coasts of the World. Briefly, The Jews (setting aside the Covenant of Peculiarity, which con∣sisted of Earthly Promises and Carnal Ordinances) was only the Worlds Cock, to give it notice how the time past (till the Fulness of Time was come) to awake its drowsie eyes to wait for break of day; to profligat those paint∣ed Lyons who had usurpt the Title of the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah; to give notice, the Star of Jacob was not yet risen, and to direct them, by the voice of their Prophets, when and where to look for the promised Seed. In a word; they were not the Catholick Church, but a Nation of Priests, se∣parated for the service of the Catholick Church, consisting of Jews and Gen∣tiles, worshipping the true God, and waiting for Christ. 3. Celsus his Exception, therefore, that Christian Religion opposeth the general Religion of the World, is manifestly false: for there never was any Religion universally profest (as that which bringeth Salvation to all) save the Christian; that is, Faith in the promised Seed; for Gentile Religions were calculated to particular Climes, but this publish'd to, and believed through the whole World.
4. What he objects as to Sects of Christians, I answer, what ever Sect re∣cedes from the Catholick Church, and the common Faith ceaseth to be Chri∣stian; that is, whoever rend themselves from that body of Believers (who in all Ages (before Christ and since) have held the common Way of Sal∣vation by the blood of the Womans Seed;) become, as to Religion, Hea∣thens: and therefore the Church is not chargeable with them. Article 10. [The forgiveness of sins.] This is plainly to be read, as a Point of Christ, and his Apostles Doctrine, and the Churches Faith, in that odious Comparison of the Epicurean So∣phist Celsus (lib. 3. 16, 17.) They that are to be initiated in Pagan Mysteries, are by a Cryer thus invited [whosoever is of pure hands and heart, whosoever is free from all impieties, whosoever hath a soul not conscious to it self of any vil∣lany, whosoever hath lived well and justly, come hither:] At sacer est locus—procul ite prophani, &c. But the Christian Preachers invite men to the Christian Faith, after these forms: [Whosoever is simple, wretched, wicked, prophane, here is pardon for them. Come ye impure and defiled Souls, here is a Fountain of Purgation open for you to wash in.] Your Jesus (you say) came not to call the righteous but sinners, (and whither should the Physician come but to the sick) as Origen well replies. In the exposition of the Apostles Creed, (among the works of St. Cyprian; but by St. Jerom ascribed to Ruffinus, and by Gennadius com∣mended as the best piece of Ruffinus; and therefore judged by Erasmus to be his;) the Pagans object against this Article, That the Christians do miserably deceive themselves in believing, that sins can be forgiven; that what is com∣mitted indeed, can be purg'd by words; whether of Promise on Gods part; or Confession on the penitent's part; or Absolution, on the Priests part. Is it possible (say they) that he that hath committed Murder or Adultery, should not be reckon'd a Murderer or Adulterer: to which it is there well answered: Why should I not believe, that that God who of Earth made me a Man, can make me of guilty, innocent; that he who made me see, who before was blind; who made me hear, who before was deaf; who made me sound, who was be∣fore lame: can restore innocency to me, when I have lost it, &c? Article 11. [The Resurrection of the Flesh.] Were this Article buried, in the oblivion of whole Christendom, it might obtain a Resurrection, even out of the grave of Pagan Writers; and loose no more of its perfection, than our bodies shall do at their's. That fleering Philosopher Celsus, while he laughs it out of countenance, brings it to re∣membrance. All that Christ taught you (saith he) touching the Resurrection of the body, touching Eternal Life and Death, he borrowed from the Books of the Jewish Prophets (lib. 2. 3.) But with how much absurdity do you (with that earnestness, as if you accounted nothing more desireable) hope and wait for the Resurrection of your Body? when in the mean while you throw your Bodies as vile things to all kinds of Torments (lib. 8. 18.) And (lib. 3. cal. 6.) The Christians amuse the unwary Vulgar with vain and bug-bear threats, of eternal judgement, of the pains of the damned: and with the alluring promises of future rewards. And yet the same Author (lib. 4. 7.) confesseth that we in our discourses of the day of Judgement speak congru∣ously to the old Philosophers. And (lib. 1. cal. 4.) the very first instance he bringeth of our concurrence with the opinions of Philosophers is that which we teach touching rewards and punishment. Deogratias relates to St. Austin this Quaere propounded by a Gentile Philo∣pher; Whether the promised Resurrection would be like that of Lazarns
or that of Christ? not like Lazarus (saith the Philosopher;) for he rose be∣fore his Body was consum'd: but you Christians say, that mens bodies shall rise many Ages after they are crumbled to dust: not like Christ; for he shew'd the scars in his Hands and Side, and did eat after he rose again: but you say, that after the Resurrection men shall neither eat nor drink, nor have any blemish upon their Bodies (Aug. Ep. 49.) Here we have not only the Re∣surrection, but the manner of it, as it is described in the Gospel, attested by Pagans to bave been the known Doctrine of the Church, viz. that our Bodies should rise glorious Bodies. Hitherto appertains that place of Ruffin. (expl. symbol.) [Infideles reclamant, & dicunt quomodò potest caro, quae putrefacta, dissolvitur, aut in pulverem vertitur, aut in mari profundo solvitur, fluctibùs{que} dispergitur, recolligi rursùm & reintegrari in unum, & corpus ex eâ hominis repara∣ri? Resp. quod in seminibus quae tu in terra jacis, per annos singulos fieri vides, hoc de tua carne, quae Dei lege seminatur in terra futurum esse non credis? Cur, quaeso te nunc, tam angustus & invalidus divinae potentiae existmator es, ut dispersum uniuscujus{que} carnis pulverem in suam rationem colligi & reparari posse non cen∣seas; cùm videas quòd etiam mortale ingenium demersas in profundum terrae metallorum venas rimatur, & artificis oculus aurum videt in quo imperitus ter∣ram putet? nec tantum quidem concedimus ei qui fecit hominem, quantum homo, qui ab ipso factus est, consequi potest? & cum auri esse propriam venam, & ar∣genti aliam, aeris quo{que} longè disparem, ferri quo{que} & plumbi, diversas in terra species latere terrae, mortale deprehendat ingenium: divina virtus invenire posse ac discernere non putabitur uniuscujus{que} carnis proprium sensum etiam si videatur esse dispersum.] Against this Doctrine (of the Resurrection of the Body) the Lufidels exclaim, and say; How can the Flesh, after it is dissolv'd and turn'd in∣to dust, or mouldered away in the bottom of the Sea, and scatter'd with the waves, be again gather'd up and reunited into one, and the body of a man be made up of it? I answer, [That which thou seest every year done, in the seed that thou casts into the ground; dost thou not believe this may be done in thy flesh, which by the Law of God is sown in the earth? Why (I pray thee now) hast thou so low an esteem of the divine Power, that thou caust not conceive how the scatter'd dust of e∣very mans body can be collected and set in its own rank? when thou seest that even humane Wit searcheth, out of the depth of the earth, divers Veins of Me∣tals: And that the Artificers eye discerns that to be Gold, wherein the unskilful perceive nothing but earth. And shall we not ascribe so much to God, who made man, as we see man can attain to, who is but Gods Creature? Or shall not the divine Power be thought able to find out and discern the proper rank▪ to which every crum of dust (of every mans) appertains; seeing the Ingenuity of Mortals extends it self to the discerning of the Veins of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Lead asunder?] But we shall meet with more upon this subject while we present the Animadversions of Pagans upon the next and last Ar∣ticle. Article 12. [And life everlasting.] If when you speak of eternal Life (saith Celsus, lib. 8. 18.) you meant no more, than that you hope your Soul shall live for ever; I should cordial∣ly assent to you, as rightly thinking, that they shall be happy that have lived well, and the unrighteous held in everlasting misery. From this Opinion, neither the Christian, nor any body else can recede: But to think that the Body shall be made immortal, is a Conceit that cannot enter but into rustick, impure, and brutish Animals. Why then did Plato think, that Souls separate have a kind of Body wherein they appeared about Sepulchres? (Orig. cont. Cels. 2. 41.) why did he assign certain fortunate Islands for the habitation of fortunate Souls, if he had not some gimmering of the Resurrection: What need a place so large, (as in comparison of that, this habitable Earth is but an Ant-hill) if it be not intended for glorified Bodies as well as Souls (lib. 7. cal. 9.) as St. Origen reasons. Lastly, why does this fleering Epicure deride
the Church for believing the everlasting Life of the Body, as a thing impos∣sible? Seeing the Philosophers are of Opinion, that the whole world is an Animal, a living Creature consisting of Soul and Body: and yet an Animal most blest and sempiternal. And that the Sun and the rest of the Planets have not only bodies (as every man's Eye may inform him) but Bodies animated, and (with these bodies of theirs) sempiternal, why cannot he, who hath given so bright and everlasting a Body to the Sun, cloath our Souls with Bodies, that shall shine as the Sun for ever, as St. Austin argues (de civitat. 10. 29.) expostulating with the Philosopers, for that they are forc'd to recede from their own Placits, while they argue against the Articles of our Faith. [Quid ergò est quòd cùm vobis fides Christiana suadetur tunc obliviscemini, aut ignorare vos fingitis, quòd disputare aut docere soleatis? quid causae est quod propter opiniones vestras quas ipsi oppugnatis Christiani esse nolitis?] [What's the matter, that while we argue with you to imbrace the Christian Faith, ye either forget, or feign your selves ignorant of, such things as you use to defend and teach? what's the matter that for the sake of those opinions of yours, which your selves oppose, you refuse to bocome Christans?] Can a fuller demonstration be required than this, that Christian Religion was deliver'd (at first) in that very Form, wherein it is now profes'd by the Church, and delineated in the Gospel? That the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly of the Vallies, which now sticks on the Churches bosome, is that which was planted by the hand of the Apostles, sixteen hundred years ago, may be evi∣denc'd (beyond all possibility of doubt) by comparing it, with that, which grows among these Thorns, with the cuts and prints of it, in those Her∣bals that were drawn on purpose to decry the Virtue of it. I put it here to the Scepticks Conscience; whether he would not esteem him a sleepy or brib∣ed Judge, who would not give sentence of his Legitimacie, would not pro∣nounce him the Son of that Woman he calls Mother, after he had heard the Adversaries (and those that would have his Inheritance to be theirs) in their pleadings against him, describe the Child, that was then born of that Wo∣man, in all points so like the defendant; as the Pagan Adversaries of our Re∣ligion describe that Religion, which Christ and his Apostles publish'd, to be like that is now contain'd in our Scriptures. Briefly, to rally up the strength of this first Argument (for the credibleness of that Testimony which com∣mends the Gospel to us) we have heard the Witnesses on both sides examin'd and those gainst our cause give as full evidence for us (as to Matter of Fact) as those of our own party: we have heard the Plaintiff declare, and his Decla∣ration is a pleading of our Cause: VVe alledge that Christ was born, cruci∣fied, rose again, &c. we can make proof of all this by thousands of Evi∣dences in our custody; but to spare the labour of perusing them, and to prevent all suspicion of Forgery, we are content to refer the business to our Adversaries Records: these have been produc'd, and appear to be all one with ours (as to the stating Matters of Fact:) so that there was never any thing more unanimously agreed in, than Gospel-history, Friends and Foes giving in their harmonious, Testimonie to the Truth thereof: and the busi∣est Adversaries being not able to make any solid Exception against any thing reported in it.
CHAP. V. The Truth of Gospel-History attested by Secular Wri∣ters. § 1. Old Antagonists did not persist in the denyal of any point of Gospel-history, save that of Christs Resurrection: and the manner of their denying it proves the truth of it. § 2. Josephus his Story of John Baptist, accords with Go∣spel-history. § 3. His Text in Testimony of Jesus vindicated from the exceptions of Vossius, &c. § 4. Josephus his Date of Christ's, and the Baptists Story falls in with Gospel-Chronologie. § 5. The Stories of He∣rod, Herodias, Aretus, Artabanus, Philip, Lysanias, in Josephus, Taci∣tus, Suetonius, timed to Sacred Chronology. § 6. The twin-Priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas at Christ's Baptism and Passion cleared. § 7. The Date of Philip the Tetrarch's death. § 1. 1. THat Christ was born at such a time, of such a Mother, did such things, preach'd such Doctrine, as our Scriptures mention; the Jew (who was upon the place, and his Contemporary) had not the face to deny: as being things not done in a corner, but the greatest and most consi∣derable part of them, famously known to thousands of Eye and Ear-witnesses. The only Passage (in the whole Story of Christ) he offer'd to make excepti∣on against, was that of Christ's Resurrection: for the disproof of which he hired Soldiers, to say, that he was not risen, but his body stoln away by his Disciples. But now the positive part of their Testimony clearly confutes the Negative, and confirms the rest of the Evangelical Story, touching that matter: for if the Soldiers can tell, that his Disciples stole him away; then it is certain; that his Sepulchre was watch'd by them; that his body (the third day) was gone out of the Sepulchre; and that his Disciples said, he was risen. And this is as much as we need strive for, in this Question (con∣cerning Matters of Fact reported by the Apostles) Whether this report were true or no! is another Question, whose final and irrefragable Determinati∣on depends upon the probat of their divine Mission (of which anon:) For grant but this, that the Apostles (to whose Doctrine God set his Seal) did preach, that Christ rose again; and Gods Seal will go farther (with conside∣rate men) than the word of suborn'd Buff-coats: Soldiers are not gene∣rally, men of over-tender Consciences: To weigh the Evidences, at present, in the Scales of common Sense: That Christ was conveighed out of the Grave (either by the hand of his divine Power, or of his Disciples) and that the Disciples said he was risen; is confes'd, is attested to, by the Soldiers: the only doubt remaining, is, whether in that Point wherein they differ, we are (in reason) to believe the Apostles, or Soldiers? The Apostles can shew Gods Hand and Seal, to confirm their Report; do with great power give evidence of Christ's Resurrection: we have only the Soldiers bare word, and the syllables of it not hanging well together: His Disciples (say they) stole him away while we slept: a company of armed men, set on purpose to watch, must certainly be asleep, if they let his Body be taken away by a few unarm'd and timorous persons, a few scatter'd sheep, now their Shep∣herd was smitten, and on a dead sleep, if they were not awaken'd by that noise (they could not but make) in opening the mouth of the Sepulchre: it being shut up, with a great stone, firmly fastned in the Rock, with cramps of Iron soder'd into the Rock and Stone; and made as sure as could be, by the wit of his mortal enemies: Make it as sure as you can (saith Pilate) so they went and made the Sepulchre sure, sealing the Stone, Mat. 27. 65. , use the best of your skill to make it fast, so fast as it
cannot be removed [] they made the Sepulchre sure: as sure as a prison is, when the doors are fast lock'd; as feet are from getting out, when they are lock'd in the Stocks, Act 5. 23. Act. 16. 24. And this by sealing the stone, not as we seal bags (which makes them not fast, but is only a sign of honest dealing;) for no such sealing could have hindred the Disciples (if they had had a mind) to steal away the Lords Body: and therefore this sealing of the stone, could be nothing else, but their fastning it to the Rock, as hath been above expres'd, (Gaill's Sacred Philosophy, art. 4. cap. 27.) But then (if they were on so dead a sleep) how can they tell what was done, or by whom it was conveighed away? They were awake (after the Body of our Lord was gone) when they saw, it was not in the Grave: and the Disciples were awake, those many times they saw him, and handled him, after his Resurrection. All say, they saw the Se∣pulchre empty, on Sunday morning, when they were broad awake: the Dis∣ciples say, they saw him alive after he was risen; and knew that Body, where∣in he appear'd, to be that very Body which was crucified, by many infallible tokens. No (say the Soldiers) he did not rise again, but the Disciples stole away his Body; yet confess, they were asleep, while this was done: which is (in effect) to acknowledge they cannot tell, how it was conveighed a∣way: and to forbid all sober men to give assent to what they say, as being in∣competent Witnesses. Christ's Body we can assure you is not in the Sepulchre; but how it was removed thence, or by whom? ask them that can tell, for we were asleep. This is just like the evidence which Aemilianus gave a∣gainst Apuleius. (Apolog. pag. 295.) [Habuit Apuleius quaepiam linteolo involu∣ta: haec quoniam ignoro quae fuerint, iccirco Magica fuisse contendo: crede igitur mihi quod dico, quia id dico quod nescio.] Apuleius had certain things wrapt up in Linnen cloath: these, because I knew not what they were, I strongly affirm to have been some Magical Tools; that is, (as Apuleius truly represents to the Judges this Testimony) you must therefore believe me, because I affirm that of which I am wholly ignorant. And had the Chief Priests themselves believed the Soldiers Tale, why did they not send hue and cry after the Thief? why did they not rack those, that were famously known to be his Disciples, to make them confess where they had laid it? why did they not make privy search for it, while the sent was hot? Why did not the Soldiers, (if they had believ'd themselves) as soon as they awoke (and saw the stone roll'd a∣way) disperse themselves several ways, in pursuit of those had stoln it? why did they not apply themselves (forthwith) to the Guards, at every Gate? to the Watchmen, that went up and down the City; with a [Saw ye not, heard ye not, can ye tell no tydings?] why was not Jerusalem all in an up∣roar at the news? How easily might the Discipies have been taken in the manner, who (by the Soldiers own confession) could not be gone far, be∣fore they awoke: for they had not time, (to shut the Cabinet, after they had stoln the Jewel) to roll the stone to the Sepulchres mouth again, after they had taken out the Corps; which certainly they would have done (had they not been prevented) on purpose to hide from the Soldiers so certain an indication of the removal of the Body, till they were got out of their reach. It had been worth the while to have turn'd every stone, to find whither the Disciples had convey'd it, that they might have laid it forth to open view of the people, to affront the Apostles preaching of the Resurrection: But the proud are robbed, they have slept their sleep (as their own Prophes, in a holy scorn and derision of them, had foretold) and in the hands of the mighty there is found nothing: Nothing, but this palpably feigned Tale, can be in∣vented, to prejudice the truth of Christ's Resurrection, by a Council of the subtilest and most implacable enemies Christs name ever had, and that, after whole nights plotting upon their pillow, (for they suspected Christ would rise from the dead) what to do? what to say, in case their fears should come to pass? yea, after comparing notes, and taking counsel together. Had they so drain'd their heads of devilish policy, in compassing Christs Death, as
they could invent nothing, to disprove his Resurrection by, but this pitiful shift? (as Euphranor bestow'd so much art in carving the Image of Neptune, as he could not tell how to go to work with the other Gods.) I begin (now) less to wonder at the observation I am upon, than I did, when I first took it up: It seemed strange to me, that Gospel-history should pass through so many Ages so currently, as not to meet with the least rational Contradiction (as to any Clause or Tittle of it) from any of those millions of desperate enemies it hath met with (all along in its passage down to us) save only in this case: But I see (in this very case) the Devils good will to oppose it, especially in this Article of the Resurrection; (this being that, wherein Christ triumphed over him; and we, in Christ; ['Tis Christ that dyed, yea, rather that rose from the dead] is the acme of the Apostles glorying) And his want of skill, or power, or heart, to oppose it, ever since Christ tri∣umphed so gloriously over him (and his Instruments) in this Debate about his Resurrection; as no man (how great soever his enmity was against it) would so far under value his own Reputation, as to hazard it in gainsaying the Reports of the Gospel: So that this little Stone (ever since it was cut out of the Mountain) has not met with any contradiction, that could put it to a stop; but what it has with ease run over. I would not be too pe∣remptory in affirming, what hath not been done; there may be more Anta∣gonists against our Religion, than I have read: but this I may safely say, that after some considerable enquiry, and most serious perusal of all the ancient Authors opposing Christianity (that I could compass a sight off;) I have not read, nor heard of one person, who offered to assert himself, an Eye-witness, of any one thing, contrary to the Evangelical Story. § 2. These Testimonies of Adversaries are sufficient to evince the Truth of the delivery, and though the impossibility of the Apostles, either de∣ceiving or being deceived (which hath been demonstrated in the first and se∣cond Book) does manifestly evince that they delivered nothing but the Truth: yet that the Atheists mouth may for ever be stopt, I shall, ex abun∣danti, produce the Testimonies of strangers and enemies, for the proof of the Truth of the things delivered. There is (we see) no Comparison betwixt the Allegations of Plaintiff and Defendant. Their exceptions are, to our Evidences; as the dust up∣on the Ballances, to the weight in the Scales; lighter than vanity. Were it a drawn match betwixt us, were the Scales equally ballanced; the weight of the Testimony of By-standers, of persons that did not interest them∣selves in the quarrel, as it relates to Religion; but nakedly record the great Emergencies of the World, as Historians; especially of such of them as (in point of Religion) side with our Adversary, will add over weight to our Scale, and cast the ballance, on our side so irrecoverably, as it shall not be in the power of Scepticism it self (by injecting Queries) to pull down the other Scale; or, with all the doubts it can raise, to with-hold its assent to the in∣dubitable Truth of our Evangelist, in those things that are hardest to be be∣lieved, and of that importance, as the belief of them necessarily inforceth and demonstrateth the Truth of the rest of their Histories. Josephus, a Jew and a Priest of Aaron's Order (as himself informs us in the History of his own life) in that part of his Jewish Antiquities, for the truth whereof he appeals (against the Exceptions of one Justus, a bold lying Pamphleter) to the Roman Records, in the custody of Vespasian and King Agrippa; that Agrippa, who was so zealous of the Law, as he wish'd he might no longer live, than he might be serviceable towards the pro∣moting of the Jewish Religion (and therefore fell down dead at Caligula's feet, when he perceived him inexorably set against the Jews, for refusing to erect his Statue in their Temple (Philo, Legatione ad Caium) And if the Testi∣mony, of such an Author, confirm'd by such Evidences, in the custody of so great an enemy to our Religion, be not sufficient to prove the Truth of
it, in those parts of it, it hath relation to, what will satisfie? Now this Jo∣sephus, (Jud. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 9.) relates the whole History of John Bap∣tist exactly in the tenour of the Evangelists, thus. [Herod putting away his own Wife, the Daughter of Aretas, the King of Arabia; and taking from his Brother (yet living) his Wife Herodias, had (not long after) War with Aretas: in which Battle Herod's host utterly perished: after which (for Herodias her sake, and through her ambition) he was deprived of his Kingdom, and, with her, banish'd to Vienna in France] What manner of man doth this speak the Baptist to have been, in the opinion of the people? when they impute Herod's mishap to the murthering of him, rather than the Sanhedrim (re∣puted sacred persons) or his own Children (a cruelty more than salvage) a∣gainst which Barbarities, though Josephus declaims, yet he does not impute to them Herod's falling into the displeasure of God, but to his beheading John. (lib. 16. cap. ult.) and his following the counsel and humours of Hero∣dias (18. 9.) wherein he had the concurrence of other Jews, as himself writ∣eth. [Many of the Jews were perswaded, that those judgements befel them in punishment and revenge of the death of John Baptist [as he was commonly call∣ed:) for Herod had slain him, being a just man. This John commanded the Jews to embrace Virtue, to execute justice one towards another, to serve God in Piety, reconciling men by Baptism to Unity: for upon this account Baptism seem∣ed unto him a thing acceptable to God; if it were used, not for the remission of sins only, but for the purifying of the body, the soul being, first, cleansed from unrighteousness: he excited men to the studie of Virtue, but chiefly of Pie∣ty and Justice, as also to the Laver of Baptism; which he then said was grate∣ful to God, when they did not give over this, or that, but all sins; and to minds, first purified by righteousness, added the purity of the body. (lib. 18. c. ap. 7.) And when as divers flocked after him (for they were greatly delighted in hearing him) Herod fearing, that so forceable a power of perswading, (as he was endowed with) might possibly lead the people into Rebelligon, sent him to Machaerous Castle.] How perfectly does this square with our Evangelists? as to his Doctrine of Repentance of Righteousness, &c. As to the Opinion the Jews had of him, as a just Person: As to the occasion of his confinement and death; in pre∣tence (and partly) Herods fear, that he might draw the people into Re∣bellion (and therefore Christ, hearing of John's Imprisonment (and the Pharisees muttering, that Jesus Baptised more Disciples than John) fearing that upon the same score he might be restrain'd, steps aside into Galilee, out of Judea; where he saw the people flocking after him, was looked upon with an evil eye (John 4. 1, 2.) as Scaliger well observes (de emendat. temp. lib. 6.) But really (and chiefly) John's telling him of his Brothers Wife, and Herod's gratifying of Herodias: for if they did not rtpute her hand to be in John's murder, why should they deem her exile (as well as Herod's) to be the effect of Divine Vengeance, for the death of the Baptist. As to the multitude of his Followers; the End of his Baptism, to be a Badge of U∣nity, (a sign of the reconciliation of the hearts of Fathers to Children, of Children to Fathers, and of the unwise to the wisdom of the just.) Its in∣effectualness to save by the outward Sign, without the inward Grace fignified, &c. Non ovum ovo similius: never was one more like himself (in all propor∣tions) than that Baptist is, which the Evangelists, to him, whom Josephus describes. § 3. No less a Similitude is there, betwixt that Jesus, whom the Evange∣lists describe at large in Iliads; and him whose story Josephus contracts, into this Nut-shell: (Antiq. l. 18. c. 4.) [About this time there was one Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to account him a Man (and no more;) for he was a worker of Miracles; a Teacher of them, who gladly embraced the Truth: of whom he drew many after him both Jews and Gentiles; this was Christ: Insomuch, as though Pilate (by the advice and instigation of our Elders) delivered him to be crucified, yet they who had loved him from the beginning, did not forsake him;
for the third day he appeared alive to them; (as the holy Prophets had foretold, not only these, but innumerable more marvelous things, of Him.) And to this day the Christian people (which of him are so named) cease not to encrease.] Before I proceed to the Application of this Testimony to our present Case, I must remove some Objections, whereby some of the over-wise Sect have attempted to alleviate this Authority. There are who suspect a Pious Fraud here; that some Christians have been tampering with this Text of Josephus, and turned what was originally writ in dispraise of our Jesus, into this commendation; by foysting two Clauses into it. 1. [] [if we may call him a man.] And 2. [] [this is Christ.] But why might not Josephus make honourable mention of Jesus? as well as of his fore-runner, John the Baptist: or his Disciple, James the Just? both which he commends for holy men, and so far in Gods favour; as, in re∣venge of their Murders, Vengeance fell upon Herod, and utter desolation upon Jerusalem. Josephus they say was a Pharisee, and upon that account would not befriend Christ with so large an Encomium. 1. If Interest will not lye, he was more an Essene than a Pharisee: for in several places he condemns this, but every where extols that Sect) even such as himself affirms Bannus, his Preceptor, to have been (viz.) an Essene, and a great admirer of John Baptist: whom, if he followed in other things, is it like he would desert him, in his good opinion of Christ? wherein he might come short of a Christian, and be no other than Theodoret and Origen pre∣sent him: [;] [one that did not embrace the Christian Re∣ligion, nor our Lord Jesus Christ:] And yet come so far towards one, as to believe, Jesus of Nazareth to have been the Messiah, according to the Noti∣on of the Ebionites, and Nazarens, and some other Jews, (both in the time of Christ, and Josephus) who observ'd the Mosaical Rites, and differ'd not from other Jews, save in opining Jesus to have been born of a Virgin, to have risen again, to have been a great Prophet, &c. whom Trypho the Jew [in Justin Martyr) if he do not praise, does not disallow. It is true, he that would look for a Jew of this temper now, had need light up a Candle at noon-day, to seek him out: for the Sun affords not light enough. But we must not, from our Modern (ignorant and malicious) Jew, take a measure of those, who lived a while after Christ: and who might, by the Miracles which the Apostles and their Successors daily wrought, understand how great a Person he must be, in whose Name those things were done, and yet not become Christs Disciples any more than those Egyptian Christians, whom the Emperour Adrian, in his Epistle to Servianus (mention'd by Vo∣piscus, in his Saturninus:) thus describes: [Illi qui Serapin colunt, Christiani sunt: & devoti sunt Serapi qui se Christi Episcopos dicunt: nemo illic Archisy∣nagogus Judaeorum, nemo Samarites, nemo Christianorum Presbyter, non mathema∣ticus, non aruspex, non aliptes. Ipse ille Patriarchacùm Egyptum venerit ab aliis Se∣rapidem adorare, ab aliis cogitur Christum.] That is, Christian Samaritans, the fol∣lowers of Simon Magus, as Vopiscus himself stiles them in his description of the Egyptians. Suntenim Aegiptii ventosi, furibundi, aruspices, medici: nam & Christi∣ani Samaritae. For the Egyptians are windy, rageful, South-sayers, Quacks; and there are also amongst them Christian Samaritans; for so should Vopiscus be read, and not Christiani, Samaritae. These Simonians, I say, though, after their master they believed that Christ, in whose Name such mighty works were done, was a divine Person; yet they retain'd still their old Heathenish Religion, and these are the Christians of which Adrian writes, that they worship'd Serapis, and that their Bishops, for all they said they were Christians, were yet devoted to Serapis; and that there was none of that Sect, be he a Ruler of the Jewish Sy∣nagogue,
a Samaritan or a Christian Presbyter, who was not a Conjurer, a Wiz∣zard, and an Anoynter. Insomuch, as when the Patriarch came into Aegypt, some solicited him to adore Serapis, some Christ. Though Adrian of all others had least reason to condem these mungrel Christians; for he himself not∣withstanding his adhering to the Gentile Religion had that honourable e∣steem of Christ, as he had a mind to build a Temple to him, and canonize him for a God (Lampridti Alexand. Severus.) 2. What if Josephus had been a Pharisee? could he not lay the corrup∣tion of that Sect down, when he went to write? truly, if he keep pro∣mise with his Reader, he every where faithfully performs the office of an Historian, in recording Occurrences (as they fell out) without favour and affection: and (I think) never Pen, that was not guided by infallible In∣spiration, went more evenly, or directly to the point of Truth, than he did; or let fall less Passion. A suspicion of this Nature could not have en∣tred into the head of any man, to whom Josephus is not a perfect stranger. 3. Had the Pharisees enmity against no Sect but the Christian? do not we find them in opposition to the Sadducees (who denyed the Resurrection, and said there were neither Angels nor Spirits, and consequently no Miracles nor Prophesies) siding and going along with St. Paul, as far as Josepus doth in this Text: for what is there in these words that are excepted against, as not becoming the mouth of a Pharisee, or inclining any further to the appro∣bation of Christianity, than their opposition to Saducism might bend a Pha∣risee to, without prejudice to his own Sect. 1. Not in that [If it be lawful to call him a man,] for, first, that may be taken in as bad a sence, as those paradoxical wits put upon the immediat fol∣lowing words [] who interpret them, as a defama∣tion of the blessed Jesus; which joyn'd together (if the Context did not re∣claim, and Christian ears abhor the sound) may, by a sinister interpretation, be made to speak Josephus to have had this opinion of our Saviour; that he was not a Man, but some Changeling or Fairy-elf, who shewed apish Tricks, play'd strange Pranks [mimi & histriones quo{que} dicti sunt paradoxi.] (Vos. Ety∣mol.) If therefore the Christians had had a mind to periwigg Josephus (to make him look more favourably upon Christ) they would never have put upon him such a border as this; out of which he looks more a squint upon him, than he did without it. Had Josephus (in opprobry) called Christ, a doer of paradoxical actions, it would have been neither Piety nor Policy in Christ's friends, to have added by way of Preface. [I cannot tell whether I should call him a man:] the worst sence which the first clause is capable of alone, being better than the best bad sence, that can be put upon it, in conjunction with such a Preface. If it cast a bad aspect upon Christ alone, it will cast a worse in such company. 2. Take them both (as Josephus delivers them) with the right-hand; as speaking (in consort with the whole series of his Discourse) the commenda∣tion of our Saviour; and what is gain'd by taking in, or lost by leaving out these words [if we may call him a man,] that deserves the raising of so much dust? does not Christ's doing miraculous Works, his rising from the dead (according to the Prophecies that went of him) speak him to have been more than an ordinary Man; either the Messias, or that Prophet, or Elias: which is all that Josephus intends, or can be deem'd to intend in those words, (which import no more but his being of an Opinion equivolent to that Pagan Opinion of Christ mention'd by St. Austin, (de consensu Evang. 1. 7. tom. 4. pag. 162.) [honorandum enim tanquam sapientissimum virum putant, non colendum tanquam Deum.] (They thought he was to be honoured as a most wise man, but not to be worship'd as a God.) for he was so far from thinking Christ to be God: as, in the question about Messiah, he preferr'd Vespasian before him; (de Bel. Jud. 7. 12.) (an Argument, that he did not apprehend the Messias himself to be God) only, he perceiv'd (by the great Works Christ did) that he
was more than a common Man; and (by the Analogy, which those Works bare to Prophecie) that he was one of those extraordinary persons, to whom those Prophecies had relation: Either the Christ, or Elias, or that Prophet, or one of the Prophets; as some of the Jews conjectured our Saviour to be, who were far enough from believing in him, as Christ the Son of the living God (Mat. 16. 6.) 2. Nor in that, [that is Christ] whereby it was not in Josephus his thought to acknowledge Jesus of Nazareth, for the Christ, but only, to distinguish him (by that appellation) from others, his Coetanians, who were called Jesus; as the Son of Ananus (who for seven years together, before the ruin of the Ci∣ty, denounced wo against it, (Bel. Jud. 7. 12.) Jesus the son of Damneus, whom Albinus made high Priest, in room of Ananus the younger, the murderer of St. James, our Lords Brother; which James, Josephus (in the same Chapter) calls the Brother of Jesus Christ, to distinguish him from that other Jesus (Jud. antiquit. 20. 7.) there mentioned; as also from Jesus, the Cap∣tain of those Cut-throats, whom the Imperialists of Sephorim hired to sur∣prise Josephus: (vita Josephi) and Jesus, the son of Saphias, that fire-flin∣ger, who incens'd the Galileans against Josephus. (Ibid.) Jesus, the son of To∣bias, that Captain of Robbers, who, near Tiberias, surprised five of Valerian's Soldiers, (Bel. Jud. 3. 16.) Jesus, the son of Thebath, to whom Titus gave quarter at the taking of the upper part of the City Jerusalem (Bel. Jud. 7. 15.) and Jesus, the son of Gamaliel, who succeeded that other Jesus, already named, in the high Priesthood. (antiq. Jud. 20. 7.) So that, besides our Jesus, there were six, who (in that Age) bare that name, and two of them men∣tion'd in the same Chapter, where he is named Jesus Christ (Ant. Jud. 20. 7.) Briefly; so ambiguous was the name Jesus, in that Age; as the Jewish Ex∣orcists, that they might not leave the unclean spirits (which they adjured [in the name of Jesus]) in doubt who that Jesus was; annex to it, in their form of Conjuration, this discriminating Circumstance [whom Paul preacheth;] without which they might have pleaded, they neither knew Jesus nor Paul; there being Jesusses many, and Pauls many; but no Paul that preach'd Je∣sus, saving the Apostle, nor any Jesus whom Paul preach'd but Jesus Christ: and therefore the Spirits are forc'd to confess [Jesus we know, and Paul we know.] Would our supercilious Criticks have had Josephus (in this Chap∣ter) to have left out that discriminating compellation, for fear of being ac∣counted a Christian? that had been to make work indeed for the Criticks, and an administration of Goats-wool, enough for them to have spun an endless thread of contention, who that Jesus should be. But this excellent Au∣thor was better skill'd in the Laws of History, than to leave his Reader in that ambiguity; by telling a story of an individuum vagum, of one Jesus, with∣out making that name (so common to many) proper to that person, of whom he writes, by the addition of, Christ; as that which distinguished him from all other Jesuses, and whereby he was famously known and exprest by, even in Heathen Writers of that Age, wherein Josephus finish'd his Antiquity (to wit) the thirteenth year of Domitian: (as himself dates it (Antiq. 20. 9.) at which time Suetonius, writing of our Jesus, calls him Christus [Judios im∣pulsore Christo tumultuantes:] he banish'd the Jews Rome, for their turbu∣lencie on occasion of Christ, (Sueton. Claudius 25.) And Tacitus (annal. l. 15.) [Vulgus Christianos appellabat: auctor nominis ejus Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante per Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat.] they were commonly called Christians, the Author of this name was Christ, who in the Reign of Tiberius was crucified by Pontius Pilate. Have the Christians been tampering with Suetonius and Tacitus? or did they embrace him as the Christ, seeing they call him Christ? The strength therefore of this Testimony of our Religion, does not lye in those Locks, so as to put any well-willer thereof upon thinking to advantage its cause, by fastning these clauses to Josephus his Text, but they stood originally in it, as necessary parts of his History, without which it had been lame, and unintelligible; For how will his []
stand with the leaving out of [this is Christ] were the Christians nam'd of Jesus, or of Christ? And 'tis far more proba∣ble that Ruffinus (of whose and other Latin Translations Gelenius (Epist. nuncupat.) complains, that he found in them not only many Text's depraved, but in many places, not only whole lines, but pages over-slip'd) might (for brevities sake) in his quotation of Josephus, leave out the first; and Cedrenus in his, leave out the second; than that either of them should be wanting in our Author: St. Jerom's [credebatur] is rather his addition to Josephus his [this was the Christ] than that, an addition to him, by any Fautour of our Religion; and that Vossius his  (not in the the last, but last but one Chapter, of the last Book of his Antiquities, if I mistake not) is better in the translation of Gelenius applyed to James, than Jesus [fratrem Jesu Chri∣sti Jacobum nomine] the Brother of Jesus Christ called James, rather than the Brother of Jesus called Christ. § 4. If we please our selves in this humour (of razing out of the most Au∣thentick Authors, whatsoever our fanatick Genius disgusts, or takes the least (though never so unreasonable) exception against) we shall shortly turn all An∣tiquity into razed Tables: we shall leave its venerable head perfectly bald, if (as our different Fancies move us) one, pluck out the black; and another, the gray hairs. We will therefore, notwithstanding those Moths and Book∣worms attempts to deface this Text (by their corrosions and nibling at the edges of it) read it as it stands, and hath ever stood in Josephus, present∣ing us with a Table of the chief things contain'd in the Evangelical story of Christ. 1. As to the Date of Christs publick Appearance, and being taken notice of; the Evangelists state, the dawning of it in the Baptists Ministry, in a manner immediately preceding Christ's Baptism. [In the fifteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being Governour of Judaea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip Tetrareh of Iturea, and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of Abilene: Annas and Caiaphas being the high Priests;] with whom the History of Josephus will appear to synchronize in every Circumstance, if we first remove such rubs as are laid in our way by some too critical Scholiasts. As to that [In the fifteenth year of Tiberius.] The learned Vossius, that he may reconcile those Fathers to Scripture, who affirm'd that Christ suffer'd in the fifteenth of Tiberius: di∣stinguisheth the years of Tiberius his Reign [alone] and [with his Father] and conceives that St. Luke followed the Provincial Account, reckoning Tiberi∣us his Reign from the time that Augustus made him his colleague, almost three years before his death: and the Fathers, the Roman Account of his reigning alone. But, first, as this great Critick missed the mind of the Fathers, who never dream'd of such a distinction, but grounded their opinions barely upon their misinterpretation of Isaiah 61. 2. [To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord] deeming that that Text limited Christ's Ministry to a precise year. They are of age, let them speak for themselves, by the mouth of Clemens Alexandrinus (stromat. 1.) . [Christ was but to preach one year: for the Prophet speaking of him saith, The Lord hath sent me to preach an acceptable year.] And therefore he does but wash the Aethiopian, while he seeks to salve the matter. So, secondly, the Scheme which he himself draws upon this ground, runs foul upon his Author Josephus; while he assigns the beginning of Gratus his Presidency over Judaea, to the third year of Tiberius his Reign alone, which Josephus fastens to the beginning of his Reign, and mentions immediately after his coming to the Crown. And, thirdly, manifestly con∣tradicts St. Luke. For while he placeth the beginning of Gratus his Goverment, anno Tiberii 3. Christi 21. (seeing that Gratus continued that his Goverment cleven years) he is forc'd to place the beginning of Pilates Regencie; in the fourteenth year of Tiberius his Reign alone, and of Christ's thirty second; that is, two years at least after Christ's Baptism, upon his hypothesis: when
as the Evangelical Text saith expresly, that at the beginning of John's Bap∣tism, Pontius Pilate was Governour of Judaea, in the fifteenth year of Tiberius current, (the fifteenth of his Reign alone) not his twelfth: for Annius Ru∣fus was President of Judaea, when Augustus dyed: and his successor Valerius Gratus continued President eleven years; who, if he began (as Vossius think∣eth) in Tiberius his third alone, Tiberius his twelfth alone, must be expired long before Pilate enter'd upon the Government. (Vossii Chron. Saer. pag. 231.) Anno Christi. 16—Tiberius aequum ac Augustus imperium habere incipit. 19—Augustus moritur; incipit Tiberius regnare solus. 21—Gratus fit Judaeae Procurator. Pag. 232. 30—Christus baptizatur. 32—Grato succedit Pontius Pilatus. 33—Christus crucisigitur. This learned man therefore must not only prove, that Tiberius was Em∣perour three years with Augustus, but that Pilate was two years Governour of Judaea with Gratus, and that St. Luke intended that, as well as Tiberius his Government with Augustus: or his and St. Luke's Chronology will never con∣cur, as to the date of Christ's Baptism. And hardly in the date of his Passion, so as Pilate could in that time, before it, which he allows him (one year) bring his Family from Rome, and settle it in Jerusalem, much less be a long time at enmity with Herod, (as the sacred Text asserts;) so that his hypothesis ha∣zards that Article of the Creed [Suffered under Pontius Pilate] as well as cancels that part of sacred History [baptized under Pontius Pilate] I speak this in caution to others, not in disgrace of this excellent Person, to whose elaborate and judicious lucubrations we cannot ascribe too much praise, except we give them the divine honour of Infallibility. But the imperti∣nency of the application of this distinction of the years of Tiberius, to the Evangelical History, will be made more apparent in our proving of Josephus his concurrence with St. Luke in the several specified Circumstances of the Date of Christ's Story. Instance 1. Pilate. That Josephus placeth the Story of Christs beginning to shew himself, a∣bout the fifteenth of Tiberius, and the whole Story (from thence) of his and his Precursor's, both Life and Death, under the Government of Pilate; will best appear by reflecting upon his dating Pilate's Entrance and Exit. Tibe∣rius (saith he) at the beginning of his Reign, and after the Death of Augu∣stus, made Valerius Gratus Governour of Judaea, in the room of Rufus, whom Augustus (at his death) left in that place: which Province, after Gratus had managed it eleven years, he committed to Pontius Pilate; whom Vitelius, the President of Syria sent to Rome, after he had been Governour ten years: But Tiberius was dead before Pilate got to Rome. So that Pi∣late's Presidency, and Tiberius his Reign and Life ended near about the same time. Now Tiberius dyed the twentieth of the Calends of April, before the middle of the twenty third year of his Reign, which began legally at the Death of Augustus, the fourteenth of the Calends of September: upon which Consideration the Senat moved to have the name of August transferr'd from the precedent to that Month (saith Suetonius.) Tiberius therefore pre∣cisely
reigned twenty two years, five months and thirteen days. (Josephus Anti{que} lib. 18. cap. 1. cap. 9.) or (thirteen according to the Greek.) That which I observe in this part of Josephus his Chronology, and the Contin∣gencies within that time mention'd, is 1. That he inserts the History of Christ, and the Baptist in the midst of the Story of Pilate's Gests while he was Governour. 2. That he placeth Pilate's entring upon that Office in the twelfth year of Tiberius, that is, ten years and an half before his Death: for he assigns ten years to Pilate's Regency; and we cannot, in reason, assign much less than half a year, betwixt his turning out of Office, and his arrival at Rome (to answer for the misdemeanours, the Jews accused him of to Vitellius) whither it is not likely he would make too much haste, upon so unpleasing an Errand, having so good an excuse for his making delay from the season of the year, Winter being but ended upon his arrival there; where he met with the news of Caesars death. And it is no more probable that his Predecessor Gratus could enter upon his eleven years Presidentship, before the second year of Tiberius: If we consider how much of that year he complemented away in a seeming backwardness to take up the Imperial Crown, and the business at home that lay upon his hand, till he had settled there the Affairs of the Empire, before he could look so far abroad as Judaea. 3. That, by the Account of Josephus, Pilate was in Office above two years before our Saviour came in publick view; and remain'd about four years in Office after his ascension. So that all that our Saviour did, or suffer'd af∣ter he came under the Worlds Eye, is comprehended within the bounds of Pilate's Story, where Josephus lays it. Instance 2. Herod and Philip. § 5. That those occurrences concerning the blessed Jesus, which Josephus mentions, as coetaneous with the Acts of Pilate, fell out while Herod was Tetrarch of Galilee, and his Brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea (the first where∣of all the Evangelists mention in the History of Christ's Passion, as he to whose cognizance Pilate referr'd the Cause of Christ, after he heard he was of Galilee, and belong'd to Herod's Jurisdiction) is attested by Josephus (Ant. lib. 17. 1.) who gives us a Catalogue of Herod the Great's Male-issue that su∣pervived their Father, viz. Herod Antipas, and Archelaus, his sons by Mal∣thace a Samaritan: (Bel. Jud. 1. 18.) And Herod Philip by Cleopatra, the Daughter of Simon, whom he preferr'd to the Priesthood to blanch over the meanness of his Daughters Parentage. (Antiq. 17. 1.) And in the tenth Chapter of the same Book gives an account of Herod's changing his Will the second time: for whereas in the first change, (Bel. Jud. 1. 21.) he had expung'd the name of Antipater (whom he caus'd to be put to death five days before his own,) and appointed Antipas to succeed him, passing by his elder Brethren Archelaus and Philip, (upon some prejudice he had taken up against them, through the information of Antipater;) In his second change thereof, he ap∣pointed Archelaus, the Elder Brother of Antipas, to be King: gave Philip Trachonitis, and the Country about it; and to Antipas the Tetrarchate of Ga∣lilee. (Bel. Jud. 1. 21.) So that Archelaus (as St. Matthew records) reigned in his Father's stead: but falling into the hatred of the Jews, (his subjects) and into the displeasure of the Emperour (his Lord) in the twelfth year of his Reign, he was banished by Augustus, and his Kingdom and Goods con∣fiscate; (which is the reason we hear no more of him in the History of Christ, he being gone off the Stage of the World, before Christ shewed himself up∣on it.) But the other two, Herod and Philip, as they are mentioned toge∣ther by the Evangelists, so also by Josephus. This being that Herod (the Fox) who made a prey of the Wife of, (this) his Brother, Philip. In telling of which Story Josephus indeed stiles Philip only Herod (Herod Antipas, saith he) in his travelling to Rome lodg'd with Herod, his Brother, but born of ano∣ther
Mother, the Daughter of Simon, with whose Wife, Herodias he falling in love, enticed her, at his return, to leave her Husband and go with him. But that he means Herod Philip, and that I have given the right sence of his Catalogue of Herod's Sons (though in mentioning the Issue of Herod, by Si∣mon's Daughter, he, in one place, names Herod and Philip, as if they were two) is manifest: For, first, the Relative and Verb are of the singular num∣ber, in that Clause. [Herodem genuit & Philippum qui & ipse Romae edu∣cabatur;) and therefore the Copulative (&) is either redundant, or the [] by the incautelousness of the Scribe put in room of the Article [] or else is explicative, and should be rendred by [etiam] i. e. he begot Herod, even (or to wit) Philip. 2. Josephus, in his mentioning the Sons of Herod the Great, does no where name more Herods than three; to wit, Herod by Mal∣thace, Herod by Cleopatra Simon's Daughter, and Herod by Mariamne, the Daughter of Alexander the High Priest. Now this last Herod dyed while he was at School at Rome (Bel. Jud. 1. 18.) and therefore he could neither be that Herod by whom, nor that Herod from whom, Herodias was taken. 3. He∣rod in his last Will provides for no other sons, but Archelaus Antipas and Philip: and therefore both these Herods must have starved, if their Father had not provided for one of them, under the name of Antipas; and for the other, under that of Philip. 4. Josephus puts a Key into our hands (Bel. Jud. 2. 8.) The Kingdom of Archelaus being reduc'd to a Province, the re∣mainder of Herod's sons, to wit, Philip and Herod called Antipas govern'd their own Tetrarchates. In this honour they both continued, from within one year, after our Savi∣ours Birth, to within one year after Tiberius his Death; and one of them unto the Reign of Caligula: Of both which Josephus giveth this account, viz. Agrippa, (this was that Herod Agrippa, who was eaten up of worms) after six months grievous imprisonment by Tiberius, was, at Tiberius his Death, not only set at Liberty by Caligula, but had the Kindom of Judaea bestowed on him, and the Tetrarchate of Philip, (but then newly deceas'd.) This Preferment of Agrippa did so sting Herodias, as Herod could have no rest from her importunities, till she had got him to Rome (in order to his strengthning his Court interest for his own, and against Agrippa's Promoti∣on) But Agrippa so well plays his Game against his Uncle Herod, as he is forc'd to flee to Spain, and leave his Tetrarchate (by Caligula's order) unto Agrippa (Antiq. 18. 9. 14.) Neither doth Josephus only mention these two Tetrarchs as then in being, when our Saviour was upon earth, but all the Circumstances relating to them, recorded in sacred Writ. We read in the Gospel of Caesarea Philip∣pi (St. Matt. 16. 13.) so called because Philip the Tetrarch of a Village named Paneas, made it a City, and named it after Cesar, as Josephus writ∣eth. (Jud. Ant. l. 18. cap. 3:) where he describes its Scituation, ad Jordanis fontes, answerable to the Topography of the Evangelists, who describe Christ's peregrination, after he departed from Jerusalem to avoid the trea∣chery of the Jews who sought to kill him, into that part of Galilee, which appeartain'd to Philip's Tetrarchate; so, as though the Cities about the Sea of Galilee, or Tiberias, or the Lake of Geneseret, (all in Philip's Precincts) he passeth over that Sea, and along the Coasts of Jordan till he came to Cae∣sarea Philippi: A wealthy Inhabitant of which City he had before that cured at Capernaum; who, in a grateful memorial of that mercy, had caused to be ingraven the History of that Cure; to wit, two Statues, one repre∣senting her self kneeling before, the other of our Saviour with a garment down to his feet, where there grew an Herb, which, when it became so high as to touch the Hem of his Garment, had the medicinal virtue to heal all Diseases: these Statues remain'd intire, till by the command of Julian the Apostate, they were cast down, and his own erected. This Statue Eusebius affirmeth to have stood there in his time; and that when he went to Caesarea, on purpose to inform himself of the truth, he saw it with his own eyes.
(Eccl. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 14.) I therefore mention this story at large, that the Romanists may see how little it makes for their Image-worship, seeing it was erected only, as a Monument of that benefit this Woman receiv'd, and had not divine honour conferr'd upon it, for all this miraculous effusion of di∣vine Virtue into its Neighbour plant. And that our Divines may learn a more substantial way of resolving the Popish Sophisms, than by denying what is most apparently true, upon such weak Reasons as a learned man of∣fereth, viz. why all this at Caesarea, since the Woman was cured at Caper∣naum? But whoever affirm'd the memorial of this Cure to have been erect∣ed in the place where it was done, and not of the Womans aboad on whom it was wrought? or who can think but she whose Faith was so strong, as to believe she should be healed, if she could but touch the Hem of Christs Gar∣ment, and Wealth so competent as she could erect those brazen Statues at her door; could want either will or means to travel (for the Cure of so tedi∣ous and noisome a disease) as far as from Caesarea to Capernaum? (not half so far asunder as London and the Bath) or that she could think to meet with Christ any where more likely, than at the place of his home, Capernaum, or of fixing the memorial of so great a Mercy any where more conveniently than at her own door? This touch given for the Cure of such impetuous Fluxes of indigested Notions, I return to Caesarea, concerning which Jose∣phus hath this story: That antiently the head of Jordan was reputed to be in its Confines, till Philip the Tetrarch by observing that the Chaff which he caused (for trials sake) to be cast into a Well an hundred and twenty Fur∣longs from it, called Phiale, came out at the Springs of Jordan near Cae∣sarea, discover'd that Well to be the head of it: from whence working like a Mole underground, till it came to Paneas, and there breaking out in two Fountains, it made those two Whirl-pools in the Caverns under the Earth, which swallowed up the Sacrifices, which the Pagan Priests once a year cast into Paneas, making the silly people believe it was miraculous. This I re∣port not for any mention is made hereof in sacred Writ; but for the illustra∣tion of that Story in Eusebius (Eecl. hist. l. 7. c. 14.) which he receiv'd from the mouth of Astyrius his familiars; how Astyrius by invocating the Name of Christ, caused the Sacrifice to swim at the top, by a miraculous power, contrary to that natural motion of it downward, and sucking of it in by the subterraneal Vorago, whence the Priests took occasion to abuse the Credulity of the Vulgar. If we slide down the Stream of Jordan thirty four Miles, we arrive at the Sea of Tiberias, or the Lake of Genesareth, and on the Bank of that Lake, at Bethsaida, another of Philip's Towns, improved by him into a City; whence St. Luke stiles it the City Bethsaida, as it is called (Chap. 9. 11.) [] intimating it had but newly commenc'd a City. And now we are upon this Lake, we will take notice of the Issue which Christ's Execration of Bethsaida, Corazin, Capernaum, and the other Towns border∣ing upon it had, of which Josephus (Bel. Jud. l. 3. c. 17. 18.) gives us this ac∣count; That they were so slaughter'd by the Romans, as one might see the whole Lake coloured with Blood, and replete with Carkasses; insomuch as the Air grew thereby to that degree of Infection, as became trouble∣some to the Conquerour, of those who were on the Lake not one escap'd, and those who through Agestaid at home, were with Promises of safety en∣ticed out of their houses, and in their march to Tiberias slain by the Romans, except six thousand of the stoutest of them, who were sent captives to Nero. But that which is remarkable, in the infliction of the Divine Vengeance upon them, is that Vespasian calling a Council of War, to determine what they should do with the conquer'd, though they had given them quarter, though Vespasian naturally inclin'd to the more merciful side, and though they all confest it was not honest, yet the Vote past generally that the dis∣missing them alive, was not safe in that juncture of affairs, and therefore that they should all be put to the Sword. If I were not afraid to tire thy pati∣ence (Reader) I could carry thee to other places mention'd in the Gospel,
over which Secular History, draws the same Line that the Evangelius do, though I have no instance at hand of any place in his brother Herod's juris∣diction made famous by our Saviours Converse, for the Lamb of God kept himself out of that Foxes walk, after he had murder'd his Fore runner, and was warned of Herod's intent to kill him. I will therefore dismiss the prose∣cution of that Topick, and conclude Herod's Story with that of Herodias so frequently mention'd in sacred Scripture, of which, besides those that have already been specified, Josephus relateth these Circumstances: That so soon as Herod's Wife, the Daughter of Aretas, perceiv'd the Regal Bed to smell rank of this Strumpet, not being able to endure to be nosed by a Sow with a gold Ring in her Snowt, having first removed her Court to Macheron, not then the Baptists Prison: for had John been then shut up there, she neither would have desired to remove thither, nor Herod have permitted her the so∣ciety of a person, who had so openly declared himself in that Cause against Herodias, and was so well able to represent it in its most loathsome colours, to the World, if he had pleased; the fear whereof, through Herodias im∣portunity, made Herod, a while after confine the Baptist to prison in the Castle of Macheron: from whence, before he came there, the Daughter of Aretas was fled to her Father; who when he could neither prevail with He∣rod to dismiss his Brothers Wife, nor with Philip to take her from his Bro∣ther by force of Arms, he himself begins a War, at first with Philip, hoping the fear of loosing her Daughters Inheritance, might force Herodias back to her own Husband, and loosen her from those incestuous Bonds, whereby, as the Fire-brand of Galilee, she was drawing an intestine War upon that Country. And when that succeeded not any farther than to the begetting in Philip's subjects a grudge against Herod; for the convenient venting where∣of they waited, even under Herod's Banners, whither (upon Aretas his ex∣pelling them from their own habitations) they had repair'd; he turns his revenging Arms, whetted with a Fathers grief, and back'd with the justice of his Cause, upon his obscene Son-in-Law: to whose forces by the help of Philip's Subjects, who (more resenting the injury Herod had done to the Daughter of Aretas, than that which Aretas had done to themselves) turn'd about to his Standard, in the heat of the battle: he gave so total a rout, as made the religious party of the Jews interpret that defeat to have been Gods revenge upon Herod, for his rejecting the Baptists Counsel, and delivering that good man up to the will of Herodias. And forc'd Herod to run puling to Caesar for aid against Aretas; Caesar orders Vitellius to stand by Herod; a∣gainst whose joynt Forces, while Aretas is preparing to march, (with a great deal of confidence, as having been assured (by a Dream) that either he who lead the adverse Army, or he who appointed him to that undertaking, should fall by the stroak of death, before the Fight was ended.) The news of the Emperour's death is brought to Vitellius; after whose decease, Caligula coming to the Imperial Crown, uncrowns Herod, and exiles him and his Mi∣nion. How excellently doth Josephus in all this comment upon the Baptists Ser∣mon, and prove him to have been a true Prophet, when he told him [] (St. Mar. 6. 18.) no good will come of it; it will not succeed well with thee, these stoln Waters will prove bitter in the latter end. § 6. To this pair of Tetrarchs, I will (for the Oneness of their Religion) subjoyn that Pair of High Priests Annas and Caiaphas, whom St. Luke men∣tions, as being in Office at the beginning of the Baptists Ministry, and to have continued in that office, till after our Saviours Crucifixion. Sea-men of old took the joynt-appearance of those Twins Castor and Pol∣lux for a luckie omen, but accounted it a presage of an eusuing Tempest, when one of them appear'd singly: This Twin-appearance of two High-Priests together, hath wrought contrary effects, and raised such Theologi∣cal
Storms, as have clouded the Skie of plain Truth, and divided the Fleet of Fishers of men into as many Opinions, almost, as there are Pilots: So that they, whose Profession it is to secure our passage from falling upon inconve∣nience, by falling foul upon one another, have run us upon the hazard of shipwracking the Faith. I will first therefore clear the Vessel of those quicks wherein it sticks; that, having gain'd an open Sea, we may present it under sail, steering its course, by the Wind that blows from Secular, to the same Port which that, which breathes from sacred History, directs it to. 1. By divine Institution there could not be two High Priests at a time; for nothing but the death (either of Nature or in Law) of the High Priest could make way for the Succession of another. I ground this Distinction of death upon (1 Kings 2. 26.) where Solomon, before he put Abiathar from the Priesthood and Zadock in his room, tells Abiathar, that he was a man of death (a dead man in Law, having forfeited his life by Treason) worthy to dye: but for the service he had done for, and the sufferings he had under∣gone with his Father, he is content to remit that part of his punishment, and in room thereof confines him during life, to the City of the Priests, Ano∣thoth. In rigid propriety of Speech therefore, those whom Herod, and his Po∣sterity, or the Roman Deputies brought into the High-priesthood over the necks of one another, were none of them High Priests. 2. However, the Office being necessary, and those whose Office it was by lawful Succession not being permitted to exercise it; that God, who will have mercy and not sacrifice, was pleased so far to wave his own right of instituting Successors in that Office by the death (the Key whereof he keeps in his own hand) of his Predecessor: as to own them for High Priests, whom that civil Au∣thority, which he had set over that Nation, put into that Office. (Qod fieri non debuit, factum valet:) It was an Usurpation of the Magistrate over God, to put such persons into possession, but they being in the possession it was not then a time to dispute Titles; to have question'd subjection to them, as High Priests, would have been a greater Usurpation, and of more destructive consequence: and therefore we read not only that St. Paul excuseth himself for not treating Annanias with that respect, which was due to Gods High Priest: but that God himself vouchsafed to inspire Caiaphas with a spirit of Prophecy in honour of his Office, than which a more satisfactory evidence of Gods approbation could hardly have been given; this being, for kind, that wherewith God honour∣ed Moses, as that which should have stopt the mouths of all querulous op∣posers, [I have spoke face to face to my servant Moses, wherefore then were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses] (Num. 12. 18.) 3. But this would not satisfie the over-righteous Jewish zealots; especi∣ally if those High Priests, whom the Deputies displac'd, were more deserving of the Office, more zealous of the Law, and more complying with their Principles, than those who were thrust into their rooms. Now of all those of the Romans erecting, whom afterwards they dis∣possest, there was none after whom the Jews had so hankering a mind as this Annas in St. Luke's Text: Of whom Josephus hath this Observation, That after he had enjoy'd the Priesthood a long while, he had five Sons bare that Office; and was of all men the most happy in the love of the people. (Jos. Ant. 20. 8.) It was, doubtless, the dissatisfaction which the people took at his deposition, which forc'd Valerius Gratus to thrust out, within a year, Ismael (whom he put into the room of Annas) and bestow that honour upon E∣leazar the Son of Annas; which forc'd Vitellius to promote Jonathan, the Son of Annas, after the deposition of Caiaphas; which forc'd Agrippa to e∣lect Annas the younger, into the room of Joseph Cabi. And yet this An∣nas was not alone in partaking this favour of the people, so as to be reputed High Priest, after his Ejection: For Jonathan his Son (whom Vitellius made High Priest, in the room of Caiapas, and a while after deposed, putting
into his place his Brother Theophilus) gain'd that repute among the Jews, for his refusing to be restored by Agrippa in the second of Claudius, as the name of High Priest was bestowed upon him to his dying day, even after the Election of Ananias; as appears by this story of him in Josephus, (Ant. l. 20. c. 2.) Faelix, bearing a grudge against Jonathan the High Priest, for ad∣monishing him of his Duty, procured one of his familiars to murder him. (Jos. ant. lib. 20. c. 6.) and when he reports how he pleaded against the Sa∣maritans before Quadratus at Tyre, he stiles him Jonathan the High Priest. (Bel. Jud. l. 2. c. 11.) The like Privilege Ananias obtain'd, whom Herod King of Calchis (having obtain'd of Claudius for himself and Successors the power of electing the High Priest, which was continued to them till after the Wars) put into the High Priesthood, a little before his own death, in the eighth of Claudius: And yet after that Quadratus, Governour of Syria, had sent him bound to Rome, in the twelfth of Claudius, to answer what the Samaritans laid to his charge, as to his abetting the Galileans against them, and above ten years after that, when Ismael the Son of Phabeus, Joseph the Son of Cabi, Annas the Son of Annas, Jesus the Son of Damneus, and Jesus the Son of Gamaliel had possest the Priesthood, after his ejectment, he still retain'd the name of High Priest, even then Josephus writes him High Priest, when the doom which St. Paul had past was executed upon him; when this painted Wall was smitten and slain by the Robbers. (Jos. Bel. l. 2. cap. 18.) Till when, from his deposition he grew daily (by his largess to the People, his caressing of the Governours, and their High Priests) into such favour with the People, as made him in effect the High Priest, and the High Priests themselves but shadows. (Joseph. ant. l. 20. c. 8.) This (by the way) is that Annias, whom St. Paul called painted Wall, and excused himself; for that he knew not that he was the High Priest; that is, not in actual possession of that Office. For, upon Cumanus sending him prisoner to Rome, Agrippa put Ismael into the High Priesthood: (l. 20. cap. 6.) upon the same reason that he put Joseph Cabi into Ismael's room, when he understood that he was one of them who went to Rome to plead for the standing of that blind to his prospect into the Temple, which he would have had pull'd down (l. 20. c. 7.) Or if I mistake Josephus in this point; in this I am sure I do not; that Agrippa conferr'd the High Priesthood upon Ismael soon after Faelix his com∣ing into Office, and his own repair into Judaea, and long enough before St. Paul was brought before the Council. This might put a wise man to a stand, in determining who was then High Priest, there being in that juncture three that bore that name and repute (according as the interest of several Sects, lead them to like or dislike,) to wit, this Ananias, a Sadducee; Jonae∣than, a Pharisee (and therefore St. Paul's crying he was a Pharisee was in design not only to secure himself from the fury of the rabble (by dividing them) but to prevent this whited walls falling upon him, (in revenge of St. Paul's affronting him;) and Ismael whom the lawful power had estated (though perhaps unduly) in that Office, and whom St. Paul therefore meant to be the true High Priest, and the pragmatical Ananias only a shadow. For I cannot think he intended to assert there was then no High Priest at all; for what had that been but to equivocate? seeing those he replyed to, had not yet heard him, or any other Apostle preach Christ to be the true High Priest, and therefore could not be thought to have any other conception of that Title than the common Notion: neither would they have permitted such a Reply, as he gave, to have past without examination, if they had not had some person in their eye, to whom that Office did more legally appertain than to Ananias. Neither could Paul be ignorant what Ananias was, and there∣fore that he meant, as his Reply plainly imports, that he knew Ananias was not the High Priest, there being another; to wit, Ismael preferr'd to that ho∣nour by the same Authority from whence he had formerly receiv'd the High Priesthood. In which particular as he vindicated the honour of Gods Or∣dinance in bestowing it where it was due; and gratefully pleads for that
Power, the priviledge of being born under which, he had pleaded for himself the day before (Act. 22. 28.) praising now the Bridge he had gone over then: so he secured himself of protection under that Power, which God had set over the Nation, against the violence of his inraged adversary Ananias, the courage of whose party he had so lately quell'd with the terrour of the Roman Name, at the hearing whereof his Accusers and Examiners slunck a∣way, (Act. 22. 29.) But let the Learned judge as they please of this Exposi∣tion of St. Paul's Reply; That to have two High Priests at once in those times, (one legally invested by the Roman Authority, and another factiously adhered to, as unjustly deposed: The one called in scorn the Kings High Priest, as ordained by man only; the other in honour, the Lords High Priest, as elected of God, and judged to be so by the Lords people, as that sipering Fa∣ction proudly stiled it self) was no strange thing, is manifest from that Passage in Josepus (Bel. Jud. l. 2. cap. 11.) [Indè cùm Lyddam venit—duos autem Principes Sacerdotum, Jonathan & Ananiam—] When Quadratus came to Lyd∣da he again heard the complaints of the Samaritans, and calling before him twenty eight Jews, who were proved to have been in the fight, he caused them to be beheaded, and sent two Chief Priests, Jonathan and Ananias, unto Caesar; so called, not because they were Members of the Sanhedrim, but in the then most proper acceptation of that name; because Ananias was, and Jonathan had been in the possession of the Priesthood. Nay, so far did the popular Interest prevail over that of lawful Authority in the deposition of Simon Canthar; as after his place had been filled with Matthias, and Elionaeus elected by Agrippa, Herod the King of Calchis was fain to eject him, and bring to the order of a common Priest, before he would yield up the Office of the High Priest (Antiq. l. 19. c. 6. l. 20. 3.) By all these Allegations it appears, that St. Luke speaks the common Lan∣guage of the Jews, in the assigning the beginning of John's Ministry, to that time when Annas and Caiaphas were High Priests; for so indeed they were in the then vulgar acceptation of that Title; the one being then in Office by appointment of the Roman Deputy Valerius Gratus; and the other, though by him deposed, yet so much in favour with the People, as they still reputed him for High Priest, amongst whom he privately, and in Conventicles, out of the sight of the Roman Magistrate, carried it as High Priest, and pre∣pared Matters for the true High Priests proposal to the Roman Lievtenants, whom they imployed in things of that nature, only proforma, and to cast a blind before their eyes; especially during the High Priesthood of Caiaphas, who being his Son-in-Law, would not scruple to gratifie both him and the people with so obliging a favour to them, and a condescension advantagious to himself, he hereby preventing their solliciting Pilat to turn him out, as it is like they had to depose Ismael the Son of Fabi, and Simon the Son of Ca∣muthi, those short-liv'd High Priests, Caiapas his Predecessors. By this tem∣porizing he preserv'd his Father-in-Laws honour among his own people, provided for the satisfaction of the squeamish Consciences (for so they call∣ed their ignorant Zeal) of his Brethren: and yet reserv'd to himself the Re∣venues of the Office; which was more than those High Priests could do, whom Agrippa set up after the deposition of Ananias, in after more tumul∣tuous times, against those Harpyes, which the ejected Pontif. sent to rob the floores and store-houses of Tithes, and Oblations so bare, as many Priests were famish'd through that plenty he brought into his own Barns and Cof∣fers (Antiq. l. 20. cap. 6.) insomuch, as the High Priests themselves had no∣thing to live upon, but his leavings, which, falling short of a Subsistence, they accounted the later Rain of his Benevolence so great an obligation, as at last they permitted him to do what he pleased in managing that Office, whereof they retain'd only the just Title, and unprofitable Name. Caiaphas, as if by a spirit of Political Prophecie, he had fore-seen that this would have been the Issue of his standing upon rigid Terms with Annas and his Favourites, is content to let him do the work, provided that he may enjoy the benefit of the Office. Hence it was that he was not seen in our Saviours
Condemnation, till the Godly party of Pharisees had satisfied their tender Consciences, touching that point, by enquiring at their Divine Oracle, and High Priest Annas; from whence, having receiv'd their Lesson, for form of Law's sake, they carry Christ bound to Caiapas formally sitting in Council; That is after they had been with him all night, at the house of Annas, where our Saviour was examin'd, condemn'd by the sentence of the High Priest, as that faction reputed him, contumeliously reproached by the servants, and denyed thrice by St. Peter: and all this on the night, that Pilate might not take notice of their preferring Annas, the deposed, before Caiaphas the legal High Priest; they bring him bound from Annas to Caiaphas at break of day, [] (Luc. 22. 66.) where the Scribes and the Elders were as∣sembled, (St. Matt. 26. 57) that is into their Ecclesiastical Council [] (Ibid) where the Sanhedrim were set (St. Luk. 22. 66.) where without any witness, but upon what they heard out of his own mouth, after the High Priest had adjured him to say, whether he were the Son of God or not, and ask'd the Votes of the Council, he is condemn'd as a Blasphe∣mer, (vers. 70. 71.) (St. Matt. 26. 63. 66.) From Caiaphas they carry Christ bound before Pilat into the Civil Council, that Council into which these Saints would not come themselves for fear of defilement, that is, into the common Hall (St. Joh. 18. 28.) [] while it was but yet morning [.] I walk by the Light of that shining Lamp of Af∣fric. (St. Aust. de consensu Evang. l. 3. 17.) In my stating St. Peter's denials in the house of Annas; which as it may be evinc'd by those Reasons which he alledgeth (to which I refer the Reader) so it is more than probable by this, that Annas was the High Priest of the Faction, from his female attendants, and their pragmaticalness, Damsels waiting in the Hall, and keeping the door, as busie with St. Peter below, as their Master was with his above; whose Zeal to the Cause, either would not permit them to go to bed, or rowsed them thence at the news of our Saviours apprehension; that Sex being made up more of Passion than Reason, are mark'd out in sacred Writ as most obnoxi∣ous to seduction and aptest to be proselyted into a Faction. As to the rest, the observing how inconsiderable a while our Saviour was before Caiaphas, as it intimates the satisfaction of the Jews in the Sentence of Annas, and that Caiaphas was only their Stalking-horse, to give a Form of Law to their Acti∣on, as being that Person without whose previous Juridical Sentence, Pilat would not have proceeded against our Saviour; so it perfectly reconciles the Evangelists, without putting us upon the miserable shift of crowd∣ing Pilat and Caiaphas, or Caiaphas and Annas into one joynt habi∣tation. 4. Notwithstanding that Annas, though deposed, was adhered to by the Faction, as the Lord's High Priest, in conformity to which Notion St. Luke calls him High Priest; (as Moses in compliance with vulgar apprehension stiles the Moon one of the great Lights, though she be the least of those God hath set in the Firmament.) Yet Caiaphas, at the beginning of John's Ministry, and at the Passion of our Saviour, was indeed the lawful High Priest, as being put into that Office by the Minister of God, the Roman power ordain'd of God over the Jews. To this Josephus gives his suffrage (Ant. l. 18. c. 3. and 6.) Valerius Gratus took the High Priesthood from Annas, and gave it to Ismael; a while after he bereaves Ismael of it, and bestows it on Eleazar; but de∣poseth Eleazar, after he had enjoy'd that honour a year, and sets up Joseph sirnamed Caiaphas: in which Office he left him, when he went out of his own: and of which Caiaphas held possession till Vitellius Governour of Syria turn'd him out, and put in Jonathan, at what time he received order from Tiberius to conclude a peace with Artabanus, so near the Death of Ti∣berius, as Pilat whom Vitellius turn'd out of Office, and sent at the same time to Rome to answer for his Male-administrations, found him dead when he arrived there. Josephus indeed does not write Caiaphas the Son-in-Law of Annas (it not being his wont to set down any Relations but that of Father
and Son in his Catalogue of High Priests) but he writes Annas old enough to have been his Father-in-Law in his mentioning Eleazar the Son of Annas to have been High Priest before Caiaphas. So that hitherto the Chronology of St. Luke keeps time perfectly with the forreign and secular Account. Instance 3. Lysanias. That Lysanias was then Tetrarch of Abilene appears from the story of Jo∣sephus: (Ant. 15. 13.) thus translated by the judicious Dr. Heylin (in his Palestine) This tract made up the greatest part of the Kingdom of Calchis, possessed by Ptolomy the son of Menneus, in the beginning of Herod's Rise, who dying, left it to Lysanias his Eldest Son, murder'd about seven years af∣ter by M. Antony, at the instigation of Cleopatra: But M. Antony and Cleo∣patra having left the Stage, Lysanias, the Son of the murder'd Prince, enters upon his Fathers Estate by the permission of Augustus; during whose time Zenodorus, Lord of the Town and Territory of Paneas, farming the de∣mesnes of Lysanias, and paying a very great Rent for them, not only per∣mitted the Trachonites to play the Robbers, and to infest the Merchants of Damascus, but himself received part of the Booty with them. Augustus up∣on complaint hereof, commits the whole Country of Trachonitis, Batanea, Gaulonitis and Auramitis to Herod, lately created King of Jewry, that he might quell the Robbers, and bring the Country into order, leaving unto Lysanias nothing but the City Abila, of which he was the natural Lord; whereof, and of the adjoyning Territory, he was afterwards created Te∣trarch, by the name of the Tetrarch of Abilene, which he enjoyed till a∣bout the latter end of the Reign of Tiberius: for his Tetrarchate was not disposed of till Caligula gave it to Herod Agrippa. (Josep. Antiq. 18. 19. 13.) From Lysanias, the City of his Residence, and from whence his Tetrarchate was called Abilene, was stiled , to distinguish it from the Phoenician Abala: (Scal. in notis Eusebeanis, Chron. ex Ptolomeo. § 7. There is one passage in Josephus which hath found the greatest wits works enough to reconcile it to sacred Chronology, and gives a better ground for Vossius his distinction, of Tiberius his Reign with Augustus, and alone, than I elsewhere meet with, as seeming to force upon us either the rejecting of Josephus his Authority, or the concluding that St. Luke calculates Tibe∣rius his years from Tiberius his Colleagueship with Augustus. The place of Josephus (Antiq. 18. 8.) is this: At this time dyed Philip the Brother of Herod in the twentieth year of Tiberius his Empire; after he had justly and prudently managed his Tetrarchate, thirty seven years. The Knot this: If Herod had been dead thirty seven years in the twentieth of Tiberius, and our Saviour but thirty years of age in Tiberius his fifteenth, Christ's thirty seventh falls in Tiberius his twenty second, and by that acount he must be born two years after Herod's death, at which Philip his Son enter'd upon his Te∣trarchate. If in solution hereof it be said, that Josephus reckons the years of Tiberius from the beginning of his Reign alone, but St. Luke from the begin∣ning of his Colleagueship with Augustus: that will make Christ's thirty se∣venth fall in Tiberius his twentieth, and give room to date his Birth about half a year before Herod's death: for if Christ was thirty years of age in Tibe∣rius his fifteenth, from his Colleagueship with Augustus, he must be thirty two, and almost an half at Tiberius his fifteenth from his Reign alone, and by consequence thirty seven, at the twentieth of Tiberius alone; five added to Christ's thirty two, making him thirty seven, and five added to Tiberius his fifteenth, making his Empire twenty years old. But then we contract a worse snarle, and must be forc'd to date our Saviours Baptism before Pilat's Presidencie, which so palpably contradicts St. Luke, (giving this as one of the Characters of the time of Christ's Baptism, that it was when Pontius Pilat was president of Judaea) as we break the Evangelist's head in thus
plaistering Josephus's. And yet we need not with Scaliger here wholly reject the Authority of Josephus, but rather salve it, by supposing that the Number twen∣ty in Josephus, is falsified by the inadvertency of the Transcribers, and should be twenty two at least, as Scaliger himself writes it, out of Josephus, twice in less than two lines; if the Printer have not serv'd him as the Scribe serv'd Jo∣sephus (Canon. Isag. 309.) which I suppose he hath: because, otherwise, Sca∣liger's Argument is not cogent: for the twenty second of Tiberius concurrs with our Saviours thirty seventh, even according to St. Luke's account; who reckons Christ thirty full, at the beginning of Tiberius his fifteenth, as Sca∣liger himself with strenuous Reasons asserts. (de emend. lib. 6. de natali Do∣mini ad Canon. Isag. l. 3. pag. 306.) and is manifest from the Text it self [] he beginning to be of the age of thirty years, which no man in common speech can be said to do till he be thirty com∣pleat: the difference of which phrase from this [] he was beginning the thirtieth of his years] is so manifest, as every School-boy understands it, besides the incongruousness of such a speech to Grammar-rules (for had that been the Evangelists sence, he would have said  [] (he was beginning his thirtieth year) and its insignificancy, as to the describing Christs age (for he was beginning his [] his thirty years, (and all the years besides he lived, first on earth, and since in heaven) the first minute he was born: And therefore I wonder how it escapt that most learned Man's observation, that Josephus, as he ren∣ders him (if his Printer did not mistake in his [twenty second of Tiberius] makes Philip's Reign younger than our Saviour, and a good deal younger, if we take in here that note of his (in emend. temp. l. 6.) concerning Philip the Te∣trarch's Reign (to wit, that according to Josephus he held his Tetrarchate but thirty six years compleat:) for this perfectly accords Josephus with his own, and some other Learned mens opinion, touching the time that Herod lived after the Birth of Christ, which they (at the utmost) extend not to two years. For if Philip was but Tetrarch full thirty six years in Tiberius his twenty second, and Christ had begun thirty one in the fifteenth of Tiberi∣us; his thirty eighth must be begun in Tiberius his twenty second, and so his Birth stated one compleat year, and a good part of another before Herod's death. But because I presume the Quotation out of Josephus of Philip's Death in the twenty second of Tiberius, was the mistake of the Printer (for the place in Josephus specifies the twentieth year) I will, at present, lay no greater stress upon this Argument, than what may incline the ingenuous Reader, not to think me immodest in this Proposal: That perhaps, what befel Scaliger by the Press, might happen to Josephus by an inobservant Pen; and that twenty might be crept into his Text, instead of twenty two or twenty three, until I give him out of Josephus himself the Reason of this my surmise; to wit, That his dating Philip's Death in Tiberius his twentieth, will no way consort with those stories, which (he saith) bore the same date with Philip's Death: such as Pilat's being turn'd out of Office, which in all reasons, could not be long before the Death of Tiberius, in the twenty third of his Reign; which yet he layeth in the precedent Chapter: And that of Vitellius his making peace with Artabanus, and his procuring him to send his Son an hostage to Tiberius: to which he immediately subjoyns the Narrati∣on of Philip's Death with this Chain, [] Then dyed Philip, &c. Now that Artabanus had not made peace with Caesar in the twentieth year of Tibe∣rius, appears out of Tacitus, (Annal. l. 6 pag. 134, &c.) where the first men∣tion of the occasion of Artabanus his War with Vitellius is made in the Con∣sul-ship of C. Gessius, and M. Servilius; who were the last pair of Consuls, but two in Tiberius his Reign; and therefore belong to his twenty first year, of which he gives this account, That Artabanus (who till then (for fear of Germanicus) had been faithful to the Romans, and just towards his own sub∣jects) taking heart from the decrepid old age of Tiberius, and successfulness of his own arms against some neighbouring Countries; and gaping after the Ar∣menian
Kingdom, (whose King Artaxias was then lately dead; did not on∣ly impose his eldest son Arsaces upon Armenia: but also sent to demand the treasure that Vonon had left in Syria and Cilicia; together with the ancient bounds of the Persian and Macedonian Empire; threatning that he would in∣vade all the Countries that Cyrus first; and afterwards Alexander had pos∣ses'd, upon this his nobles (by the practices of Vitelius the deputy of Syria) conspire against him; go to Rome, and obtain of Tiberius, to appoint Phra∣hates, King of Parthia. Phrahates by deserting the Roman custom of living (to which he had been inured) his body not brooking that change, contracts a mortal sickness. He being dead, Tiberius institutes Tiridates in his room King of Parthia; and Mithridates King of Armenia. Mithridates takes Ar∣taxata the chief City of Armenia: and by help of Pharasmanes, forceth Ar∣tabanus out of Armenia and Parthia. What is hitherto reported of Artabanus (as it cannot in reason be otherwise conceiv'd) Tacitus affirmeth to have been two Summers work: and therefore seeing the occasion of thse trans∣actions against Artabanus (to wit, the Embassie of his Nobles, and complaint against him to Tiberius) fell in Tiberius his twenty first, they could not be ended at the soonest before the twenty second of Tiberius, was almost expired, [quae duabus statibus gesta coujunxi, quo requiesceret animus à domesticis malis:] These Parthian affairs (saith he) which lasted two Summers, I have here handled altogether, that I might divert my thoughts from the unpleasant meditation of our domestick mischiefs. Sueton. (in Tiberio, cap. 66.) reports Tiberius his re∣ceipt of Letters from Artabanus: as that which was the last experiment he had of the World's Opinion of him, and prest him to write that desperate Letter to the Senate; wherein he protesteth, he found God so bent to his ruine, as he knew not what to write [Postremò semet ipse, pertaesus talis e∣pistolae, principia tantùm non summam malorum suorum professus est: quid scri∣bam, &c.] The contents of Artabanus his to him, were the upbraiding him with his Parricides, Murders, Sloath and Luxury; and the advising him, that he would satisfie the great, and most just hatred of the Roman Citizens by laying violent hands upon himself: he would never have writ at this rate, had his Son been then an Hostage with Tiberius. But Suetonius is an Histo∣rian, no Chronologer; Tacitus is both: we will therefore return to him: who, after he hath declared what cruelty Tiberius exercised at home, during those two years wars with Artabanus abroad, he returns again to the prose∣cution of his Story; telling how his Nobles repenting of the change, restored Artabanus to his Kingdom: of Tiridates his flight into Syria, and of the fire that happen'd, the same year at Rome: (from whence Tiberius taking oc∣casion to redeem his credit with the Romans, and making an estimate of the value of the streets and houses that were consumed, he assigned 1000 Sesterti∣ums towards the repair, and Commissioners to assign to every one their pro∣portion thereof, according to the loss they had sustain'd. This so ingra∣tiated him with the People, as every one strives who shall out-wit others, in inventing new honours for him: which whether he receiv'd, or omitted by reason of the so near approach of his death, is uncertain (saith my Author) For soon after, his last Consuls Cn. Acerconius and C. Pontius enter'd into Of∣fice, and the seventeenth of the Calends of the next April, Tiberius his breath was stopt. Now it was after this restoring of Artabanus to the Parthian Crown (which Tacitus thus clearly dates in the twenty second of Tiberius) that the Emperour wrote to Vitelius, to make peace with Artabanus [Ubi Artabanus restitutus est in imperium. Auditis his, Caesar petiit amicitiam Ar∣tabani & assentiente illo:] (Joseph. antiq. 18. 6.) and it was after that peace, that Artabanus sent his Son Darius an Hostage to Tiberius: at what time (saith Josephus) Herod inform'd Tiberius of the Articles of that Peace; and therefore, when Vitellius sent Caesar an account thereof, Caesar return'd him answer, that he might have spared that labour: for Herod had already given him information thereof: At which return of Caesar's Letters to Vitellius, Josephus dates the Death of Philip. And therefore it could not be long be∣fore
Caesar's death that Philip dyed, by this account of Josephus: to which Point of Chronology Josephus himself subscribes; telling us that at Caligula (the Successor of Tiberius) his preferring Agrippa to the Tetrarchate of Trachonitis, Philip was but newly deceas'd. I leave it now to any man of common discretion to judge, whether is most probable, that Josephus his Numericals have been in this place corrupted; or himself so fowly mistaken in a door-neighbour-Story, as to Philip's Death in the twentieth of Tiberi∣us, which he makes coetaneous with Vitelius his making peace (in Tiberius his Name) with Artabanus, after his Restauration: which Tacitus dates so near the end of Tiberius his twenty second; as 'tis hardly imaginable, how all those passages conducing to it, and attending upon it, could be crowded into that small remnant of his twenty second year, which Tacitus saves from the Conquest and Flight of Artabanus, falling out in, and taking up the Sum∣mer of that year: after which, Artabanus (when he had lurk'd, and was grown squalid, earning his sustenance with his bow, among the Scythians) was restored, Tiberius inform'd of his Restauration, Vitellius inform'd of Cae∣sar's Will to make peace, &c. that there could be a return of so many Posts as was requisite for intelligence within that year, if we reckon its end at Au∣gustus his Death (August 19.) is next to impossible; and yet it is certain Jo∣sephus (and all other Historians, who account Tiberius (whose death fell on the seventeenth of the Calends of April) to have reign'd twenty two years, five months, and thirteen days) must begin and end their account there. It is therefore most probable (all Circumstances consider'd) that Philip's Death fell in the twenty third of Tiberius, and that the account stood so in Josephus, before it was corrupted,  being as soon overslipt, by a hasty scribe, as . Briefly, if Josephus his intire discourse be of more weight, than two Syl∣lables; Pen cannot describe, nor Heart wish, a clearer Computation of the Time of Philip's Death, than in here presented; to wit, after Artabanus his recovery of the Parthian Crown, and the Pacification betwixt Tiberius and him: which that it could not be effected, nor so much as propounded by Tiberius, (at which Josephus, in this Chapter, begins the Story of Artabanus: and therefore, that's the soonest we can possibly date the Death of Philip) before the twenty third of Tiberius, is most palpably demonstrable, from Tacitus his placing his expulsion out of Parthia, in the Summer of Tiberius his twenty second; his reporting, after that, his residing in Hircania, till he was grown so squalid, as the sight of him moved pitty in his Subjects (ne{que} exuerat pu∣dorem ut vulgum miseratione adverteret:) Hiero his disgusting the new, making a party among the Nobles for their old King: the Nobles applying themselves to Artabanus with promise to restore him; his gathering of Forces: Tiri∣dates his delaying to give him Battle, till the Roman Legions came in: The Parthians stealing away from Tiridates, &c. To which if we add (what Tose∣phus subjoyns hereto) Tiberius his receiving information of all this, his send∣ing to Vitellius to offer peace to Artabanus, upon condition he would send his Son and other Hostages to him, Vitellius his Transactions with Artabanus, and concluding a peace with him, &c. He that can think all this could be done, betwixt the latter end of Summer, and the 19. of August (when Tibe∣rius his twenty second ended) may, by that time he has given his Brain ano∣ther turn, imagine, that Rome was built in a day.
CHAP. VI. The Date of Christ's Birth, as it is asserted by the Church, maintain'd by Scripture. § 1. Christ homaged by the Magi early after his Birth. § 2. Christ born and baptized the same day of the year. § 3. God would have the Church observe the day of Christ's Birth. The Priestly courses, the character of it, which from their first Institution by Solomon, to the last and fatal year of the Second Temples standing, were never interrupted. § 4. The Calculati∣on of these Courses leads us to the Conception and Birth of the Baptist and our Saviour. § 5. Christ's Baptism, and John's Ministry in the same year of Tiberius Reign, point out the same thing, Objections answer'd. § 6. The Taxing of all the World ill-confounded with that of Syria. § 1. ANd now neither St. Luke nor Josephus need be beholding to Sca∣liger, for endeavouring if not to make them friends, yet to pre∣vent their being so far at odds; by his interpreting Josephus, to speak of Philip's Death in the thirty seventh incompleat year of his Government, (an Article of Agreement which this Text of Josephus will not subscribe to [after that he had presided over Trachonitis thirty seven years]) for we may allow Philip to have been Tetrarch thirty seven, and to have been well gone in his thirty eight year, at the pacification, in the twenty third of Tiberi∣us, and yet allow to Christ's Birth, time enough before Herod's Death to do all that in, which sacred Scriptures reports him to have done. Thus Christ was thirty compleat in Tiberius his fifteenth, December 25. his thirty seventh year compleat, therefore falls in the twenty second of Tiberius, December 25. and his thirty eighth current from thence overtakes Tiberius his twenty third, the 19. of August following; at what time Philip's Government had been going in its thirty eighth year, but from the middle of March. If we there∣fore will take the Universal Churches word, for this; that our Saviour was born, December 25. by so much sooner did Christ's thirty eighth commence, than the thirty eighth of Philip's Government, as Christmas preceds the middle of March. So that this does not only reconcile Secular and Sacred History; but afford us a place, where we may fix our feet, and stand our ground, in the defence of the Churches practice, against all those opposers, who employ their wit in removing old Land-marks. And therefore, for vindi∣cation of the Churches celebrating Christ's Nativity on the 25. of De∣cember, I shall improve this occasion in laying down these propo∣sitions. Propos. 1. Whatever the Gospel reports, touching the Occurrences, be∣twixt our Saviour's Birth, and Herod's Death, might (in all reason) fall out, in as small a parcel of time, as intervenes betwixt Christmas and mid March next ensuing (at which time of the year; to wit, at the beginning of Ni∣san, Herod came to his miserable end: as Scaliger observeth out of Josephus; and proveth, from the Celebration of his Funeral, a little before the Feast of unleaven'd Bread.) For, the Magi found Christ at Bethlehem, whither they were sent by Herod [] (St. Matt. 2. 8.) where they could not have found him, had they not tender'd their homage to him, before he was presented in the Temple, at the Purification of his ever blessed Virgin-mother; but in Galilee, whither they returned, (as to their home) from Bethlehem, after they had performed those things in the Temple which the Law required (Luk. 2. 39.) neither is it like, that after the Magi had enquired that at the Priests lips, and been informed (out of so cleara Pro∣phecy) that the King of the Jews was to be born at Bethlehem: God, who
had been so rich in grace towards them, as to shew them Christ's Star, in their own Country) would put the Faith of such young Proselytes to so great a trial; as to put their hopes of finding him at Bethlehem, to a disap∣pointment, by his removal thence, before they found him: for had he been then in any place else, but where they were directed by Prophecy to look for him: at how great a stand and uncertainty, if not despondency, must they have been? I need not here urge, that the word [] which we translate the house (Matt. 2. 11.) [and when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary his mother:] does more properly signifie an out-house (such as a Stable) than a dwelling house: at least, indifferently, an habitation for Men, for Cattle, and for Birds (as Scapula observes) which speaks it probable that the Magi in their visit, prevented that Office, of com∣mon Charity, of removing the blessed Babe and his Mother out of that cold Lodging, into a more convenient one; and found the Wisdom of God a∣mongst the Beasts that have no understanding. Nor that St. Matt. in his [] seems to imply, that the Magi came to Jerusalem, at the very point of Christ's Birth; and enquired after the place thereof, con∣ceiving, perhaps, that he was just then born, by the indication of that Light in the Air, which shone upon the Shepherds, and which they might, (by as many degrees of greater probability) see, rather from Jerusalem than their own homes, as their was degrees of difference betwixt the places, in point of distance from Bethlehem: Nor lastly, to shew how manifestly all this makes, for the justifying of the Churches Fidelity, in communicating this Doctrine to her Children, that the last appearance of the Star to the Magi, and their homaging our Saviour, was on that very day which we celebrate in Comme∣ration of it, that is the twelfth day after our Lords Nativity: For, 1. Bethlehem was not so far from Jerusalem, as persons so inquisitive, and upon the spur, would spend many days in journeying thither, after they had informed themselves touching the place. 2. Herod would not be long of easing himself of the fear of a Rival-King, by putting all the Children of Bethlehem to the Sword, of whom, (in point of age) he might entertain the least suspicion; to wit, [all of two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men (St. Matt. 2. 16.) not that it was two years since he had enquired, but that the Wise men informed him it was so long since they first saw the Star: and he questioning, whether it was an indication, that the Messias was then born, when it first appeared; or a Praeludium to the Star of Jacob; to make all sure, on either hand, he slays all the Infants that were born within the Precincts of Bethlehem, from its first appearance, unto the time he sent out his bloody Executioners. § 2. Propos. 2. But because this is an Argument only à posse, and therefore does not prove it necessary that Christ was born at Christmas. I will there∣fore urge some that are more cogent, drawn from these undoubtedly true Chronological Observations; compared with the date of our Saviours Bap∣tism, and John's Ministry. After I have, by way of preparation thereunto, laid down and cleared the justifiableness of that Universal Opinion of the an∣cient Church, (viz.) That our Savour was born and baptized on the same day of the year: (eàm{que} sententiam omnes Ecclesiae scriptis & usu comprobarunt] this opinion (saith Scaliger Can. Isag. l. 3.) all Churches have approved of both by pen and practice: In their practice by celebrating the Birth and Baptism of Christ together, on the same day: (1.) (die Epiphaniorum.) not the Epi∣phany, or appearance of him to the Gentiles, (when the Magi found him with his Mother) but on the day of his appearances: first, to be the Son of Man, in his Nativity: secondly, to be the Son of God, by the Holy Ghost descending upon him, and the Voyce from Heaven, when he was baptized. They at once celebrated Christ's Caelestial Generation, promulgated at his Baptism, and his humane Birth. Gregory Nazianzen: in his Panegyrick de
natali Domini (which he therefore stiles [] [Upon the appearances of God, or Births of our Saviour]) This Cu∣stom continued in the Age of Eusebius; and long after, in the Church of Alexandria. Cassianus Monachus (Collat. 10. cap. 2.) [intra Aegypti regionem mos iste antiqua traditione servatur, ut peracto Epiphaniorum die, quem Provinciae Sacerdotes vel Dominici Baptismi vel secundùm carnem Narivitatis esse definiunt; & iccirco utrius{que} Sacramenti solennitalem non hifarie, ut in occiduis Provinciis, &c.] In Aegypt this Custom hath been observed by ancient Tradition: that the day of the Appearances being celebrated, which the Priests of that Province de∣fine to be the day of our Lord's Birth, or of his Baptism: and therefore comme∣morate both these Mysteries, not on several days, as they do in the Western Churches, but on the same day, &c. And in the Armenian Church it was not only practised, but vigorously pleaded for (in Epistola, Cathol. Armeniorum.) [.] As for our keeping the Feast of the Nativity and Baptism, we have very good reasons for what we do; first, the Example of all Churches beginning from the Apostles; secondly, the Word of God; for St. Luke gives Testimony of this (that our Saviour was born and baptized both on one day of the year (Vide Scaliger Ibid.) And Beroaldus Chronic. (l. 4. c. 2.) where he proveth from the joynt-Testimony of Authority, that the Birth and Baptism of our Saviour were celebrated and fell out on the same day of the year, though in computing Christ's Age when he was Baptized, he assigneth it to the beginning, that is the first day of his thirtieth year initiant; but therein he is sufficiently confuted by Scali∣ger, who, from the plain Grammatical sence of St. Luke's Phrase, evinceth, that Christ was baptized the last day of his thirtieth, and first of his thirty first. However this will make no difference here, for be it first or last, it comes all to one, as to the vindicating of this commonly-received Truth, that St. Luke dates Christ's Birth and Baptism on the same day. But for the Reasons pre-alledged I adhere to Scaliger. And therefore, if you demand where St. Luke testifies this? I answer; where, he saith, that Jesus, when he was baptized, was thirty years of age: that is, on that day, which terminated his thirtieth, and gave beginning to his thirty first. Secondly, and if St. Luke had not thus punctually delineated the Time of Christ's Age, when he exhibited him∣self to the Baptist, as a Candidate for Ordination. Yet the same thing might be collected from that Law (under which the Law-giver put himself, that he might fulfill all righteousness) prohibiting the Priests, to officiate till they were thirty, and commanding them, then to enter upon the exercise of their sacred Function. (Numb. 4. They shall serve from thirty years old and upwards.) By virtue of this Law, Christ would have been a Transgressor, had he in∣truded himself into the sacred Ministry, before his thirtieth year was com∣pleated: and therefore till then, he doth not shew himself to Israel, no not to his own Parents (for his Mother was uninstructed in the knowledge of her Son) not to his Fore-runner (for the Baptist, though he knew Christ was in the croud, yet who was he, he knew not, till he saw the Spirit de∣scending upon him) but kept at home, and was subject, to and under the Nur∣ture of Father and Mother. So wide is that Gloss from the sence of that Text, (where we have account of Christ's being amongst the Doctors) which stiles it, Christ's disputing with them, which was nothing else, but his ex∣hibiting himself at twelve years, as an Israelitish Catechumen, to ask the Law (the Tearms of the Covenant, which he enter'd when he receiv'd Cir∣cumcision) and to receive their Answers, to what he propounded, or to answer their Questions (not as their Doctor, but Scholar:) and upon his examen, and their approbation of him (who sate in Moses Chair) perso∣nally to enter into that Covenant, which his Sureties had enter'd into in his name, at his Circumcision. The Work of his Father which he had there to do, was to be a Scholar, not a Teacher.
And on the other hand, he would not have been an exact fulfiller of that Law, if he had delaid the tender of himself to Ordination, beyond the time fixt by the Law, and not applyed himself to the Baptist, at whose laying hands upon him, he knew, he was to receive the Holy Ghost, and be visibly separated to that Work, which his Father had fore-ordained him to, assoon as ever he was legally capable of it, in respect of Age: upon this account Christ urged the Baptist in these words [suffer it now, for thus it behoves us to fulfill all righteousness,] Christ had no need to be baptized with John's Baptism (the Baptism of Re∣pentance for remission of sins) neither did he receive that Baptism: but John's Baptizing of him, was of another kind, than his Baptizing of other per∣sons; to wit, and external Rite, in the administration whereof, Christ was to be visibly set apart, and called by God to his Office of Preaching, (See Dr. Hamond's Annot.) the Law, therefore, the Righteousness whereof Christ fulfill'd, in being baptized by John, was that which prohibited Prophets to run, till they were sent of God. But this was not all the Righteousness which Christ fulfill'd now, but also of that other Branch of the Law com∣manding them, whom God had separated to the service of the Sanctuary, to enter upon that Function, as soon as they were thirty years of Age: and therefore our Saviour inserts this note of time [] suffer it [now] now, that the impediment of Age is removed, I must not defer my entrance upon the work of Teaching: Nay, if there had not been such a Law, Christ's Love to us would have been a Law to himself. He, who when the time was come that he should be offer'd, was straightned till his Baptism of blood was accomplish'd, that went into the Garden to meet the Traytor; would sure not be well at ease, when the time was come (assigned by the Law of his Father) that he should be inaugurated in the Office of the great Pro∣phet, till he was baptized with that Baptism, of Water by John, and of the Holy Ghost, by his Father, by which he was to be consecrate to that Office. Would this tender Shepherd of Souls, for his love and for his pitty, let a day pass, after the removal of the impediment of Under-age, before he put him∣self into a capacity of seeking and saving the lost Sheep of Israel! How have they learned Christ, either as to his Obedience to his Father, or his Com∣passion to his Brethren, who scruple the belief of this point, which the Primitive Church Universally embraced upon so good and solid Reasons, as who so questions the force of them, must present the blessed Jesus to their own minds, as a person that cared not what the Father said, not what we ail'd. § 3. Propos. 3. This being concluded on, and laid for a Ground, that Christ's Birth and Baptism fell on the same day of the year, I proceed with this Light before me, (by the help of those Chronological Observations I have, or shall irrefragably make good,) to find out the Day of Christ's Nativity. The Mother of John Baptist was going in her sixth month at the Annun∣ciation of the Blessed Virgin, and Conception of Christ (St. Luke 1. 36.) [And loe thy cousin Elizabeth hath conceived a son [] and this is her sixth month] saith the Angel Gabriel, when he was sent to Mary the blessed Mother of our Lord, [in the sixth month] that is, of Elizabeth's Con∣ception (vers. 26.) [about these days] (of Zacharie's returning home) (from fulfilling his Office in the Temple, in the Course of Abias, that is the eighth in order, of those twenty four, into which David divided the Priests (1 Chron. 24. 10. the eighth Lot fell to Abijah) [Elizabeth conceived, and hid her self five months, and in the sixth month the Angel Gabriel was sent by God to a City of Galilee, named Nazareth, unto a Virgin espoused to an husband, whose name was Joseph, and the name of the virgin was Mary.] Certainly, if it had not been of use to us to know the Time of our Saviour's Conception, the Holy Ghost would not have given this Character of it twice, in ten Verses: Nor a Rule to find it out, in his specifying the Course of Abias falling out im∣mediately
before the Baptist's Conception, if that Rule had not been both sure and applicable to this Question. He would never have beaten the Air with those Chronological Descriptions of it, had it been vain for us to know the time, or impossible for us to find it out (so manifestly false is that Fana∣tick Conceit, which the Novelist propounds as his main Principle, to wit, that God hath conceal'd the time of Christ's Nativity, (as he did the Body of Moses) to prevent our observation of it: and so dim-sighted was the in∣dustrious Beroaldus at noon-day, who though he confesses (Chronic. l. 4. c. 2.) that the ignorance of the day of Christ's Birth proceeds from meer supine sloath in not sifting those means of its discovery which God hath propound∣ed to us: and if we could tell when, or how long Zacharie's Course begun and continued: the Question would quickly be determin'd: yet waves that enquiry, as a fruitless undertaking: chusing rather to pin that Character of time, assigned by St. Luke, upon Herod's sleeve, as denoting only his Reign (to which it cannot possibly have the least relation) than to fasten it upon the Baptists Conception, where St. Luke so manifestly fixeth it, as he must be blind, that sees not the drift of the Evangelist in this and the other forementioned marks of time, to be the leading us by the hand to the inve∣stigation of the Baptists, and, by it, our Saviours Birth. I will therefore follow the Conduct of Gods Spirit, and this Holy Angel, in pursute after the knowledge of that acceptable day, which God would not have the Church either ignorant, or unmindful of. 2. These several twenty four courses of Priests (by the Computation where∣of the Holy Ghost directs us to the Time of Christs Conception and Birth by comparing them with the Baptists) served their week about [.] (Joseph. antiq. l. 7. cap. 1.) [David appointed one Course to at∣tend upon the service of God eight days, from Sabbath to Sabbath] eight in∣clusively; for they began at the Morning-sacrifice of the first, and went out at the Morning-sacrifice of the next Sabbath, after that the High Priest entring with the Course which succeeded, had blessed that Course which had serv'd (Joseph. B. Jud. 6. 6.) [the High Priest went into the Temple with the other Priests, not every day, but only every Sabbath-day, and the Calends of every Month, and the aniversary Feasts.] And that the High Priest dismiss'd the Course that served the preceding week at the going out of their weekly service, the Book of the Jewish Liturgy affirmeth [Sabbato autem adjiciebant benedictionem unam ephemeriae illi, quae exibat ex ministerio.] (Libro Liturgarum Judaic.) [On the Sabbath they added one benediction upon that Course, that then went out of their ministration.] The compleat days therefore of the Fun∣ction of one Course were seven days, of all, 168 days, that is, seven times twenty four: so that they returned to the same day, whereon they officiated at the first Institution of these divisions, at the end of 487 Courses, which they fulfill'd precisely in the space of 224 years. But more of this anon. 3. This order lasted unto the time of Josephus [] (Judaic. antiq. l. 7. c. 1.) and was so precisely observed to the very last, while the Second Temple stood, that in the year of its fall, the solem fast on the seventeenth day of Tamuz (where∣on the Jews to that day, afflicted their souls, in commemoration of Moses his breaking the Tables of the Law) (Judaic. comput. in Scal. de emend. l. 7. pag. 651.) was omitted, by reason that the Family, to which that weeks Course appertain'd was absent from Jerusalem, because of the close siege [ 17) ] (Joseph. Bel. Jud. 7. 4.) [Titus had heard that on that day the daily Sa∣crifice ceas'd to be offered to God, through want of persons to officiate; and that for that cause the Jews were exceedingly afflicted.] Insomuch, as they celebrate to this day the sad commemoration of that accident, on the seventeenth of Tamuz (which is our fifteenth of July, Scaliger emend. fragm.) as render'd thereby
unfortunate, as it had been of old by the breaking of the Tables. Ob∣serve here, that rather than they would break the Order of the Courses, by permitting (even in that case of extream necessity) any other Division to of∣ficiate, than that whose lot it was to attend that week, they will omit the service it self, on one of the most solemn Fasts they had in the whole year. When notwithstanding they were so zealous of this, as nothing else but meer force, could procure them to wave the daily sacrifice; of the continuance whereof they were more sollicitous than of their own safety. Hence when the Temple was besieged by Sosius, all the request they made to him was, that he would permit Beasts for the daily Sacrifice to be brought in (Joseph antiq. 14. c. ult.) of which Dion also, a Gentile Historian makes mention (lib. 49.) when Pompey besieged Jerusalem, he with greatest wonder observ'd that they intermitted nothing of their Religion, in the midst of arms: but as if they had enjoy'd the greatest peace, did offer their daily Sacrifices and Victims: and while his Soldiers were upon the slaughter of the Citizens, and put them daily to the Sword (even before the Altar) they abstain'd not from that Di∣vine Service, which by their Law they were to celebrate day by day [] Nay, the Priests when they saw the Sol∣diers rushing into the Temple (with drawn swords) did undauntedly per∣severe, in fulfilling their Divine Courses, and were themselves sacrificed to the Roman revenge in the very instant when they were offering Victims to God, and burning Incense: preferring the discharge of their Office before their Lives (Josep. Bel. Judaic. l. 1. c. 5.) Yet how zealous soever they were of maintaining the daily Service, they were more zealous of observing the Or∣der of the Priests and Levites Courses: For at this time, when the daily O∣blation ceas'd, there were Priests enough in the Temple (Josephus, in the place above quoted, writeth that when Titus sent him to John, the Captain of the Templars, upon occasion of his hearing that the daily Sacrifice was interrupted: many Priests, (by name Joseph and Jesus) taking that op∣portunity, made their escape out of the Temple to Titus; and therefore it was not simply for lack of Priests, but Priests of that Course, whose Lot it was then to officiate, that the Divine Service ceas'd: whence appears the invalidity of Scaliger's Herculean Argument, for the abruption of the Priests Courses, when the daily Oblation was taken away by Antiochus: for they placed more Religion in keeping their Courses, than in performing the Ser∣vice: and therefore might possibly stand in [procinctu] according to their Lots, when they were prohibited, (by main force) to offer sacrifice, wait∣ing for the removal of that force. Whatever therefore befel the daily sa∣crifice, Josephus his [] affirming, that the Courses set by David were not interrupted unto his time, is proof sufficient, that the Priests Courses kept their course. But since it is questioned by some, whether in the several Apostacies during the first Temple, those Courses were canonically observed? And determin'd by Scaliger, that during the persecution under Antiochus, they were inter∣rupted in the Second Temple (upon which Principle he proceeds, to invali∣date the Ancient and Catholick Opinion [that our Saviours Birth was on the 25. of December.] So that nothing need be said more, in reply to his reasoning, and vindication of the Church, than to shew his mistake, in that point which he so peremtorily asserts, and the groundlessness of his and o∣ther learned mens questioning upon that account, the cessation of the Priests Courses, I shall prove from sacred Testimony, that no such cessation fell out, either under the First or Second Temple, nor till the year of the last Temples Fall, and the last part of that year: when God was departed from the Temple, as Josephus himself testifieth to his Country-men's faces, (Bel. Jud. 6. 11.) leaving upon Record to the Censure of all Ages this Sentence upon Jerusalem, [Jam enim Dei locus non eras] thou hadst then ceas'd, to be Gods habitation. (Bel. Jud. 6. 1.
1. Not under the First Temple, as is manifest from that mournful Song of the Jews thus render'd by Scaliger, Die Nona mensis, hora vespertini temporis, Cum essem in vigilia mea, vigilia Joiarib, Introiit hostis— wherein speaking of the Desolation of the First Temple, they introduce the Priest, whose Course it was then to wait, thus lamenting. [On the ninth day of the month, at the hours of the Evening-sacrifice, when I was in my Course; the Course of Joiarib. (to whom fell the first lost, 1 Chron. 24. 7.) the enemy enter'd, &c.] which could not have been his Course, if the Order of serving had been computed, either from Hezechias or Josias, his setting the Priests in order. But falls out exactly to be his lot, if we reckon from Solomon's Dedication (as that never to be sufficiently praised Keeper of the Clock of Time hath demonstrated, in his Fragments annext to his Emendation) And that there was no cessation of these Courses under the First Temple may be irrefragably evidenc'd from that plain Text (Ezech. 44. 15.) [The Priests that kept the charge of my Sanctuary, when the children of Israel went astray from me after their Idols; they shall come near to me to minister, and they shall stand before me to offer.] And they are rebuk'd by that Prophet, that did not keep Gods charge by course in their own person (whether in compliance with the Court-interest under idolatrous Kings, or in scorn of those meaner Offices, to which their lot assign'd them, (for the several services was distributed by lot weekly, amongst the Priests of every Course at their entrance upon their service, whence it is said of Zacharias, that [his lot was to burn incense]) subro∣gated others in their room (just as our Pulpit-Pearchers (either in compli∣ance with the Rabble of their brainless Proselytes, or out of scorn, after the promotion to a Lecturer's place, to stoop so low as the Desk,) used to pro∣cure the Minister of the Parish to read the Divine Service to the Walls; but yet with so much more impious contempt, as the offering of the daily Sa∣crifice excell'd the kindling of a fire, or sweeping away the ashes of the Al∣tar: the Common-Prayer being that very daily Incense, and pure Oblati∣on which God promised should be offer'd in all places under the Gospel, and as far surpassing the best Pulpit-exercises, both in point of preaching the pure Gospel, and praying according to the Will of God, as the most rational Ser∣vice surpasseth the Sacrifice of Fools.) This irreligious shifting of the charge of God's holy things to others, God taxeth and menaceth the Jewish Priests for. Vers. 8. [Ye have not kept the charge of my holy things, but have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for your selves.] 2. Not under the Second Temple; as appears, from Gods Promse to the Priests who had kept his charge under the First, that they should stand before him in their Courses under the Second Temple (Ezcch. 44. 15. 16.) [They shall keep my charge] which as it is every whit as good a medium, for the probat of a Non-cessation under the Second; as the pre-alledged Text (which Sca∣liger urgeth to that purpose) is for the proof of a Non-cessation under the First Temple: so it might seem strange how it could escape the observa∣tion of that Eagles-eye; (but that we see it usully thus fall out, when men approach sacred ground, with their shooes on their feet; address themselves to sacred Scripture, prepossess'd with their own Conclusions; and do not strip themselves of all private preconceptions, when they come to enquire for Truth, at that sacred Oracle. But to proceed; the Non-cessation of these Courses, during either Temple, is clearly asserted by God himself, in his Promise to Zadok: whom Solomon advanced, (at the deposition of Abiathar,) to fulfill Gods threatning to Elie's house (1 Reg. 2. 27.) and of whom Sa∣muel carried from God to Elie, this Message (1 Sam. 2. 35.) [I will raise me up a faithful Priest, and he shall walk before mine anoynted for ever.] Which Promise never receiv'd accomplishment in any other sence but this; to wit,
that the Priesthood in that Line, should keep their Stations or Courses con∣tinually, till the rejection of the whole Nation. For in all other points the Priestly Office had been interrupted, they did not walk before God, or his anoynted perpetually, in their offering of Sacrifices, or actual performance of their charge of holy things; but only in their standing in their Courses, ready to perform their several charges, when the impediments were removed: they stood in their weekly lots perpetually, (waiting for times of refreshing, and break of day,) in the darkest nights of interruption of actual services, which befel them during the standing of both Temples. And this is farther evident from the deep silence of the Jewish Records, as to any interruption of their Courses, till the year that Jerusalem was desolated by Titus: of which we should certainly have heard (as well as of that last and final Ca∣tastrophe thereof) had such an accident befaln them. They who kept a Fast, for the extinction of the holy Lamp (through want of Oyl by the neg∣lect of the Priest, whose Lot it was to supply it) in the Reign of Ahaz, (on the 18. of Ab.) in Commemoration of the Israelites, ceasing to present their First-born in the Temple under Jeroboam, (the 23. of Sirvan) in memory of Gedoliah's slaughter (the 3. of Tisri) of the bickerings betwixt the Schools of Shammai and Hillel, and more contingencies of far less concern (lib. anga∣riarum) would sure have celebrated the day, whereon so sad an acci∣dent had happened, in the afflicting of their Souls: but more of this anon. 3. The only Scruple (then) remaining is, what became of these Courses, in the interval betwixt the two Temples, during the Babylonish Captivity. It is commonly taken for granted, that they then ceas'd: and if they did, it will not prejudice my account: for if we begin at Zorobabel's restoring of the Hierarchical Courses, the Lot will fall orderly upon the Course of Abias, (wherein Zachary serv'd, wherein he receiv'd the Promise of a Son) in such a time of the year, as thence may be demonstratively evinc'd the Time of Christ's Nativity to have been at that season, wherein the Church celebrates the memorials of it. To which Calculation I find the account drawn from Solomon's Dedicati∣on of the Temple, to agree so perfectly; as encourageth me to assert (with∣out all hesitance,) that the Courses of the Priests, during that long Vacation of the exercise of their Function, were reckon'd by Zorobabel (much more, in that short interruption under Antiochus, by Judas Maccabeus) at their re∣storing them to the actual serving in their proper Courses; as vertually ful∣fill'd, (as the years of the Reigns of exil'd Princes are put into the account at their Restauration, as if they had actually during the time of their Banish∣ment exercised the Royal Function.) So that from the fall of Jerusalem by the Babylonians (in the 1. Course, the Course of Joiarib) there had so ma∣ny weeks passed, unto the 3. of Adar (when at the Dedication of the Second Temple, the Priests were set in their Divisions) as the same division was then appointed to serve; whose Course it would have been to serve, had the Ser∣vice not been interrupted; for otherwise their putting in Order, would have been a putting them out of Order, and an injury to those Families, whose turn by the Series of intervening years (according to David's Order) fell out before theirs, who first served at that Dedication, by the appointment of Zorobabel: And indeed what use can be made of St. Luke's mentioning the eighth Course in our Calculations of the Time therein pointed at, if it was not the eighth course from the first Institution? § 4. This will be both more intelligible and apparent, if we compute the Courses themselves. In order whereto (though I plough with Scaliger's Hei∣fer, I shall not let her run wild over the ancient bounds, but accustom her to bear the Churches yoak, and inure her to tread out the good Corn of Catho∣lick Verity) I shall first premise these two infallible dictates of that great Oracle of Chronology.
1. The compleat Cycle, or Period of Time, wherein the twenty four Courses of Priests (appointed by David, and set to serve in the Temple by Solomon) return to the same day and hour, wherein they first waited, is 224 years. 2. There is a less, but incompleat, Cycle of these Hieratical Courses con∣taining fifty Revolutions, and concluding at the end of twenty three years, after their first Institution, or Revolution of the great Cycle; with the over∣plus of ninteen hours. Secondly, and these common Chronological Notes, 1. From the Dedication of the Second Temple, in the sixth of Darius Nothus, Adar the third, (about our February 19.) to the Fall of that Tem∣ple, are 490 years (Euseb. Chron. Daniel's seventy Weeks, Chap. 9. 24.) 2. From our Saviour's Birth to the Fall of Jerusalem are seventy one years (Scaliger append.) Phlegon, quoted by Origen (tractat. in St. Matt. 29.) reckons from the fifteenth of Tiberius, to Titus his desolating Jerusalem, for∣ty years: this falls in with Scaliger, if we understand him to mean (as his words plainly import) after the expiring of Tiberius his fifteenth, and we cannot pitch upon an Author better vers'd in the Roman Annals, than he was. Upon these Principles, I proceed thus to collect the Time of Zacharie's Ser∣vice, from the Courses of the Priests intervening, betwixt that and the De∣dication of the Second Temple. In the 490 years that that Temple stood, there are two compleat Hieratical Cycles ending Anno 448 And there remains years to Temples Fall   42 Deduct this 42, out of Christ's at Temple Fall   71 And there remains 29; which denotes the year of Christ, when the second great Hieratical Cycle ended, and the third began. Out of this   29 Deduct a smaller Cycle, of fifty Revolutions, in the space of years   23 And the remainder from that sum: Years   6 Denotes the year of Christ, when the Courses began on the same day they did at first, with the overplus of ninteen hours: Thus in Christs 6 the 1 course began. Feb. 19 5 January 19 4 December 19 3 November 19 2 October 19 1 September 19 The first course therefore, the year of Christ's Conception, began August 19 From whence if we reckon to the eighth week, we come to the its beginning falls October 7 eighth Course (that of Abias) & find its end October 14 At what time Zacharias, having fulfill'd his Weeks Ministration, re∣turn'd home, and his Wife conceiv'd precisely five months and three Weeks, before the Annunciation.
With the like Certainty and Perspicuity may the same Date of Zacha∣rias his Ministration be collected, if we compute the courses from Solomon's dedication. From the Dedication of first, on Adar 29 Mart. 30. (Scaliger) to fall of the Second Temple, Josephus accounts 1130 y. 7 m. 15 d. From which deduct the year of Christ at the fall 71 There remains 1059 y. 7 m. 15 d. In which 1059 there are Cycli Hieratici 4 Whose Period 896 taken out of 1059 There remains the year before Christs Birth when those four Cycles ended, and the fifth began:— 0163 Divide these 163 by 23 (the space of the lesser Hieratical Cycle, the Quotient is— 7 Denoting seven of these Cycles to have run out their course in that Period: and the remainder 2 Pointing to the second year before Christ, when the Courses began again, where they began at first (viz. at Solomon's Dedication of the Temple) within five days, (which the 19 overplus hours, in each Revolution, make up in the whole seven Cycles.) The first Course therefore, the second year before Christ began, April 4. and the same Course, the year preceding Christ's Birth commenc'd, Mart. 4. Whose first Revolution of twenty four Weeks ended August. 19. where the second Revolution began: and therefore the eighth Course in that Revoluti∣on (the Course of Abias) began at the end of the seven weeks thence, to wit, Octob. 7. and ended, Octob. 14. the very same day we have found it fall, by computing the courses from the Dedication of the Second Temple. An admirable Correspondence; and such as must satisfie all persons, who have so much ingenuity, as to enter upon such kind of disquisitions, with that cau∣tion, which the Philosopher presented to the Candidates for admission into his School [.] These Way-marks set, the way-faring man, though an Idiot, cannot err; in fixing the Date of Christ's Conception, the 25 of March: and of his Birth, the 25 of December. And if Zacharies Wife, Elizabeth, conceiv'd in the week after her Husband's return, from his serving in the Course of Abias (which ended Octob. 14.) precisely five month's and three weeks be∣fore the Angel was sent to the Blessed Virgin (at what time Elizabeth was going in her sixth month) who sees not upon what substantial grounds the Church proceeded, in her fixing the Baptist's Birth upon the 24 of June; there being in that space, to wit, from the 14. of October (when Zachary end∣ed his Ministry) to the 24. of June following (when the Church celebrates the Baptist's Birth) exactly nine months and one day, the ordinary time of a womans going with Child, in the common opinion of Physiologists: who assign six weeks, for the plastick Virtue to do its work in; and seven months and a half, for the perfect vegetating of the Embrio (echerm. Sy. Phys. l. 3. c. 14. Aristot. de Historia animal. l. 7. c. 4.) ( in . Scip. l. 1. c. 6.) [cum nono mense absolutio est, &c.] this reckoning the Mother of the seven Brethren makes, 2 Mac. 7. 27. [Oh my son, have pity on me tt are  nine months in my womb.] So that if the Baptist's Birth was  the most com∣mon course, his Mother Elizabeth conceiv'd the 15. of October, that is the day of her Husbands returning home; for his Ministry in the Temple begin∣ning and concluding with the Morning of the Sabbath (when the Shew-bread was renewed) and his habitation being distant from Jerusalem, in the hilly Country of Judaea (and therefore probably more than a Sabbath days∣journey from the Temple) it is not like, but he would stay in Jerusalem,
till the Sabbath was over. Now from the 15. of October to the Annunciati∣on, on which day the Church celebrates the Virgins Conception are five months, three weeks, and one day precisely; so long was Elizabeth gone with Child at the Angels Salutation, as her sixth month was upon its last week: which is not only hinted by Gabriel, but by St. Luke in the sequel of that sto∣ry, vers. 39. [In those days Mary arose and went into the hill-country to visit her cousin Elizabeth, and she abode with her about three months] that is till her Cousin was delivered, and the Baptist circumcised: for it is improbable, that she (whose affection carried her so far from home to give her a visit, and de∣tain'd her with Elizabeth so long) would leave her in her greatest exigent: or that so near and dear a Relation (who had she been at her own home, would have been sent for to the Baptist's Circumcision, amongst the rest of the Kindred) being with Elizabeth, so near the end of her nine months; would go home in that juncture, and not stay till she had perform'd that Office of a Kinswoman: And most of all, that the blessed among Women, (whom the Evangelists signally commend, for laying up in her heart all special Emer∣gencies of Providence) should not stay, till she saw what became of Za∣charie's dumbness, or not be one of those Kinsfolks, who, upon the day of Circumcision, are said to ponder, what befel, then, in their hearts. By this reckoning our Saviour, indeed, was ten months in the Virgins womb: but as it is no strange thing for women to go so long, so a fitter Pe∣riod could not have been pich'd upon, for the Lord of Hosts pitching his Tent in the blessed Virgin: if it were but barely to answer the expectations of the Gentiles, who (out of Sybils Books) had got this notion by the end, that the Eastern Monarch, the Jews Messias, the Restorer of all, was so long to Tabernacle in his Mothers Womb; well exprest by Virgil, in that Eclogue which Constantine the great (in his Oration to the Clergy) shews can be ap∣plyed to none but the blessed Jesus. Matri longa decem tulerint fastidia menses. When ten months shall have inflicted tedious weakness of stomack upon thy teem∣ing Mother. How much more convenient was it, that Christ should fulfill that Period in the Womb, which of all others is most canonical, in the opinion of that great Oracle of Learning, Varro, who (in his first Book de Hebdomadibus.) as he's quoted by Agellius (noct. Attic. l. 3. c. 10.) thus dictates [Hi qui justissime in utero sunt, post ducentos octoginta dies, postquam sunt concepti, quadragessima deni{que} hebdomade nascuntur. [They who stay in the womb, the most exact time, after they have been conceiv'd, are born in the fortieth week.] The learned Au∣thor of the wisdom of Solomon (chap. 7. 2.) brings him in, affirming that he was fashioned to be flesh, in his Mothers Womb, in ten months. And behold here is a greater than Solomon. Taruntius being employed by Varro to calcu∣late the Nativity of Romulus, did with a great deal of confidence and alacri∣ty declare to him that Romulus was conceiv'd on the twenty third day of that month, which the Egyptians call Choe, we December, and born in Thoth, that is, September the 20. day, the 12. before the Calends of October (Plutarch. Ro∣mulus) that is, he was born in the fortieth week, in the last week of the tenth month after his conception: and I suppose, if the Births of Heroes were examin'd, it would be found that antiquity assigned them commonly one month in the Womb beyond the account of ordinary persons. § 5. But I leave this to be disputed by Mid-wives, while, to the proof of my Assertion, that Christ was born at Christmas, (drawn from the time of Zacharie's Ministration,) I add another drawn from the Circumstances of Christ's Baptism. St. Luke dates the Beginning of John's Ministry, and Christ's Baptism, both in one and the same fifteenth year of Tiberius; and Christ's
Baptism, before Easter in that year. Now St. Luke reckons Tiberius his Reign, from the death of Augustus (as hath been already proved) that is, the 19 of August. And this clearly evinceth the absurdity of that Hypothesis, that Christ was born in September: and manifesteth all those strong Reasonings of ill-im∣ploy'd wits for it, to be meer Paralogisms. For since our Saviour was born, and baptized on the same day of the year; had that been in September, John must bestir himself at that rate, as no man in his right wits can make haste to believe he did, if betwixt then and the 19 of August preceding (which is the utmost latitude we can allow in the fifteenth of Tiberius, which commenc'd that day) he could come into all the Country about Jordan, and draw such multitudes of Disciples to his Baptism, from Jerusalem and all Judaea, and all the Region round about Jordan (St. Luke 3. 1. 3. St. Matt. 3. 5.) How vain doth this, by name, prove Beroaldus to be in his imagination, that our Saviours Birth fell in September at the autumnal Equinox: for from the 19 of August, which was the first day of Tiberius, his fifteenth year of Reign (in which year, the Divine Oracle saith, the Baptist began his Mini∣stry) to the fourteenth of September (on which day Beroaldus saith our Savi∣our was both born and baptized) are but three weeks and four days; now whether Christ's Forerunner could, in that scantling of time, fulfill the Pro∣phecies which went of him, and the work which the Evangelists say he did, in preparing Christ's way before his face; I refer to the determination of all unbiass'd and intelligent persons. If it be, here replyed, that he began his Preaching towards the Spring, and after he had spent that Summer, baptized our Saviour about September; that indeed gives him time enough, but then the fifteenth of Tiberius would have been expired, and his sixteenth began, before our Saviour's Baptism: And be∣sides this supposition leaves our Saviour more time unto the Passover, for the effecting those things, which he is reported to have done in that space, than his zeal to the work of Redemption would permit him to take, who came into publick, as a Gyant refresh'd with Wine, ready to run his race. But now all these inconveniencies are avoided by dating Christ's Birth and Baptism at Christmas. For, 1. the Baptist being, in respect of Age, capable of a call to the Mi∣nistry at Mid-Summer, had a sufficient time to prepare himself for the exercise of it, after his call by fasting in the Wilderness: so that by that time that Tiberius his fifteenth year commenc'd, he might begin to perambulate the Regions about Jordan: and by Christmas, his fame might be spread so far abroad, as to bring persons of all ranks out of all Ju∣daea to his Baptism: that Nation being at that time big with the expectation of the Messias, then to be exhibited: which is hinted by St. Luke in his say∣ing that [all men were musing of John whether he were the Christ.] And 2. Our Saviour by this account had time sufficient, and no more than sufficient, before Easter: for his forty days fast in the Wilderness: for his coming to Bethabara (where the Baptist gave Testimony of him, that he was that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; that Christ the Son of the living God, whom they looked for) for his setting his Fathers Seal to the Testimony of John, three days after, in Cana of Galilee; for his going down with his whole retinue to Capernaum, where he conti∣nued not many days before the Passover was at hand, at the approach where∣of, he went up to Jerusalem, purged the Temple, &c. Briefly (for it were endless to enumerate particulars.) The perspicuity of this Calculation, as it gives light to several sacred Texts, otherwise unin∣telligible: so it discovers the Vanity of all attempts, to pitch Christ's Birth upon any other day but that (wheron it hath been commemorated in all Ages) the 25. of December: whether of those that go in that Analytical way which Beroaldus chalk'd out, who, though he hath sufficiently invalidated
the Argument of the Decembrians drawn from the Feast of Exipiation, yet he hath not offer'd any Arguments against the practice of the Church (which is not presently to be concluded unreasonable and groundless, as soon as some weak defenses, which some of more zeal than knowledge make of it, are cast down) but what proceeds upon more manifest mistakes. Such are (that I may, for the honour I bear to his Learning and Parts, particularly confute them) his professing he will shoot at an hairs-breadth (ad unguem) to the mark in Daniel's Bow. But he casts that Bow so, as it shoots not near Daniel's scope. 1. In assigning the Term of Daniel's seventy Weeks at Christ's Passion, which Daniel aim'd at the Fall of Jerusalem, as hath been prov'd in my Discourse upon those weeks. 2. In expounding Daniel's middle of the Week to denote the precise mid∣dle of the year of Christ at his Passion, he pareth the Prophet too close; for, as Mr. Meed observeth, that Phrase of speech implys no more, than that the Messias should be cut off within the space of the last Septimane, the last not of the 70 but 62. 3. He is wide of Daniel's mind in expounding the cutting off of the Mes∣sias to be his death, for Daniel meant it of his rejection by the Jewes from being their King. So that he fixeth not one of these steps upon firm ground, which he maketh in travelling for this Conclusion, Christ was born at the Autumnal Equinox, from this medium; His Passion fell out in the midst of this last year, at the Vernal Equinox. His Argument from the Type of expiation stands upon no better ground, yea makes against him: for grant the world was created at the Autumnal Equinox, that then the ancients began to reckon the year, that then the Pro∣mise of Expiation was made in Paradise, that then the Feast of Expiation was observed: did not God himself alter the beginning of the year to the Vernal Equinox, at what time Christ expiated for sin by his death, and re∣created the World by his rising from the dead: and what fitter expedient could Wisdom it self have found out to draw peoples minds from expecting to see the Redeemer come in September. Or of those who are not so industriously, but more subtilty, vain in their reasonings, than Beroaldus: that pack of lazie Curs that will not take the pains to range Chronology for Arguments against the Churches Practice, but lye barking in Chimney-corners, and manage their attempts against it, not by hunting out the account and marks of time set out by the holy Ghost, but by representing to us the complexion of the Season, when these things and others accompanying them fell out. Such is the objection from the cold∣ness of that Winter-month: Calculated indeed to the effeminacy of this degenerate Christian Age (wherein nothing passeth for Gospel-preaching, but Flesh-indulgency, wherein men's love to Christ and Zeal for their own Souls welfare is grown so cold, as they will scarce wet their foot in serving Christ, or in working out their own Salvation; and therefore shrug at the thought of men's watching their Flocks by night, of such multitudes descending into the Water, of the Virgins travelling to Bethlehem, and of Christ's travel∣ling for our salvation in the greatness of his strength into the deep of Jordan, in the depth of Winter:) but not bottom'd upon any thing, will go for Reason among any persons, but such as live by Sense. As to the Virgins jour∣neying in that Brumal season, it may put to a stand the Faith of the Sibarites (who were so dainty as they would not permit those Manufuctures that made a din to come within the hearing of their City) or those mincing Daughters of Jerusalem (who could not walk but where they could make a tinckling with their feet, nor abide that wind that would ruffle their well-set Hair:) But how Credulity should stick so deep in this mire, as it cannot get out amongst us: whose high-ways are never unoccupied (but terms and Markets frequented, by both Sexes Winter and Summer;) is scarce con∣ceivable; except we think the Air be full of frosty Daemons, in Christmas∣week,
above all the weeks in the year; and that upon that account the Coun∣try carriers come not up to London that week. As to the Shepherds [] [abiding in the Field, &c.] Though Scaliger render it [sub dio] [in the open air] or rather if we speak properly in translating [sub dio] in the open Sun-light, or day-clarity of the Air (and that will be very proper to the night; but we must first imagine, that the Light which those Shepherds saw shining round about them, came from the Sun in the other Hemisphere, darting its Beams through some holes or clefts of the Earth: for otherwise they could not possibly be [sub dio] in the night.) Yet the word most properly signifies, [stabulantes in agris] [being in their huts] or rather their Field-halls [] [keeping court in the fields] whence both Homer and Hesiod ascribe it, as the Epithete of all Shep∣herds, [men living in the fields] and though they were not fire-houses, yet they might with Straw (or that Hay they prepar'd to feed their Cattle with next morning) make them as warm as they pleased? If it be replyed how then could they either see to their Flocks, or observe the shining of that glo∣rious Light, if they lay snugging in their Cabines. The Text exhibites this answer [] they watched their watchings over their flocks, that is, [they kept watch by turns] and that they might do without de∣triment to themselves in the coldest Season, and with as much advantage to their Flocks, as if they had all watch'd at once: and sure what instinct teacheth Crows, reason would teach them, that one pair of attentive ears and eyes would as well hear or see what befel, as if they were all awake, who might call up the rest, if he descried the approach of any strange oc∣currence: Lastly, put the Case at the worst, say they had no Cabines (which yet it is unlike they were without, even in Summer, to defend them from the days heat, as well as nights cold) was this any greater hardship, than the Heir of that whole Land their Father Jacob endured in Laban's service? Or can St. Lukes words sound harsher than those wherein Moses expresseth Ja∣cob's complaint (Gen. 31. 40.) In the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night. As to the multitudes flocking in to John's Baptism, notwithstanding the ex∣tremity of the Season. The Baptist himself, even with a wet finger, wipes that stain off from the Churches practice, which some from thence cast upon it, in the observation he made thereupon: that they came to his Baptism, that they might flee from, and escape that wrath which, by the infor∣mation of their Prophets, they believed would fall upon those whom their Messias at his coming should find impenitent. Can it then seem strange, that men should run through fire and water, to avoid that ex∣cision, which the Axe (laid to the root) threatned to every Tree, that did not bring forth fruit meet for Repentance; to escape that Damnation of Hell, that unquenchable fire, which they believed was to be the portion of such as would not listen to the voyce of the Cryer. And as to our Saviours submitting himself to the tolerance of Winters cold, his acquainting him∣self with grief, as soon as he came out of the Womb, and his exposing his sacred Body to Jordan's chillest Streams; as they were part of his Cross and Expiations for that pleasure we take in sin, so they were the products of that inconquerable Love of his to Mankind, a Love stronger than Death, and which many Waters could not quench (Cant. 8.) And would doubtless be so taken; if men, who turn Grace into wantonness, did not fear, that the Ex∣ample of it would force them from their Epicurism, unto the most ingrateful austerities of Mortification, which rather than themselves will undergo, they will loose the benefit of Christ's Mediation. §. 6. If thou beest as nice (Reader) as these fine-dame-Divines, I shall not know how to make my Apology before thee, for this large digression; however I will not hazard the bringing of thee to another qualm, by plead∣ing my excuse at large; but only beg thy pardon, and bring thee back from
whence I diverted (viz. the Testimony of Josephus in confirmation of the Verity of the Evangelical History, as to its Date of Christ's Baptism) to that Testimony he gives, touching the time of Christ's Birth, as to that other Character of it specified by the Evangelists, to wit, [the first Taxing under Cyrenius:] wherein, though some would make him disagree with St. Luke, and Maldonat by name, who will needs have that Taxing which he menti∣ons (lib. 18. c. 3.) to be mistaken by Josephus, for that which was made at our Saviours Birth: yet that there is a fair Correspondencie betwixt him and the Evangelists in that point, will appear, if we consider, that that which Jose∣phus there mentions is the last under Cyrenius, which he gives an account of; and that that which St. Luke speaks of, as coincident with our Saviour's Birth, is specified by him to have been the first of those two Taxings, which were made during Cyrenius his presidency over Syria. The first of all the World, that is, the whole Roman Empire (of which St. Luke speaks [Tunc breviarium totius Imperii conficere Augustus in animo habebat; in quo opes publicae continebantur; quantum civium sociorum{que} in armis, quot classes, regna, provinciae tributa, vectigalia & hujusmodi alia.] which was therefore made, because Au∣gustus had a mind to make a doomsday-book of the whole Empire; wherein was set down, the Revenues of the Empire; what Train-bands the Citizens, what the associates found: what Navies, Kingdoms, Provinces, what Tribute, Customs and such like, belonged to the Empire; as Scaliger (de emendat. 6. pag. 551. and in Euseb. Chron. numb. 2018.) collect out of Tacitus and Suetonius. The second nine years after that, in the thirty seventh year after the War of Acti∣um, wherein Augustus overthrew M. Anthony (Joseph. antiq. 18. 3.) of Syria only (and Judea, as annexed to the Province of Syria by Augustus) after the Banishment of Archelaus, and confiscation of his goods: for the Sale of which also, at that time Cyrenius came into Judaea. Of the first of these Taxings Josephus is silent; and his very silence gives consent to the truth of that Circumstance related by St. Luke that it was [the taxing of the whole world;] which therefore he omits, as not falling in with his Subject the Jewish Antiquities; in relation to which only he glanceth at the affairs of the Empire, which peculiarly concern Judaea, but passeth over those that were of common Influence upon all the Imperial Pro∣vinces, as Suidas (in Augusto) affirms this to have been. [Augustus Caesar decreed to number by head , all the inhabitants of the Romans] . and that he did not only intend but per∣form this intent, he assures us in the word  [Augustus sent out un∣to all those Regions, that were subject to him, Officers by whom he made the en∣rolings.] and the word () he tells how many Myriads were found () inhabiting the Roman Empire. These places of Suidas do also confirm another Passage in St. Luke's History of this Taxing, that thereby Augustus took account of Women, as well as Men; and of both as to their Lineage, Extract and Condition. [all went to be taxed every one into his own City, and Joseph went up out of Nazareth unto the City of Da∣vid, Bethlehem, because he was of the house and Lineage of David; to be taxed with Mary his espoused Wife] This kind of Taxing and Enroling was in Custom in his time, saith Dionysius Halicarnassaeus (lib. 4.) who came to Rome presently after the Conquest of M. Anthony at Actium; where af∣ter he had learn'd the Latine Tongue, he gave himself up wholly to the stu∣dy, and writing of the Roman History (argumentum in historiam Dionys.) and though he either lived not to finish that History, or Fate hath deprived us of that part of it, which succeeds the ejectment of the Decem Virale Ty∣ranny: yet in the account he gives of the first institution (by Servius Tullius) of that way of enroling, which he saith was used in his time, in the Reign of Augustus: he fully agrees with the Evangelical Description of it [Jussit omnes, qui eandem pagam incolehant, in singula capita certum numismatis genus conferre, sed aliud viros, aliud mulieres, aliud impuberes: quibus connumeratis
apparebat quis esset hominum numerus per sexus & per aetates distinctus.] He commanded all that appertain'd to the same Town to give in by head, a certain kind of Coyn; the men, of one stamp; the women, of another: they of under-age, another: by counting whereof the number of persons appeared, distinguish'd by sex, age, &c. This was done, saith Florus (Hist. l. 1. c. 6.) [Ut omnia patri∣monii, dignitatis, aetatis, artium, officiorúm{que} discrimina:] that all the diffe∣rences of Patrimony, Dignity, Age, Craft, Office might be recorded. For, as Dionysius (in the place fore-cited) saith; the Coyns which were given in at this Enrolment were differently stampt, according to the distinction of E∣states and Degrees into Nobles, Plebeians, Artificers, &c. And they also gave oath, that they had truly rated their Estates, and gave in the names of their Parents, their Ages, their Wives, their Children, together with the place of their Habitation, saith the same Dionysius. The Learned Dr. Hammond hath given an hint of one other particular, wherein secular History agrees with the Evangelists touching this Taxing, out of the relations of Sepulvada and Gerundensis: That twenty seven years before the Birth of Christ, Augustus appointed that there should be an en∣rolling of the whole Empire, and proclaim'd it a Tarracon, a City of Spain; after he had subdued the Cantabri, and others that had in that Country broke off from him (with whom Velleius Paterculus seems to agree:) but upon this Proclamation, he finding new stirs breaking out again, deferr'd the ex∣ecution, till a fitter time, which was this very point of time wherein Christ was born: of which the whole Christian World was so well perswaded, as the Christians of Spain (taking this Taxing to have been made when the Decree went first out) dated the Birth of Christ twenty seven years before all other Christians, taking it for granted on all hands that this Taxing did concurr with the Birth of Christ. This going out of the Decree, some considerable time before the Tax was made, St. Luke seems to imply in his [] there went (or there had gone) out a decree: and his [:] but this Taxing (though decreed before) was first made when Cyrenius was Governour of Syria. But I remit this to the judgement of Criticks: being more solicitous to unty a Knot, which he hath made upon this sacred Chronology, while (from a misunderstood place in Tertullian) he makes C. Sentius Saturninus to have been president of Syria, at what time this first Taxing was made, and will have Cyrenius to be sent only upon this extraordinary occasion, and not to have had any set∣led Dominion there; directly against St. Luke's [] [Cyrenius being Governour, or (as Erasmus translates it) President of Syria] against the Authority of Suidas thus (which he alleageth and translates) [Augustus desiring to know the strength and state of his Dominions, sent twenty chosen men into his Dominions, one into one part, another into another, to take this account: and P. Sulpitius Quirinius, had Syria for his Province:] and against the mind of Tertullian, who in the place quoted by the Dr. (advers. Marcionem. l. 4. c. 19.) thus answers that Heretick, perverting that Text (St. Luke 8.) [who is my Mother?] (to this fence, as if Christ thereby denyed he had a Mother.) [It is manifest, saith Turtullian, there was a tax∣ing at the time of Christ's Birth under Augustus in Judaea by Sentius Saturni∣nus, by which they might have found out Christ's stock:] he does not say that Sentius Saturninus was then Governour of Syria, but only that he assisted [tanquam Princeps in magistrorum auguralium numero,] at the making of that Enrolment [as the chief of the Colledge of Augures] as Franc. Junius ob∣serves (in his Notes upon that place) and as Tertullian explains himself (de pallio. Cap. 1.) [ubi maenia Statilius Taurus imposuit, solennia Sentius Satur∣ninus enarravit:] Taurus the Proconsul (what time the Tax was made there, and the liberty of Carthage restored by Augustus) built the Walls, [and Sentius Saturninus, the Augure recounted the solemnities,] that is, he per∣formed those sacred Offices, which Servius Tullius had appointed to be cele∣brated, at his instituting of this Tax, or Enrolment, and which Dionysiu
saith were in use under Augustus, one of which was [to reckon up the tokens, which persons of all conditions had brought in by pole, and to compute how many there were of every estate, age and sex] [Quibus connumeratis per sacrorum Prae∣sides, &c. Romani autem ad meam us{que} aetatem hac lustratione post Censum per∣fectum lustrantur à sacratissimo magistratu.] (Dionysius Halicarnassaeus lib. 4.) We need not therefore here betake our selves to that shifting distinction of [Governour standing and extraordinary] to make this passage in St. Luke's comport with Secular Chronology: For Saturninus might make this Descrip∣tion of Judaea (as a chief Augure) and yet Cyrenius be, as the Evangelist then stiles him, Governour of Syria. Of that second Taxing under Cyrenius, St. Luke makes mention, from Gamaliel (Act. 5.) as that which gave occasion to Judas of Galilee his Insur∣rection, with his cut-throat Crew of St. Levellers. To which Josephus gives a most clear Testimony (Antiq. l. 18. c. 1.) [Quirinius a Roman Senator is sent into Syria by Caesar, to administer the Law, and rate every man's estate: with whom came Coponius, to take up the administration of the affairs of Judaea. Yea, moreover, Quirinius himself came into Judaea, now laid to the Province of Syria; that he might enroll the Estates of the Citizens of that Region, and put to sale Archelaus his goods. The Jews, though at first they took heavy the men∣tion of a Tax, yet did not pertinaciously resist, but by the perswasion of the high Priest permitted the Tax to be perfected. But a while after their stood up one Judas Gaulanites of the Town Gamale, who with his Companion, Sadducus a Pharisee, solicited the people to defection; saying that the Taxing was nothing else but a manifest profession of servitude. It is not to be imagin'd (saith Jose∣phus) how much these men disquieted the whole Nation; while they fill all places with slaughter and plunder, and a promiscuous robbing of friends and foes; and the murder of the best men, under the pretext of asserting the publick Liber∣ty. Insomuch, as they created such a deadly few'd in the Nation, as neither for∣reign War, nor Extremity of Famine could draw the enraged Factions from one anothers Throats: till at last the mischief proceeded so far, as the Temple of God was consumed with hostile flames; for to speak the truth, Judas and Sad∣duck were the Authors of all the succeeding Calamities, while to the three old ones of Pharisees, Sadducees, and Esseans, they introduced this fourth Sect of Gaulonites: and drew multitudes of such after them, as were given to change and affected Novelties: which did not only for the present disturb the publick Weal, but was the seminary of all future slaughters.] But for the date of this Insurrection of Judas (or as he names him (Bel. Jud. 2. 7.) Simon of Galilee) he sets it down most exactly in Gamaliel's Phrase (Jud. Antiq. l. 20. 23.) where speaking of two sons of this Judas or Simon, James and Si∣mon, whom Alexander the Successor of Cuspius Fadus, crucified: he calls them the sons of that Judas of Galilee [qui agente Syriae Censum Quirinio Judaeos solicitavit ad defectionem à populo Romano, &c.] [who, while Quirinius was making the Tax of Syria, solicited the Jews to a defection from the Romans.] At one breath informing us: that Cyrenius began to make that Tax of Syria in Judaea, and that after he had laid it there (Leaving Coponius to gather it) he himself went into Syria to lay it there; during which Leavy, Judas made Insurrection against Coponius, while he was collecting it in Ju∣daea. Or as Josephus (De Bel. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.) yet more clearly expresseth the pre∣cise juncture [Coponio disceptante, Galilaeus quidam, Simon nomine, defecti∣onis arguebatur; quia indigenas increparet, si tributum Romanis pendere pate∣rentur, dominós{que} post Deum ferrent mortales] [While Coponius was reason∣ing (with them, about paying their Tax laid by Cyrenius) a certain Galilaean, Si∣mon by name (the Greek hath Judas) was convict of making defection; be∣cause he reproach'd his Country-men, as grievously offending God, if they should permit Tribute by head, to be paid to the Romans, or acknowledge mortal Rulers, after God had been their King] From the whole we learn, that there were two Taxings while Cyrenius was Governour of Syria: the first (as St. Luke stiles that which was made at our Saviour's Birth) an enrolling of the whole
Empire (a Term so equipollent to that of the whole World, both in Sacred and Secular Writ, as Bartolus pronounceth him an Heretick, that will not say, the Emperour is Lord and Monarch of the whole World) that this first Tax was a mere enrolment of mens Ages, Dignities, Lineages, &c. and therefore no wonder if we hear of no commotion in Judaea, upon the account of that; nor find it mention'd in Josephus, the Jews being in that no more concern'd than the rest of the World; And least of all, that St. Luke should be so ready in drawing the Line of Joseph, (and by consequence of the blessed Virgin) up to David (even through those Generations, which the Sacred Old Testa∣ment-rolls make no mention of (notwithstanding that Herod had burnt all the Genealogies, he could, and durst, lay hands on) seeing Joseph had now given in an account of his Line, into those mens hands; out of which He∣rod durst not have snatcht it, if he had lived to an opportunity of attempting it; which he did not, but deceased within one half year after our Saviour's Birth; leaving behind him this new Edition of Judaean Chronology; to serve the Christian's use, and stop the Worlds mouth, from excepting against those Records which were so solemnly delivered to the Custody of the Ro∣man Archives, before the name of the blessed Jesus was known, or Con∣troversie concerning him raised in the World: as St. Chrysostom (in his 8. Hom. on St. Matthew) observes, and Tertullian suggests (in his fourth Book against Marchion) A providence which St. Luke sets an accent upon, in his prefacing the Genealogy of Joseph (which he lays down in his third Chapter) by giving us this Circumstance of our Saviour's Birth (in his second) that it fell out, at what time Joseph of the House and Lineage of David was gone up with Mary to the City of David, Bethlehem, there to have his Lineage enroll'd, in such a crowd of his more wealthy Kindred (who would certainly have excepted against the draught of his Line, if they could have found any flaw in it) as took up all the Inns in the Town, and forc'd this poor kins∣man into a Stable. And this enrolment made by Roman Officers, with the assistance of their Augures, to take him sworn to the truth of what he al∣leaged touching his stock, and with other such Formalities (mention'd by Dionysius Hallicarn, lib. 4.) as it was not possible that Forgery could in this case escape undetected. Our Josephs name-sake, this famous Jewish Histori∣an, in the History of his own Life, presseth this very Argument against the Calumniators of his Pedigree; against whose suggillations he proveth his Extract from the Priests of the first Order, and of that Family of Priests, who for a long time obtain'd, both the High Priesthood and Kingdom of of Juda; out of that Succession of his Kindred, which was inserted into the publick Tables, that is, into those Roman Records, which were taken of e∣very mans Stock, at the universal Taxing; for the publick Records of the Jews had been burnt by Herod, before Josephus was born: and there is no Track in History of transcribing Genealogies, after that, into any publick Registers, but what Augustus caused to be made at the first Enrolment of the Empire. Yea, what evidence, but that which was transcribed out of that Dooms-day-book, could be ground sufficient of that triumph which Jose∣phus sings [Hanc generis nostri successionem, ut est in tabulas publicas relata, huc transcripsi, parvi faciens calumnias] [This succession of our Family, as it is enter'd in the publick Rolls, I have transcribed hither: and now I value not the calumnies of busie wicked men.] For whatever Records he could appeal to besides those were, in comparison of them, but private, and not exempted from possibility of adulteration, which that first description left no place for. Neither were the Priests enroll'd at the second Tax, they being exempted from payment of such Taxes as were at that time levied. The second Tax∣ing (and under Cyrenius also) was this which Gamaliel mentions, and Jose∣phus writes at large of, as being of Syria only, to which Province Judaea then belong'd, and therefore pertinent to his subject. This being not on∣ly an enrolling of Persons, but a laying of a Tax upon their Estates, admi∣nister'd occasion to turbulent over-holy Hypocrites, to make head against
that Roman Power which God had set over them: which I therefore mention the story of, from the mouths and pens of persons of the Jewish Religion, to evince, that St. Luke hath the approbation of foreign Testimo∣ny, to the validity of that distinction which he makes of Taxes, when he saith [the first taxing] As for Theudas, who, as Gamaliel saith, made an in∣surrection before Judas; he must be another Theudas, than he of whom Jo∣sephus gives the story (Antiq. l. 20. c. 5.) under the Regencie of Fadus, long after the discourse of Gamaliel. For it is not to be imagin'd, that either Jo∣sephus or Gamaliel should be so far out, in a story so modern to them, as one of them must be, if they speak of one and the same person. But I am less careful to reconcile this Text to Josephus; because the Controversie which it adminsters, is not betwixt Josephus and St. Luke, but Gamaliel; whose saying St. Luke only records as an Historian, but undertakes not to justifie it: So that if their be any error therein, in point of Chronology, let the Scribes of the Law look to it, and study Arguments to perswade intelligent persons, that the Dictates of their Master are, in this case, to be preferr'd before the judgement of so exact both Historian and Chronologer: Who though he may, perhaps, disagree with Gamaliel, yet we have found him (and other secular Authors; so unanimously agree with St. Luke in those grand Synchronisms: As if the question be; Whether in the Reign of Tiberius; while Pilat was Governour of Judea; Herod, Tetrarch of Galilee; his Brother Philip, Tetrarch of Ituraea; Lysanius, Tetrarch of A∣bilene; and Caiaphas the High Priest; Jesus Christ shewed himself to Israel, and during all their continuance in their respective Offices, perform'd miraculous works, preach'd the Evangelical Doctrine, suffer'd death, rose a∣gain, &c? If the Question be, Whether this Jesus had for his Fore-runner, the Baptist, who preach'd repentance to all that came to his Baptism, re∣buked Herod for Herodias, for which he was beheaded? And lastly, if the Question be: Whether at that time when the Evangelists date the Birth of Christ, there was not a Taxing, in all points, as St. Luke describes, &c? He that will not acquiess in the Testimony of the Evangelists, may hear all these Questions determin'd affirmatively, by strangers to our Religion, and so suitable in every punctilio to our sacred History; as if they had laid the Gospel (and not only common fame) before them, to shape their Histo∣ries and Chronologies after, they could hardly have come nearer to the Evan∣gelists, than they do
CHAP. VII. Josephus his Suffrage to the Evangelists in the Substance of their History of Christ. § 1. He appropriates the Compellation [Christ] to our Jesus, speaks of the Churches growth in a Gospel-stile. § 2. Describes Christs Disciples by Evangelical Characters; gives the Evangelists Reasons why others did not embrace the Gospel. § 3. He peremptorily asserts Christ's Miracles, how he came to a certain information thereof. Appion and Justus would have found it out, if he had proceeded here upon presumptions and uncertainties. § 4. He describes Christ's Miracles after the Evangelical Model; § 5. And affirms them to have been such as the Prophets had foretold. The Touch-stone of canonical History. § 6. He asserts Christ's Resurrecti∣on with all its Circumstances. § 1. JOsephus keeps time with the Evangelists in the date of Christs Histo∣ry. And if we lay our sound-trying ear to the History it self, we shall find that therein he keeps tune with them. 1. He giveth him the Name by which he was in common speech distin∣guished from others [Jesus Christ:] What will you (saith Pilate.) I shall do unto Jesus who is called Christ? Insomuch, as his compellations from the place of his education and converse [Jesus of Nazareth] [Jesus of Galilee] grew so far out of use, as his Disciples ceas'd to be stiled [Galileans and Nazarites;] except by the Jewish or Pagan enemies to the Name of Christ, when they would either cast scorn upon them or calumny; as denominated from a place of which they had this Proverb [Can any good come out of Na∣zareth?] Whence our Saviour inferrs to the man that called him [good] that thereby he confes'd, he was God, and something more than came out of Nazareth, that he had another Birth, before, and beside that he had in Na∣zareth (for the Jews thought he was born there) or from a place, whence the common opinion was that no Prophet was to come; [Search and see, for out of Galilee ariseth no Prophet.] These denominations (I say) except in such mens mouths quickly grew out of use, that of Christian being en∣tail'd upon them by consent of Nations: for which Names sake they were called before Kings and Governours, persecuted, hated of all men [Chri∣stiani, not Galilaei ad leones] was the common acclamation of the whole World of Heathens [negato te esse Christianum,] was the advice which was given to the Disciples of the blessed Jesus, when they were following him either to, or under his bloody Cross: by all that cruelly pittied them, that apishly loved them, and would have killed them with kindness, have had them lose eternal, by saving a temporal Life [Christianum se negat] was the Court-form of acquitting, of suspending proceedings against, those unhappy men, who apostatized from the Faith, and withered, for want of root and depth of earth, when the Sun cast its scorching Beams upon them, [Christi∣anus sum] was the Catholick Form, wherein all Martyrs made a good Con∣fession before their Persecutors. (With what face can the Jesuits, and their fruitful Spawn of Sectaries, who suffer under other names than that of Christian, challenge the Crown of Martyrdom, or lay the odious Crime, of persecution, to the charge of Gods Ministers, while they suffer as evil doers? Is this the silence of the Sheep before the Shearer, the voyce of the dumb Lamb under the hands of the Butcher? and not rather [] (Jude 16.) the murmuring of sturdy Malefactors, while they are whipt deserved∣ly for their faults, the grunting of Hoggs (ut porcus saginatus:) (Aret.) who derives that word from , to grunt.) better fed than taught, against
their Keeper; or the cry of Swine, while they are a ringing, to prevent their rooting up the Vineyard of Christ; yea, the Field of the VVorld, and thereby so tainting it with their earth-poysoning Snout, as nothing but Soul-poysoning VVeeds grows after such ploughing (I have stept out of my way to turn this devouring and make-spoil Herd out of the Corn.) The good Shepherds Flock suffer'd under another Name, were known, as by o∣ther properties, so by another compellation, even this of Christian, im∣posed upon them at Antioch, and derived to them from Jesus his compella∣tion, Christ, as Josephus here testifieth, therein agreeing with the Evangeli∣cal History. 2. To which he gives his suffrage, as to the growth and wonderful in∣crease of the Christian Religion, both among Jews and Gentiles, Josephus his Text [And to this day the Christian people, which of him are so called, cease not to increase] [] [the Tribe of Christians is not in its wane, but increase.] .] [many Jews, and many out of gentilism] (some copies have [,] infinite numbers) became his Disciples. He lived to see, that Grain of Mustard-seed, the Kingdom of Heaven, (the least of all Societies) plant∣ed by Christ (in a Corner of the VVorld, Judaea) grown up to a Tree, that spread its Branches all over the VVorld: that little Leven hid in the three Measures of Meal (Judaeans, Grecians and Barbarians) levening the whole Lump: That light, which arose in the East, shining unto the West, and spreading its Beams all over the VVorld: that Grain of VVheat, which fell into the earth, and dyed there, bearing great increase, according to the Prophecies of Christ, related in the Gospel, and the accomplishment of those Prophecies; related in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles. VVhat is there more said by St. Luke, when he tell us, [souls were added to the Church daily; that the word of God grew and increased mightily; that multi∣tudes, both of Greeks and Jews believed:] by St. Paul, when he writes [that the Gospel brought forth fruit in all the world, was made known in all places, &c.] than Josephus here attesteth; manifestly implying, it did not only in∣crease at first, but ceased not to increase under the persecutions raised by Nero and Domitian [.] [To this very day the Tribe of Christians decreaseth not] now Josephus concluded these Books of Jewish Antiquities, in the latter end of Domitian, after that, by him and Nero, all the means for the suppressing it had been used, which hu∣mane VVit could invent, or Power use. [In praesentem us{que} diem, quae incidit in decimum tertium annum principatùs Domitiani] (Autiq. l. 20. c. 9.) In spite of all which, it grew, as our Saviour had fore-told, and St. Luke, and St. Paul frequently report. If they shed Christian blood, it manured the VVorld, and made it more fertile of Christians; if they burnt them, not single Phaenixes, but whole Nests of them arose out of their Ashes. The more the Olive was beaten, the more fruitful it grew: The Story of St. Steven's Martyrdom is seconded with that of Paul's Conversion; St. Paul's Chains made the Go∣spel more famous, &c. Insomuch, as in Tertullian's time the greatest part al∣most of every City were Christians; which he mentions as an argument of the loyalty of Christians, in his Apologie to Scapula, President of Africa: [Ex disciplina patientiae divinae agere nos satis manifestum esse vobis potest, cùm tantà hominum multitudo pars pene major civitatis cujus{que}in silentio & modestiâ agimus, singuli forte magis noti quam omnes,] In all which expressions of the Christian Faith, bearing up against all winds, what is said more, than both Suetonius and Tacitus (in places already alleadged) and Josephus (in this place) testifies the truth of. § 2. VVhat other reasons of the Prevalency of Christianity (notwith∣standing all attempts made against it) are given in the Gospel, than what Josephus lays down in the Text. 1. The nature of Christ's Doctrine, and the qualification of them that re∣ceived
it [] [A Teacher of them that willingly received the Truth:] wherein Josephus bears wit∣ness to the truth of these points, so often inculcated by the Evangelists; that the generality of Common People reputed Christ, as they did the Bap∣tist, a Preacher sent from God, a Teacher of the Truth: insomuch, as for fear of the people, who held them Prophets, the Pharisees durst neither de∣ny John's Baptism to be from Heaven, nor cause Jesus to be apprehended, but on the night, and in the absence of the people, lest they should have raised a tumult. That the reason, why they gladly heard both him and his Fore-runner, but did not practically conform to their Doctrine, was, because though their Judgements were convinc'd, that they taught Truth, and in∣joyn'd nothing but what was holy, just, and good; yet their Affections be∣ing over-born with carnal interest, some were kept, from giving up them∣selves to the observance of his Law, by Envy (Act. 13. 45.) some, by Co∣vetousness (Luke 16. 14.) some, by Ambition, and seeking praise of men. (John 12. 42.) And that they, who, by the preventing Grace of God, were better disposed and qualified, for the reception of the Truth, when it should be reveiled to them, became Christ's followers, were peculiarly evangelized, effectually wrought on, by the preaching of the Gospel: where this seed fell on [a good and honest heart] it took root and brought forth fruit (St. Matt. 13.) where God had open'd the door of the heart (by the preventing Grace, of an humble teachableness, of a sincere desire to know and do Gods Will) there this King of Glory came in and was entertain'd. If any man will do [] that is [sincerely desire to do the Will of God] he shall know of the doctrine that I preach, whether it be of God. (Joh. 7. 17.) that is, ac∣knowledge it for divine, as it is: These were the  [fitted for the Kingdom of God] (Luke 9. 62.) the  [the disposed for eternal life] (Act. 13. 1.) the  [the meet for, worthy of becoming Christ's Disciples.) (Act. 13. 46.) This point of Evangelical Doctrine is well exprest by St. Austin, in that Socratical Sentence he minds Longinus the Pagan of (Epist. 20.) [quibus satis persuasum est, ut nihil mallent se esse, quam viros bonos, his reliqua facilis est doctrina:] [to them who are sufficiently perswaded, to desire nothing more than to be good men, the remainder of (Chri∣stian) Doctrine is easie.] But it were endless, to quote all Texts looking this way: for I believe a Tythe of the Gospel beats upon these three Ponts last specified; and therefore how much of it does Josephus bear witness to, and comment upon, in this succinct Sentence [Christ was a Teacher of (had for Followers and Disciples) such as willingly received the Truth.] VVhich how it could fall from his pen, and not soak into his heart (to make it compliant with Christ, and his heavenly Doctrine) can hardly be resolv'd, if not by this observation: That he, and such like admirably moralized persons, who came thus near the Kingdom of Heaven, as to think thus honourably of the Christian Religion, had the same opinion of it, as the Romanists have of those they call special Religions among themselves, profess'd by several Orders of Fryars: the Rules and Grounds whereof they look upon, as Evangelical Counsels of perfection (advantageous to those that will put themselves to the trouble of such heroick acts of Self-denyal and Mortification, in order to their obtain∣ing a far more exceeding weight of eternal Glory:) but not universal Pre∣cepts obliging all Christians. (Gerson de religionis perfectione:) [Religio Chri∣stiana sub uno supremo Abbate Christo sola est salutaris & perfecta: nibilominùs distincta gradibus meritorum & ordinum.—qui votis aliquibus se subjiciunt ultrà legem commune Christi.] [Christian Religion, profes'd under one supreme Ab∣bat, Christ, is the only saving and perfect Religion. It is notwithstanding, distin∣guish'd, according to the degrees of Merits and Orders; So as they are most perfect, who subject themselves to certain Rules, beyond the common Law of Christ.] Thus did these esteem the Royal Law to be an excellent Rule of Life and Heart; for such as aim'd at perfection of Grace and Glory: but for those that could content themselves with the common scantling, they might be saved
by that Religion, by which their Fore-fathers had been saved, there was no necessity of practising so chargeable and austere a Doctrine, as that of Christ. The moralized Gentile had that Opinion of the Christian Religion, in com∣parison of his own, as he had of his own, in comparison of all the rest: the Jew had that esteem of Christ, compared with Moses; as he had of Moses, compared with all other Legislators; or (to come to an Instance, will both administer more light to this business, and whereof we have from the Ancients a better account) as he had of the common Jewish Religion in comparison of those stricter Sects of the Pharisee and Essene: as leading to that height of Virtue, as few are capable of attaining to; to that Commu∣nion with God, as is inaccessible, saving by persons of a better Clay: and therefore obtains the good word of all, that are not brutified and led by un∣tamed Passions (as that which leads to the most perfect Beatitude, and a trade of Life far excelling all others;) but not practicable in common Con∣verse, and therefore obtains observance from few. As Philo speaks of the Essenes. [Meritò ut absolutae probitatis receptum in multis orbis regionibus, a Graecis at{que} barbaris ordo tendens ad faelicitatem perfectissimam:] (Philo de vita contemplativa.) They are deservedly entertain'd, as men walking by a Rule of absolute perfection, in many regions of the World: both Grecians and Barba∣rians applaud their Order, as tending to the most perfect happiness. It is adored and reverenc'd at a distance by all; but not approach'd to, except by such, as a kind of divine fury drives on, to lay violent hands upon it; having first laid violent hands upon themselves, and thereby become dead to this mortal Life. (amore correpti rerum caelestium, & quasi divino furore perciti prae immor∣talis cupidine, vitâ hac mortalidefuncti] (Id. Ibid.) Josephus himself is a notable Example of this praising the Heroick degree of Virtue (as absolutely the best) but yet chusing a more remiss degree (as best for him:) for though he far prefers, in point of worth, the Essene above the Pharisee (in his discourses of them.) (Antiq. 15. 13.) he presents the Pharisee, as indulg'd by Herod out of that respect he bore to Pollio, a chief Master amongst them, but out of the reverence which Herod had to the Religion it self of the Essenes, he re∣mitted to them the taking of the Oath of Allegiance, which he imposed up∣on the other two Sects, as conceiving the Essenes Virtue and Justice, would oblige them more to duty, than an Oath would the Pharisees or Sadducees. And he spends so much of a long Chapter (cap. 7. de Bell. Judaic. 2.) in commending the Essenes for that admirable degree of Temperance, Tole∣rance, Pacateness of Spirit, contempt of Earth, love of Heaven, which they attain'd to; as he almost forgets to describe the two other Sects, as not worthy to stand in competition with this. And in the History of his own Life, gives the preheminency for Virtue to the Essenes, whose Rules he followed, under Bannus, three years without intermission. Yet when he came to near twenty, and began to consider, where he was, and how to provide for a subsistence in this world, sutable to his mind; he chose the Religion of the Pharisees, whom he saw on the sunny-side of the hedge, as most conducible to a Civil Life; as a way wherein he might safely walk, towards the obtaining immortal happiness; though not administring so large an entrance into it, as that of the more mortified Essenes; yet more easie to be kept, without loss of his Secular Interests, and laying more in the way Preferment, &c. As he himself informs us (in the History of his own Life) [Jam{que} undeviginti annos, natus, civilem vitam aggressus sum, addictus Phari∣saeorum placitis.) Of whom, notwithstanding, he gives this Character; that they were a slie, and arrogant kind of Men, pragmatical in Affairs of State, enemies to Kings, beguiling silly Women with shews of holiness. (Antiqui∣ties, l. 13. c. 3.) But however that Sect he chuseth as most convenient for a Ci∣vil Life, [:] (Isocrat de pace:) Thus he adhered to the Religion of Moses in practice, though he honour'd Christ's Doctrine in heart before it: with Philo his Eunuch philosopher (Phi∣lo de Josepho.) approving it in judgement as the most wholesome, but
relishing the other as more tooth-some: [loquitur ut oportet, sed sapit con∣trarium.] Of the same make were those multitudes of Believers, to whom Jesus would not trust himself, knowing what was in them; those of the Rulers and Pharisees, who believed, but did not practice his Doctrine, for fear of being cast out of the Synagogue; through love of the praise of men, &c. such were the Gnosticks, the Ebionites, the Hemerobaptists, and the whole Frie of Mungrel-Christians: who not being able to expung out of their Minds an honourable Opinion of Christ, nor out of their Wills an en∣mity to the pureness of his Doctrine, compounded the quarrel betwixt Conscience and Affection, betwixt Reason and Passion. § 3. Of Christ's working of Miracles, which he propoundeth as another Cause of so many Disciples flocking after, and adhering to him; Josephus thus writes ; [hic fuit mirabilium operum pa∣trator, He was a der of admirable Works:] Every word, and almost syllable hath its Emphasis. 1. The VVorks wrought by Christ were  [wonderful, beyond and beside the ordinary course of Nature;] not only in the opinion of the Vulgar, who are easie to be imposed upon by Thaumatourgists (by reason of their ignorance in the Reason and Cause of Effects) but in the judgement of the most knowing persons; for doubtless such was Josephus, and such those with whom he convers'd, in order to his receiving satisfaction in this Case: and therefore if he had not been well assured, that as it was beyond the power of the most approved minds, to find out; so it was out of the Sphere of Natures Activity, to afford Causes of such Effects: he would not have given them this Atrribute. Upon the same account, that bitter e∣nemy of Christ, Celsus also confesseth, that Christ by means of the Miracles he wrought, procured many Disciples (Origen. Contr. Celsum. lib. 1. cal. 21.) 2. He casts not in here that common allay, of, [as it is reported.] nor gives that Caution against his Readers too facil Credulity, which he usual∣ly inserts, where either himself questions the Truth of Matter of Fact, or fears his Prudence may be called in question, for not questioning that; but roundly affirms Christ to have done wonderful works; not fearing the Cen∣sure of his critical Readers, upon either his reporting it for a certain Truth, or believing it [nec meis scriptis timui conscius enim mihi eram veritatis ser∣vatae:] Vita Josephi) [I was not afraid of mens censuring my writings, for I was conscious to my self, that I have kept strictly to the Truth.] He writes in another strain, when he reports the dream of Archelaus expounded by Si∣mon the Essean; the appearance of Alexander's Ghost to Glaphyra, and an hundred more historical Passages, out of which I single this, for its proximi∣ty of time to our Saviour's working and preaching. These stories, though reported to him by the familiars of the Queen Glaphyra, though one of them came from an Essene (to the Professors of which Religion Josephus ascribed more holiness than all other the most strictest Sects) he concludes thus; [Though I thought good to communicate these Relations, as being of great use towards the proving the immortality of the Soul, and divine Providence; yet they that think these things incredible, I give them leave to enjoy their Opinion.] (Jud. ant. 17. ult.) And another thus (Antiq. l. 15. c. 13.) [Haec tametsi fi∣dem excedere videntur, visum est tamen Lectori indicare, quia multi sunt in eo ge∣nere, quibus ob morum probitatem, divinitas aperire dignatur sua decreta & con∣silia:] These things, though they seem to exceed belief, yet I thought good to ac∣quaint the Reader with them: because there are some of this Sect, to whom for the probity of their Manners, God vouchsafes to reveil his Decrees and Counsels. What reason can be given of his confidence, thus peremptorily to di∣ctate, while he discourseth of Christ? is he, in so short a while, as the writ∣ing of two or three Chapters takes up, grown so regardless of his Credit
(that he was, so lately, so tender of) as, without any Salvo, or reserve; thus positively to affirm, that Jesus wrought admirable Works? or proceeds not this rather from the assurance he hath of the Authentickness of his In∣telligence; this being a point, that he had the fairest opportunity to inform himself about, of any that are recorded by him, except those he was an Eye-witness of, for before the end of Claudius's Reign, at sixteen years of age, he committed himself (for five years together) to the Discipline of the Essenes, Scribes and Pharisees in order to his making, a prudential Choice of the best Religion; who, doubtless, out of an inveterate odium against Christ, would taint this new Vessel with all imaginable Prejudices against the Gospel; from his one and twentieth year he resigned up himself to the Placits of (the greatest enemies our Saviour had while he was upon Earth) the Pharisees, and to the Society of their Brethren in iniquity, the Priests of Jerusalem. (Josephi vita) thus armed against the Christian Faith, in the Judaean troubles under Gessius Florus, he betakes himself into Galilee, the Stage of our Saviours great Works: in managing of which Province he staid till he was taken Prisoner by Titus; having in the mean while his resi∣dence, by turns, in all the Towns of note, in that tract which the blessed Jesus had so worn with his feet, as he could scarce come any where, where he might not yet see the recent prints of them, and converse with thousands, upon whom, and in whose sight, those Miracles were wrought; he might yet, at the Sea of Tiberias, where he first quarter'd, see the Ships which those Disciples were called out of to be Fishers of Men; wherein Christ taught multitudes, that stood on the shore, wherein he commanded the Winds, and the Sea to be still. At Gadera, the next place he march'd to, he might speak with the Relations of that man, out of whom Christ cast Legion, and with some of the owners of that Herd of Swine, into which the Devils enter'd. At Cana he might see the Water-potts whence the true Vine made Wine flow in room of Water. After quarter given him by Vespasian, he followed the Roman Ensigns, as a Prisoner, to Caesarea; where he might feel the Prison and Moot-hall, almost yet warm with St. Paul's Breath; the Judgement-seat, yet quaking with Felix his-trembling, yet resounding the Eccho of St. Paul's pleadings, and Agrippa's Confession, that he was half perswaded to be a Christian: if not infested by that Vermine, which in∣sinuated into that other Herod, the knowledge of his being a Man, while the flattering voyce of the people cryed him up for a God: where he might, with his Keeper, walk to the House where Cornelius was praying, when he saw the Angelical Vision; where he and his Family were brought in, and consecrated to Christ, as the First-fruits of the Gentiles; and converse with that Italian Band that Cornelius had command over. (Bel. Jud. 3. 14.) From whence he had as fair an opportunity of sending to Joppa, to enquire for the Tanners house where St. Peter lodged, and on whose Battlements he received his Commission to go to the Gentiles, as could be offered; for at that very time Vespasian, sent a party thither. (Bel. Jud. Ib.) But I must not write a Journal of his March with the Army in Chains, though all that while he had freedom and leisure enough to inform himself in the Truth of those things he then intended to commit to Posterity. Follow we him, whither the Eagles lead him, after he has liberty granted him by Vespasian, (now made Emperor) and we find him at Alexandria in Aegypt: where was a famous Chri∣stian Church, then gathered by St. Mark the Evangelist, and a Society of four thousand Essenes, mentioned by his Co-etanean Philo the Learned Jew; if they were not all one (as Eusebius thinks) they were so near a kin, in the Judge∣ment of the World; as the ancient Church, (to wash her hands of those stains were cast upon her Virgin-purity, by the Worlds deeming the Essenes to be of her Society,) was fain to explode them together with the Ebionites, Nazarites, and Hemerobaptists: or rather the Essenes were really the greatest opposers of Christians, and the Christian the most perfect hater of them, of any Society of men, as coming nearest him in outward shape (as the Ape to
a man) but having a divers Soul, and therefore the most odious of all Beasts: However Josephus his venerable Opinion of that Sect, and his three years Pupilage, in his Minority, under Bannus the strictest of the Judaean Es∣senes, could not but invite him to the acquaintance of the Alexandrian: a∣mong whom the fresh memory of Jesus, and his Fore-runner the Baptist, (a person of blessed memory with both him and them) must needs lead them to confer upon the Stories of them, and to compare Notes. With Titus we find him at Antioch: where the Name of Christian (by which he comme∣morates Christ's Followers) was first imposed upon Christians, taken up (as the learned Junius thinks) by themselves, to distinguish them from such as called themselves Galileans and Nazarites, as if they embraced the Gospel, but of whom for their Judaizing the Church was ashamed, and wiped their names out of her Calendar. At Jericho, at Bethany, and all Judaean Towns where Christ convers'd; from the Inhabitants and inspection of which places he either saw those manifest tracks, or received that full satisfaction of what he reports of Christ's miraculous Works, as makes him thus po∣sitively assert the Truth of those Matters. For where else, among whom else, could he gain that certain knowledge, that he himself requires in an Hi∣storian, and professeth himself to have had of those things he records, both in his Books of Antiquities, and the Wars. He that promiseth to others (saith he) the Tradition of Facts really done, must himself first have a perfect understanding of those things (either because he was present at the doing of them, or understood them by those that saw them done) which Rule I have strict∣ly observed in both my Treatises, (Josep. contrà Appion, l. 1.) He could not be a Spectator of the Works, of the Effects of them he might, (upon those per∣sons, upon whom they were wrought, in those places where Monuments of them remain'd:) but where could he have better information by Eye-witnesses, than the Inhabitants of those Countries and Villages where Christ manifested his Glory, and Josephus so long convers'd? Of the Truth of such information that he was undoubtedly assured, will be yet more evident, if we observe, how narrowly he was watch'd by those two men of an evil-Eye, towards him and his History. Appion, a learned Gentile Philosopher, and Justus so zealous a Jew, as Agrippa became his Advocate to the Emperour (against the accusations of the Decapolitanes, presenting him as the sole Author of his Countries Apo∣stacy from its Allegeance) and born and living in that part of Galilee, where our Saviour chiefly convers'd. How glad would either of these have been, to have taken Josepus tardy, in so considerable a point of his History? and how easily might they have catch'd him tripping here, if he had not look'd so well to his feet, as to deliver nothing concerning our Saviour, but what he was certain of, and could make good against all cavils? How comes it to pass that those critical Adversaries, (who scarce leave one Story, in either of his Treatises, untouch'd, against which they could make any plausible Exception) have not a word to say against this, but because the Evidence of its Truth was so apparent, as there was no contradicting of it? Nay, would not these pick-quarrels have found fault, if not with the falsity, yet at least with the presumption of this Passage; if they had not been convinc'd, that he went not upon presumptions, but undoubted Grounds. Photias (de Justo Tiberiadensi) writes, that in Emulation of Josephus, he wrote the Hi∣story of the Jews (from the time of Moses, unto the death of Agrippa, the seventh King of the Herodian Race, and last of the Jews, who began his Reign under Claudius, augmented his Kingdom under Nero, and more un∣der Vespasian, and dyed in the third year of Trajan, to whom Justus dedi∣cated his History.) I report this quotation at large: as well to certifie a mistake of my own, touching Josephus his Appeal to Agrippa, for the Truth of his Judaick Wars; it being this Agrippa, and not (as I then supposed) he whom Caligula preferr'd, for that was he, of whom the Text of St. Luke speaks, who dyed in the fourth of Claudius, of worms, while Josephus was
in his Nonage: as also to shew, that this Justus had time enough, betwixt Josephus his finishing his History (under Domitian) and his finishing his own (under Trajan) to examine, and find fault in it: and that if he could have detected Josephus of falsity, in this his Story of Christ: the Heathen World, and this persecuting Emperour (who hated Christians to death) would have been sure to have heard of it by Justus. Never did any Secular Historian pass a more severe scrutiny than Josephus did: and in no part of it more than this of Christ, and the Baptist. To proceed therefore in his Testi∣mony. § 4. 1. By the Characters he stamps upon Christ's mighty Works, he ma∣nifestly distinguisheth them from all others, and points them out to be those very individual ones, which are recorded in the Gospel. 1. In that he makes Christ the Maker of them [the ] the Former of them by his own power; a word more properly attributed, by the Chri∣stian Church (in our common Creed) unto God, to express his creating Heaven and Earth, without pre-existent Matter, or co-existent Helpers: than that of [] by the Philosophers (as Justin Martyr observes in his Protrepticks ad gentes) the Christian VVord expressing the Christian Sence of that Article (est enim  qui ex nihilo aliquid facit) and Plato's word ex∣pressing the Philosophers sence of the Original of the VVorld, to wit, that of Matter eternally pre-existing, was made the  (the well order'd Frame of the Universe) the confused Chaos was brought into shape, by the Ministry of co-eternal petty Gods, the , or chief worker, drawing the Model, and over-seeing the VVork. Or if the Sirname of Martyr fright our dainty Scepticks from reading that Author. Sir Philip Sidney, that Prince of Romancers, (in his commendation of the Art of Poetry) will in∣form him what the proper importance of  is. According to which, Josephus his applying it to Christ, implies, that he thought those strange Ef∣fects wrought by Christ, not to have been educ'd out of the active Poten∣tiality of the Matter upon which, or means by which he operated; but to have been the immediate Emanations of Christ's Power, as the Fountain cause: and hereby he discriminates Christ's Miracles, not only from the Ef∣fects of natural Magick, produc'd out of natural Causes (though latent to us Owls, yet naked and barefac'd to those Spirits, that have their name from Intelligence) but from those which were wrought by Moses, by the Prophets, or Apostles, those being effected by another Power, in another name, than their own: but what Jesus of Nazareth did, he did as having power in him∣self, not as a subordinate Agent, but principal. That which never man pre∣tended to but he, that which never was ascribed to any man but him, and yet ascribed to him by such as did not write Christian. He describes Christian Miracles according to the Gospel rule. 2. In his affirming these Works to have been [,] [inopinata, praeter omnem expectationem, & contrà omnium opinionem] A word which may seem to have faln into his Pen; either from the mouth of the people, or the Text of the Evangelist (Luke 5. 26.) [.] we have seen strange things to day; unexpected things, which we look'd not for, from Joseph's Son (chap. 4. 22.) from him, whose Father, and Mother, and Sisters we know. This was the Vulgar Vote, though the Christ, when he comes, will not, cannot do greater Miracles than this man doth: yet that this man (whose Generation we can declare, and know it to be so mean) should thus speak and work, is that which we little expected. The whole Nation were now big with expectation of some great Man, who should do great Things (they looked when the Mountains would bring forth, when God would shake the Heavens, and thence send the Desire of all Nations:) while they are thus musing, the Branch springs up out of the wither'd Stem, the dryed Root of David's Stock, without form, without comeliness; one wherein they could see no beauty: here they are as much frustrated of their
expectation, as those in the Fable were, when they saw nothing but a Mouse born of the swelling Mountains. But when they see this Mouse gnaw a∣sunder the Cords wherein Satan had kept the Seed of Abraham fast bound; when they see this Worm stinging the old Serpent to death; when they see this little Stone bearing down all adverse power before it: this was as much above what they looked for, from so contemptible a Person: as his external Form was below that Grandeur, they looked for in their Messias. Besides, Impostures filled their Followers with expectation of great things from them, by their boasting of their power to work Miracles, they had a Trum∣pet before them to call men in to see the show: Here goes the mighty Power of God, who will come and see it exerted, was the cry of the Si∣monists? Come with me to the Mount of Olives, and I will make the Walls of Jerusalem fall flat to the ground, by a Battery of omnipotent Words, crys one: Go with me to Mount Gerazim, there I'l shew you what has been hid from Ages, cries another: March with me into the Wilderness, and I'l there do wonders, crys another. But the Powers of the Kingdom of Heaven exert themselves, in the works of our Saviour, without ostenta∣tion, his Miracles (I mean those he wrought to convince the Jews before his Passion) were unpremeditate and extempore: the maladies he kill'd, felt the Bullet, before the by-standers heard the Crack: he rung no Bell to that Dinner he prepared, for many thousands, of a few Loaves and Fishes: his Acts of wonder were without Prologues, surprised the Spectators with their suddenness, were done before they could forethink he would do them, and upon that account, , strange things they looked not for. § 5. And yet Josephus affirms, that the Jews had all the reason in the World to expect the doing of such things, as Christ did, by some Person of note, whom God was to raise up for the benefit of that Nation: for thus he writes: [.] [The divine Prophets having feretold these and other wonderful things concerning him] wherein he fully accords with our Evangelists in this main Foundation-point. 3. That the Wonders which Jesus of Nazareth wrought, were such as the Prophets of God had foretold, should be wrought by the Christ, when he came. A point which is constantly prest by our sacred Historiographers, and appealed to by our Saviour, in the answer he returned to John the Baptist (when he sent his Disciples to enquire, whether he were the Christ?) Go and tell John what you see, that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, &c. If these be not the Works assigned to the Messias by the Prophets, believe me not that I am he. The Miracles that Christ did were not elective Works (as those were which false Christs pretended to) but fore-appointed and prescribed him by the Spirit of Prophesie; and therefore as they point him out to be him that was to come; for never man but he applyed himself to work by the Rule of Pro∣phecy (and I challenge all Reading to produce one Example of a person, be∣side him, that so much as pretended to the doing of those wonders that the Prophets cut out for the Christ.) So they clearly evince those VVonders that were reported by common and undoubted Fame, in the Age of Jose∣phus, to be those very Works of Christ that are specified in the Evangelical History; there being none of them but bear this Character, are such as the Prophets fore-told the Messias should work: and none but those in the Go∣spel, being by any persons fasten'd upon Christ, that will abide that Test, or have not been reprobated upon that Rule of Trial. The Enemy began be∣times to sow the Tares of Forgeries with the good Seed of Evangelical Hi∣story. Some, as the Carpocratians, reporting other things of Christ, than what the Gospel relates; upon this pretence, that Christ did or taught those things
in private, to some choice Disciples (Irenaeus cont. Haeretic. lib. 1.) And that false Merchant Isidore is not ashamed to feign the holy Bishop Clemens (whom St. Paul mentions in his Epistle to the Romans) to make the same Plea in his Apostolical Canons. Under the same Pretext the Ebionites, Gnosticks, Carpocratians, &c. forged the Gospel by St. Thomas, St. Andrew, St. Philip, St. Matthias, St. Peter, St. Thaddaeus, St. James the younger, St. Barnaby, St. Bartholomew, the Book of the Infancy, and another of the Nativity of our Saviour, of his Mother and her Midwife, the Manichees Book called the Foundation: (Crab. conc. tom. 1. Gelasii decreta. pag. 992.) Tertullian (in his Prescription against Hereticks) affirms, that when they could not make good their Conceipts by Scripture, they pretended that either the Disciples did not know all that was necessary for the Church, (Christ telling them he had many things to say unto them, which they were not able to bear) or else that they did not communicate all they knew to all, but that they reserved the greatest Mysteries for them that were perfect. Others boasted, that what they reported of Christ, beside what was contain'd in the Gospel, they had from the Apostles by word of mouth: This was Artemon's Plea, (Euseb. 5. 28.) Clemens (Strom. 7.) tells us, that Basilides gloried in his having for his Master one Glancias, the Interpreter of St. Paul: that Valentinus father'd his Fanatick VVhimsies upon Theodate, St. Paul's Familiar: and that the Mar∣cionites bragged, that the Disciples of St. Matthias were their Teachers. And Athanasius (2. contrà Arrianos) recites this Exordium of a writing of Arrius [I have heard these things of the Elect of God, of the most knowing and even paced servants of God.] These they called Depths of knowledge, but Christ calls them Depths of Satan; and the Church proved them to be such, and rejected them, as soon as ever they saw the light, for spurious; upon this Ground, because they did not bear Correspondency, to what, the Pro∣phets had fore-told: Pope Leo rejected Apochryphal Miracles by this Rule, that which the Prophets did not foretel should be done, and the Gospel re∣ports not to be done is spurious. [Quod Prophetia non cecinit, quod Evan∣gelica Veritas non praedicavit. (Leonis Epist. 50. Crab. con. tom. 1. pa. 715.) [per Prophetas & per Evangelium.] (Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. pag. 242. a.) [Sicut improbi pueri excludunt praeceptorem; ita etiam hi (haeretici) arcent Prophetias à suâ Ecclesiâ] (Id. Ib.) [As naughty boys shut out their School-master (saith Clem. Alexand.) so those Hereticks exclude the Prophets from their Church: whereas the full proof of a Truth is this that both the Prophets and Evangelists give their joynt Testimony to it.] And therefore he concludes, that that Faith that is not cloven-foot'd, that depends not on both Testaments (the Pro∣phesie of the Old, the History of the New) is unclean (Id. Ib. 245.) But of all other most Divinely, Lactant. (de Justicia l. 5. cap. 3.) [Disce igitur si tibi cordi est, non idcirco à nobis deum creditum Christum, quia mirabilia fecit: sed quia vidimus in eo facta esse omnia quae nobis annunciata sunt vaticinio Propheta∣rum. Fecit mirabilia: magnum putassemus, si non illa ipsa facturum Christum Prophetae omnes uno spiritu praedixissent. Ita{que} Deum credimus non magis ex∣factis mirandis, quam ex illa ipsa Cruce, quam vos sicut canes lambitis, quoniam simul & illa praedicta est:] [Learn therefore if thou hast a mind that we do not believe Christ to be God, barely because he wrought wonders: but because he wrought such wonders as the Prophets foretold should be wrought by the Messias at his coming: He wrought wonders, we should have thought that a great matter; but that is nothing in comparison of this, that those very works that Christ did, all the Prophets with one breath did predeclare should be done by him. We therefore believe Christ to be God, not more upon the account of his admirable Facts, than of that very Cross which ye doggs snarl at: because that also amongst other things was foretold.] And yet more clearly: That Christ (saith Tertullian) which Marcion describes (out of the Gospel of St. Luke, as he hath perverted chopt and changed it) is not the true Christ: [for God's Christ, is the Pro∣phets Christs; one that, every where, and in all things, bears a resemblance of Prophecy.] (Contra Marc. 4. 8.) [Caeterm verus Christus Prophetarum erat Chri∣stus,
ubicun{que} secundùm Prophetas invenitur] That which Petilian affirms of Christ cannot be true (saith St. Austin) (contra literas Petiliani. 3. 6.) for who∣soever (I do not say of us men, but) of the holy Angels, shall say any o∣ther things of Christ, than what is foretold in the Old, as well as re∣ported in the New Testament, let him be accursed. The same Father (contr. Faustum Manichaeum, lib. 12.) hence concludes the Manichees Christ, to be a Christ of their own invention, because he was not (talis qualem patres Hebraei prophetaverunt,) [such an one as the Hebrew Pro∣phets had described:] We will not believe (saith he) those Preachers, who would deceive us with a Christ, that not only is a counterfeit Christ, but never was at all; seeing we have the true Christ, even him [that was re∣ally described aforehand by the Prophets, and preach'd by the Apostles who make proof of what they say of him, out of the Law and Prophets.] The learned Chancellor of Paris, (in his Book de examine Doctrin. 1.) alledgeth this gloss upon the Text, [And there appeared with him Moses and Elias] [suspecta est omnis revelatio quam non confirmant Lex & Prophetae cum Evangelia,] [That is no true Picture of Christ, which answers not the Model drawn by Moses and the Prophets.] The Law is the Touch-stone of the Gospel, by which we may discri∣minate the good Money in the Apostles Scrip, from the adulterate in the Cheaters Bag: the Genuinness of their History (while they make known unto us the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus) from all other the most cunningly-devised Fables that ever were invented of him. Their drawing Christ after the Pattern they saw in the Holy Mount, (when Moses and Elias talked with him,) with those Rays of Glory, those Emanations of such mighty VVorks, as the Prophets speak off, as they give the Platform and rude draught off (when they speak of his Glory) puts the matter out of all possibility of delusion, beyond the Power of the subtilest Imposture to counter∣feit; and affords us, if we attend to this sure Word of Prophecie, as clear a Light to discern, that the Description which the Evangelists make of Christs Acts and Person, is a perfect representation of the Prototype, (and all Apo∣chryphal Pieces that write not after that Copy, therefore spurious Mis-re∣presentations) as I could have to judge, whether the Painter has hit it or mist it in drawing my Picture, by comparing it with the Image in my Glass. Brief∣ly, Josephus in this Character which he gives of Christ's Miracles (that they were such as the Jewish Prophets had assigned in their Predictions to be per∣formed by the Christ) doth both discriminate Christ's Miracles in point of Excellency from all others (for as the veriest Dunce may have conn'd some Lessons so by heart, as to have them at his singers end: that if he be left at liberty to read where he pleases, one that hears him would think he reads perfectly; when perhaps he scarce knows one Letter of the whole row and therefore, the way of trying his sufficiency, is to turn him to, and make him read the Lessons which we prescribe him:) So the most sottish Wizzard, if he may chuse what Pranks to play, may shew one or two, which may pass for Wonders: But if you prescribe him what to do, he forth with bewrays his inability: nothing but Omnipotency could keep pace with the Prophets Prescriptions in working Miracles;) And also evinceth those, of which the Evangelists make report, to have been those very in∣dividual great VVorks, of which Josephus writes: seeing all these, and these only, (of all those that either Christ hath been reported to do by apochry∣phal Authors, or any man pretended to do in any other Name) do mani∣festly bear the Impresses of this Character, that they are such, as the Prophets predicted should be performed by the Christ, at his appearance. § 6. Of all Christ's Miracles, the greatest and of most use to the Chri∣stian, (as being the crowning and confirmation of all the rest,) was his Resurrection; concerning which Josephus gives as full a Testimony to what the Evangelists deliver, as he could have done, had he been a fifth Evan∣gelist: for thus he writes. Though Pilat upon the accusation of the chief of
our Nation, sentenc'd him to be crucified, yet they that had loved him from the first, did not relinquish him; for he shewed himself again alive to them the third day after his death. [.] In which Text this Jewish Priest gives witness to the Truth of what the Evangelists declare touching the most material points of Christ's Death: that he was crucified, and that under Pontius Pilat; and that by the instigation, and accusation of the Jewish Elders, and Chief Priests: and the main Circumstances of his rising from the dead, that it was on the third day; that he gave Demonstration of it, the very day he rose, not to all, but certain VVitnesses, whom he had chosen to go in and out with him from the beginning; that this Demonstration was so palpable and convincing, that it animated the Disciples to adhere to him, not withstanding his preceding ignominious Death. This is all so clear that it need no Comment, no o∣ther Reflection but this. That as Josephus could not be ignorant of the Allegation of the Jewish Priests (he being himself a Priest, and after∣wards an Associate of the Priests of Jerusalem) that his Disciples had stole him away; so he makes so little account of it, as he thinks it not worth the mentioning: but, not withstanding that report, without any circumlocution, affirms plainly, that Christ did shew himself alive the third day to his Disciples: on whom he bestows that Epethete which our Saviour gave them in his question to St. Peter. [Simon lovest thou me more than these?] How strong is that Truth, upon which the whole Fabrick of Chri∣stian Religion is built? since the Evidence of it prevail'd so far with a Jew (in Religion more than Birth) as to obtain from him this full Testimony, and that upon Record for the perpetual memory of the thing, and in a Book dedicated to him that persecuted the Professors of this Truth!
CHAP. VIII. Josephus confirms St. Lukes History of Herod A∣grippa. § 1. He paints him in Evangelical Colours, as the Jews Favourite, as a Pro∣digal, as much in the Tyrians debt, and therefore displeased with them, &c. § 2. He dates his Death according to St. Luke. St. James martyred in the third: and Famine at Rome in the second and third: In Judaea in the fourth of Claudius. § 3. He describes his Death after St. Lukes Stile. Two Acclamations: immediately after the second, he was struck by a Messenger of Death, an Owl. § 4. Angels assume what form the divine mandat prescribes: Evil Angels God's Messengers. § 5. Herod the Great dyed of the like stroke. Josephus gives the natural Symtomes of Agrippa's disease. § 6. A digression, touching St. Paul's Thorn in the Flesh. § 1. HE gives as full a Testimony to the History and Acts of the Apostles, as to Christ, in all those particulars where the Af∣fairs of the Church are interwoven with the Affairs of the Empire, or the Kingdom of Judaea, that is, where-ever their History comes in his way. 1. Herod Agrippa the Son of Aristobulus, his Story in Josephus goes hand in hand with St. Luke's Story of him. 1. As to his personal Qualifications, He is described by St. Luke (Act. 13.) to have been so great a Favourite of the Jews, so ambitious to gratifie them, and so zealous and forward a Professor of their Religion, that to serve their interest, and to do them a pleasure, he beheaded St. James, and imprisoned St. Peter, with an intention to have sacrificed his Blood also to that Peo∣ples humour. In the same habit of Soul does Josephus paint him; not only in those Texts which have been formerly alledged, but also in the seventh Chap. of his ninteenth Book of Antiquities: Where, shewing his different Temper from that of Herod Antipas, he tells us that Antipas, out of an o∣dium against that Nation, manifestly shewed more good will to the Greci∣ans than Jews, adorning foreign Cities with Gifts, Bathes, Theaters, Tem∣ples, &c. but not vouchsafing to grace any one Town of the Jews with any memorable, either Ornament or Bounty. But Agrippa, on the o∣ther hand, though he was beneficent, liberal, and courteous to all; yet he was above all others benign to, and ready to help in their greatest ex∣igencies, his own Country-men the Jews; willing to have had his constant residence in Jerusalem; being so religious an observer of his Countries Rites, as he let no day pass without sacrifice, nor suffered himself at any time to be polluted with Legal uncleannesses: insomuch, as when one Simon who had in a publick Assembly calumniated him behind his back, as impure, and not fit to be admitted to Temple-Worship, was convented before him, he was not able to instance one particular, where∣in Agrippa had miscarried touching the Law.
Another of his Qualifications; hinted by St. Luke, is his profuse Gallan∣try, [,] Because their Coun∣try was maintained by the Trade they drive at Court, (Acts 12. 20.) the Roy∣alty and Gallantry of Herods Court maintain'd their Country with Trade. The Maritine Towns and Countries of Tyre and Sidon being chiefly main∣tain'd, by their Court trade, by vending there their rich and costly Commo∣dities for back and belly, those Peacock-feathers that made him so gay on the Judgement-seat, as to procure him divine adoration: if their acclamations were any thing else than an artifice of those cunning Tyrian Merchants, to cry up and inhance the price of their own Wares, and to intimate to this ambitious Prince, that what had gain'd him the repute of a God, was well worth the price he had given for them; for I cannot think that Royal Ap∣parel could dazle those Eyes, which were dayly inured to the richest Rarities of Nature or Art: and I have strong impulses to opine; that Herod's fine Cloaths stood yet unpaid for in those Merchants Books, and that he stormed so furiously against them, either for that they had set the Dice upon him in their price, or dun'd him for payment: for I could never yet learn, what other cause of quarrel he could have with those Merchant-Towns; nor how that ambitious Prodigal could maintain that Pomp he kept, without run∣ning upon the Tick,; nor for what they, that (but five days before) call'd him a God, should at his death, curse his Memory: but because he died so much in their Books, and his Lands were not bound to pay his Debts. And I doubt not but my intelligent Reader will be partly of my mind, by that time he has heard Josephus speak to this point. This King, (saith he) was so born to Liberality and demeriting of people by Largesses; as he took ex∣tream pleasure in making his name famous by Munificence, and cared not what expence he was at, to purchase the repute of a munificent Prince, (l. 19. 7.) Before Calignla prefer'd him, (Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. 8.) he brought himself to that penury, (with the Splendour of his dayly Attendance, and immoderate Liberalities) that he durst no longer shew his face in Rome; but taking Sanctuary (from his many and importunate Creditors) in a Castle of Idumaea, bethought himself how he might put an end to his miserable life: which hunger would quickly have determin'd, had not his Sister Herodias (by the instigation of his Wife Cypros) obtain'd of her Husband Herod, a sti∣pend for him, and an Office at Tiberias; till his Uncle (in the midst of their Cups) upbraiding him with it, he left him in scorn, and betook himself to the Trencher of Flaccus the President of Syria: from whose friendship he fal∣ling, doth (with much difficulty and disadvantage) obtain, of his Mothers Freeman, the Loan of 20000 Attick Drams: with which he makes fot Ita∣ly, but is intercepted and arrested by Herennius Capito, for 300000. he was indebted to Caesar. Follow him whither you will, till he come to the Crown, you shall find him immersing himself in Debt. And when he comes to that, he leaves not his old wont: for, though then his yearly Revenues were 1200. Myriades, yet he outrun the Constable in his Expences, his Disbursements did so far exceed his Incomes, as he was still forc'd to borrow and take up upon trust. (Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19. 7.) But we need no other Instance of his excessive profuseness, nor evidence of his being deeply in the Books of the Tyrian and Sidonian Tradesmen, than that Description of the Royal Apparel (mention'd by St. Luke) which Josephus makes, viz. [He was arrayed in Cloath of Silver so admirably wrought, as the Beams of the rising Sun beating upon it, it cast so wonderful radiant a splendour, as begat veneration in the be∣holders. We will proceed to his external Character, [Herod the King] whereby he is distinguish'd from Herod Antipas, the Tetrarch of Galilee, who slew the Baptist, and simply [the King] without the addition [of Judaea] to diffe∣rence him from Herod the Great, in whose son Arebelaus, the Kingdom of Judaea expired, being annext to Syria, and made a Roman Province, at the latter end of the Reign of Augustus, and administred by the Governours of
Syria, (Jos. ant. 18. 15.) from which time to the Reign of Caligula the Herodian Family had not so much as the Title of King; and when Cali∣gula bestowed that Title upon this Herod Agrippa, he made him not King of Judaea, but only of those Tetrarchates which he gave him, (the Tetrarchates of Philip, Lysanias, and Herod) together with some part of those Territories which Archelaus had held. And this Herodian Kingdom (of the second E∣dition) though it throve to as great dimensions, under the favourable influ∣ences of Claudius, Vespasian, Domitian, and Trajan, upon the Junior Agrippa, as that of Herod the Great, had done, under Julius and Augustus, [Claudius added to Agrippa's Jurisdiction, Judaea and Samaria, which had of old belonged to the Kingdom of his Grandfather Herod,] (Jos. ant. 19. 4.) yet it never re∣cover'd that Grandure, either to be, or to be so much as reputed, the King∣dom of Judaea, till either Eusebius or St. Jerome miscalled it so, (to make it comport with their former mistakes, about Daniel's Weeks, and the Depar∣ture of the Scepter.) Against which mistake both the sacred Historian, (in giving Herod the Great, and Archelaus, the formal Title of Kings of Judaea: but Herod Agrippa, and his Son, that only of, King;) and Josephus (by giving us the Story at large of both those Kingdoms) have given us sufficient Cau∣tion, have set up so plain VVay-marks, as the way-faring Ideot cannot erre, if he attend to those palpable differences of those Kingdoms, pointed out by those Mercuries; nor possibly overlook their perfect Correspondency in that particular. For this Herod is not so much as stiled King of Judaea, except once, by Josephus, and that for brevity's sake, with the addition of [totius:] [Tertium Judaeae totius regni annum agens:] (ant. 19. 7.) by that distingui∣shing that his three years Reign, from his four precedent, under Caius (where∣in he had only some part of its Territory, which under Herod the Great made up the Kingdom of Judaea) but not intending thereby, that he was,, in due form, King of Judaea: for he presents him as coap-mated and check'd by Marsus, the Deputy of Syria, in his building the walls of Jerusalem, and his entertainment of the five Kings, whom Marsus commanded forthwith to depart Herod's Court unto their own homes, much against Herods will, if he could have helpt it: (Joseph. Antiq. 19. 7.) § 2. The like agreement there is betwixt St. Luke and Josephus, in their dating the remarkable Death of Herod. At that time, while (upon Agabus his Prophecy of a general Dearth) the Church of Antioch sent St. Paul and Barnabas, with relief to the Christians which dwelt in Judaea, St. Luke dates it, for having mentioned their Mission, he subjoynes the stories of Herod mur∣dering James, imprisoning Peter, and his own miserable End; after which he tells of Paul and Barnabas their return, (from performing that Ministry, and Office of Charity) unto Antioch, from whence they had been sent: which though it do not necessarily inforce this Conclusion, that all those things mentioned in that intervall, fell out in that order, wherein they are related (for St. Luke might lay the Actions in the 12 Chapter, before the send∣ing out of Paul and Barnabas to the Gentiles, on purpose that the story of St. Peter might be taken up together, and concluded,) before the Story of St. Paul come in, which is to be prosecuted to the end of the Book (as Dr. Light∣foot well observes,) and therefore St. Paul's Mission to the Gentiles might, possibly fall out, before some part of the story of Herod, and yet properly e∣nough be mentioned after,) Yet this intertexture, plainly enough teacheth us, that their former Mission, to carry the benevolence of the Church of Anti∣och, to the Saints of Jerusalem, happen'd before the Commencement of He∣rod's Story, and that this is contemporary with that Famine which fell out in the days of Claudius, as St. Luke states it. That is Herod's murder of James fell out in the third, and his own death in the beginning of the fourth year of the Reign of Claudius, as Josephus expresly affirmeth, (antiq. 19. 7.) Herod Agrippa died at the age of 54. after he had reigned seven years. That is, in the Tetrarchate of Philip, three years: and one, in the Tetrarchate of Herod (ad∣ded
to that, by Caligula.) And three years more, under Claudius, who be∣stowed upon him. Iudea, Samaria, and Caesarea. And that Herods murdering of James could not be before the third of Claudius, is manifest, from Josephus his affirming, that Claudius sent not Agrippa into Judaea, till after he had sent forth his general Edicts in favour of the Jews, not only unto Alexandria, but throughout the whole Empire. [his edictis Alexandriam & per totum or∣bem dimissis; moxque Agrippam,] (Jos. ant. 19. 5.) which bare Date the second year of his Reign: (chap. 4. 5. l. 19.) and of his being Consul the se∣cond time: which Consulship beginning the First of January, it was so near impossibility, that those things should be done at Rome, and Herod provide for his journey, and travel it, and come to Jerusalem; and there perform all those things touching the settlement of his own Affairs, which Josephus reports he did, and proceed to the condemning of James, and all this before Easter, (for then it was that he apprehended St. Peter, Acts 12. 3.) unless he hasted as if it had been for a wager; that he that can believe St. Peter to have been imprisoned, in Claudius his second year of Consulship and Reign, must exceedingly straiten the time of these occurrences, to make way for his belief. It was therefore at the Passeover in the third of Claudius, that St. Peter was apprehended; and Herod missing of his prey, betakes himself to his Progress; wherein he stays at Berytum, during the pompous Dedicati∣on, and impious handselling of the Amphytheatre he had there built. At the Galilean Tiberias, while he caresseth the five Kings of Comagena, Emosine, Armenia the Less, Pontus and Chalcis. From thence he removes his Court to Cesarea, whence he departs not, till he departs the world: having at his coming thither, fulfill'd the third year of his reign, since Claudius began his, (pag. 19.) and therefore the tenth of the Calends of February, on which Claudius began to reign, was then past, when Herod arrived at Caesarea, and not so much of Herods fourth years reign remaining, as unto Easter follow∣ing, before his decease, for that would have made so considerable an addition of months and dayes to the years of Herod, as Josephus would not have o∣mitted the mention of them; neither would Herod have cast his progress so, as not to have been return'd to Jerusalem (had he lived) before the passe∣over: he being a man so punctual in observing the Law. It was therefore in the beginning of both Claudius, and of Herods reign under him, the fourth year, that Herod came to this wretched end. (Jos. ant. 20. 1.) puts this beyond all doubt: for there he tells, how that Claudius, after the death of Herod, sent Fadus to look after the affairs of Judaea, after whose coming thither, and demanding the high Priests stole and Crown to be de∣liver'd into his custody, the Jews sent an Embassie to Rome, to deprecate that impeachment of their privileges: this request Caesar grants, and writes to Fadus: to suffer the Jews to enjoy that, and other favours, granted them by the Romans; and these Letters of Claudius bear date the fourth of the Kalends of July, in the fourth year of his Reign: four or five moneths is little enough, for all these transactions, and journeyings betwixt Rome and Judaea. Let us now see how well this accords with that Character, which St. Luke sets upon these occurrences, [The time of the Famine,] Dion. (l, 60, p. 410.) Placeth the beginning of it indeed, in the second year of Claudius, but hints the continuance of it, some years after: for Claudius is reported by him, to have made that preparation for the importing of Corn at all sea∣sons of the year, (in his building that Haven, from the attempting where∣of, the Workmen discouraged him with the greatness of the charge) as the Horse must have starved while the Grass grew; if, that year, the famine had dilated it self so far, as the City could not be reliev'd out of the circumja∣cent Countries, (the way by Sea being blockt up, while the Haven was a building.) In his third year, the Dearth of necessaries bred that distur∣bance among the Commons, as the Emperour was fain for their Pacificati∣on, to go into Campus Martius, and himself set the price of Commo∣dities.
But what progress soever the famine might make in other parts, it reach∣ed Judaea in the fourth year of Claudius, Rufus and Pompeius Sylvanus Consuls, and Fadus Governour of Judaea: as Josephus dates it, (l. 20. 1.) at the same time that Helena Queen of Adiabenum, being turned Jew, went to Jerusalem: in an happy time for the poor distressed Inhabitants, whom she seeing to be opprest with a grievous famine, and multitudes of them to dye of hunger; sent some to Alexandria, for Corn; others to Cyprus, for dryed Figs: wherewith she relieved the almost famish'd people, (l. 20. c. 2. 3.) So that upon supposition of Dions faithfulness in the account he gives of the time when this Famine began at Rome, and his reconcileableness with Jose∣phus, who placeth the heat of it at Jerusalem two years after, viz. the fourth of Claudius; Josephus his date agrees exactly with St. Luke's: the Sacred Historian assigning Herod's Death to that time, when the Messengers of the Church of Antioch were carrying the Contributions of that Church to Jeru∣salem, for their relief in that grievous Famine; which fell (as Josephus saith) in the fourth year of Claudius, at the same time when Queen Helen succour'd the Circumcision, and King Herod expired. Upon which Hypothesis, I ra∣ther proceed, with Dr. Lightfoot, than upon that of Scaliger, that Dion speaks of one Famine, and Josephus of another: because 'tis usual for Famines to be of as long continuance, as we make that to have been; and chiefly because the sacred Text seems to look that way; if we either leave out the full point after [,] or render [] with Dr. Hammond, according to its limited sence. [.] [There will be a great Famine over all this Nation, even that which is now and hath been some while at Rome,] For we may with more reason and correspondencie to the Context, supply the want of a word to follow the latter [] by repeating [] than by adding [in the reigns or the days,] The Question is but, whether we should add a word signifying time, or place? for the later; Agabus, in fixing the Article betwixt [] [,] seems to point to the ground, on which he stood while he prophecied; and to say, [On this whole Land there will be a grievous Famine,] and to be expounded by Josephus, thus describing that Famine, (antiq. 20. 3.) [,] There was a grievous Famine all over Judaea,] and therefore it is most congruous, to repeat that word in the next Clause, and to read it, [,] [Even that, that hath been (this last year) and yet is, in Italy, the Native Country of Claudius Caesar.] But if this be rejected as a Singularity, this other Translation is not guilty of that fault, viz. [This Famine, that is begun under Claudius Caesar, will with∣in a while spread over this whole Nation:] and this exactly agrees to Christs Prophecy of the same thing, (St. Mat. 24. 7.) [,] [There shall be Famines in divers places;] that is, successively, from place to place; this Meager Plague that now infects Italy, will shortly remove into Iudaea: and sutes the Course was taken by the Church of Antioch, in send∣ing Contribution thence, and from the neighbouring Provinces, where the Famine was not (at least, not then,) into Judaea, which was wholly infested with it: that the Equality that St. Paul speaks of (2 Cor. 8. 14.) might be observ'd in their disposing of benevolence; that at this time, the abundance of the Antiochians, might be a supply to the Jews, in their penury, that when the Famine reach'd them, the plenty of the Judean and other Churches might supply their wants. § 3. As to the substance of this Story, Josephus attesteth to these parti∣culars. 1. That Herod, upon a set day, presented himself in glorious Apparel, to the view of the People of Cesarea: to wit, on the second day of that great Solemnity he had appointed to celebrate there, for the Health of the Em∣perour: to which were assembled a great multitude of Nobles and Gen∣try,
out of the whole Province: at which Assemblies they that bid those extraordinary Festivals, used to make Speeches, in praise of Caesar, Pane∣gyricks upon the happiness of his Regiment, to stir the people up to more Devotion in praying for his Health. On which day, he had appointed them of Tyre and Sidon (saith St. Luke) to have an hearing, and to sue out their pardon, by crying Peccavi; that his Greatness in bringing them upon their knees, and his Goodness in pardoning of them, might be so far more conspicuous as the Audience, before whom these matters were transacted, was more august. 2. That while he was pleasing his ambitious Mind, with the expectation of the peoples grateful Acclamations, the Spectators and Auditors (amazed with the splendidness of his Attire, and ravished with the sweetness of his Voyce) salute him for a God: uttering that voice of Beasts, It is the Face, it is [the voice of a God;] and that no Demy-god, as the Hero's were esteem∣ed, but one altogether a God [not a man,] one of the immortal Gods: some crying out, [Hitherto we have rever'd thee as a Man, now we are forc'd to ac∣knowledge something in thee more excellent than Humane Nature; Oh, be thou a propitious and favourable Deity to poor Mortalls prostrate at thy sacred feet!] Josephus does not tell the story, of the Tyrians and Sidonians in St. Luke's Form of words; but yet he presents them in Hieroglyphicks and Rebuses: out of which we may spel their deep sence of his displeasure against them, and their deprecating, with all humility, the insupportable effects thereof: and smell the Chamberlain's contrivance of the whole Plot, that he, as the Master of those Ceremonies, had taught the Phaenician Merchants (who re∣ally had no other God than Hercules, the God of gain) this Lesson of Flat∣tery, to erect this Chair of State, this Bed of Honour for Herods pride to rest in, with as much complacential quiet, as the Center of his Ambition ob∣tain'd could confer upon him. A Lesson which Tiridates King of Armenia took out, and repeated to Nero, after he had con'd it over before his Statue, unto whose image, in the presence of Corbulo and the Roman Legions, that fawning Prince Sacrificed, and made oblation of his Crown, (Tacitus an. 15.) [Caesis ex more victimis, sublatum capiti Diadema Imagini imposuit,] and to whose self, before the Senate and People of Rome (as dazel'd with that pom∣pous Majesty in pretence, but) in design to obtain of him the Armenian Crown, he bleated out this sheepish speech (unworthy of the Family of the Arsacides,) [I am come, Caesar, to worship thee for a God, not inferiour to Mi∣thra, my Country-deity; to profess that I will be nothing but what thou art pleas'd, by a kind of destiny, to make me, for thou art my fate.] (Xiph. ex Dion. Nero.) Pride at this height is not far from its Fall, (and therefore Tiberius wisely avoided all Deifying Compellations, as bad Auguries, and unlucky Presages of approaching Ruine,) (Suetonii Tiberius,) Nero's shameful death did not tarry long after this blasphemous Sacrilege of Divine honour: But Herod is taken with the mannour, struck down in the Act of his Pride, the report whereof, 3. Is the third Point, wherein Josephus gives his Suffrage to St. Luke's Story, [immediately (upon the peoples shout) the Angel of the Lord smote him, and he was eaten up of worms and gave up the Ghost.] Josephus instead of St. Luke's [immediately] hath [by and by,] but therein he contradicts him not, but explains the former part of his own Story, touch∣ing the Acclamation was given Herod, when he enter'd the Theater, and gives Reason it self room to think, that after Herod was sate down upon the Judgment-seat (where St. Luke begins his account of the Reason of God's smiting him, leaving out what befell at his first appearance, as that which he might on his part be excused for not shewing his dislike of, while he was passing through the throng) when the first thing he should have done there, was to have check'd the peoples Blasphemy, he begins his Speech in praise of Claudius: upon the Conclusion whereof, followed that second Ac∣clamation, upon which immediately he received his Deaths-wound: for it
will not stand with the Reason of his celebrating that Festivity for the Health of Caesar, that he should not, as soon as he was well composed on his Tribu∣nal, prefer his own good wishes for him, and perswade the people to say Amen; but only sit there as a gazing-stock, and make a dumb show of his own Attire, and the richness of his own VVardrobe: nor with the Divine Patience, to strike immediately upon the peoples Acclamations, before he could possibly shew his dislike thereof; had he not shown his approbation of it, in not rebuking them for their first sacrilegious ascribing to him divine honour, which he had time enough to have restored to God, while he made his speech, during that [by and by,] which intervened betwixt the first and second Acclamation; which he not doing, but on the contrary, by his silence, giving consent to, is now immediately arrested by the hand of Divine Justice, as a Partaker with them, in their first; as the Author of their second Shout: which he might have prevented, had he either repuls'd or chastised that first impious Flattery; for the neglect whereof, as Josephus saith, by and by (that is, after that which he mentions) the Angel of God smote him. For it is manifest, from the Comparison of St. Luke's and Josephus his Stories, that at Herod's first appearance in his gay Robes, the People adored him as a God: and after he had made his Speech, they renew'd their deifying Acclamations; which multiplying of Divine honour upon him, Herod, liked so well, as at the Conclusion of his Oration, and their blasphemous applauses; instead of casting down a frowning Countenance upon the People, he casts up an am∣bitious eye upon the Cieling, (as men do that think scorn of others;) or looked about him, as Orators do, when they please themselves with having pleased the Audience; or cast up his eyes as men do in suddain apprehensi∣ons of fear of Divine vengeance; and in this twinkling of an eye, he espies an Owle sitting over his head, upon a Curtain-rod, or one of the Cords that bore up his Canopy: and perceived (saith Josephus) that this Bird was the Angel or Messenger of Calamity, a German Southsayer having foretold him, that when he saw that Bird again (which was then a Messenger of glad ti∣dings to him; as he interpreted an Owls sitting upon a Tree, (on which Herod Agrippa lean'd and rested his weary body, born down with grief of mind,) to be) he must expect death, within five days. (Antiq. l. 18. 13.) § 4. It would be too large a Digression here, to discuss the Art or rather Craft of this kind of Divination, the Vanity of it has already been discovered, and is sufficiently evinc'd by this Example; for this German promis'd He∣rod an happy Death, and that he should leave his Children in the possession of his Wealth; neither of which proved true: his Son being kept many years from the possession of his Fathers Crowns, during which time he was the Emperours Beads-man: and his Soul passing out of his Body, through those faetid Pores the Worms made in his Entrails. Though God permitted the Augure to hit the point of truth, in his Prediction, that within five dayes after his second sight of that Bird, he should die; as he did, the Witch of Endor's Familiar (in Samuels mantle) to tell Saul the sad tidings of his next days loss of Field and Life: the divine Wisdom ordering mens Curiosity and Credulity, in such cases, to be their torment. That other Point, of Appa∣ritions of Spirits, this Text of Iosephus, forceth me to speak to, that I may illustrate his Paraphrase upon St. Luke, and proceed upon clear grounds, in paralleling the remaining parts of the story. But yet I shall not be so prodi∣gal of my Readers patience, as to discuss, whether this Angel of Herods mis∣hap, this Messenger of his death, sate upon his Canopies Cord, or only upon his Optick Nerve: that is, whether a Spirit, assumed this form upon it self, or painted it on Herod's Fancy? For 'tis all one, as to our Case, whether the File, was a real one, upon the Book; or a painted one, upon the Spectacles. Nor whether good Angels appear in any but august Forms? and, by con∣sequence, whether this was a good or an evil Spirit? I profess not to cure
the itch of mens Curiosity, but only to shew the agreement of St. Luke and Josephus in sence, while one calls that an Owl, which the other calls an Angel; in order to which it will be sufficient to observe, That good Spirits are more obedient, than to refuse any form, that God bids them take, for the service of his Providence, or the Ministry of his Saints, (as this was; for St. Luke reports it, as an occasion of the growth and multiplying of the Word) why then should a good Angel more scruple at appearing in this homely form, than a whole host of them did, at appearing in the shape of Centaures and Chariot-horses, for the encouragement of one poor servant of the Prophet: nay, than the eternal Spirit did, at the appearance in the form of a Dove? Is there not infinitely more distance betwixt the holy Ghost, and an Arch-angel; than is betwixt a Dove, and an Owl: Nay, hadst thou been of Gods council, what form couldst thou have advised him to command his Angel to take, whom he sent to bring message to Herod of his approach∣ing Death, (to torment him in the midst of his jollity, with the fore-thought of it) than of that Creature which he (being perswaded of the Infallibi∣lity of the German Oracle, in the last, by experiencing the truth of the first part of it) thought as verily to see five days before his Death, as Simeon hoped to see the Lord Christ; before his departure. But that the Sceptick may not laugh in his sleeve, at my transforming an Angel into an Owl (though had he so much of Athenian Learning, as he boasts of, he would not think Minerva's Squirell, so contemptible a Bird, but that an Angel might assume her form, and therein be more congruously plac'd, than his (so brutified a Soul, as it lives by nothing but Sense) is, in an humane Body. I do not positively assert this to have been a good Angel; for as the heavenly attend as Voluntiers, so the infernal Spirits, as prest Sol∣diers, are at the command of the Lord of Hosts; and when he imploys them, they are his Messengers, the Angels of the Lord. God march'd through Aegypt, when the First-born were slain with the Pestilence, in the head of an Army of evil Angels, Psal. 78. 50. [by sending evil Angels among them,] [he weighed his anger] (distributed it by a just proportion, to the E∣gyptians, while the Israelites were passed over; and among the Egyptians, so as it fell upon the First-born of Man and Beast, while the rest escap'd) [they were given over to the Pestilence] by the immission of so many Asmodei, [,] (Septuagint.) Sent by the hands of evil An∣gels. Chald. Indeed which of his Creatures can God more properly make use of to be the Executioners of his wrath than evil Angels: and yet the de∣stroying Angel is called [the Angel of the Lord] (2 Samuel 24. 16.) the Hang∣man is the Kings Officer. Be this therefore a good or bad Angel, it was that Angel of the Lord that smote Herod, as both St. Luke stiles this Appa∣rition, and Josephus conformably unto him. To proceed now in his Sto∣ry: therein the blewness of the Wounds this Messenger gave him, is appa∣rent both upon Herod's Soul and Body: for as soon as he perceiv'd this ill∣boading Angel, he is struck to the heart with grief [ex intimis praecordiis indoluit;] and his belly with gripings, [secuta sunt ventris tormina.] where∣upon turning his eyes to his Parasites, Behold, (saith he) I, whom ye called a God, am commanded to depart this life; fatal Necessity proves you layrs; and I whom you stiled immortal, am posting to the Chambers of Death: with his speech his pain increaseth: they therefore forthwith carry him to his Bed; where, after five days racking and gnawing pain in his Bowels, he gives up his weary Ghost. § 5. This part of Josephus his Text agrees with St. Luke's: 1. In his assigning this stroak to a supernatural hand, as inflicted upon him by the Angel of the Lord, so palpably, as Herod himself perceived that Spectrum, to be the Messenger of God, upon sight whereof he received these stroaks in Mind and Body, as proved mortal; of this supernatural im∣mission Josephus speaks not so dubiously, as he does of the last and mortal
disease of Herod the Great. (Bel. Jud. 1. 8.) upon whom the same malady of worms (was, as he saith) by some conceived to be inflicted, (assiduis vexa∣batur coli tormentis, inflatio ventriculi putredo{que} virilis membri vermiculos gene∣rans;) in revenge of Judas (not he of Galilee, but) the Son of Sepphorae∣us, and Matthias the Son of Margalus; whom that Herod, a little before his Death (as this a little before his, slew St. James) had put to death; for taking down that Golden Eagle which Herod had crected over the chief Gate of the Temple, and thereby profan'd the sacred place: so that those were Martyrs for the Law, as St. James was for the Gospel: and therefore his imbruing his hands in their Blood, was reputed by the religious Party, to be that which fill'd up the measure of that bloody Herod's sins, and ripen'd him for this Judgement. But in his assigning the meritorous Cause of this our Herod's being struck, he is positive in affirming, it was immitted from Heaven. 2. And as peremtory in fathering it upon his Pride, as its procuring Cause; because he gave not glory to God, by repulsing the peoples sacri∣legious Shout: of which his sin, this was no small aggravation, that he had before him such two recent Examples, the one of Tiberius, who might have led him to an expression of his dislike of such Flattery; for he, when he saw a Consular person attempting, to prefer a Petiton to him upon his knees; by making haste from him (as if he had seen a Ghost come towards him) gave himself a fall: if he heard any man either in common Discourse or a set Speech, fawn upon him, he never doubted to interrupt and repre∣hend him, till he had forc'd him to change his stile: when one stiled his Occupations, sacred; and another told him, he had been the Author of his advancement into the number of Senators; Say I was the Adviser of the Senate to it (faith he) to him: and call my Imployment, laborious (saith he to the other:) and to one that stiled him [Lord.] Let me no more (saith he) hear my self called by this ignominious name, which belonging to the immortal Gods, cannot without a reproachful taunt be attributed to any mortal Man. (Sueton. Ti∣berius, cap. 27.) The other of Caligula; whose untimely end and general hate (pull'd up∣on him hy challenging Divine Honours to himself) might have deterr'd him from treading in his steps: to say nothing of the inconstancy of those po∣pular-breezes, with which Caligula fill'd his sails; Herod having seen (in less than a years time) his Statues, yet smelling of the Founders and En∣gravers hand, dispossest of the Temples they had usurped, and some of them thrown into Tyber; into which his Carcase had been dragg'd (as the case of an incarnate Devil) had the people dared to believe he was dead, before it was, in an hurry (before, for haste, it could be above half burnt) buried under a few Clods, in Samian Gardens. (Sueton. Caligula) So vain a Breath will Herod purchase with the displeasure of Heaven; and is there∣fore blasted by the Angel, deliver'd over to this Tormentor; not as Job was into Satan's hands, for trial; nor as St. Paul was buffeted, for Diet and Disci∣pline sake, (to keep him from ascribing glory to himself;) but in revenge for his Pride. 3. Josephus particularly specifics, what St. Luke generally hints, some space of time, betwixt the Angel's giving of the stroke, and Herod's giving up the ghost; to wit, five days: and that his Death is described by our sacred Author, as not following the blow so immediately, as the blow did the peo∣ples Acclamation; appears both from the pointing, the interserting the nar∣rative of the Cause betwixt them, and the words whereby he expresseth his Disease and Death, there being a full point after [because he gave not glory to God] and that being inserted, as the qua that God had against him, as that for which he sent his Angel to  him: and St. Luke's Words, after that pawse ] being  up of worms: argu∣ing that  had some time of breathing (after the Angel had, as it were, f-blown him) before he gave  the ; that these Vermine might
grow; that this Army of Insects might muster and consume his Vitals by browzing upon them. He was immediately after the second Acclamation Thunder-struck, and upon that began to vermiculate; not after a few days according to the Course of Nature, but perhaps, immediately, in a few mi∣nutes (fulmine icta, intra paucos dies, verminant.) (Seneca, lib. 2. Nat. quaest. cap. 17.) But yet Herod, after he became a stable for Worms (as the Syriack Translation renders it) was not presently, [,] crudus comesus [devoured raw at a morsel] but [] [gradually corroded] till he dyed: the Worms laying at rack and manger in that Stable, till they had eaten out a passage for Herod's Soul. The worms did not swallow him up at a morsel; but, by corroding his inwards, did, within a few days render, them unable to perform their Office. Erasmus renders it [Erosus] the Vul∣gar [consumptus] à vermibus [he was gnawn off, or rather gnawn through] as consumed by Worms: both well; not only as to the Terms, but in that their Terms are capable of Tense, and may best thus be rendred [And when he was eaten through, or his Vitals consumed of Worms, he gave up the ghost] but neither of them express fully St. Luke's []. [becoming gnawn with worms] that is, becoming (verminosus) [full of Worms] when those Worms had consumed him, he dyed: implying the Germination of them, the Vermi∣culation (inflicted supernaturally) and their eating of Herod's inwards (their natural operation) for the effecting whereof, they have time allotted them here, though not so long as they spent in dispatching Herod the Great: for after they were immitted into him, he went to Calliroe, and finding no help in those Waters, struggled so long with his Worms, as weary of his loathed and painful Life, he attempted to cut his own throat, and prevented of that, made shift to get his Son's Antigonus head struck off, and yet lived after that five days; as long as our Herod lived in all, after he had received his Deaths-wound. 4. Though he does not, in terminis, say, that this Herod was eaten up of Worms; yet he concurrs with St. Luke in sence, in laying down the most proper Symptoms of that Malady, [ex intimis praecordiis dolor, ventris tor∣mina—&c.] the very first Symptom of Herod the Great, his mortal Disease, which Josephus himself mentions: and the Symptom of that distemper, that's caused by the Worm call'd [] (the name which St. Luke (the beloved Physician) gives to them that eat up Herod) which Riverius specifies (prax. med. l. 10.) [dolor in ventre morsum & erosionem repraesentans] [a grief in the Belly, representing biting or gnawing:] exprest thus by Sener∣tus (pract. med. l. 2. par. 2. Sect. 1. cap. 5.) [Symtomata vermium, morsus & velli∣catio in abdomine:] And by Duretus, upon Hollerius de vermibus, (in Josephus his own words) [tormina in alvo;] Nay, such griping and erosions of the in∣wards, are so signal indications of Worms: that the same word [vermina] which signifies Worms: (Donec eos vitâ privarant vermina saeva. Expertes opis, ignaros quid vulnera vellent. Luc. lib. 5. Until the Worms that bred in their undefiled wounds kill'd them,) signifies also, that kind of griping in the Bowels, which resembles the gnawing of VVorms. [Vermina dicuntur, dolor corporis cùm quodam minuto motu quasi à vermibus scin∣datur] (Festus) Hence, because the pain, that attends the Dropsie, resembles that of the VVorms, (and hath this name sometimes alotted to it) grew that dangerous mistake of Eusebius; that Herod the great dyed of the drop∣sie; who yet (if I mistake not) affirms, that Herod Agrippa dyed of the same Malady: in that, opposing Josephus; in this, both him and St. Luke. And verminatio,  (St. Luke's word in the Text) is used to signifie in general, any gripings in the inwards, like to the gnawing of VVorms, which it particularly signifies. [Vossii Etymologicon.) Can this common notion (of both Greeks and Latines) hint to us any thing
less, then this: that the [tormina] in the Bowels are commonly [vermina] the grief of the VVorms, and properly a Symptom thereof, except it ap∣pear, by other Symptoms joyn'd with it, that it is not that Distemper: and I am perswaded, were the Symptoms of Herod's Disease propounded to a skilful Physician, and the question put, what distemper the patient was afflicted with? he would, without any long pause, resolve, that he who is held, as Josephus represents Herod, must, as St. Luke reports him, be afflicted with Worms. § 6. If it might not be thought a digression, and (which I more fear) a culpable singularity: I would shew mine opinion of St. Paul's Thorn in the slesh (2 Cor. 12. 7.) [And lest I should be exalted above measure through the hyperbole of the Revelations, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, the mes∣senger of Satan to buffet me.] Its proximity to Herod's Case will alleviate the first: and the plausibleness of the Reasons, inducing me to it (together with my propounding it as a matter of Opinion, not Faith) the second crime, with candid Readers: in which presumptions, I shall hint these brief Observations. [There was given me a thorn in the flesh.] [.] 1. They that make this Thorn to be Concupicense, should do well to con∣sider: how they can free God from being the Author of Sin: while they make it his gift to St. Paul: for mine own part, I shall not need to put in∣to my Letany [from such gifts of God good Lord deliver me,] for I am well assured, that that God whom I serve, cannot (by reason of his Holiness) o∣pen such a Pandora's Box; can no more tempt, than he can be tempted, to evil: and if he were such an one, as bestows such Gifts (as Concupiscence) upon his friends: I would bless my self from him, and chuse to be listed a∣mong his enemies. As also, how such an immission can be a gift (for any man's good) to him that receives it? as [] implies this was for St. Paul's advantage: Besides, how Concupiscence (which is the Fleshes right Eye and right Side) can be a Thorn to it to grieve, and prick it? how that can be a Thron in its eye, a Goad in its side, which is the very Life and Soul of it? is so hard to conceive, (or else I am so dull of apprehension) as I cannot (with a Pitch-fork) thrust that Fancy into my head, any more than Musculus could into his: who thus staves us off, from embracing the Anti∣nomian Gloss. [Non simpliciter dicit esse sibi stimlum, sed esse sibi datum stimulum; uti{que} non allunde quam à Deo ipso, loco videlicet antidoti, quae à me∣dico contrà periculum pestis datur (Musc. in locum.) He does not say simply [that he had a thorn] but [that a thorn was given him] It proceeded therefore from none but God, by whom it was bestowed as an antidote against the danger of that plague, which St. Paul might possibly have caught, after his Rapture. [Disertè dicit [datus est mihi stimulus] ut significet illum reputari à se pro sngulari Dei dono] Of which he therefore saith expresly [there was given me a thorn.] that he might give us to understand, that he reckon'd it for a singular benefit of God. 2. It must therefore imply the infliction of the evil of pain, not of sin: some sad and sharp affliction, some pricking anguish immitted by some instruments of Satan. Irenaeus (lib. 4. cap. ult.) Theodoret and Theophilact (on the place) think some of the Gnosticks, the Followers of Simon Magus, that great Sor∣cerer to have been the instrument of buffeting St. Paul (Vide Dr. Hamond in locum.) whose Teachers, in the stile of this Apostle, were Minsters of Satan (2 Cor. 11. 15.) as vying with the Apostles, in their lying Wonders wrought by a Satanical power (2 Thes. 2. 9.) Chrysostom names Alexander the Copper smith, Himenaeus and Philetus, as those among whom we may like∣iest find this Messenger of Satan. And judicious Musculus singles out Alex∣ander, as that Minister of Satan that was given to St. Paul, for a Thorn, as it were sticking in his flesh, and every where pricking and afflicting him.
But I am not solicitous to determine the numerical Instrument: it will give more light to the Text, if we can resolve, what this pungent affliction was, wherewith St. Paul was kept humble? since it could not be Concu∣piscence; for that had been to cast out Satan by Satan: to expel one De∣vil, by bringing in seven, nay, the whole legion of unclean Spirits: the Body of Sin, to subdue one Member. St. Chrysostom thinks (Epist. 15. to 7. pag. 101.) this Thorn was the Ca∣lumnies, the Persecutions, raised against the Apostle. But these were: 1. So usual and daily, and so universally inflicted by all the enemies of the Cross of Christ, as will hardly comport with this [Thorn] in the Text; which as it was signally given (upon this special occasion) so it was inflicted by some particular emiment Tool of Satan. 2. It will not be easie to conceive how this kind of Physick could be proper for this distemper, but should rather imp the Apostles Wings, for an higher flight of self exultation; and oc∣casion him to think that those Consolations in Christ, in the Anticipations of Paradise, were set to counterballance his afflictions for Christ, if not God's re∣warding his sufferings. They guess most probably, in mine Opinion, that conceive this Thorn to have been some corporeal Disease (whether the , or some Iliac Passion, is not much material: the buffeting, that is, beating about the ears or head, favouring the first: and the Thorn in the flesh, the second.) That as Job was delivered, for his Trial, to Satan, to inflict what Diseases he would upon his Body, provided they were not mortal; and as the Apo∣stle, in mercy to men's Souls, and in order to their recovery from some fowl Lapses, gave some over to Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, that their Spirits might be saved, (that they reflecting upon the sad Effects of the Apostolical Rod, might study to reconcile themselves to the Church.) (1 Cor. 5. 5.) so the Lord (in favour to St. Paul, and to prevent his being ex∣alted above measure) sent Satan to buffet him, to infix some pungent Dis∣ease in his flesh (Dr. Hammond (on 1 Cor. 5. 5) reckons St. Paul's buffeting as an effect of God's delivering him unto Satan) which caused the like pain as they feel, that have a Thorn in their Body, or a barbed Arrow stuck in their Flesh, or a sharp stake run through their body, upon which they are, as it were, spitted, as [] the word that is here translated Thorn, signifies: or any other sharp-pointed thing stuck in Man's Body (as the Learned Cameron) having its derivation from a Verb that signifies, to dig or make holes in, or bore through, a thing: (affine . Pasor, circum∣circa scalpo.) the same from whence comes [] that kind of Worm that consumed Herod: which makes me think St. Pau's Thorn might be a spice of his disease: and to have been so apprehended by St. Paul himself, as also to have been sent in his apprehension, as Herod's was, as a Judgement of God upon him, for his priding himself in that glorious priviledge of being rapt up into the third Heaven. Of which sin he suspected himself guilty, not so much from any feelings of Prides working in his Soul, as of these prickings and gnawings in his Flesh; which resentment he could not have express in fitter terms, than by the Metaphor, of a pricking Thorn: (which as it creates the same kind of pain, and shooting that Worms do, so the Word which the Apostle uses [] comes as near the word [] a worm, as to that other word, signifying a Thorn [,] & all three have their names from the sharpness of their heads or points, which makes them apt to prick and pierce:) Or than by the Metaphor of [Satans buffeting] which as it implies the Vermination of the Ears, of which both Pliny and Celsus affirm the cure to be very difficult, (Vessi Etymolog.) and therefore might occasion St. Paul to su∣spect, that he was punish'd in that Organ, through which he had (in his Exta∣sie) received unutterable words; so it alludes to Herod's being smitten,  [the angel gave Herod a patt:] Or than by his more than importunate begging the removal of this Thorn: his beseeching thrice, speaks that veSpancy of desire to be quit of this affliction, as is scarce con∣sistent
with that greatness of Christian Courage he shewed, in bearing all o∣ther afflictions: if he had not apprehended this to have had that poysonful sting of Pride complicated with it, as its procuring Cause. Hence, signanter, he prayes not that [this thorn] but that [this thing] might be taken away; that is, the Affliction with its Circumstances; of his too much exaltation, if he were (as Satan suggested) really guilty; or if not, his fear of it; for that he was jealous of himself, as faln into Herod's sin; because he found him∣self in Herod's Disease, and thought he read his sin, in the judgement, is yet more manifest by the answer that God return'd. [My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness] and St. Paul's triumph upon that Answer [most gladly will I glory in my infirmities] : and his now reading and repeating the gracious end of God in this Dispensation, which answer of God, is not a Promise, but an adjudging the Victory to St. Paul, the Spirits witness to his spirit, that that favour, which had rapt him up in∣to the third Heaven, had prevented his being lifted up above measure, in the sence of that Priviledge; and that by means of Gods sending Satan to in∣flict this Disease upon him; in which weakness, this tenderness of his heart (exprest in this godly jealousie) and the strength of his Faith (exprest in his recumbency upon God, & not letting his hold go, when Satan by these sugge∣stions pull'd so hard) were more glorious Effects of God's both Favour to him, and grace in him, than his preceding Rapture. And St. Paul's Inference, from this Answer, speaks him to have learn'd, by this, what the purpose of God was in thus afflicting him, which he knew not before: (vide Musculum in locum) and to resolve that he would now, to chuse, be so far from fear of over doing it, in boasting, as he would glory more in this sickness, than in his former ex∣altation, as an occasion of bringing more Glory to God, and an indication of a greater Vertue and Strength of Grace.—But I digress too far; only I took occasion, from the Parity of St. Paul's and Herod's Disease, to vindicate this Text, out of the bad handling of those, who to the perdition of them∣selves, (and millions of their Disciples) wrest it to a sence, whereby it is given out to speak of Concupiscence, or sinful Infirmities, whereas it mani∣festly intends a bodily Disease: except we will make God an Author of sin, and his chosen Vessel to glory in his shame, as themselves do in theirs. I re∣turn to Josephus, who witnesses a better Confession of the Christian Faith, and gives a more honourable Testimony of Christ, than they do in their Glosses; and speaks more consonantly to the Apostolical sence, in all those Texts of his, we have conferr'd with the Sacred: and in all the rest, that any way con∣cern the Emergencies specified in the Gospel, the comparing of all which would tire my Reader, and my self; and one would think it should put Im∣pudency her self to the blush, to demand more Instances than have been pro∣duced, or better Evidence for the proof of the Truth of Matters of Fact reported in the Gospel, than the Testimony of such an Author: yet that the Atheist may know, the Church hath, in this case, more than one such VVitness, I shall offer to Examination the Testimony of other Secular Re∣cords.
CHAP. IX. Other Secular Witnesses to the Truth of Sacred History. §. 1 Phlegon of the Darkness and Earthquake at Christs Passion. § 2. Thallus his mistaking that Darkness for an Eclipse. § 3. The Records of Pagan Rome, touching that and other Occurrences. §. 4. The Chronicles of Edessa, though Apochryphall, yet true. Julian's Prohibition of the use of Secular Books in Christian Schools, his Testimony. § 5. Moses his History of Joseph attested by Pagans. § 6. His History of himself. § 7. Of Noah, Balaam, &c. avou∣ched by Secular Writers. § 1. OF Phlegon, a Pagan Writer, under Adrian the Emperour, (who wrote 16 Books of Olympiads, and therein the memorable Ac∣cidents that fell out in the space of 229 Olympiads.) He, in his 13, or 14. Book, affirms, (as he is quoted by St. Origen, in Cels. l. 2. cal. 8. 9.) That Christ foretold many things to come, which accordingly fell out: and from this his foreknowledge of Contingencies, is forc'd there to confess, that his Doctrine was super-humane. [,—] And mentions the Eclipse that happen'd at our Saviours Passion, (as the same Father in his Treatise upon St. Matthew, chap. 35. affirms,) and St. Jerom upon Eusebius (his Chronicle notes) giving this Testimony of that miraculous defection. In the fourth year of the 202 Olympiad in the Reign of Tiberius, (this Olympiad concurrs with the 18 of Tiberius, (Gual∣ter's Chronolog. Bullenger in Daniel) happened the greatest and most famous Eclipse of the Sun that ever was, the day being, at the sixth hour, turn'd into night; so as the Stars appeared: which Eclipse was accompanied with such an Earthquake, as many Houses of Nice in Bithynia fell to the ground. Of which Earthquake Phlegon (out of the History of Apollonius the Gram∣marian) gives this further account, that by it were overthrown many and the most famous Cities of Asia, which Tiberius afterwards repaired: in me∣morial whereof were stampt those Silver-pieces, that had on one side, the I∣mage of Tiberius; on the other, of Asia, with this Motto, [Civitatibus Asiae restitutis,] one of which Scaliger saw in the custody of William Gorlaeus: (Scal. in Euseb: Chron:) And Pliny this description, [Maximus terrae, me∣moriâ mortalium, extitit motus, Tiberii principatu, 12 urbibus Asiae unâ nocte prostratis,] There was in the Reign of Tiberius, the greatest Earth-quake that has faln out in the memory of man; whereby in one night 12 Cities of Asia were ruin'd.] Tacitus, this, Twelve of the Famous Cities of Asia fell that year by an Earthquake; of which many men were swallowed up, by which the highest Mountains were levelled, the lowest Vallies elevated. (lib. 2.) where he men∣tions most of the Cities that underwent this sad accident, And Seneca, this hint, (upon occasion of that, which afterward happen'd in Campania.) [Asia duodecim urbes simul perdidit,] Asia lost twelve Cities at once by Earth-quake, (Natur. quest. lib. 6. cap. 1.) Whether Tacitus have stated this Earth-quake so long before the Passion of our Lord, as he seems to do at the first and overlie sight? and whether he has then stated it right, and might not be mistaken in that, as he is frequently in his Chronology? or how the stating it so early, stands with his interweaving it with the story of Artaba∣nus, which fell out so near the latter end of Tiberius? I shall leave to the Sceptick to discuss; and am content, to shake out of the lap of my discourse these Testimonies, concerning this Earthquake, when he shall have dispro∣ved my Opinion: that this was it, which happen'd at that time, when the
veile of the Temple rent and the Rocks trembled—(vide Scal. de emend. l. 6. pag. 564.) § 2. Of this same miraculous darkness wrote Thallus the Chronogra∣pher: whose Testimony the most Learned and Ancient Christian Antiquary, Affricanus cites in these words, [.] Thallus calls that Darkness, which overshadowed the Sun at Christs Crucifixion, an Eclipse, but without all reason, as I conceive, for it happen'd at the full of the Moon, when she was so far from being perpendicular under the Sun, as she was in opposition to him: in so much as the Moon her self suffered an Eclipse that day at Sun-setting, as Scaliger hath demonstrated by Astronomical Calculation (de emendat. 6. Of which also, as well as of this twofold Heathen Testimony S. Tertullian takes notice in his Apology for the Christian Religion: [Eodem momento dies, me∣dium orbem signante sole, subducta est, deliquium utique putaverunt, qui id quo∣que super Christo praedicatum non sciverunt.] At the minute of time when our Lord suffered, the Sun in the mid Heaven, day with-drew it self: so as they that ne∣ver knew how it had been prophesied of Christ, that while that Shepherd was smitten it should be neither day nor night but betwixt both, a Nucthemeron of God's own creating, thought that diminution of light to have been an E∣clipse. § 3. The Roman Archives and publick Records. Into which was entred and ingross'd (amongst other strange accidents) this also of darkness, in the Reign of Tiberius: where this wonder was to be read, in Tertullian's time, as himself testifieth, in his Apology: [eum mundi casum relatum in Archivis vestris habetis.] [Sane egregium tam celebris diei monumentum, (Scalig. de e∣mend. 6.) An excellent monument of so famous a day, as that was, whereon the darkness was so great and universal, as to be thought worthy of an intrado into the publick Records, amongst the portentous Contingencies of that Age. But Pilate's Letter to Tiberius, concerning our Saviours Crucifixion; with what past thereupon at Rome, (preserv'd till Tertullian's days, in the same Records) is a more remarkable piece of Roman Antiquity: for that Apo∣cryphal Gospel, as in point of Time it got the start of the Canonical, so it contains the sum thereof, viz. That the blessed Jesus through the envy of the Elders of the Jews (for the fame he got, by his miraculous healing of Diseases, stilling the wind and seas, raising the dead, &c.) was deliver'd to Pilate to be Crucified: that though his Sepulcher by Pilate's order, upon the motion of the Elders, was watch'd; yet his Sepulcher was found empty the third day; after which, he convers'd upon Earth forty days, and then ascended into Heaven, [Ea omnia super Christo Pilatus Tiberio nunciavit. (Ter. ap. cont. gent. 21.) upon which information given to Tiberius, by Pilate and other Roman Officers, that lived in Judaea (the place where Jesus exerted those indicati∣ons of his Divinity) the Emperour made a motion in the Senate, that Jesus should be Canonized for a God: which though, upon a Maxime of State, the Senate refused to grant, yet Caesar persisting in an honourable esteem of Christ, prohibited the Jews to persecute Christians, upon severe penalties, to be inflicted upon those that did disturb them, by the Roman Deputies in Ju∣daea and elsewhere, where the Jews inhabited: for the proof of all which he appeals to the Roman Chronicles, (Tertul. apol. cont. gentes. 5.) upon which Francis Zephirus thus paraphraseth: So famous and so many were the Mi∣racles of Christ, reported to Tiberius out of Judaea, as though the Secular Historians (whether out of envy to the Christian name or adulation to the Emperours, whose Gests they would be thought alone to admire) had not mention'd them, yet a great part of them might have been read in the Writings of those who were enemies to the Christian name, as long as the Books of Fasts, the Acts of the Senate, and the Commentaries of the Emperours were extant.
§ 4. The Edssen Chronicles shared, with the Roman, in the honour of being the Repository of the Evangelicall Stories, concerning the mighty works of the blessed Jesus. Out of whose Annals (extant in the Syrian Tongue in his dayes) Eusebius (Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 13.) translates word for word this Story. The fame of Christs Miracles drew infinite numbers of persons, to apply themselves to him for cure of their Maladies, among whom Ab∣garus the King of Edessa, (Tacitus mentions this King of Edessa, (annal. 12. pag. 157. (though he miswrite him Abbaras, as Scaliger observes, de e∣mend. temp. 6. tit. quinta pascha. pag. 561.) being faln into a grievous, and in humane appearance, incurable Disease, sent a Messenger to Jesus, with a supplicatory Letter, that he would please to come and heal him: of these con∣tents. Abgarus, Prince of Edessa, to the propitious Saviour, that hath appeared in the Flesh, in the Confines of Jerusalem, health. I have heard of those miraculous Cures, which thou doest without application of Medicines and Herbs, (for it is reported that thou givest sight to the blind, causest the lame to walk, cleansest the Leprous, castest out Devils and unclean spirits, curest the most inveterate sick∣nesses, and recallest the dead to life.) from which I conclude one of these two things, that either thou art God, come from Heaven, and doest those things: or the Son of God, that bringest such things to pass: wherefore, by these my Letters, I beseech thee, to take the pains to come and cure me of my malady wherewith I am sore vexed. I have heard moreover that the Jews murmur against thee, and go about to mischiefe thee. I have here a little City, and an honest people, which will suffice us both. To this Jesus sends this Reply. Blessed art thou Agbarus, because thou hast believed in me when thou sawest me not, for it is written of me, that they which see mee, shall not believe in me; that they which see me not, may believe and be saved. Concerning that which thou writest unto me (that I would come unto thee) I let thee understand, that all things touching my Message are here to be fulfill'd, and after the fulfilling there∣of, I am to return to him that s me. But after my Assumption, I will send one of my Disciples unto thee, who shall cure thy Malady, and restore life to thee, and them that be with thee. Out of the same Records, Eusebius reports, how after our Lords Ascension Thaddaeus, one of the seventy, was sent to Edessa, who cured and converted Agbarus, and preach'd the Gospel to his Subjects, &c. I know that Gelatius in a Council of 70, Bishops, (Crab. Con. Tom. 1. de∣cret. Gelasti, pag. 993.) decreed those Epistles Apochryphal (as he did also the VVritings of Tertullian and Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History) to pre∣vent their being received with the like reverence, wherewith we embrace the Canonical Scripture; but neither he, nor any body else (either Christian or Pagan) question'd the Truth of this Relation, till Nicephorus discredited it, by his forged additions (of Christs sending his Picture to Agbarus, drawn on an Handkerchiefe; and of the strange Effect that Image had, when that City was besieged; and those other ridiculous storyes relating to that bu∣siness. The Sceptick, I know, will except against these last Allegations; that their Originals are not extant: in answer to which I commend to the Umpirage of common Reason, these Queries. 1. Whether it stand with Reason that men who stood so much upon their credit, as the ancient Christians did, would appeal to common Records, for the probat of these things, had they not then been to be read, in those Authors or Chronicles, out of which they made their Allegati∣ons?
2: By what means it came to pass, that the Adversaries of our Religion, who lived upon the place, and had opportunity enough to-examine those Quotations, and whom interest would have prompted to enquire into these things, did not make their exceptions against the Apologists of the Christian Cause. 3. Whether the Christian Church or the Pagan Adversaries were most like to obliterate those Antiquities? the Christian whom they favour'd; or the Pagan, whom they confuted? considering what artifices Julian the A∣postate, used to suppress Learning; forbidding Christians to be trained up in prophane Literature, (Ec. Hist. 3. 10. Socratis Scholast.) which Facts of Julian, Ammianus Marcel. (though a great admirer of him and the Pagan Religion) condemns, as worthy to be buried in eternal silence, [Illud autem inclemens obruendum perenni silentio, quod arcebat docere magistros rhetoricos & grammaticos ritus Christiani cultores,] (Am. Marcel. 22. 10.) As that where∣by Julian designed, to deprive the Christians of the knowledge of those Pa∣gan Writings and Records, out of which the Christian Apologists had colle∣cted such palpable Testimonies for the defence of Gospel-history; and to bury the Originals, out of which they had made their Quotations, in per∣petual oblivion, as advantagious to our Cause, by their confessing the Truth of the Matter of Fact, Lactantius by name, whose scope was, [Quia nondum capere poterat divina, prius humana testimonia ethnico offerre, id est Philosophorum & Historicorum, ut suis potissimùm refutaretur Authoribus—quo si eruditi ho∣mines se conferre caeperint evanituras brevi religiones fallas,] Because the Heathen World was yet uncapable of Divine, first to offer it Humane Testimonies of Hea∣then Philosophers and Histories; that it might at least be confuted by its own Authors: Which method if Learned men would take, false Religions would quickly vanish. See more in Eusebius his Apology for Origen, (where he shews how he and other Christian Doctors foil'd the Pagans at their own Weapons;) and Dionysius the Areopagite his Epistle to Polycarp. For not deal∣ing in this way (but by Texts of sacred Writ) with Demetrianus, Lactan∣tius blames St. Cyprian (Lact. de justicia l. 5. c. 4.) Let Julian who was thus careful to suppress Pagan records, bring up the Rear of Gentile Witnesses to the Truth of the Evangelical Writings, as to their being rightly Father'd upon those Authors whose Names they bear: who as Cyril, (Contra Julia∣num lib. 10.) testifieth, [Apertè fatetur Petri, Pauli, Mathaei, Marci, Lucae, esse ea quae Christiani legunt iisdem nominibus inscripta,] con∣fesseth, That the Books which the Christians read, inscribed with the names of Peter, Paul, Mathew, Mark, Luke, are the genuine Writings of those men. § 5. I should put the utmost of my Readers patience to trial, should I shew the Prints of Old-Testament-stories in the Antiquities of the Heathen; I will therefore content my self with these few particulars, and for the rest, re∣fer him to Blundel, Vossius, &c. The History of Joseph was presented in the Aegyptian Apis, saith Ruffinus (lib. 2. historiae Ecclesiast.) and produceth Pa∣gan Writers affirming, that a certain King or Steward of Aegypt, in a time of Famine, relieved the people out of his Storehouses; to whom therefore, af∣ter his Decease, they built a Temple, wherein an Ox was kept at the publick Charge, as an Embleme of the best Husbandman, a creature (saith Dio∣dorus, Siculus, l. 1. cap. 2.) exceeding helpful to Husbandmen; which Var∣ro (l. 2. c. 5. de re rusticâ) stiles the Husbandman's Companion and the ser∣vant of Ceres. Upon which consideration was grounded that Athenian Law, that no man should kill an Oxe that Plowed the ground, [,] Because he is a kind of Hus∣bandman, and a partaker with man in his labour, (Aelianus var. hist. l. 5. c. 14.) and therefore Appianus (de belis Mithridat.) makes it an Argument of the extremity wherewith Mithridates was opprest, that he spared not so much
as the Plowing Oxen, but slew them; to make Thongs of their Hides, and strings for his warlike Engines, of their entrails, (Appian. Alex. de bellis Mi∣thridat, p. 229.) But more plainly in Justin's Compendium of Trogus Pomp. (l. 36. cap. in risum) [Minimus inter fratres Joseph fuit, cujus excellens inge∣nium veriti fratres, clam interceptum mercatoribus peregrinis vendiderunt, à quibus deportatus in Aegyptum, cùm Magicas artes ibi solerti ingenio percepisset, brevi ipsi Regi percharus fuit. Nam & prodigiorum sagacissimus erat, & somniorum primus intelligentiam condidit, nihil{que} divini juris humani{que} ei incognitum vide∣batur. Adeò, ut etiam sterilitatem agrorum ante multos annos providerit; periisset{que} omnis Aegyptus fame, nisi monitus ejus edicto Rex servari multos per annos fruges jussisset. Tanta{que} experimenta ejus fuerunt, ut non ab homine, sed a Deo responsa dari viderentur,] Joseph was the youngest Brother, whose excel∣lent wit his brethren being jealous of, intercepted him privily, and sold him to forreign Merchants; who carried him into Aegypt; where having, through his industrious wit, learn'd the Magick Art in a short time, he grew greatly in favour with the King: for he was quick in finding out the meaning of Prodigies, and the first that taught the interpretation of Dreams, and seem'd to understand whatsoe∣ver appertain'd to the Divine or Humane Law. So as he foresaw a Famine ma∣ny years before it fell out: and all Egypt had perish'd through Famine, if the King, admonish'd by Joseph, had not commanded provision to be laid up for many years. Yea such experiments did he give of his Wisdom, as his Responds seemed to pro∣ceed not from man but God. For this it was that he obtain'd, while he lived, the honour of being proclaimed by the Kings Command, [Abrech,] that is, [tender Father,] or as St. Jerom, (in his Hebraick Questions) and the Vul∣gar Latine Translate it, [The Saviour of the World,] (Gen. 41. 43.) prefer∣ring that, before that of Aquila, which Aben Ezra favours, and our English follows, [bow the knee.] And after his Death was worship'd by the Israelites in the Wilderness, under the form of the Golden Calf: they putting more confidence in him (for relieving their wants, in that barren Land) than in their Fathers God, who so often had spread a Table for them in the Wil∣derness: Him also did Jeroboam worship at Dan and Bethel, as the God of Plenty, and for the honour of his Tribe, Jeroboam being of the Tribe of Ephraim, the Son of Joseph. Of which (beside the suffrage of some Rabbies mention'd by Vossius, (de origin. idololat.) these Observations may be a Con∣firmation. 1. The Image of the Aegyptian Ox, sacred to Osiris, had a bushel set upon its head (saith Ruffinus, Eccles. Hist. l. 2. cap. 23.) to denote Josephs measuring out of Corn; this reason is alledged by Suidas (in Serapis) why some conceiv'd that Idol to represent Joseph. 2. Moses in his blessing that Tribe, (Deut. 33. 17.) saith [The firstling of a Bullock is the Beauty of his countenance,] [,] manifestly expressing the Embleme which the Egyptians erected in his memory; not that he appro∣ved their abusing of it, by Religious Worship; but only commends Joseph, whom God had blest with that Wisdom, as procured him that Testimony of civil respect: for it was no more at first, than a piece of Heraldry. This Coat of Arms, Moses calls, the Firstling of a Bullock; because of the green∣ness of Joseph's years, when he was set over the Land of Aegypt, being then but 30 years old, exceeding young for the Gravity of his Counsel and de∣portment; and therefore his Emblem was a Calf or Firstling. 3. Though the bewilder'd Israelites erected but one Image, yet their acclamation, before, it was, [These are thy Gods, oh Israel, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt] [Exod. 32. 8.) VVhy Gods? but to denote, that Idol to have been of the Epicene Gender, and to have represented both Apis and Osiris, the Ox of Memphis and Heliopolis, which saith Plutarch, (de Iside & Osyride) the Aegyptian Priests affirmed to be all one, and that Isis was the Soul of Osy∣ris. And why, [Thy Gods which brought thee up out of the land of Aegypt,] but to exclude the Inderites, Egyptian Gods, whose Interest it was to keep them in Aegyptian Bondage, and to imply it was some deified Israelite, to∣wit,
Joseph, who at his Death had prophesied their Return and whose Re∣liques they brought with them out of Egypt, to whom they imputed their deliverance and conduct. § 6. The History of Moses is more plainly comprehended in the Fables of a third Osiris, or Liber, whom the Poets describe, in the Indian, or Ara∣bick expedition of Bacchus: for that this Osiris, and Liber and Dionysius, are all one, Nonnus testifieth (in his Dionysiacωn lib. 4.) and that the ancient Greeks accounted all the Tract beyond the Mediterranean, India; is mani∣fest from that of Ovid, (De arte amandi, lib. 1.) Andromedam, Perseus, nigris portarat ab Indis. Perseus brought away Andromeda from the black Indians: now Andro∣meda was brought away from Joppa, a City of Phoenicia, (saith Pliny, l. 5. cap. 13 & 31.) and (chap. 9. cap. 5.) [Belluae, cui dicebatur exposita fuisse Andro∣meda, ossa Romae apportata ex oppido Judaeae, Joppe, ostendit, inter reliqua mi∣racula, in Aedilitate sua M. Scaurus] [M. Scaurus, when he was Edile, did a∣mongst other rarities, make show of the bones of that Sea-monster, to which An∣dromeda was reported to have been expos'd, having caused them to be brought from Joppa a City of Judaea.] Having premis'd these Tropological Notes; let us compare the Stories. The sacred History saith, that Moses was exposed in an Ark upon the Water, watched by his Sister, and found by Pharaoh's Daughter: The Pro∣phane tells us, of Liber's Mother and Nurses, being with him at the Bank of Nile. Orpheus in hymmis: , . [With thy Goddess-mother, the venerable Isis wearing black, with thy Maiden∣nurses at the Egyptian River.] At Brasiae in Laconia, they had an old Tradi∣tion; that Bacchus, as soon as he was born, was put into an Ark, and com∣mitted to the Water; which after-ages (to give repute to that City) cor∣rupted with the addition; that the Ark was driven by Tides to their coast, and Bacchus educated with them: whence their City called formerly [Oreatae] took the name of [Brasiae] , from a Verb signifying to be cast up with the tide (Pausanias Laconici.) In certain Verses of Orpheus, the Caldean Liber, is stiled , [Wa∣ter-born] and [] which misseth Moses his Name but one Vowel. It is true indeed, he is elsewhere stiled [unutterable Queen] but that proceeded from the Grecians mistake (expess'd by Alexander Polyhistor) that the Jews receiv'd their Laws from a Woman, named [Mosω] they conceiving that word to be of the Feminine Gender, as Saphpho, Didω, &c. whence also grew that Opinion that Bacchus was of both Sexes. Plutarch (de Iside) reports that Osiris, while he was at Nurse, was called [Palestinos] whence could this Fable rise, but from Moses his being an Hebrew, seeing that Nation came into Aegypt out of Palestine. Moses had two Mothers, one who bare him, ano∣ther who adopted him, and brought him up as her own Son (Exod. 11. 10. Act. 7.) no Epithet is more common to Bacchus, than,  [twice mo∣ther'd] which might be applyed to the younger Bacchus the Theban, because of his being sowed in Jove's Thigh, (yet not without straining courtesie with that word, as Martial, not without a Sarcasm, observes in an Epigram, I have elsewhere quoted:) but could not be attributed to the Indian, upon
any other so proper Reason, as that which our Scripture assigns, and Secular Historians and Poets beat so much upon, to wit, his being brought up by a∣nother, than his own natural Mother: for which he was so famed, as the Braseans pretended they could shew the place where his Nurses educated him, called [the Garden of Liber] (Pausanias, Ibid.) Our Moses [was a goodly child] (Exod. 2. 1.) that is, as St. Stephen expounds it (Act. 7. 20.) [] [exceeding or divinely fair.] rendred by Josephus (Antiq. 4. 5.) [] [of a dvine form, and generous toward∣liness:] And brought up in all the Learning of the Egyptians. Diodorus Siculus describes Bacchus thus; [] (lib. 5.) [he far exceeded others, in comeliness of form.] And Justin (lib. 36.) Moses thus, [quem praeter paternae scientiae haereditatem etiam formae pulchri∣tudo commendabat] [the beauty of his Body commended him as well as that of the Mind.] Bacchus is said (by Diodorus, lib. 3.) to have been conveighed unto Nyssa, a Mountain of Arabia: And before him, Homer, in his Hymns, had sung, that Bacchus was educated in Nyssa, which he thus describes: . [There is a certain Hill flourishing with thick woods, called Nyssa, in the confines of Phaenicia, near the Waters of Fenny Egypt] The Alexandrian Chronicle (pag. 80.) makes [Nyssa] to be the same with [Sina] [.] and so they are, by transplacing of Letters, and change of a Vowel: Whence could this grow, but from Moses his flight into Arabia, and resi∣dence there forty years, and the eminency of Mount Sina in the sacred Story, for Gods giving there the Law? From this flight arose the Fable [] of Bacchus his Exile, (Plutar. de Iside) and from Moses marching through the Red Sea, that of Nonnus, concerning Liber (Dio∣nysiacn 20.) .] [He went through the tawny Waves of the Red Sea.] Of Bacchus, Diodorus (out of Antimachus) lib. 3. reports, That marching into Arabia, where he expected a friendly entertainment, the King of Arabia gather'd an host to destroy him, and his Company; but was put to flight by Bacchus. And (lib. 4.) That he lead about an Army, not of men only, but also of women. [.] Orpheus stiles Dionysius [] Lawgiver, and ascribes to him [] a Law of two Tables. . [In the Laws received from Gods, which he received according to two sorts of precepts.] In the same place he mentions Gods making and ordering all things after the method set down by Moses, (i.) beginning at the evening and ending, at the morning. , .
[Learn how God framed the whole order of Nature, of one night and also one day.] The same Poet gives him these Epithets [.] [horned like a bull, bearing horns, ox-horn'd] usually gi∣ven to Bacchus, pointing to those Horn-like Beams of Glory, flowing from Moses's face, when he had been in the Mount (Exodus 34. 29.) from hence proceeded the Custom of drinking in Horns, at the Celebration of Bacchus his Rites. Euripides (in Bacchis) introducing Agave, and the rest of the Bacchae, celebrating Bacchus his Revels, saith, , . [But one of them snatching a javelin smote the Rock whence flowed the dewy humour of water.] The same Author, in the same place, mentions the Bacchanals, crowning their heads with Snakes. (—) In remembrance of the Serpent that was lifted up in the Wilder∣ness. From the ambiguity of Caleb's Name (which in common signifies a Dog) and his faithful adhering to Moses, against the murmurers (Numb. 13. 31.) and when they would have stoned him, (Numb. 14. 7.) grew the Fable of [Bac∣chus his Dog] bestowed upon him by Pan; a Dog that had reason, and for his service, was promoted to Heaven, as Caleb obtained the Land of Pro∣mise: Hyginus (Poetic. astron. tit. Arctophylax.) stiles the Dog-star [the Syri∣anstar of Myriam] by a word something corrupted: (but that's no new thing) — Nonnus (Dionysiacn 16.) mentions Bacchus his Promise, and therewithal Myriam, the Sister of Liber, of Moses, and the Bunch of Grapes, which Iearius, that is, (as he there saith) Liber his Dog, Caleh the Dog of Moses brought from Escol. [] that thou also mayst ripen the Grape, casting a splendor from thy self upon the fruitful bunch of Grapes. Euripides describes the Coun∣try, wherein Bacchus settled his Crew, in the same form of words, wherein the holy Text describes the Land of Canaan, wherein Moses his people rest∣ed, in his Bacchis. , .
The Land flows with Milk, flows with Wine, flows with Honey; and smells like the Syrian Libanus. The Memorial of Myriams taking a Timbrel, and going out before the Women singing, and dancing, and praising Jehova, was preserved in Bac∣chus his Frows; who in a posture of Triumphers, with Spears deckt with Ivie (in token of Victory) went about dancing and singing [Evohe,] whence they were called [Evantes, or [Ehovantes] that is [Jehovantes] women praising the Lord] and Theocritus (Idyl. 27.) mentions their erecting twelve Altars: whereof, though he applys three, to Semele; and nine, to Bacchus: yet we may with more probability conceive them to have pointed out the twelve Tribes, and to have been transferr'd, out of the Story of Israels passage o∣ver Jordan (where they erected twelve stones) into the story of their pas∣sage through the Red Sea, confounded with the three Tribes erecting an Altar of Memorial on the other side of Jordan, whereat the nine Tribes took unjust offence. Plutarch, (quaestion. Symposiacis, lib. 4. quaest. 5.) ascribes to Bacchus the Jewish institution, of abstaining from the Flesh of Swine, Hares, &c. their carrying of Boughs in the Feast of Tabernacles; their using Trumpets and other Instruments of Musick, in their Temple service. Their High-priests Mitre, Robes, Shooes, Bells on the Fringe of his Vest: There not using Homage in their Sacrifices: and so many other particulars, as Sym∣machus, in that conference, tell Lamprius, that he had transcribed all those things, out of the Mysteries of the Hebrews. § 7. The same Author (de solertia animalium) interweaves the Story of Deucalion, with the mention of a Dove, which being sent out of the Ark, by her returning gave notice, that the Flood was not yet allay'd: and by her not returning, when she was sent out the second time, signified that the Wa∣ters were abated. This Story of Noah's Ark and the Flood (saith Josephus antiq. lib. 1.) all Gentile Writers mention. Berosus the Caldaean, Hieroni∣mus the Egyptian, Muaseus also, and many more: and Nicholas Damascenus (lib. 96.) The History of Eden's Apples, and the Serpent, is manifestly re∣corded by Hyginus (in his Poeticon astronomic. titulo serpens.) That of Bala∣ams Ass, is plainly couch'd in his Story of that Ass, which Bacchus rode upon to the Oracle of Dodona, which spake with Man's voyce, and disputed with Priapus, about Nature. (titulo Aselli) And that of Sampson's conquer∣ing the Philistines, with the Jaw-bone of an Ass, which God shewed him; as plainly, in his relation, how that Hercules being opprest with multitudes of Barbarians, and having spent all his Arrows, Jove taking pitty of him, procured a great many Stones to lay at his feet, where∣with he defended himself, and put the Barbarians to flight. (titulo Ergonasia. Menander, in the Gests of Ithobal, King of Tyre (Ahabs Contemporary) speaks of that Drought that happened in Ahab's Reign (Joseph. antiquit. l. 8. cap. 7.) The same Author (contrà Appionem. lib. 1.) sheweth, how the Truth of the Jewish Histories was attested to, by forreign Writers: even of such Na∣tions, as most hated and emulated the Jews: and produceth the Tyrian An∣nals, in confirmation of Solomon's building the Temple, of his being aided therein, by Hiram; of his wise Questions and Answers: there being then, when Josephus wrote, in the Tyrians hands many Letters, which Solomon and Hiram wrote one to another: for which also he alledgeth the History of Dius, concerning the Phenicians. But I refer my Reader (for fuller satis∣faction in this point) to that excellent Defender of the Jewish Antiquities, Josephus himself; who, not only in his Discourse against Appron, but in his
Jewish Antiquities (lib. 1.) prosecutes this Argument: quoting Abydenus, writing the same Story, that Moses doth touching the Flood. And Mare∣thus, Berosus, Molus, Hestiaeus, Hieronimus Egyptius, the Phenician Chroni∣cles, Hesiod, Hecataeus, Elaricus, Acasilaùs, Ephorus and Nicholas, affirming that the Ancient Heroes lived 1000 years: for that they being the friends of God, and using a more wholesome Diet, than could he had after the Flood, must in Reason be supposed to live longer than their Successors: and be∣sides, that they might find out Arts profitable for future Generations, as A∣strology, Geometry, &c. they had a longer life bestowed upon them, seeing it was not possible, that they could observe the several Faces of the Stars, in less than six hundred years; which space is therefore called the great year of Revolution. And Abydenus, for the proof of Moses his History of the building of the Tower of Babel. And Sibyl, for the Confusion of Languages; thus speak∣ing, [When men were all of one Language, they attempted to build a Tower that might reach up to Heaven; but the Gods beat down the Tower with Tempests, which from the wonderful Confusion of Tongues was called Babel.] And Hestiaeus making this mention of the Plain of Sinar, [The Priest who escaped, sacrificed to Jove, in the Vale of Sinar, and the Language of men being confounded, they began to inhabit divers parts of the World.] But I am weary of transcribing: consult Josephus: and Eusebius (de praeparatione Evangelica, lib. 9. cap. 1.) whose title is [that many forreign Writers have admired the Jewish Nation] (Cap. 2.) The Testimony of Haecateus:] (Cap. 3.) [The Testimony of Clearchus to Jewish Antiquities:] (Cap. 4.) That many forinsick Authors agree with the Truth of the Hebrew History.
CHAP. X. The Adversaries forced upon very great Disad∣vantages to their own Cause, by reason that they could not for very shame resist the E∣vidences, brought in defence of sacred Hi∣story. § 1. Christ accused of working by the Prince of Devils: that Accusation withdrawn in open Court: and this Plea put in against him, that he made himself a King, and therefore was an Enemy to Caesar. § 2. Pet∣ty Exceptions rebound upon the heads of their Framers. § 3. The Modern Scepticks half-reasons too young, to grapple with old Prescription. § 4. Christ's Works, God's Seal to his Mission. § 5. The present Age as able to judge of the Nature of those Works, as that was, wherein they were done. § 6. Aheistical exceptions against particular points of Religion, an Hydra's head; yet they all stand upon one neck, and may be cut off at one blow, by proving the Divine original of Re∣ligion. § 1. THese are all the kinds of Testimonies, that Matters of Fact are capable off: and so full and impartial; as, I am sure, our Modern Disputers cannot produce the like, for the probat of any Matters of Fact, except those which we have account of in the Gospel. I might therefore here conclude: But that I may leave the Sceptick without, not only all possibility of Reply, but of Excuse, for his Pertinacy, (if he hath the face to question the validity of this Argument) I shall add this weighty Consideration. That the Adversaries of the Christian Religion, in their discoursing upon that Subject, were put upon exceeding great inconveniencies, meerly upon this Reason, because they could not (for very shame) resist those Evidences were brought, in defence of the Evangelical History. To begin with the Jewish, we find the chief of them consulting, what they should do to hinder the Progress of the Gospel, when they saw such notable Miracles effected by Christ and his Disciples, as could not be denyed: and fore saw, that the whole World would run after them, if some stop were not put to this rowling Stone. The first Obstacle they lay in its way, was the calumniation of those great Works, as being done not by the Finger of God, but the Hand of Beelzebub. But whatever Presti∣giator was read of in any History, so qualified as Christ was? the In∣stitutor of a Society, accomplish'd with all Gravity and Virtue; a Prae∣ceptor of most sincere and true Doctrine (as Eusebius challengeth the Pagan Objectors (Demonst. Evang. 3. 8.) The only colour of a proof they bring for this (for their Fables, of Christ's going into Aegypt to learn Magick, of his having the Tetragrammaton sown in his Thigh, have not the least shew of Probability) was the seeming Contradicti∣on betwixt the Law of Moses and of Christ, it being on all hands con∣fess'd, that Moses was sent of God, and assisted in the Wonders he wrought
(in confirmation of his Mission) by a Divine Power: and therefore what Christ did, in proof of his Doctrine, must needs be (as they bla∣sphem'd) by a Diabolical. But when he attempts (at the araignment of our Saviour, and his Protomartyr) to prove Christ's Doctrine op∣posite, to that of Moses (by suborning Witnesses, to alledge many things in the New, looking a squint upon the Old Testament) these two, upon examination, prove better friends, and agree better with one a∣nother, than the Witnesses do among themselves: whose allegations de∣stroy one another, while they are combining to prove the Gospel destructive to the Law; and in conclusion, after they have left no stone unturn'd, they are not able to make good one Instance of any such Doctrine. And thus, while the Jew cannot, while he dares not, de∣ny the doing of the Works, the Delivery of the Doctrine (they were so manifest) but is forc'd, (if he will not, let the Gospel wholly alone) to en∣ter this Plea, he runs himself upon the inconveniency, of being manifest∣ly baffled, and nonsuted in open Court: Insomuch, as (for all his boast∣ing, when he put on that Armour) he dares not trust to it, in the pitch'd Field, has not the heart to mutter one word before Pilate, of Christ's casting out Devils by Beelzebub: though could he have made such a charge but probable, it would have administred to him a more plausible occasion of putting Christ to death, (both in respect of the Law of Moses and Caesar) than that which he was, at last pinch, forc'd to take up, viz. [he said he was king of the Jews.] A Plea which, of all other, the Jew would not have stood upon; had not Malice over-clouded his Intellect, and prompted him to snatch up, in a rage, that weapon to offend Christ with, which (otherwise) he could not but forethink, the Gospel would take up in defence of the Truth of its History, and Deli∣very of that Doctrine, which is the very Soul of our Religion [He said he was king of the Jews,] that is, King Messias, the great Prophet that was to come into the VVorld. This is proved to the Christians hand, in open Court; Christ is called to make a good Confession of it, before Pontius Pilate. Pilate causes this Indictment to be writ in Capital Letters, in He∣brew, Greek and Latin (for all to read) over his Cross; as the Crime, of which he was accused, and for which he suffered [Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. 1. This is enough to evince the Truth of the Gospel, as to Matter of Fact and Delivery of Doctrine; that the Church hath not feigned this story, that Christ really gave out himself to be that Person, that the Go∣spel reports him to be: for in saying, he was King of the Jews (in the common sence of that Age, and in the Notion of King Messiah) Christ said, he was born of the Virgin, of the Lineage of David, born in Beth∣lehem, fled into Aegypt, educated in Nazareth, convers'd in Galilee, made the lame to leap as an Hart, made the Eyes of the blind to see out of obscurity; was anointed of God to be that great Prophet, whom all are to hear; that Seed of the woman, that was to break the Serpents head: the Desire of all Nations; that unknown God; whom the Gentiles ignorantly worship'd; that Judean King, who was to subdue all Kings Scepters to his. 2. Can it be imagin'd, that one who pretended to this Title, would come with his Thumbs in his Mouth, and not demonstrate his Right to it, by doing such stupendious VVorks, as could not be effected, but by Divine Power; (seeing all pretenders to the Messiaship, both before and after him made show of working Miracles, in confirmation of their Pretensions;) and not exercise that Office, he affirmed he came in∣to
the VVorld to manage, by giving out his Royal Law, by publishing his heavenly Doctrine. 3. VVhat VVorks, what Doctrine, was ever father'd upon Christ, so well becoming that Title, so like to sting the carnal and blinded Jews, to grate upon the proud and envious Pharisee, to offend that Generation that opposed him; as that whereof the Gospel giveth us an account? By what other VVorks but those, could Pilate be so far (conscientiâ Chri∣stianus, as Tertullian stiles him) convinc'd in judgement, that Jesus was indeed (what the Jews accused him to say he was) the King of the Jews; as he could not by their solicitations, be perswaded to alter the first Inscription? VVhat Doctrine but that could, upon trial, have been found so holy and blameless, as Christ's most malicious and cunning enemies, could not suggest one tittle of it, to a Judge, partial enough on their side, that he could find any fault in? St. Paul therefore had reason to call that [a good Confession] which Christ made before Pontius Pilat, and to urge it upon Timothy's Conscience, in that charge he gives him, to observe the Canon of Doctrine and Life, propounded in that Epistle: as being that Doctrine of Christ, which he confirm'd by work∣ing of Miracles before the people: and by confessing himself, before Pilat's Tribunal to be King of the Jews. And so much more infatua∣ted did the Jews appear, in procuring (by the Plea they enter'd against him) the publication of this Title, in the ears of Jews, Romans and Grecians: which as it comprehends the Sum of the Christian Faith, so it is the Touchstone of all VVorks and Doctrines father'd upon Christ; and clearly evinceth the Truth of Evangelical History, if we compare what it delivers, with what the Prophets foretel the King of the Jews was to say and do. § 2. These were their studied and unanimous Pleas against Christ: they had some Extempore ones, and, as it were, the Opinions of pri∣vate Doctors. I will but glance at these. VVhen the Resurrection is preach'd, the Pharisee Applaudes, the Sadducee derides: when Christ preacheth the paying of Tribute, the Herodians approve, the Pharisees oppose. VVhat means this snarling of the Dogs, but that such bones were thrown amongst them? Some alledge, [that no man knows whence the Messias comes,] and therefore concludes, that Jesus was not he; they knowing, that he came out of Nazareth, and having converse with his Mother, his Brethren, and Sisters. Others affirm that [the Christ was to come out of Bethlehem;] and that therefore the Son of Mary was not he, being of so obscure an Extract, such a Terrae filius, as no man knew whence he came. Besides the manifest Contradiction whereby those Adversa∣ries to Christ trip up one anothers heels, here are the manifest Prints of Christ's twofold Generation; one as God eternal, of his Father, which none can declare; another temporal, of the Substance of his Virgin-Mother. And of two material Passages in the History of Christ, point∣ed at by the Prophets, and infallibly conducting us to the places, where we are to look for the Messias; to wit, at Bethlehem, as to his so obscure Birth, as it was hardly taken notice of: and at Naza∣reth, as the place of his Education, and constant residence of his fleshly Relations. But these are but slight Inconveniencies, which the Jew drew up∣on himself, by chusing rather to betake himself to these kind of Ex∣ceptions, than to oppose the Truth of the Narrative; in com∣parison of those mortal Wounds, he hereby, gave his Cause, and
might have avoided: if he had but dar'd, to have chosen that ground. 1. Had he excepted against the Truth of the History, and could have gotten the better there; he had been absolute Master of the Field: could he, for shame, have denyed the doing of the Miracles, the Do∣ctrine delivered would not have been able to stand out against his assaults, who would have followed a Doctrine, so repugnant to all mens carnal interest, so far above all humane Reason; had not God given it out, under his own Hand and Seal; without which Testimony of Christ's Mission from Heaven, he would but have been, as a private man: and his word of no more than (nay, not so much as) the Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees: for they sate in Moses's Chair, and could shew Gods ordinary Commission: and therefore if they could have invalidated Christ's extraordinary Call, they needed not have feared, that his VVord would have been taken before theirs. Now what shorter or clearer way could they possibly have proceeded in, to make void Christ's Commission (even to all mens satisfaction) than by proving, that those great Works, which are reported of him, were not done by him, had that been feasible? Again, could they have proved, that he did not preach such Doctrine, as the Gospel presents; the Miracles would have wheel'd about to them, and have proved as good a defence of Pharisaism, as they are (as the Case now stands) of Christianity. If it had not been so famously known what Christ preach'd; as they could not deny, nor pervert his Doctrine; they might have father'd their own, upon him: and have alledged the Miracles wrought by him, in confir∣mation of it. Had not the Jew wanted face or courage to fall on here, he could not have wanted men: their love to sin, and priding them∣selves in the Covenant of Peculiarity, would have furnish'd him with whole Legions of Voluntiers; besides those he might have prest with Bribes (as he did the Witnesses and Souldiers) to make a breach upon the Truth of Gospel-history: had not that attempt been looked upon as desperate, upon what other imaginable account can it be, that he sneaks about the Shore, where, ever and anon, he either runs on ground, or splits against the Rocks, and makes such miserable Shipwrack of his Re∣putation? Why avoids he the open Sea, and dare not encounter the Go∣spel there, where, if he can put her to the worst, all's his own? Can any thing stand in his way, but cowardise, and the desperateness of the adventure? It is reported of the northern Augustus, the great Gustavus, that he seldom brought into the Field an Army of above 10000 men, (but those veteranes and experienc'd Solders) chusing rather to animate a well-set, than a corpulent and bulkie Body. Such was Christ's Army of Martyrs, whereby he subdued the World to the belief of the Gospel, and so formidable to the Jew, as he despaired to break its ranks, with all the force he could raise. Methinks I hear him thus discoursing with himself: [Should I say, this or that Passage in the History of Christ, is a forgery? I could have Seconds more than a good many; I could levy more Legions, to employ in that service, than the Gospel hath Squadrons, to defend its Truth: But alas mine would be as so many droves of Sheep, led up a∣gainst Lyons: Those that she hath are faithful, and tried veterane Soldiers, Eye and Ear-witnesses of what was done and said; and the greatest part of them prest (at first) against the natural inclination of their will, against the Religion of their Country, to be on her side (and such in this case will do best service) meerly by such Conviction, as they are not able to withstand. It grieved them to hear and see such things; but such is the Evidence, whereby they commend themselves to the Consciences of all, that see or hear them, as they cannot be flattered, threatned, excommunicated, reason'd into
a denyal of them. Who can I muster up, that will not be as Grashoppers, in the eyes and hands of such Gyants? the greatest part of those I can rally, being such, as were out of the way, when the things, under debate, were done; the rest such, as all know to be my own Creatures: but the worst is, when they come to charge, they will not be kept in any Order, but fall foul upon one another, and be in as many different Tales, as they are Persons. I must therefore let the Gospel alone, as to the Truth of its History (which sails with so strong a gale, as it were desperate fool-hardiness, to affront it, di∣rectly:) I will rather try, what can be done by Consequences; I will give it Sea-room to sail by, perhaps I may espie something, in the works done, that may make men suspect, they are not the Finger of God; something, in the doctrine delivered, that may argue it not to come from Heaven: but as to the doing of the Works, the Delivery of the Doctrine, they are so manifest, as it were madness to oppose the Report.] This is the plain English of the Jew's behaviour, in his opposing the Go∣spel. § 3. Another irrepairable loss he hath sustain'd, to the disparagement of his Cause, (by permitting the History of the Gospel to pass currant, through the first Age, without any offer of his opposition) is, that he hath hereby deprived himself, and his friends, of the advantage of playing an After-game. Had he boldly calumniated the Truth of the Story, something might have stuck, that might have rendred it less cre∣dible, and afforded its Adversaries, in after-ages, some colourable ap∣pearance against it: but now, he that lived upon the place (and nar∣rowly watched, for Christ's halting: for the faultring of the Pen of the sacred Scribes) having nothing to say against these Matters of Fact, has wholly disappointed, and bereav'd succeeding Generations of all possible Pleas. [Orpheum Poetam docet Aristoteles nunquam fuisse, & hoc Orphi∣cum Carmen Pythagorici ferunt cujusdam fuisse Cecropis] (Cotta in Cicer. de natura deorum, l. 1.) Aristotle taught, that there never was any such Poet as Orpheus; and the Pythagoreans report, that the Poem that goes under the name of Orpheus, is the work of Cecrops. But both he any they were too young, to gain upon the VVorld's Faith, that had been ground∣ed upon the former, ancient, and universal Tradition, (that there was such a Poet, and that the Verses that go under his name, are his.) Let the Sceptick, if he can, produce one single Testimony, of that validity, that these against Orpheus are, against the blessed Jesus. How then can our Modern Atheist think, his silly and importune Quarrels, against the Evangelical History, are of any Validity with intelligent Persons? his Quarrels now, in the end of the World, sixteen hundred years too young, to bear witness against that, which its Contemporaries had not the face to deny? If Jephtha's Replie to the King of Ammon (demand∣ing of him to restore the Towns, which Israel had taken from that Crown, at their coming out of Aegypt, three hundred years before this demand:) [Why did you not recover them all that while?] (Jud. 11. 26.) be ground∣ed, as Civilians say, upon Principles of natural Honesty. (Grotius de jure 2. 4.) 2. If Isocrates his Plea against resigning up their right in Messina, (drawn from the Spartans, having had the uninterrupted possession there∣of, from before the erection of the Persian Empire, and the building of the greatest part of the Grecian Cities) be grounded upon the general Sentiment of all men [That Possession confirm'd by long Prescription is as good as inheritance] (Isocrat. Archidamus, pag. 287.) [] And so valid, as to dispute against it, is branded
by Historians, as meer babling and beating the Air. (Tacitus annal. 6.) A∣mong whom do these novel Disputers against the Truth of Gospel-Histo∣ry (after the Prescription of so many hundreds of years) think their Al∣legations will be of any force; but persons that have renounc'd all Principles of Reason, Equity, Humanity, Polity, and common Sence? I would therefore advise them to bespeak themselves an Audience, in the Sister-hood of tatling Gossips and silly Women; who are not able to comprehend the weight of that sharp retort of St. Austin. [restat, ut ipsi velint esse testes de Christo, qui sibi auferunt meritum sciendi quid loquatur, loquendo quod nesciunt.] (August. tom. 4. pag. 162. de consensu Evang. 1. 8.) [It remains, that we take those mens Testimony of Christ, who by speaking those things which they are ignorant of, deprive themselves of the benefit of knowing what to speak:] while I lay open the mortal Wounds, which the Jew, his not daring to deny the Matter of Fact, hath given his Brother in iniquity, the Gentile Philosopher; who having so much Reason, as to think it unreasonable, that he, who was not an Eye-witness, should ex∣cept against the Evidence of Eye-witnesses, touching those things, which Eye-witnesses (and as great enemies to the Gospel, as himself) had not been able to make any substantial exception against; was forc'd to grant the Truth of the History, and had nothing left worthy of a Philosopher, to object but this, § 4. That the Works Christ did, did not speak him to be God, but only a good Man, and familiar with the Gods (by converse with whom, he learn'd the Art, or obtain'd the Power, of working Miracles) I use this Dis-junctive, because Porphyrie held the faculty of doing Miracles, may be attain'd by Art, but Jamblychus will have it, the free gift of God, bestowed on those that are most conformable to, and conversant with him, exploding all Arts tending that way, as Diabolical, (as Ficinus ex Jamblicho de mysteriis relates, pag. 78, 79. &c.). But let them dissent or a∣gree, as they please, that the stupendious Works of Christ were the effects of Divine Magick, and such as he could not have wrought, had not God been with him, was confest by the unanimous consent of all the Philosophical Opponents of the Christian Faith, who all subscribed to that of Porphyrie [Porphyrius dixit Christum summè religiosum, immortali animâ post corpus incedere, animâ sapientiae, gratiâ, honore affectâ, ds carâ, &c.] (Euseb. demonstr. Evang. 3. 8.) [Who said that Christ was a very reli∣gious Person, and subsisted after bodily death in an immortal soul; a soul exalted to honour, for the sake of that wisdom it was indowed with: dear to the Gods, &c.] Only they excepted against the Miracles, as no▪ suffici∣ent Indications of Christ's Deity: [nec us competentibus signis tan Majestatis indicia clarescunt, quoniam larvalis illa purgatio, debilium curae, reddita vita defunctis, haec & alia si cogites Deo parva sunt:] (August. Volusi∣an. Epist. 2.) [It appears not by any competent signs of a Divine Majesty at∣tending him, that your Jesus was God: for his casting out of Devils, his curing the sick, his restoring the dead to life, (if these and other strange things done by him be duly weighed) are too mean for him to manifest his glory by, whom you stile the Lord and Governour of the Universe,] said the Gentile Philosophers, in that Conference, of which Volusianus gave St. Au∣stin an Account. I will not so far anticipate my intended discourse a∣bout Christ's Miracles, as here to give a full Answer to this Argument, but only glance at that which St. Austin returns him, [It's true indeed, such things as these have been done by men. Elias and Elisha raised the dead (1 Reg. 17. 22. 2 Reg. 4. 36.) but whether the Heathen Magicians ever raised any from death, let them inquire, who will needs maintain Apuleius did so, contrary to that defence himself makes, against the imputation of that,
as a Crime. To be sure, in his being born of a Virgin, in his raising himself from death, in his Ascension into Heaven he out did all men. And he that thinks these things too mean for God, I cannot tell what he can expect more; except he thinks Christ should have done such things, as are inconsistent with his being made Man. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, and all things were made by him: Ought he, therefore, being made Man, to have made another World, to convince men that he was he, by whom the World was made? But a greater than this, or one equal to this, could not have been made in this World: and had he either made another World out of this; the making of that would have been no evidence to the Inhabitants of this, (for it would have been out of their sight) or a less World than this, in this; the Scep∣tick would have had the same objection, that it was less than became God to make: seeing therefore it was not meet he should make a new World, he made new things in the old World; his Virgin-birth, his Resurrection, and Ascension, are works of greater Power, perhaps, than making the World: If here they answer, that they do not believe these things: what shall we do with such men, as contemn the least, and dis-believe the greatest of his Miracles? They believe he raised the dead, because that hath been done by others, and that's too mean for God: his taking Flesh of a Virgin, and lifting it up from death unto eternal Life above the Hea∣vens, is therefore not believed, because no man ever did it; and its fit for God to do.] To return to our Heathen Philosophers. The Rea∣son they gave why they thought those things reported of Christ in the Gospel, not clear enough evidences of his Deity, was because some of those amongst themselves, who were reputed most holy Men, had done the like things; and therefore Christ, being a very wise and holy Person, and who convers'd intimately with God, might obtain that favourable Gift at the bountiful hand of Heaven. What an infinite disparity, both in respect of the things done, and the credibility of the stories, there is betwixt the Works of Christ and their Magi, will be discust in its proper place: I am now only to shew, what inconveni∣ence the Learned Gentile was put upon, while he is forc'd upon making this Exception; as not having the face to deny the Matters of Fact. 1. By the Evidence of Christ's great Works, he is convinc'd that Christ was a good an holy Man; for none but such were privileged with a Power of doing such Works, as he did. By the same Evidence he must confess that Christ is God, for he profest himself to be one, with, and equal to the Father: and [a good man will not lye.] 2. Again, if Christ were an holy Man, and by his Holiness had at∣tain'd the Magick Art, he would have communicated the Principles of that Art to others: for [,] [a good man is a common good;] communicative of his profitable knowledge. The Pagan here, was driven to this Reply: That Christ did write Books of the Magick Art, and dedicated, and delivered them to St. Peter and Paul. They could not (saith St. Austin) have pitch'd up∣on a more ridiculous answer; the falshood thereof laying open to the youngest Catechumen; who can tell these gray-beards, that Christ was ascended into Heaven, before St. Paul became his Disciple. But they had seen the Memories of those two Apostles celebrated together, and had heard them spoken of as the prime Apostles (the one of the Cir∣cumcision, the other of the Incircumcision) and therefore they joyn'd them in this Fable, as the likeliest persons, by whose hands Christ
might diffuse the Principles of the Magick Art, through the World, of Jew and Gentile. Or they might take up this Conceipt, from the Helcesaitae, of whom Eusebius thus writeth: [St. Origen. in Psal. 80. mention'd a kind of Hereticks, called Helcesaitae, who gave out that they had a Book, which fell down from Heaven, which who so heard and believed the doctrine thereof, should receive an otherwise Remission of sins, than that which Christ dispensed.] This should be a Book of Magick by that Ti∣tle in Justinian's Codex [de maleficis & mathematicis o Incantationes quibus utebantur] where, amongst others, that Heresie of the Helcesaitae is condemned (Euseb. hist. lib. 6. cap. 31. § 5. But the mischief of mischiefs, that the Jew has brought upon his own, and his fellows Causes (in his not being able to resist the Truth of the Evangelical History,) is this, That hereby he has afforded the Christians of this last Age, an even ground to play with them upon, at all other Weapons, in all the remaining Controversies, touching that Subject. 1. It being confest, that the Doctrine of the Gospel was deliver'd by Christ and his Apostles, and witnessed to, by such wonderful Works as are therein reported: for the determining of this Question, whe∣ther those Works are truly and properly Miracles, and sufficient indi∣cations, that the perpetrators of them, were commission'd by God (as his Embassadors) to treat with man? we of this Age are e∣very way as well instructed as they that were (or as we our selves could have been, had we been) Eye-witnesses of them; whether Pompey or Caesar had the better Cause? (it being supposed that Antiquity has given us the true state of it) may as well (and perhaps more impar∣tially) be resolved by Modern Civilians, than by Cato or Cicero; though there may be more danger of mistake in resolving this Case, than ours; for the precise Rules that Lawyers are, in that case, to pro∣ceed by, are not the universal Maximes of Right, but as they are con∣fin'd, limited, and manacled by the then Laws of the Roman State, where that might have been just or unjust, two thousand years ago, that would be the quite contrary now, (in respect of those mutati∣ons have, in the interim, befaln their Politicks:) But, in our Case, we are to walk, by standing and fixed Principles in Nature, of eternal Ve∣rity: nothing can be a Miracle, or not a Miracle now, that would not have been so, three thousand years ago: State-maximes are not, like the Laws of Medes and Persians unalterable: but the Covenant which God hath made with Day and Night, (the Ordinances of Sun, Moon and Stars) cannot be broken, but by the immedate hand of him that made them (Jer. 32. 26. 33. 20.) And therefore we who live now are better abilitated to judge: when the interposition of that hand suspends the operation of those Ordinances, than they who lived before us, saving the advantage they had of us, by means of the first Traditional Learning, communicated either by God, to Adam, or by Adam, to the Patriarchs: or acquired by those long-livers before the Flood, (the length of whose Age allowed them so large a time, to conn those Les∣sons, which the hand of creating Omnipotencie had writ, in the Vo∣lume of the Universe) and deliver'd by their survivour Noah, to the Generations after the Flood; the benefit whereof the Devil did not so much envy (to humane kind) as he did the Tradition of Religion; (and therefore that was better preserv'd than this) Though our own be but a Pigmey-experience, yet it stands upon the Giants Shoulders of the experience of former Ages, by means of which upper ground, we dai∣ly
make new Discoveries, and take out new Lessons out of the Book of Nature, [facile est inventis addere.] To say nothing of the Modern helps we have; Of Scripture-physicks, by which many of the old Philoso∣phers mistakes are discover'd, and we lighted to a clearer discovery of Nature, than Nature could make of her self: Of Accademies, where we enjoy all imaginable expedients of Arts, towards the perfecting our Minds in the knowledge of Natures Laws, and Learning to judge, when those Laws are either suspended, or improved, beside, or be∣yond their own Line (the benefit of which opportunity would yet be improved, if we would subordinate Philosophy to Divinity, in point of Authority and Use:) of Authority in preferring the Light of the Sun, to the blaze of that Candle of the Lord within us: of Use, in studying natural Ethicks and Physicks, to the end we may know where Nature ends (as to both) and where Grace, and the God of Nature, begins to out-do those ordinary Powers, that are planted either in the great World, or its Epitome. 2. The Truth of the Gospel-Narrative yielded. If upon due exa∣mination, but any one of those mighty Works, therein reported to have been done, do undoubtedly appear to be a Miracle: we may, we must, without the least haesitancie, rest assured of the Infallibility of the Evan∣gelical Doctrine. For Gods Faithfulness and abhorrencie of Falshood, will no more consist with his setting one Seal to a Lye, than a thou∣sand. The Magicians vying with Moses, in some of those Wonders he wrought before Pharaoh, did not prejudice his Divine Com∣mission; seeing Moses did some things in confirmation thereof, which they could not imitate, but confess'd to be the Finger of God. 3. Any one Action of Christ, proved irrefragably a Miracle, will seal to the Truth of the whole Body of Gospel-doctrine, will attest the in∣tire sum, and compleat form of sound Words, to have been from Heaven. For God by granting Miracles to be wrought by Christ, and his A∣postles in Christ's Name, did immediately seal to Gods sending Christ, and Christ's sending his Apostles, as Heavens Plenipotentiaries, to treat with the World, about the Matters of Eternal Life. The miracu∣lous descension of the holy Ghost upon our Saviour, at his Bap∣tism, was to point him out to his Fore-runner, John the Baptist, as that true Light, which (according to Prophecy, and the general ex∣pectation of the Jews) was come into the World, [he it is upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descend.] Upon seeing of which, and hearing that voyce from Heaven, [This is my well-beloved Son] the Baptist asserts him to be, that Prophet which God promised to send, to com∣municate his whole pleasure to the sons and daughters of men. Christ's transformation in the holy Mount, was to confirm the three Apostles, in the Truth of that Voyce, they heard [This is my Son, hear him;] that is, whatever he shall speak in my Name, what terms soever he shall propound to the World, what way soever he shall chalk out to reconciliation, let them be observ'd, let no other be expected; For I have made him my Ambassadour, and given him full power to treat with the World. When the Apostles returned from working Miracles, the Question that Christ propounded to them was [Whom do men say I am?] and the question he put to such, as upon hearing or seeing the miraculous Cures, he wrought on others, applyed themselves to him for Cure, was, [Believest thou that I am be?] Infinite Examples might be produc'd. But this Proposition [Miracles do immediate∣ly confirm the Divine Authority of the Speaker, and consequently
the Truth of whatsoever he delivers] is so evident, as it needs no proof. 4. Lastly, Matters of Fact granted, and the Supernaturalness of any one thing, done in confirmation of the Gospel, proved, affords Chri∣stians of the meanest Capacities, ability sufficient, to confirm them∣selves, in a full assurance of the Truth, of all Gospel assertions; to convince the subtilest Gain-sayers, (as that Laick did the Arrians, in the Council of Nice) and to answer all Objections, that ever were made, or can be invented, from those seeming absurdities, impossibilities, contradictions, &c. which the wittiest Sophister can make himself be∣lieve, he finds in the Evangelical Religion. For there cannot be [yea and nay] with God, nor any thing impossible to him, to whom it is possible to raise the dead, and to do such stupendious Works, as were wrought, for the demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Go∣spel: [Si Ratio contrà Scripturarum authoritatem redditur, quamlibet a∣cuta sit, fallit verisimilitudine; nam vera esse non potest: rursùs, si mani∣festissime certae{que} rationi velut Scripturarum authoritas objicitur; non intelligit qui hoc facit: & non Scripturarum sensum (ad quem pene∣trare non potest) sed suum potiùs objicit veritati; nec quod in eis, sed quod in seipso, velut pro eis invenit, opponit.] (August. Marcellino Ep. 7.) [If Rea∣son be alledged against the Authority of divine Scripture; be it never so a∣cute, it is not true, but deceives us, with an appearance of Truth, with a shadow of Reason. Again, if the Authority of Scripture seem to oppose manifest, and certain Reason: he that alledgeth that Authority does not un∣derstand the Text he quoteth; and objects against that Truth, which Rea∣son presents, not the sence of Scripture, (which he is not able to dive in∣to) but his own conceipt. Neither doth he oppose, against such Rea∣son, what he finds in the Text, but his own gloss and Comment, which he frames to himself.] And therefore when that Affricane Light thought he found any thing in Scripture, that seemed contrary to Truth, he concluded; That it was but either a shew of Truth, or a shew of Scripture, and that either [the Copy was corrupt, or the Translation false, or that he himself did not understand the Text aright] (August. Hieron. Ep. 19.) [—vel mendosum ese codicem, vel interpretem non esse assecutum quod dictum est, vel me minimè intel∣lexisse.] The same Purity, and infinite Perfection of the Divine Na∣ture, that makes it impossible for God to lye, makes it impossible, that he should give his approbation, and the Imprimatur, to a self∣contradicting, absurd, or unreasonable Book. § 6. Judicious Plutarch (in his Treatise of the Fortune of Alexander) compares his attempt to subdue the World, to Hercules his Combat with Hydra; in that, though he had no sooner dispatch'd one War, but a∣nother sprung up, yet by searing the places of the neck where the heads grew which he cut off, he prevented the pullulation of fresh heads from those places: that is, by fortifying the places he gain'd, with Garrisons, he prevented the rising of the conquer'd, at his back; by which means at last he conquer'd all Nations. Of like difficulty and immense labour, is the undertaking to subdue Atheism: in an heart pos∣fest with which, is a world of Devices; and a Tongue, prompted by such an heart, is a World of Iniquity (if not Epicurean infinite Worlds) (Jacob. 3. 6.) Three of this Hydra's most lofty and blasphe∣mous
Heads are already dispatch'd, and the Topicks whence they were rais'd, the necks on which they grew sear'd by so feeling an application of each Argument, to the Serpents only beloved temporal and earthly concerns: as it may be hoped his delicacy will hardly indure the pain of a new fracture in those tender parts, by the reviving of those Ar∣guments against the Gospel, which speak him a mere Novice in the great affairs of the World, and not to know the State of that virile Age of the Roman Empire, when the Gospel was first publish'd, or render him uncapable of knowing, when to hum, when to kiss in a Play-house; or of maintaining his right, to what he challengeth, as his Fathers Heir, as his Mothers Son. It may be some daunting to the Atheists, some encouragement to the Church, to see so many heads lye gasping at the feet of the meanest of her Sons: And, perhaps, satisfie the ex∣pectations of modest persons, as to what my Title promiseth, to see three of those Horns, that have (with the greatest spite and dis∣dain) been pushing at the Gospel cast out, by one so unskilful a Carpenter; A work for three of the ablest Artists; for God allows to eve∣ry Horn a Carpenter, (Zech. 1. 20.) Had this Monster no more Horns than Zechary saw in that prophetical Vision, had this Hydra no more heads than Alexander's World had Kingdoms, than that Lernean Ser∣pent, which Hercules flew, had heads: (be they seven, according to Naucrates Erythraeus; nine, according to Zenodotus, or fifty, according to Heraclides Ponticus his opinion; my success hitherto might give me hopes, at last to excind the last of them. But how many Heads this Monster of Monsters hath, he only knows, before whom Hell is bare-fac'd, and who searcheth the above-measure Deceiptfulness of those Hearts, that are witty in contriving their own destructiou To pro∣ceed therefore in cutting off the several Heads of Atheistical Prejudice, one by one, would be more than an Herculean Labour, and as vain as that, which Pirrhus imploy'd in the conquest of the Roman Armies, which he could not faster defeat, than others rose up in their stead, the ranckness of the Roman Blood scorning to be stanch'd, by all the Searing-irons, he could apply to the Wounds, he gave that Cities then rising greatness; but putting forth its plastick Virtue, in the fresh production of so many martial Spirits, as taught that gallant Epirot (by the loss of his Kingdom) to construe Apollo's Oracle, to a sini∣ster sence (as to his own fortune, of which, Cyneas gave him a good item, when he told him, he was combating with the Lernean Hydra, and the Poet gives an elegant description. Non Hydra secto corpore firmior Vinci, dolentem crevit in Herculem. Thus against Hercules, vext the field to lose, From wounded Hydra, heads more fierce arose. No less numerous and fierce are the assaults which Atheism makes against particular Gospel-enunciations and Conclusions: It ferrets e∣very Text (from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Revelati∣on) to find breaches, in Jerusalem's pearly Walls; Seams in Chrst's
Coat; Errata, in that Edition of Heavens mind: this is impossible, that is too ordinary; this is impious, that incongruous; this is de∣fective, that redundant: he complains here, of affectation; there, of boldness; here, of obscurity; there, of plainness: The Christian Aedipusses (the Fathers, of old; the School-men, of late) untied these knots as fast as Sphinx could knit them: and, with indefatigable industry, pur∣sued the enemies of the Cross of Christ : clearing all the Texts and Propositions excepted against, from the misprision of those Crimes were lay'd to their charge; and proving, that our Religion had nothing in it, against either Reason or good Manners, no∣thing unworthy of its Divine Original, or unsuitable to its merciful ends. In their managing of which holy War, I cannot tell, whether I should more admire the solidness of their Judgements, or the heat of their Divine Zeal: the labour, or success of those Angels of Michael, contending with the Devil and his Angels. In which way of com∣bating, he that would now follow them, must be so much more pa∣tient of labour, than they were, as Atheistical prejudice is more proli∣fick now, than then; and fall so far short of them, in point of suc∣cess; as Pagans are less under judicial obduration, than Apostate Christians. Must we suffer then this many-headed Cerberus to go unmuzzl'd, out of the Lease, barking against the Light of Heaven. and drivelling his poysonful Foam upon the Flowers of Paradise? Must the new sprung Heads of Hydra still stand rampant upon her stiff-Neck, and hiss, without controul, against Religion? Must we in de∣spondencie cast away our Sword, and yield the Field to this Mon∣ster? Is there, after the dismounting of these three Heads of Preju∣dice, no way, whereby we may reach the rest? Nero wish'd, that all the heads of the Senators stood upon one neck (that he might dispatch them at one blow.). The opportunity, which he impiously wish'd against the Senate, God hath graciously vouchsafed us, against the Atheist; for though these three Objections of his against Chri∣stianity, that have been answered, stand upon several Grounds (as distinct Necks) and therefore are not to be cut off, but one by one: yet all his remaining Objections stand upon one neck, center in this one point. Say Christ and his Apostles meant honestly, say they were wise men, say we have in the Gospel a true account of their doings and sayings: yet they were but Men, and as men discover their weakness, in such and such Texts, in these and these passages: which had they been divinely inspired, would never have faln from their Lips or Pens. If, then, we can demonstrate the Errour of their Con∣clusion, we make the Sophistry of all their Premises, upon which they labour to ground it, apparent: a man of the weakest Intellect, that hath seen Snow, will conclude all arguments, brought to prove it is not white, Fallacious. If we can manifestly prove, (the contra∣dictory to what they would conclude) That the Sacred Scrip∣tures are of Divine Original, the weakest Christian (by help of that natural Logick, that is, every man's Birth-right) though he cannot discern the particular irregularity of the Atheists discourse, as to Mood and Figure; yet may certainly and scientifically con∣clude, in the gross; that the Atheist's Arguments are not cogent, and necessarily concludent: and may stop all his blasphemous mouths, charm, into a dead sleep, the hundred squint eyes he casts upon Re∣ligion; with one Bolus, with one Caducaeus; and, be his Heads a thousand, give them their deaths wound at one blow, and so cut
the Sinnews, that makes him go with a stiff neck, as if his Heads have brains in them, they shall stoop and vail to that Majesty, which the Gospel challengeth, and shall be confirm'd, in the just possession thereof, by the probat of this Position. In the Fourth Book. The Divine Original of the sacred Gospel (and the Old Testament, of which it is the perfection) is as demonstrable as the Being of a Deity.
Christian Religions APPEAL To the BAR of Common Reason, &c. The Fourth Book. The Divine Original of Christian Religion is as demonstrable as the being of a God. CHAP. I. The Being of a Deity demonstrated. § 1. Atheistical exceptions against particular points of Religion; an Hydra's head, yet they all stand upon one neck, and may be cut off at one blow by proving the Divine Original of Religion. §. 2. The Existence of a Deity demonstrable from the frame of the World, the composition of humane bo∣dies. §. 3. The Garden of the earth did not fall by chance, into so curious and well ordered knots; the ingenuity of Birds sings the wisdom of their maker, &c. §. 4. The Heavens declare the Glory of God. § 1. IT hath been a question agitated in the Schools, whe∣ther the Notion of a Deity be not so imprinted on the Tables of the Heart, as 'tis not possible to be ra∣zed out? So congenial to the humane mind as it cannot frame a conception inward, answerable to this outward expression [There is no God] a Sentence in the Fools mouth and heart, and perhaps in his Brutish imagination, but not to be transcribed thence into his upper soul, whose pre-notions repulse all thoughts of entertaining it. (Alexand. Alens. sum. par. 1. quest. 3. memb 2.) An ita deus sit cogitare non esse; (vide Trismig. peri∣and.) Jamblicus makes the knowledge of God so essential to the soul, as he saith [to know God is the very essence thereof] Jamblic. de mysteriis 6. titulo de cognitione divinorum.) [Ante omnem rationis usum inest naturaliter dei notio: imò tactus quidam divinitatis melior quam notitia—Intellectus divinus dat esse
animae, per intelligere suum essentiale: ergo esse animae est quoddam intelligere, scilicet deum, unde dependit; esse nostrum, est Deum cognoscere.] The Notion of God is naturally in man before all exercise of reason: yea, a certain touch of the Divinity better than knowledge. The divine intellect, by giving it to understand its own being, gives being to the soul, the being therefore of the soul is to know that upon which it dependeth, to wit, God, our being is to know God.] Or whether, in case it could be supprest within, the arguments from without, of a Deity, are not so urgent upon our discoursive faculties, as we cannot open our eyes upon the creature, but we must see the impresses of the infinite Wisdom, power, goodness, of their Creator and disposer? The Author of the Book of Wisdom chap. 13. puts the fool upon all them, who from the good things that are seen, could not see him, that is, neither by attending to his works, would acknowledge who is the workman. As to matter of fact the Gen∣tile ages afforded those were called Atheists, by those who reputed all such that did not imbrace the commonly received Gods, (for which reason the Christians were branded with that ignominious title) but that those a∣ges produced one real Atheist, is more than can be proved: there were then such as doubted an dii sint vel non sint [Whether there were any Gods or not] There were such as questioned (or rather determined negatively) whether those were Gods, whose Idols were presented either in the colour of the Aethiopian Deities, black, (as Alexander Geraldin, 5. Itenerarii affirms the Ae∣thiopians to have painted their Gods, thinking that the most venust colour which themselves were tanned with) or in the bloody hew of Victors, Red: as the Romans in their triumphs painted Jupiter (saith Pliny, l. 3. cap. 7.) or in such ridiculous and unbeseeming shape, as that was whereby Latona was represented at Delos; at the sight whereof Parmenistas Metapontius could not refrain laughter, who before that had never laught since he came out of Trophonius his Cave (Athenaeus Dypnosoph. 14.) but there never was any a∣mongst the Ancients that ever questioned. An Deus sit? [Whether there be a God?] But this last age hath been productive of Monsters, whose Bellies have sent up those fumes into their head, as cloud the knowledge of a Dei∣ty, and will not suffer any God to be acknowledged but the Belly: so much more black and dismal is that night of ignorance, wherein the divine Ju∣stice invelops the abusers of Divine light, than that which men brought up∣on themselves, by not attending to natural Notions. That we may not therefore seem to beg that principle, but force the adversary to an acknow∣ledgement of the Deity; we will first prove the existence of a God, and then (by the same evidences) prove the Scriptures to be of Divine and superna∣tural revelation. Cicero in his wild discourse of the production of the Universe, makes one sober Observation. That he who goes about the framing of any work, if he have before him a model thats always the same, and propounds that to himself as a sampler, must of necessity produce an excellent work: but if he mind only the shape of the thing it self which he is making (which changeth with every turn of the wheel, and receives new impresses by eve∣ry new motion of the Artificers hand) he shall never bring forth so absolute comly a piece as he desires. From hence (saith he) it necessarily follows that this world, which we plainly discern to be an every way perfect pro∣duction, is the counterpart of some eternal Idea, pre-existing in the mind of the Architect, before it was made. (Seneca de provid.) Supervacuum est ostendere, tantum opus non sine aliquo custode stare. (Arist. 2. Phys.) Natura ut est sub primo agente intellectuali, operatur propter finem; (& Metaph. 12. 10.) necesse est unum esse principem, ut optima sit universi gubernatio. Neaue enim potentia temeraeria, sed sapientiae virtute, omnipotens est Deus (August 9. super Genesin ut li∣teram cap. 17.) It is needless to shew that such a work cannot stand without a Keeper (saith Seneca) Nature as it is under the first intellectual agent, operates for some end: where the universe is so excellently composed, there must need be one Prince (saith Aristotle) God saith Saint Austin is Omnipotent, not by a teme∣rarious
power, but by the virtue of wisdom. I choose this for my medium, be∣cause the consequence of it is perceiveable by the common sense of all men, from the greatest Statists to the simplest mechanicks. If the Carpenter or Wheelwright had nothing in their mind while they are hewing, but whats under their eye and Axe, (to which every stroke gives a new shape) if the one while he is shaping a spoke, did not think of a Wheel, and the other while he is forming a Beam, of an House, and both of them had not the perfect Idea of the proportions, and forethought of the use of that they are framing, they would never make all meet together in that symmetrie of parts, as the ultimate product of the one should be meet for habitation, and of the other for carriage. Should not the Gallants Taylor take measure of him, and sound all his Dimensions, or at least have one of his size in his thoughts while he cut out a sute for him, he would make a pitifull Gentleman of him, if he were a man only of the Taylors making, and nothing but his cloaths. §. 2. No less conspicuous are the prints of infinite wisdom, the footsteps of eternal, all-comprehending, divine foreknowledge in the admirable frame of the world. If we travel through the little World, Man, the Index, Epi∣tome, and Abstract of the great, that Nutshel wherein the whole Iliads of the larger Poem are comprised, that Center where all the lines of the whole Creation meet; and therein contemplate the outward and inward composure of the body, wherein there is not the least particle but hath its apparent use, and whereof every part is without the care or industry of Parents fitted to its proper use, with so much art, that the greatest Philosophers and most e∣minent Physicians can never sufficiently admire it. This Workmanship shews the Workman to be a most excellent mind, and to have squared his work by the line of most Superlative wisdome. The Prince of Physicians, Galen, though an Heathen, saw, (and wondred that any are so blind as not to see) the incomprehensible riches of the divine omniscience in the Anatomy of the eyes, and in the Dissection of the hand, felt (and admired that any should be so thick skin'd, as not to feel as it were by the fingers end) the foreknow∣ledge of the maker, exprest in the admirable disposing of every joynt, so as to make the hand a fit tool for the performance of every work, we use it in. The tongue of the most fluent Orator never run more glib in expres∣sing any passions of his mind, than those of admiration, at the artificial com∣posure of an humane body; when he read to the World that Anatomy Le∣cture, in his second Book de Natura Deorum, where discoursing upon that Subject, from the hair of the head to the nails of the toes, he makes every pipe of that well tun'd Organ, every string of that melodious Lute, sound cut the praises of the all-wise Maker, one while stiling it the [incredibilem stru∣cturam] so admirable a composure, as did we not see it with our eyes, we could not be induc'd to believe it were within the compass of wisdom it self to contrive such Engines of speech, of Breathing, of Digestion, Egestion, Generation, Local Motion, &c. another while crying out [vim quondam in-, credibilem artificiosi operis divinique testantur.] would it be credible if it were not sensible, that so artificial and Divine Works could be framed? § 3. How much greater Wonders of the Divine Science might I shew the Atheist, if I ripped up before him that other part of himself? If I shewed him the sparklings of the Jewel that's deposited in this Cabinet; the Artifici∣alness of the Spring of all, these stupendious Motions; whereby, in the twinkling of an eye, his Mind surrounds the Earth, and, if he please, mounts above the Stars: but this his immortal Piece is as far from his knowledge as his care! I will therefore not disturb him out of that pleasing Dream and conceipt of Jack-work or Clock-work: (for his mind is so taken up with Time, so fastned to his Trencher, Palate and Panch; as he can think of nothing but Clocks and Jacks;) nor wish him to strain his eyes in the rea∣ding of so small a Print, as that incorporeal Spirit is writ in, whereby he
lives (or should live) the Life of a Man; nor draw him out of his own gross element of bodily Substances; nor pose him with these hard Questions, con∣cerning things above his head, the ballancings, the Bottles of the Clouds, the moulten Glass of the Heavens, the Treasures of the Snow and Hail, the way that parts the Light, the Rain-spouts, the influences of the Pleiades, the time measuring Mazzaroth, the Seamans guide Arcturus; his Neck inured to stooping, would ake if it should stand in an erect posture: But only ad∣vise him to cast his eye upon that, on which he sets his Feet, the diverse co∣loured, flowrie, or grass-green Carpet of this Earthly Globe; and with the same reason he can think, that any thing but immense and eternal Wisdom, could contrive, the providing of so well furnished a Table, with all neces∣sary Food, and such plenty of delicates; the planting of so rich a Garden, with such variety of Flowers for Food, Physick or Delight; with so plea∣sing a variety of Colours, Scent, Tastes; he may far rather expect, that his own Garden should of it self, by meer chance of Fortune, without the con∣trivance of the Head, or labour of the Hand, part it self into most curious Beds and Artificial Knots; or that Stone and Timber should by chance, lay themselves into the form of a well-built House; or that single Letters cast out of a shuffling Box, should fall in that order, as to make an Elegant Poem. (Cicer, de Natura deor. 2. p. 87.) [Hîc ego non mirer esse quenquam, qui sibi persuadeat corpora quedám solida atque individua, vi & gravitate ferri, mundum∣que ornatissimum & pulcherrimum ex eorum corporum concursione fortuita? Hoc qui existimat fieri potuisse, non intelligo, cur non idem putet; Innumerabiles unius & viginti formae literarum, aliquo conjiciuntur, posse, ex his in terram excussis, an∣nales Ennii, ut deinceps legi possint, effici: quòd nescio an in uno quidem versu pos∣sit tantùm valere fortuna.] [Have I not reason here to wonder, that any man can perswade himself, that certain solid and individual Bodies are tost by motion and gravity, and that this most adorn'd and beautiful World was made by the fortuitous congress of those bodies? He who thinks this possible to be done, I see no reason why the same man should not also think, that if innumerable Characters of the one and twenty Letters, were cast somewhither, there might of them fal∣ling upon the earth be made the Annals of Ennius, so as they might be read, whereas I can hardly think, that fortune would be able to make one verse, after that manner.] How much more like a man did he discourse, who obser∣ving Geometrical Figures drawn on the Shore, said, [I see the footsteps of a man] easily perceiving that such Figures had not been flung by blind For∣tune, but drawn by Art. If he dare venture to cast his eye so near Heaven, as the top of a Tree, or the midst of a Bush; he may observe those so well timed and orderly Actions of Birds and Bees, as cannot but proceed from an higher Reason, than that of their particular Natures; that Fore-cast, to make; that ingenuity in making their Nests; that Discretion in know∣ing at first sight their Foes from Friends; that Parental care of their young, &c. may with more reason be admired, than they can, by the best improved Art, be imitated by us men. If the Atheist scorn Moses, let him (if it be but for Recreation) read Aelians History of Animals, Plutarchs Treatise of the Ingenuity of Birds, Beasts, Insects, Fishes, and Bees▪ himself must be (what Plutarch denies any of them to be) a Brute: if he learn not, that they received their skill from a mind fraught with infinite Wisdom; from a Be∣ing of infinite Goodness, proportioning every of their properties to the bene∣fit of their own Beings and conservation of their kind. If he open but an Ants Nest, a whole Colledge of Doctors will accost him, and offer to read him a Divinity-Lecture, upon this Point: the Doctrine whereof they not on∣ly carry in their Mouths, but lay upon their Shoulders; he may see them hording up in Autumn their Winters Provision, and first eating the Root∣end of every grain of Corn in their Granarie, to prevent its Sprouting: how gloriously incomprehensible must that Providence and Foresight be, that makes those silly Insects thus provident! How great that Wisdom, which teacheth them this discretion!
§. 4. But while I send the Sluggard, the Slow-belly Atheist to the Ant to learn, I must not forget to lay open to my Christian Reader, those Golden Letters of this great Volume, those Spangles that glitter in that our Canopy, which is but the Pavement of the upper House of the invisible World; whose Influences and Motions are so attempered to the Production and Conservation of Terrestrial Creatures; so fitted to our conveniency, as it is not possible to imagine how they could have been order's better. Though Epicurus made shew he did, [Nulla inquit disposi∣tio est, multa enim facta sunt aliter, quam fieri debuerunt. Et invenit homo divinus que reprehenderet; quae singula, si vacaret refellere, facilè ostenderem, nec sapientem hunc fuisse nec sanum, sed hominem quo s & vigente nullus aeger ineptiùs deliravit] saith Lactant. (de fal. Sapientia lib. 3. cap. 17.) [There is, saith Epicurus, no orderly disposition of things; for many things are made o∣therwise then they ought to have been. And this Divine man (saith our La∣ctantius) found a great many faults in Gods works, whose Cavils, if I had time to refell, one by one, I would easily show that this querlous Philosopher, was neither a wise man, nor well in his wits; but a person than whom (though he was sound and thristy in his Body) never any Sick man raved more madly.] But sure his tongue ran before his wit. Nor do I think that Al∣phonsus King of Spain, was in earnest, when he said that had he been with God, at the Creation, he could have directed the Sun a better course than that which he steers: Or if he was, he had the Moon then in his Crest, or was himself the greatest errour that ever nature committed. For though another course of the Sun might have been more convenient for Alphonsus his Kingdoms, as well as another course and place of the Sea; and though the end of his keeping within the Zodiack, which Cleanthes fancies, (to wit this, that the Sun being a Globe of Fire (the Food of whose Vitals was Moisture) that he might not die of thirst, would not recede further from the Mediterranean, than that he might reach, if not his Lip, yet (with the help of a long arm) his Spoon into it; and sip from thence his dayly nu∣triment, might have been better obtain'd, if he had in his course been led al∣ways to face the Ocean. Yet to him that considers what a general benefit it is to the whole world, that the Sun follows that line he does, in his dayly and yearly course; how by this means his Light and Heat is most equally distributed; the, (as profitable as pleasant) interchanges of Winter and Sum∣mer, of Spring and Autumn, procured: and all sublunary Creatures have assigned to them, as fit proportions of time (to work and rest in) as could be devised. To him I say that considers this, it will appear that an house built thus Magnificent, and furnisht with all imaginable conveniences, and all the members and parts of it disposed into so comely an Order (where∣in every particular serves it self, in serving the Community) was neither built for, nor by, Rats and Mice; but by that infinite being, who had in his mind, before the production of it, a preexisting, eternal and perfect I∣dea of all its Parts, Uses, Appurtenances, and Circumstances. If the fortu∣itous concourse of Atomes (saith Cicero) could produce so comely a Stru∣cture as the Universe, why do not they produce a Portch, a Temple, a City, which are far more easie, and have infinitely less Workmanship? Who can think him worthy of the name of Man, who when he sees such certain and regular Motions of the Heavens, such fixed Orders and Ranks of the Stars, and all things in Heaven and Earth so aptly connext and joyn'd together; can deny that the greatest Reason hath been, and is imployed in the making, sustaining, and guiding of them? Or conceipt that those things fall out by chance, they are disposed by such deep Council, as non-plusseth all humane wit to comprehend it: when we see things moved by Engines, we make no question but that those are the works of Reason; and when we see the C∣lestial Bodies wheeling about with so admirable Celerity, and most con∣stantly making their anniversary Vicissitude, to the greatest benefit and con∣servation
of all things; do we make the least doubt but that they follow the conduct not only of Reason, but the highest and Divinest Reason? [Quî igitur convenit! signum aut tabulam pictam cùm aspexeris, scire adhibitam Artem; cúm{que} procul cursum Navigii videris, non dubitare, quin id ratione at{que} arte moveatur; aut cùm Solarium, vel descriptum, vel ex aqua contemplere, in∣telligere declarari horas arte, non casu: mundum autem, qui & has ipsas artes, & eorum artifices, & cuncta complectitur, consilii & rationis esse expertem puta∣re. Quòd si in Scythiam aut Britanniam Sphaeram aliquis tulerit hanc, quam nuper effecit Possidonius, cujus singulae conversiones idem efficiunt in Sole, & in Luna, et in quinque Stellis errantibus quod efficitur in caelo singulis diebus, & no∣ctibus: quis in illa barbarie dubitet, quin ea Sphera fit perfecta ratione, Archime∣dem arbitramur plus voluisse in imitandis Spheris, quàm Naturam in efficiendis? Ille apud Actium Pastor, qui navem nunquam ante vidisset, ut procul novum vehicu∣lum Argonautarum è monte conspexit; primò admirans & perterritus, dubitat quid sit, at juvenibus visis, auditóque nautico cantu, consimilem ad aures cantum refert: (de Nat. Deor, 2. 7.) [How incongruous are these Epicurean imagina∣tions! If thou dost but cast thine eye upon a Sign Post, or Painted Table, thou would be ashamed to question, whether Art had been used therein, or chance had put them into that form? If thou seest a Ship under Sail, thou doubts not but Reason and Art are imploy'd in the conduct of it; If thou take a view of a Sun∣dial or an Hour glass, wherein the half hours or quarters are marked out, thou perceives that those Lines were drawn not by Chance, but Art. But when thou contemplates the World (which comprehends these very Arts and Artificers, and all things else) thou thinkest it void of Counsel and Reason. Put case a man should carry that Sphere which Possidonius lately made (whose several Motions make the same progress in the Sun, Moon, and five remaining Planets, which them∣selves make in the Heavens every day and night) into Scythia or Britain; (poor Britain, how art thou Posting back to thy old Scythian-equalling barba∣rousness) who, among those Savages, would make question, but that Art and Reason had an hand in framing that Sphere? Can we think that Archimedes had his mind more imploy'd in imitating the Spheres, then Nature in making of them? That Shepherd of Actium, who had never seen Ship before, when the Ship of the Argonautes came within his Ken; at first (wondring and affrighted) doubted what it was: but when he saw the Marriners and heard the Seamens Songs, he return'd the like Songs to their ears.] Put case, saith Aristotle (as he is quoted by Balbus, in Cicer. de Nat. Deor. 2.) That some men, who had al∣ways lived underground, should be let out of that Dungeon, and be per∣mitted to come upon the surface of the Earth; where, on a sudden, they should see, the Earth, the Sea, and Heaven; perceive the greatness of the Clouds, the force of the Winds; look upon the Sun, and understand the vastness of its Bulk, the Beauty of its Face, and the force of his Influence; the efficacy of its Light, making Day, of its Heat cherishing and refreshing all creatures: and next, when day is shut in, should fix their eyes upon the many thousand fixed eyes of the Starry Heaven, the various Faces of the Moon Increasing and Decreasing, with all their Risings, Settings, and constant Motions. They could not with - hold their assent to this Truth; That all this is the contrivance of unsearchable Wis∣dom. Divinely our Lactantius (De falsa relig. l. 2. 5.) in answer to that of the Philosopher [If the Motions of the Stars be not fortuitous. they must be vo∣luntary, and have a Principle of Life and Reason within themselves] denies the sufficiency of the Disjunction; saying, they are neither fortuitous, nor voluntary; and yet keep a constant course in performing their journeys, because God (the Architect of the Universe) hath so framed them, that they run through the spaces of Heaven, by a Divine and admirable Reason, in order to the making of variety of Seasons succeeding one another. If Ar∣chimedes could so frame the Image of the World in concave Brass, as one might see therein the Sun and Moon, making the like Motions as they do
in the Heavens, &c. Could not God much more so despose the things them∣selves, than humane Wit could make a Resemblance of them. And if a Stoick should see the imitation of the Heavenly Motions, would he say that motion was caused by the Wit of the Engine, or of him that made it? There is therefore Reason in the Stars, fitted to carry them to the accomplish∣ment of their various courses; but that is the Reason of God, who made and governs all things, not of the Stars that are moved. And c. 2. [Nemo est tam rudis, qui oculos suos in caelum tollens, tametsi nesciat cujus Dei Provi∣dentiâ regatur hoc omne quod cernitur, aliquam tamen esse non intelligat ex ipsa rerum magnitudine, motu, dispositione, constantiâ, utilitate, pulchritudine, tem∣peratione: nec possit fieri, quin id, quod mirabili ratione constat, majori aliquo consilio sit instructum.] There is no man so rude, if he lift up his eyes toward Heaven, although he knows not by what Gods Providence, all that which he sees, is governed, that does not understand by the Immensity, Motion, Disposition, Constancy, Conveniency, Beauty, Composure of these things, that there is some providence or other; and that it is not possible, but that that which is continued by such admirable Reason, was at first framed by the greatest Counsel. CHAP. II. The Author of Christian Religion hath stampt thereon no less manifest Prints of Infinite Science, than the Maker of the World hath left upon that his Workmanship. § 1. Heathen Prophecies the Result of Ratiocination. § 2. From general Hints which for mens torment God might permit the Devil to Communicate. § 3. The Ambiguity of Oracles on purpose to hide the Ignorance of them that gave them. § 4. It was by chance they spake truth. § 5. Scrip∣ture-Oracles Distinct; of pure Contingencies; their Sence plain; punctu∣ally fulfilled. §. 1. I Would not run my Reader down with numbers, but beat him down with weight of Arguments, and shall therefore singly insist upon this one, viz. There cannot be a more certain Indication of Infinite and boundless Know∣ledge, than that which the Author of our Religion hath exerted, in the Pro∣phetick Part thereof. Of how many pure Contingencies (which then neither were, nor possible to be discerned, in their second Causes, nor to be foreknown at all, but by him, to whose inspection all things, past, present, and to come, are a like vi∣sible) must that Spirit have the Foreknowledge, that inspired our Prophets with so certain a Prenotion of those events which they foretold; as none of their Predictions have miscarried in the least Circumstance: many of which Circumstances are in themselves so inconsiderable, and so little conducing to the gracing or setting forth of the Subject of their Prophecy; and yet so utterly impossible to have been foreknown, but by the indication of the all∣at-once-knowing Wisdom; as they seem to have been communicated, for no other end, but either to convince the World of the Divine Original of those Discoveries. (Isa. 45. 21.) [Who hath declared this from ancient time? have not I the Lord] (Isa. 46. 8.) [Remember this and shew your selves men. I am God, and there is none like me declaring the end from the beginning.] Or to outface all Pagan Oracles and Divinations, (Isa. 41. 23.) [Let all the Nations be gathered together, who, among them can declare this, and shew us things to come hereafter, that we may know, that you are Gods?] If the Father of Lies and those lying Vanities of the Heathen at any time gave true Responds.
1. They were usually not of things purely future, but latent in their se∣cond causes: latent (I mean) to Humane Knowledge, but not to Diabolical Sagacity; which smelt them at a distance, sometimes in their general Cau∣ses (by their skill in Judicial Astrology) sometimes in their immediate and more particular Causes (by their skill in the affairs of States and Interests of several Nations, &c. By means whereof, I am so far from admiring their fore-telling the events of Battails, the Fortunes of some Persons of note; their communicating Intelligence from places of 100 or a 1000 miles di∣stance, in an hour, in a minutes space; as I wonder they could get any re∣spect at all, among the soberer and more Civilized Nations, by such three penny Prognostications, as an ordinary Wizzard might out-vie. Hagag the Son of Joseph a Jew, and Prefect of Babylon, Anno Christi 714. being taken with a violent Fever, inquired of an Astrologer, whether he could find by the Motions of the Starrs that a King was to die that year; he affirmed there would but one, whose name was Cain Hagag, calling to mind that his Mother had given him that Name at his Birth; I must die then (replyed he) but thou shalt die before me: and instantly commanded his head to be struck off: (Scalig. can. Isagogic, l. 2. pag. 143.) Could he read his name in the Stars? No sure, but he came to the knowledge of it as Gypsies do, of mens Relations and the temper of their Neighbours towards them. [Ho∣rum sunt auguria non divini impetûs sed rationis—quos prudentes possimus di∣cere, id est, providentes, divinos nullo modo possimus; non plus quàm Milesium Thalem; qui ut ostenderet etiam Philosophum, si ei commodum esset, pecuniam facere posse, omnem Oleam, antequàm flores cepisset in agro Milesio coemisse dici∣tur; animadverterat fortasse quadam scientiâ, olearum ubertatem fore: Necillam divinationem voco, quâ Anaximandro Physico moniti Lacedemonii sunt, ut ur∣bem et tecta relinquerent, armatique in agris excubarent; quòd terrae motus in∣staret:—Nec illam quâ Pherecides, cùm vidisset haustam aquam à jugi puteo, terrae motus dixit instare (Cicer. divinat 1. pa. 197.) Such mens Auguries are not the results of the Divine Impulse, but Reason.—We may call them wise; that is, provident, but by no means Diviners; no more than the Milesian Thales; who (that he might shew that a Philosopher, if he pleased to use it, had skill to get wealth) bought all the Olive-trees in the Milesian field before they blossom'd, foreseeing by his knowledge of the Constitution of that Year, that it would be a plentiful year of Olives; nor do I call that a Prophecy whereby the Lacedemo∣nians were counselled by Anaximander to forsake their City and Houses, and watch abroad in the Fields, because an Earthquake was approaching: nor that of Phericedes, who when he saw Water drawn from a living Well, said, there would happen an Earthquake. How easily might the most Callow and but Pen-Feather'd Demon, tell how many Figgs were on a Tree, how many Pigs in the Sows Belly. As in that contention betwixt Calchas and Mopsus (re∣ported by Hesiod and repeated by Natales Comes lib. 4. cap. 10.) Mopsus an∣swered, there grew ten thousand and one Figgs upon that Tree, concerning which, the question was propounded by Calchas. And to that question which Galchas could not answer) How many Pigs were in the Sows Belly, &c. He gave as true an answer, that they were ten, one whereof was a Bore-Pig: and of the rest, three had a white Cross over the Shoulders; two of them white spots upon the eyes: and the rest had the near-hinder-foot white, from the Hoof to the Knee.—Aemulantur divinitatem dum furantur divinationem, &c. (Tertul. apol. cont. Gent. 22.) They Emulate the Divinity while they Steal Divi∣nation. The Philosophers (saith St. Austin de Civitate 10. 32.) have no e∣steem of such like Divinations, and that justly. [Nam vel inferiorum fiunt praesentione causarum, vel immundi Daemones sua disposita facta praenunciant:] For they are either effected by the presention of inferior Causes, or the impure Demons foretell the coming to pass of such things, as themselves are determined to do. But it is more to be admired that those busie spiritual Wickednesses, in the Heavenly places, those Princes of the Air, those Curriers that went to
and fro over the Earth, did no more improve the advantage which their na∣ture gave them, to their abusing the World with stronger Delusions; To which, doubtless, their Pride and Ambition to be reputed Gods, and their spiteful enmity to the Womans Seed, did instigate them. And therefore I cannot but adore that Divine Providence, which so far restrain'd those ma∣licious, powerful and intelligent Spirits, as in this point (of Fortune-telling) they could not go the full length of the Line of their own Natures; they were not permitted to tell all they knew, to shew things that were in their second Causes, (and therefore under their inspection;) much less to commu∣nicate the fore-knowledge of things that had no being but in the first Cause. § 2. Though he might (for the punishment of mens impious Curiosity) have used bad Angels as well as good, to carry Tidings of such Contingen∣cies, as the Messenger could not have known, but by his Revelation: yet that was done without impeachment of this his challenged Privilege of shewing the End from the Beginning: For he used the service of wicked Spirits (to anticipate the torment of wicked men, by their fore-knowledge of what would happen) only in general predictions of some one single event, without any other Circumstances than such as did either naturally touch up∣on, or might with strong probability be gathered from, that one supernatu∣rally-reveal'd Contingent. Thus, upon supposition of Gods revealing to that Spirit, which the Witch of Endor raised, that Saul should die in that Battail, which the Israelites and Philistines were so near an engagement in, as both Armies were set in Battalia, and facing one another, what time Saul consul∣ted the Witch; that spirit might rationally collect the time of his death [to morrow;] for it was not like the Armies would stand longer in that posture, nor the Israelites engage sooner, than Saul should return to the head of his Army: the discomfiture of the Israelitish Host, for it could not be ima∣gined, that Saul should die in that Battail, but either in Fight, (and that would be such a quelling of the spirits of his men, as to make them turn their backs upon the enemy) or in Flight (and that must be after his loss of the Field, and the taking of the Ark of God, which they carried with them into the Field, and must leave there when they had lost the Field. It might be here observ'd, that the Indian Responds to Alexander, were meer Gypsie-juglings. Alexander in his Epistle to Aristotle, informs him, that the Priests told him, that [The Sun gave out Oracles in the Grecian as well as the Indian Tongue, but the Moon only in the Indian:] Is not the reason of this apparent? because the Priests of the Sun were Learned Knaves, and could speak Greek; but the Moons Vestals were illiterate Females, who understood their Mother-Tongue only. And as to the Answers which both gave, how easily might they guess what Alexander desired to be resolved about? For what could a person of his ambition think of, but Conquering the World; or a person to whom his Mother and Sister were so dear, as he intermingled their Names in the Discourses he had with the Gymnosophists, but of returning home to those beloved Relations, af∣ter so long a march? And, how easie was it to promise him the Conquest of the World, after he had subdued it as far as India's utmost Eastern Bounds, (that is, to the end of the known World on that side, where it was most anciently and populously inhabited, and therefore most likely to make resistance.) Lastly, how probable was the Conjecture, that (now his labour of conquering was as good as over) a man of his complexion would give himself to that ease and luxury, as would lay him open to the stroke of untimely death, by effeminating his body, and making it unapt to bear the extremities of the Climes, through which he was to return; Or grow up to that height of disdainful pride, as might possibly provoke his Captains to disgust him. To say nothing of that light, which those Travelling Sophs might have received, from Daniel's Prophecy, from which it is manifest, those Chaldeans borrowed that Light, which they exhibited, in their Prog∣nostications
of Alexander's Greatness, and Darius his Fall, (by Q. Curtius l. 4.) The Demon of Delphos was not such a punie Devil sure, but that he could count to four, and read Daniels Text, where he wrote of a fourth King of Per∣sia, from Darius Nothus, whom the King of Graecia should subdue: nor such a Freshman, but that he had Logick enough to make this inference, That he who was to subdue the Empire of the whole World, would translate the whole Empire to himself: and therefore his informing Philip, that his Son, whom Bucephalus permitted to come upon his back, should make the whole World his Mule; was no more than what any Pigmie, set upon the Gyant shoulders of Daniel might have seen. § 3. Where Pagan Oracles, in an apish imitation of those of the God of Israel, seem to foretel things from beginning to end; yet they shew not, they declare not, those future things, in such clear expressions and incontro∣versial Terms, as speak the Author of those Responds, to have had the know∣ledge of what they seem to speak; but rather a design to cover their own Ignorance, and save their credits, under the shelter of ambiguous words; such as, whatever should fall out, might equally be applied to them and ga∣thered from them, according to the different Glosses, which several Fan∣cies might put upon them. Of which though I have elsewhere given seve∣ral examples, I shall here add that out of Homer, observ'd by Macrobius in his de Som. Scipion. (lib. 1. cap. 7.) [Divulgatis etiam docemur exemplis, quàm penè semper cùm praedicantur futura, ità dubiis obserantur, ut tamen diligens scrutator, nisi divinitùs impeditur, subesse reperiat apprehendendae vestigia verita∣tis, &c.] We are taught (saith he) by famous examples, how that almost constant∣ly when future things are foretold, they are sealed up in doubtful words; yet so as the dilligent searcher, if he be not divinely impeded, may find out some footsteps of Truth therein hinted. As when the Grecian Emperor comman∣ded by Jove in a Dream, that the day following he should draw up his Army and give Battail to the Trojans; and, encouraged with manifest hope of promised Victory, did as he was commanded: but came off with so great loss of men, as he had much ado to make a retreat to his own Camp. Was he deluded with a lying Oracle? by no means (saith Macrobius) but the Fates intending that mischance to the Grecians, there was that lurking in the words of the Dream, which had they observ'd, would have directed them, how they might either obtain the Victory or avoid Fighting. For Jove's Precept was, that the whole Army should be drawn up, meaning, that the King should forthwith make his peace with Achilles, (who upon disgust, had drawn off his Party, and deserted the Cause:) The King therefore not following Jove's Instructions, did both deservedly sustain that detriment, and absolve the Dream from the envious charge of lying. Such another Plaister this great Humanist applies, for the Salving of the credit of that Delin O∣racle, which put Aeneas to so many years wandring, and such dangerous voy∣ages, in the quest of the native soil of his Progenitors: which he might have sav'd, had he understood that one ambiguous word Dardanidae. But why did not Apollo avoid the Equivocation, with a man so pious as Aeneas, if indeed he himself had certainly known, what place Providence had allotted for that Trojan Colony to sit down in, or understood any more touching that point, than any ordinary person might have arrived at, by discourse? to wit, That their Mother-soil was likeliest to receive them into her lap, now that the Trojan soil had proved a Step-mother to them: but whether Crete, whence Teucer, or Italy (whence Dardanus sprung) would give Ae∣neas entertainment, the Oracle durst not determine; and therefore to save its credit, gives this uncertain sound. [Quid opus est circuitione & anfractu? ut sit utendum interpretibus potiùs, quàm directè; Deus siquidem nobis consule∣bat, hoc facito, hoc nè feceris diceret. (Cicer. Divin.) Et si Medicus aegroto im peret, ut sumat, terrigenam, herbigradam, domiportam, sanguine cassam; potiùs quàm, hominum more, Cochleam dicere. Pucuvianus Amphion, quadrupes,
tárdigrada, agrestis, humilis, aspera, capite brevi, cirvice anguinâ, aspectu truci, eviscerata, inanima, cum animali sono: Cùm dixisset, tum Attici respondent, non intelligimus, nisi apertè dixeris; at ille, uno verbo, Testudo: non potueras hoc igi∣tur a principio citharista dicere] (Id. Ib.) Why such winding and abruptness? That he that inquires hath need of an interpreter: Why do not Oracles rather answer Directly? Sure if it were God that gave advice, he would say, Do this, beware of doing this, &c. As if a Physician should injoyn his Patient to take the Earth-born, grass-creeping, house-carrying, bloodless Insect, rather than a Snail, in the plain usual way of speech, when Pacavianus Amphion thus can∣ted. The four foot, slow-pac'd, rude, low, rugged Creature, with a sharp head, Snakes neck, fierce look, and no howels, nor soul, yet having the voice of a living Creature: We understand thee not (cried the Athenians) speak plain. I mean (quoth he) in one word, a Tortoyse, why couldst thou not (pittiful Fidler) have said thus at first? Reply they. § 4. Fourthly, if those Oracles at any time plainly foretold any Contin∣gents which took effect. The Responds were as contingent, as the things they foretold. Those blind Bards might hap-hazzard, stumble upon a Truth; as the veriest Lyar in the World may; while those great Lotteries were fre∣quented, though most of the Fortunes were Blanks, yet some lucky hand might perhaps once in an Age draw a Prize, or throw a Venus upon the Prenestine Dice, once in an hundred casts. To that Samothracian who made offer to prove Neptunes faithfulness to his Votaries, by the multitude of votive Tables which were dedicated by such as had escaped Shipwrack; yea, replied Diogoras, but were there a Table hung up, for every one that has been drowned, while they were most devoutly invocating Neptune, the Temple would not contain them. [Quis enim est qui totum diem jaculans non aliquando collimet?] (Et Plutarch de oracul. defect. pag. 679.) sicut ii qui saepè jaciunt, saepenumerò scopum attingunt] He has very bad luck that shoots all day long, and never comes near the mark, saith Cicero, (de Divin. 3.) Upon these accounts these Oracles grew into that contempt, as the Spartans would not trust to the Respond of Dodona, till they had sent Agesilaus to Delphos, to propound this Question to Apollo; whether he was of the same mind with his Father? and notwithstanding they had the assurance of two Oracles, Agesilaus, to cure the Despondency of his Army, was fain to sub∣orn the Augur to imprint Victory upon the Liver of the Sacrifice, and pre∣tend he found it there. And therefore Epaminondas, in contempt of both lucky and adverse Oracles, laid the one at his right hand and the other at his left; telling his Souldiers, it was at their choice, whether of those For∣tunes they should have, wishing them to depend more upon their own Va∣lour, than upon the most favourable Respond. (Plutarch. apothegmat. mor. Tom. 1. § 5. But now the God of Israel communicated to his Prophets, the foreknowledge of future things, whose Causes were then only in his own Preference, with all their Circumstances, in plain terms: of which Prophe∣cies not one tittle has fail'd, but in its time appointed received its accom∣plishment. Of all which properties, whereby the Sacred Oracles are dis∣criminated from prophane and Diabolical, those are eminently partakers that relate to the Messias, and are fullfil'd in our Jesus. Which 1. Distinctly foretell the place of his Birth, Bethlehem; of his Re∣treat from Herods rage, Aegypt; of his Nurture, Nazareth; of his greatest Re∣sidence in the time of his Ministry, Galilee. The Confederacy of Herod and Pilate, of Jew and Gentile against him, the Treason of him that eat of his Bread, that dipt in his Dish; the Price at which he was sold; the Purchase of the Potters Field, with that price of Blood. All the Puctilio's of his Passion. The Piercing his Hands, Feet, and Side; The Distension of his Sacred Body upon the Cross, so as one might tell all his bones; the Mar∣ring
of his blessed Face, with Buffeting, spitting and besmearing with blood (trickling down from his Thorn-crowned Head) his being numbred with Transgressors; his being Crucified between two Thieves; the Souldiers di∣viding his Garments among them; their casting Lots upon his Vesture: The Jews scornful and malicious deportment towards him; hiding their face from him; turning their backs upon him; rejecting him as not their King, when Pilate presented him; their giving him Vinegar to drink. The very form of words wherewith they taunted him, were by Prophecy put into their Mouthes. [He trusted in God that he would save him; let bim deliver him if he will have him] Mat. 27. 43. Psal. 22. 8. His making his Grave with the rich, his being buried like a noble man; for he was before hand, by Ma∣ry Magdalen anointed against his Burial with most precious Spikenard, was perfum'd, imbalm'd by Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews; wound in fine lin∣nen by Joseph of Arimathea, and laid in that new Tomb, which that Ho∣nourable Person had hewne out of a Rock in his Garden for himself: and to make his Funeral more august, the Chief Priests and Pharisees contri∣bute a guard of Souldiers to watch his blessed Corps, and take order that his Sepulchre be made fast with a hewen Stone, (filling the mouth, and fastned with Cramps of Iron into the sides of his Tomb) the most honou∣rable form of entombing, All which things the Evangelists do therefore af∣firm to be done, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, and our Jesus demon∣strated, to be the Person of whom those infallible Oracles spake. The far greatest and most substantial part of those things not being applicable, in truth, to the persons that spake them. David in his own person suffered not such like things, any more then he did not see corruption, as Saint Peter argues: And therefore, as the same Apostle dictates, those Prophesies were not of private interpretation; that is, as Saint Philip, (in answer to the Eu∣nuchs question) resolves, the Prophets did not speak those things of them∣selves, but of some other man, to wit the Messias. 2. Can any thing be imagined more purely contingent than those things? Is it conceivable, how so long before, there could be a Foreknowledge of their Futurity by the Prophets inspection into their Natural Causes. The Learned Vossius (de Origine idol. lib. 2. cap. 48.) doth explode the madness of some Modern Astrologers, who affirm, that all the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles, or any body else, were the natural and necessary ef∣fects of some Conjunctions of Planets; and were not ashamed to ascribe to the Horoscope, the Birth of Christ of a Virgin, and all his stupendious works, and those great Changes which have faln out in respect of Reli∣gion; ascribing the rise of the Jewish, to the Conjunction of Jupiter with Saturn; of the Chaldean, to the Conjunction of Jupiter with Mars; the Ae∣gyptian, to the Conjunction of Jupiter with the Sun; The Mahometan, to the Conjunction of Jupiter with Venus; the Christian, to the Conjunction of Jupiter with Mercury; and the Antichristian, to Jupiters Conjunction with the Moon, (all which is to be read in Albumazar, lib. 2. de mag, con∣jectul. tract. 1. dissect. 4.) Say that such Conjunctions might possibly incline those parts of the World, under the Dominion of their Influence, to imbrace those several Religions; yet he must be of a Facile Faith, that can believe it was possible for our Divine Prophets to read their Predictions, in the Book of the Starrs; who if they had had an everlasting Almanack in their heads, from what Positions of the Heavenly Bodies could they have Prog∣nosticated, the concentring of so many emergencies upon one man? from what Conjunction of Planets (or Lincaean inspection into Matters of State) (a Book more tost, and to better purpose than the other, by those prudent Judicial Astrologers, who had a mind not to shame their Profession) could David foresee the agreement of Herod and Pilate who the day before were at enmity, and on the day of our Saviours Passion were made Friends, and that in order to our Saviours Crucifixion at Jerusalem? which (according to Gods determinate Counsel revealed to David) could not be effected, till
those Rulers under the Gentile Empire stood up in their Masters quarrel, and with the people of Israel, took councel together against the Lord and his Christ, as the Church dictates, Act. 4. 25. 27. From what sowr and crab∣bed Aspect of the Planets, could David foretell, their turning of Drink in∣to Vinegar? From what influences the distilling of the Blood of God from Christs Head, Hands, Side, Feet? In what Ephemeris did the Prophet read that astonishing Darkness that invelopt the Earth? Briefly, in what Cause, but the Will of God revealed to them by himself, could they see those strange events that fell out; that one Year, that acceptable Year of the Lord; that one Week, that great Week, as the Ancients stiled it; that one Day, that Day of Redemption? Let the most expert Astrologer e∣rect a Scheme, set up all the Lamps of Heaven, in that posture wherein they stood at our Saviours Passion; and try if he can by their Light, disco∣ver the least appearance or likelihood of a reason, that in such a juncture such things must fall out, by the course of nature. That at that time (for instance) those Prophetick Forms, which the Jews used in derision of Christ, that had hung (as it were frozen) at the Prophets lips, so many hundred of years, should be thawn, and drop into the Mouthes of that Generation: That the Legs of the Thieves should be broken. and not our Saviours: That his Side should be pierced and not theirs, &c. 3. Those Prophecies are so plain, and the Application of them, in their Effects, to the Blessed Jesus, so natural; as we need not strain courtesie with the Letter it self (to wrest it from its most obvious sence, in making the Buckle and Thong meet; in making the accomplishment kiss the Oracles. Here need no Salvoes of the Prophets Credit, by understanding them to speak figuratively; The Text is so easie, as it needs no other Gloss, than the plain History of the Gospel; the same words, the same things, which the one foretells to be done, the other tells as done, Bethlehem answers Beth∣lehem, Nazareth, Nazareth; Aegypt, Aegypt, as face answers face: David declaring the case of his own soul used the phrase of [Broken Bones] Meta∣phorically, to shew the dislocation of its Faculties, by his great Fall: But Moses in describing the ordinance of the Paschall Lamb (the Type of the Lamb of God) uses those words [a Bone of him shall not be broken] in their proper sence, in that sence, wherein the Evangelists applies that Text to Christ. He had his Metaphorical Gall, Vinegar, Spittings, Buffetings, &c. But the Son of David had them really, according to the Letter of the Pro∣phecy. The ruine of the Jewish State, the Vocation of the Gentiles, the Glory of Christs Kingdom are sometimes indeed set out in Rhetorical Flou∣rishes and borrowed expressions; but they (and all things else pertaining to Christ) are in other Prophetick Texts, so plainly foretold as the Tongue of Man can speak. 4. The punctual performance of this whole Cluster, the ripening of eve∣ry Berry thereof into Event, speaks the Prophets not to have spoken by chance. That Poem cannot be a Medley, a Rapsody, whose every foot is of a regular length. If you throw 4 Dice, perhaps one of them may be a Size, but who ever saw an hundred Sizes cast at one throw of an hundred Dice. If a Sow with her Snout should imprint upon the ground, which she is rooting up, the Figure of the Letter [A] couldst thou therefore ima∣gine, she might, in these Lines she draws express Ennius his Andromacha, or Virgils Aeneads. (Cicer. Divin. 1. p. 162.) It was the unparallel'd Commen∣dation of the Prophecies delivered to Israel, that there failed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken to the House of Israel: but all came to pass (Josh. 21. 45.) for the truth whereof Joshua appeals to their own Experience (chap. 23. 14.) Ye know in all your hearts, and all your souls, that not one thing hath failed, all is come to pass, and not one thing failed. And hence the whole Assembly are perswaded, that he, who appeared to Abra∣ham, and spake by Moses, was the only God, worthy of credit, deserving to be confided in, and adhered to.
CHAP. III. Instances of Prophecies fullfill'd whose Effects are permanent and obvious to the Atheists Eyes, if he will but open them. § 1. Predictions that Israel would reject their own Messia, made, by Jews Con∣fession, many hundreds of years before Christ. § 2. The Prophets foretell Gods Rejection of the Jews for their Rejection of his Son. § 3. Texts pro∣ving a final Rejection. Christs Blood calls down this vengeance. § 4. These Menacies executed to the full: Temple, City, and all vanish'd, Spirit of Pro∣phecy past from the Synagogue to the Church. § 1. TO give an Enumeration of all Particulars here, would be an end∣less Task, It may suffice, that the most prying Adversary hath not, to this day, produc'd one instance of any of our Prophecies that hath faln to the ground; but what our Apologists have demonstrated, either to be accomplisht, or accomplishable in its time. And furthermore our Mo∣dern Atheist is too wise to believe further than he can see; and therefore I will not press him to the belief of the accomplishment of those Prophecies, whose Effects are gone and past out of sight by any other Arguments, than those I produced in the first part of the Third Book, where I proved the Truth of Matters of Fact reported in the Gospel. But if he be wise enough to know, what his own Senses Dictate to him? it is all that Wisdom, at this present, requires of him, to make him docible, and capable of her Instructi∣ons: And verily, if he be not so far a man, as this amounts to, Anticira is a fitter place for him, than the Academy. Art thou then weaned from the Milk, taken from the Breast? art thou not still like that Child of the Lady Moores Prayers, a Boy still, and wilt be so, as long as thou livest? Know∣est thou thy right hand from thy left? Come in, sit down (Wisdom invites thee) though thou beest in the lowest Form of Rational Animals, she will teach thee knowledge, though thy Soul be the most narrow mouthed glass, that ever was blown by the breath of that Almighty, whom thou scornest she will infuse her Documents into thee, drop by drop, as thou art able to receive them, through the Loop-holes of thy Head and Face. 1. If thine Eyes can spare so much time from beholding vanity, fix them upon those Texts, Is. 53. 1. &c. and they will inform thee, that the Pro∣phet foresaw and foretold, that he, of whom the Evangelical Preachers were to say, [Thy God, Oh Sion, Reigneth,] that that arme of the Lord, upon his making of which bare, all the ends of the World, should see the Sal∣vation of Israels God: that he, who was to besprinkle many Nations; at whom Kings were to shut their Mouthes; who was to have a Portion divi∣ded him with the great, and to be made very high; to have a Name gi∣ven him above every name: should (notwithstanding the beamings out of his Glory amongst them, notwithstanding Moses and the Prophets had so manifestly pointed him out) be despised and rejected of those that saw him, among whom he had his converse. 2. From them cast thine Eye upon Secular Chronology, and that will tell thee, how many hundreds of years this Prophecy was pen'd, before our Saviour (to whom alone it is applicable) was incarnate: Or if thou suspects, they may write in favour of Christ, consult the Jews, his profest enemies, and they will inform thee; how Isaiah gave forth this Prophecy, before the Birth of Jesus of Nazareth, so many ages, as rendred those things impossible to be known, but by the Reve∣lation
of that Infinitely-wise Being, to whom all things past and to come are alike present. Of which if thou makes question, it will be thy part to shew, by what other means the Prophets could come to the knowledge hereof; or to give one instance, at least of any one man, that by Natural Means hath foretold a thing so long before it fell out. But rather than en∣ter upon such a Wild-Goose-chase, (except thou could devise how to get a∣bove the Magnetick Sphere of the Earth, that thou mayst stalk it over the Clouds, into the World of the Moon, to fetch an example thence, of what is not to be found in that Globe which we inhabit) I would advise thee, to make a Voyage into the Low-Countries, and to enquire there, whether the Jews do not reject that Off-spring of David, who made his soul an offering for sin, who was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep, was Dumb before the Shearer, and opened not his mouth, when he was provo∣ked to call his servants to rescue him out of the hands of his Murderers: who gave his Face to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, that Buffeted and abused him. Ask this Generation what opinion they have of Jesus of Nazareth, of whom their Fathers were the Betrayers and Murderers, whom God raised from the Dead, by whom God wrought Signs and Miracles. I am sure they will make thee such answer, as the Spi∣rit of the Messias, above two thousand years ago, by the mouth of their own Prophets, foretold they would make to that Question. Listen in their Syna∣gogues, if thou canst hear the blessed Jesus named, except it be in execrati∣ons, spie if thou canst see the Symbol of his precious Death, except it be in their barbarous representation thereof, by some Crucified Christian In∣fant. Observe if there be any Signs of their relenting, for Murdering that holy and just One, of their bitter mourning over their Fathers sin, in choos∣ing a Murderer before the Innocent Lamb of God: If thou discernest one tear to trickle down from their eye, while 'tis fixt upon him; except it flow from their spightful envy, to see him exalted, adored, and worshipt of all people, but themselves: [,] (Isidor. Pelus. l. 4. ep. 74.) They are preserv'd alive, that they may be vexed at the heart, by beholding the glory of Christ shining every where. Or be in revenge of that vengeance upon them, by which Christ has paid himself, for the Travel of his soul for that unthankful Nation; and vindicated the honour of his Deity, in the opinion of all men, but themselves: by which they, that would not receive instruction, are made an instruction to others; and they, who would not, (by all the plainest Demonstrations which Christ or his Apostle did lay before them) be convinc'd, are become a Demonstrati∣on to convince the World, that that Jesus, whom they slew and hanged upon a Tree, is the very Christ: For as their Fathers, by condemning him; so the Children of that stock of Abraham, by persisting in their denial of him, (not knowing him, nor the voyces of the Prophets, which are read eve∣ry Sabbath day) have been and are still fulfilling those Prophets, as to this Point of their Prediction, that that People should reject their own Messias, (Act. 13. 27.) § 2. A second Branch of Prophecy, whose Fruit hangs yet upon it, whose Effect is still permanent, to be seen, felt, and handled, is that tou∣ching Gods Rejection of the Jews, for their rejecting of his Son; Of the truth of which that Nation is a manifest proof, and stands as a Pillar of Salt, to season all Ages with the belief of the Supernaturalness of those Re∣velations wherein that event was foretold; And of the warrantableness of the Churches Application o them to the Blessed Jesus; whereupon Celsus having excepted against that Opinion of the Christians, [That the Jews had moved Gods displeasure against them for their Crucifying and disowning Christ:] Origen replies, [What? Is not the dispersion of their Nation, the ruine of their Temple, City, &c. sufficient indications of Gods rejecting that people?—I dare say they shall never be restored:] (Origen. contra Celsum. l. 3. cal. 10.) I
hope the English Atheist is not so much a French Gentleman, as to take it in Dudgeon, that I lay some grains of this Salt on his Trencher, or rather advise him to help himself to some, now that it stands at his Elbow: for I fancy him yet in Belgium, taking out the first Lesson touching the Jews dis∣owning of Christ: And now that he is amongst those Keepers of our Rolls, those bearers of our Books; let him search, whether those Prophecies which foretell, that upon that Nations refusing to accept their own Messias, their Fa∣thers God should wholly disown them; be the inventions of Christians, the pious frauds of our Church, or the Responds of their own Prophets? Ask a Jew of whom that Prophet of theirs (whom for honours sake they call An∣gel) Jeremy, speaks, (chap. 6.) [I will bring evil upon this people, because they have rejected the word of the Lord] because they said [we will not walk in the good way,] wherein they were promised to find rest for their souls; because [they would not hear the sound of the Trumpet] that sound which the Gen∣tiles would hear; [Hearken therefore; hear ye Nations] hear O earth: I will bring evil upon this people, reprobate Silver shall men call them, because God hath rejected them.] Can the most obstinately blinded Jew shut his Eye so close, as he shall not here see the glimmerings of those unwelcome Truths. 1. That this is an Evil, the Effects whereof should be so palpable, as all Na∣tions should so manifestly see the Marks of Gods rejecting them, as the name whereby they should, in common speech, be called, [is reprobate Sil∣ver,] a refuse Nation, a People cast off of God; a name, which God was angry with the Heathen for fastning upon them, in the saddest dereliction of that people formerly. That, 2. [The word] for their rejecting whereof they were rejected of God: [The good old way,] for their refusing to walk wherein, they were left out of the road of Mercy, can be none other, but that eternal Word, who pro∣claimed himself to be the Way, and offered Soul-rest to them would come to him, is manifest. For, 1. This is absolutely and without compare the good old Way, the sa∣ving Word that was chalk'd out, that was Preach'd to Abraham, before he was Circumcised, 400 years before the good old Way of Moses was known; Nay, preach'd by Noah, that Preacher of Righteousness, by Faith, many Ge∣nerations before Abraham; and by God himself in Paradise, tendering Life through Faith in the Blood of the Womans Seed, which was the only thing saving, in all the After-dispensations of that Covenant of Grace. 2. This is the only Word and Way which the Jews totally rejected, the Word, spoken by Moses and the Prophets, their Fathers (in some part, for some time) neglected, but never totally renounc'd it; and the Modern Jew does too tenaciously stick to the Letter of that Word, and the external Form of that Way. 3. The only Sound of the Trumpet which the Gentiles hearken to, in order to their finding rest to their Souls, is that sound of the Apostles, which from Jerusalem, is gone into all the Earth, and to the uttermost parts of the World: the sound of that Trumpet, whereby Christ is Proclaimed, the Word of God, the everlasting Way of Salvation. §. 3. Ask a Jew, whether the same Prophet (chap. 16, and 17.) threaten not a more dreadful Judgment (then impending over that Nations head) than the Northern Captivity; to wit, a dissipation into Strange lands, that neither they nor their Fathers knew;] whereas Chaldaea and all the Nations in∣to which they were carried Captive, before their Crucifying the Lord of Life, were their door Neighbours (with whom they had Commerce) where God would [shew them no favour] (as he had done in all other Captivities) but [take away his peace from them, even loving kindness and mercy:] where they should be hunted from every Mountain and Hill and Hole; wherein
not only all the Treasures of Gods Mountain in the Field (the riches of that Covenant of Grace, sometimes deposited with that faithless and fruitless People) should be given as a spoile to the Gentiles: [But the holy Mountain her self discontinue from that heritage which God had given her, and he burnt up and made desolate, by a fire that should be kindled in Gods anger, and burn for ever:] A fire of Eternal Vengeance, such as that whereby God [destroy∣ed Sodom and her Sisters:] So as she may with as much reason expect, that the Lake of Sodom shall become firm Land again, and grow into a plea∣sant Plain like the Garden of Eden; and the Captivity of those Cities be return'd from that Sulphury Abyss that captivates them: as she can look for the returning of that her Captivity, as another of their Prophets fore∣warned them (Ezek. 16. 55.) To these Prophecies Josephus relates, when John the Captain of the Rebel-Jews, had answered Josephus (whom Titus employed as his Interpreter to perswade them to yield) That Jerusalem was Gods City, and therefore invincible. I confess, replied Josephus I deserve to be severely punish'd, for attempting to perswade you, to avoid your Destiny, and to preserve men condemned by the Sentence of God: For who knows not the writings of the ancient Prophets and their Responds hanging over the Head of this most miserable City? (Bel. Jud. 7. 4.) The Modern Jews who have lain under the burthen of those Prophecies so many hundred years, cannot for shame deny that Application of them, which one of their own Priests made, at the first Commencement of their Effects, even before their irresistible force had batter'd their City and Temple about their ears, and scatter'd their whole Nation as chaff upon the face of the Earth. However they cannot deny, that these are the Responds of their own Prophets, and I dare refer it to the judgement and determination of the blindest Atheists own eyes, to conclude upon what people those Menacies are faln; whose de∣stiny it is, to be the butts of those well aimed Arrows of Vengeance. And then let either Jew or Atheist say if they can, what that Sin can be, upon the ac∣count of which, the God of Sion should so loath Sion, as his heart should wholly depart from her: that Sin of Judah written with a pen of Iron, with the point of a Diamond, that it might remain in the guilt of it before God for ever (compare Jer. 17. 1. with Job 19. 24.) that sin of theirs; which out-cries all the beastly and barbarous Idolatries of their Fathers, the filthiness of the Sodomites: that sin which, in the days of the Messias (as their own Tal∣mudists, quoted by the Learned Dr. Lightfoot (in harmo. on Epistle to Phi∣lippians,) gather from their own Scriptures) shall make the Synagogues be∣come Stews, the Wisdom of the Scribes to be abominated, and the religious persons among them to be scorn'd, and the faces of that Generation to be as Dogs: that Sin which shall speak that Generation to be, men of Canine Im∣pudency, Ass-like Contumacy, and Savage Cruelty:) as the Talmudists de∣scribe the State of the Jews in the days of the Messias, in another place, quo∣ted by Grotius (verit. Christian. rel annot. pag. 336. [Of Canine Impudence] they make ostentation of the nakedness of their very nakedness once their glory, now their shame: once Circumcision a Seal of the Covenant, now only Concision, a gash in the flesh. [Ass-like contumacy;] All the Judgments of God upon them cannot cudgell them into one sober Reflection upon what their Fathers did, in Crucifying the Lord of Glory; though they have so many years been braid with a Pestel in a Mortar, the Husk of their Stupidity is not departed from them: and [Savage cruelty] this they practise as of∣ten as they have occasion, or dare shew it; witness their barbarous dismem∣bring of the Cyprians, in the Reign of Adrian, and those other instances I have alledged elsewhere. To which add, their filling all Asia with fire and Slaughter, putting both Christians and Ismaelites to the Sword under their Prophet Buba: anno Christi 1237. (Scal. can. Isag. l. 2. p. 15.) Hagag the Viceroy of Irah and abylon under Caliph Abdimelech, (an. Christi 714.) in the 20 years of his Government, slew 120000 men; besides those that died in Prison, of Men 50000. of Women 3000. (Scaliger. dynastia Chalipharum in
Bagded.) That sin, which shall turn the House of Divine Instruction, into a Den of Dragons: (that is, (as R. Jud. expounds it) A Brothel-house) at what time the Son of David should come: that Sin which shall never be blotted out, but cause them to be blotted out of the Book of the living, then when the Gentiles sing unto the Lord, [A new Song, which will please him better than an Ox that hath Horns and Hoofs;] better than the best Le∣gal Sacrifices; which Aben Ezra (Pf. 69. 29.) applies to the Times of Christ: Let the Jew I say name if he can, what that Sin can be, but what the Prophets impute it to: to wit, the Guilt of that Blood which the Fathers invoked upon themselves and Children, [They are written in the Earth (where the Ostrich layes her Eggs) where the foot of every Beast that passeth by may crush them, because they have forsaken the Lord the hope of Israel] (Jer. 17. 13.) Not God, the possession of Israel, while Israel was his possession; but the Lord, the hope of Israel, the promised Lord, which Israel hoped for, To which promise, the twelve Tribes, incessantly serving God day and night, did hope to come. (Acts 26. 7.) It was their hating the innocent Jesus without a Cause; their becoming his enemies wrongfully; their heart breaking Reproaches; the Gall they gave him for meat; the vinegar they gave him in his thirst, for drink; that exasperated their God's heart against them: It was for this, that David (in the Spirit of Prophecie) de∣voted that Nation to that Ruine, we now see brought upon them; to that Vengeance, we see God pouring out upon them; in making their Table their Snare, and their Wellfare, their Trap; in turning the Law of Moses and the Covenant of Peculiarities, into an occasion, of their perverse denial of Christ, of their further Obcaecation and Obduration: It is for their per∣secuting him, whom God smote, (when he laid upon him the iniquities of us all) that, that man after Gods heart poured out these imprecations against them [Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold of them: ever bow down their backs] that is, let them fall and never rise (let them never see that Redemption from Captivity which they look for, as the Syriack expounds it:) Let them not come into thy righteousness,] that is, deal with them in fury, not in Judgment; let them be strangers to that mitigation of the severity of justice that's tender'd in the Gospel; let them have judgment without mercy: (as the Arabick glosseth) (Vicars his Decupla on Psal. 69.) As to any other sin: The Jew came out of the fire of the Babylonish Captivity, so refin'd; as he hath been, ever since, his Fathers better; not a dram of the Golden Calf would ever since down with him; he hath never since relisht the Cakes bak'd for the Queen of Heaven, nor lusted after the Onyons, Garlick, or Flesh-pots of Aegypt; nor endured upon his body the fi∣gures of the Letters of his Idol, as King Joachim did (which marks were seen upon him, when he was cast out naked, says, Tostatus, and Nicholas, Lyranus, on 2 Chron. 36.) nor the Symbolical Mark of Bacchus, an Ivy-leaf: which rather than they would receive the impress of, they exposed them∣selves to a thousand torments; nor endured to hear the cries of Innocents, while they were a sacrificing to Maloch; nor so much as the name of a strange God. And for Immoralities, he that reads Josephus, and compares either his general charge of Sins (worse then those of Sodom) upon that Generati∣on on which the fury of Divine Wrath was poured; or the particular Ex∣amples he brings of the Impiety and Irregularity of that Age, with the af∣ter-temper of that People, must be very uncharitable, if he does not con∣clude, that the present Generation is much reform'd, if not wholly changed from that boysterous and indomable opposition to Supreme Power (the sin which actually procured their ruine) into as sordidly fawning and servile a Spirit as Flesh and Blood is capable of: and that therefore that which Me∣ritoriously wrought their subversion then, and continues them under Judge∣ment still, must be something which escap'd the observation, not only of Jo∣sephus, but of modern Jews (though more theirs than his) and some of their
Forefathers, then living, who in a great measure charged their downfall, upon the guilt of their sin, in murdering St. James our Lords Brother, and first Christian Bishop of Jerusalem. But could the blood of a meer Man, wherein the hands of a small party of Zealots for the Law, were only im∣brewed, contract the guilt upon the whole Nation, which nothing can ex∣piate? Sure that Nation lyes under the guilt of the blood of God, of him that's more than Man, of him whom their Prophets stile Immanuel, God with us, the Lord Jehova our Righteousness. Isidor. Pelusiot. (lib. 4. epist. 74.)——[And let them lay this to heart that in the Age of their Forefathers though they committed Idolatry, Sacri∣ficed their Children to Devils, and slew the Prophets; yet they suffered no such things as they do now: but, after their suffering, chastisemeut, were restored to their old habitations, whereas now they suffer a captivity from which they shall ne∣ver return.] For the proof of Christs Divinity (as the same Author observes) The grievousness of the Jews punishment was urged against the Arrians, [Quòd si, ut Arriani aiunt, nudus fuit homo, quare Judaei, cùm olim multos viros sanctos sustulerint, nihil tamen ejusmodi unquam sunt ob id perpessi: propter hunc autem occisum ea sustituerunt, quorum atrocitas, si cum quavis Tragaediâ compa∣retur, longissimo omnes intervallo antecedit: (Isidor. Pel. lib. 4. epist. 166. [If as the Arrians say, he was mere man, why did the Jews (seeing of old they killed ma∣ny holy men, but never upon that account suffered any such things) undergo, for killing of Christ, such punishments, as if the grievousness thereof be compared with any Tragedy, it goes far beyond it.] Upon their shedding of which pre∣cious blood (when they had rejected all the Methods, it pleased God to use, for their Conviction, that that Jesus whom they had slain, was the Christ, the King of Israel, the Prince of Glory) there was brought upon that Gene∣ration all the righteous blood that was shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the first; to the blood of Zacharias the Son of Barachias, the last righteous man was flain (a little before the Romans laid Siege to Jerusalem:) of whose Death our Saviour speaks, as then perpetrated when he spake, be∣cause he foresaw it would be perpetrated: making use of the Aorist (] which may as fitly be rendred [whom ye shall have slain;] the not observing of which, hath put, even Learned Men to their Wits end, in studying who this Zacharias should be, some conceiving him to be the Father of the Baptist; whom the Apochryphal Protevangelium Jacobi, and Petrus Alexandrin (in canon) affirms to have been slain by Herod's Officers; be∣cause he would not tell where his Son the Baptist was, for whom Herod sent: but Origen, and (from him) St. Basil, Gregory Nissene, Cyril, Alexand. Theophilact, &c. affirm he was slain, for prophaning the holy place, in plead∣ing that the blessed Mary was a Virgin, and therefore ought to have her place among the Virgins. St. Jerome concludes, it was that Zacharias, whom Joash slew, (2 Chron. 24. 19.) But the story of Josephus does more exactly sute this Text, in brief thus. After the Zealots had murdered Ananus, (which was the beginning of the Cities ruine) from which day the walls began to be demolish'd, and the Republick of the Jews to perish, saith Jo∣sephus) they erect a high Court of Mock-Justice, for the Trial of Zachary the Son of Baruch, against whom when they could not threaten the Judge to give Sentence, two of the stoutest of those Russian-Rebels assault and kill Zachary in the midst of the Temple, (Bel. Judaic. 5. 1.) The meaning then of this Menacy of Christ is, that the Jewish Nation should (by their persisting in Impenitency, for their rejecting him) ripen themselves for as great a Judgement, as if they had been guilty of all the innocent blood that had been shed, from the Foundation of the World, to the day of the Fall of Je∣rusalem: and this is no more than what the Prophets had as plainly fore-told, as any thing they delivered. Yea, so clear are their own Scriptures, in this Point, on our fide, with such open mouth do their own Oracles predict Gods reprobating that People, for reprobating his Son, as we dare stand to
their Determination of this Querie, and have had this question determi∣ned for us, by those greatest Rabbies, possitively: that in the days of the Messias, the Jews, for their rejecting the Son of David, shall be cast off by God. §. 4. And lastly, whether these Menacies be not executed to the full? whether wrath be not come to the uttermost upon this People of Gods Curse? Whether Israels God hath not withdrawn from them all the Tokens of his favourable presence? and manifestly exprest his abhorrency both of their Persons and Most Religious Performances; yea, of that Worship which him∣self commanded their Fathers to pay unto him; may be committed to the Umpirage of any mans eyes, that reads what glorious indications of Gods owning that Nation (above all the Nations of the Earth) were exhibited to their Progenitors: and sees how things are with them now, and have been, since that Generation, which our Saviour said, should not pass away, till all the Prophets Menacies were fulfill'd upon them. Israel was Holiness to the Lord, separated from all other People (by the eminent favour of God towards them) to be his peculiar Heritage. But what is now become of the Ark of his pre∣sence, the Holy Oracle, from whence he was wont to give Responds, as of∣ten as they had need to enquire? Whither are those winged Cherubims and Seraphims flown, betwixt which he dwelt, while he was Israels Sheepherd? By what terrible Earthquake is the Holiness of that place flitted, which he chose to put his Name in, as long as he would have that Nation called by his Name? Where is that holy and beautiful House, the joy of the whole Land, where their Fathers worship'd him, of which Judah's God had said, Here will I meet you, here will I dwell for ever, (that is, while I dwell with you;) out of which no Sacrifice was acceptable, but polluted and unclean, (Hag. 2. 14.) By what power hath that Royal Pallace of the great King been laid in the dust, and kept from a Resurrection, but of his Arm, who said, it should be perpetual desolations, (Israel's sometimes God;) and of his word; who said, One Stone shall not be left upon another (Israel's rejected Saviour.) Where is that Copy of it (the Temple of Heliopolis) erected by Onias, in a precocious humour to fulfill the Prophecy of Isaiah, (Chap. 19. 19.) and, in his conceipt, built as a Trophy of the God of Israels Victory, over the Idols of Aegypt, in a place full of the Ruines of the Shrines of their Sacred Animals (Joseph. ant. 13. 6.) was it able, with all its weight, to suppress those Rat and Mice-Gods while it stood: And did it not fall at last with the Idol-Temples? Was it not blown down by the Breath of him, for whom the Conquest of Aegypt (to the Obedience of Israels God,) was reserved, (our great High-Priest, who hath erected there the Altar of his Cross) after it had first been prophan'd with the Image of that Monster of Men-Gods, Caligula, and shut up against the Jews at the end of the Jewish War, by Lupus, and kept shut, by Paulinus, (Joseph. Jud. Bell. 7. 30.) Where is their High-Priests spirit of Prophecy, since Caiaphas Prophesied, it was ne∣cessary that one man should die for that Nation; hath not that one Man's Blood so discoloured the Gems of the Ephod, as they never since sparkled out a Respond? Hath it not so fast Cemented the Names of the twelve Tribes to the Plate on which they were set, as the Letters of those Names could ne∣ver since stand up above their fellows, so as by those prominent Characters, the enquirer could spell out the Determination of his propounded Question? Hath not God called that his Leiger, that his Resident, Agent, from amongst them: and sent him to the Christian Church; in the virtue whereof, Christ and his Apostles have foretold the sacking of their City, the demoli∣shing of their Temple, the overthrow of their Politie, and dispersion of their persons; and whatsoever else conduceth to the strengthning of our Faith, or the engaging us to possess our souls in patience. In the virtue whereof, our old men have dreamt Dreams, our young men have seen Visions, our Daughters have been Prophetesses; and by this means the Extremity of Fa∣mines
have been provided against, (as by Agabus his Prophesie of an Univer∣sal Famine;) loss of Lives in Shipwrack prevented (as in St. Pauls Voyage to Rome;) mens hearts have been secured against fear in the greatest dan∣ger (as St. Pauls was by a Vision at Corinth.) Men have been resolved in their doubts (as St. Peter was in his, whether he ought to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles;) time would fail me, should I reckon up those multitudes of Christian Prophets, mentioned in the Canonical Books, much more should I name those that were famous after the sealing of the Canon, unto the Council of Nice. [Alii autem (in Ecclesia,) & praescientiam habent futuro∣rum, & visiones, & dictiones propheticas (Irenaeus adv. Heres. 2. 58.) [Many o∣thers in the Church have the prescience of future things and visions and prophe∣tical predictions.] [Quemadmodum & multos audivimus fratres in Ecclesia, prophetica habentes charismata, & per Spiritum universis linguis loquentes & ab∣scondita hominum in manifestum producentes:] Irenaeus advers Haer. l. 5. p. 539) [We have heard many Brethren in the Church, who had Prophetick Gifts, and would speak by the spirit with divers Tongues, and brings into open light the hid∣den things of mens hearts.] In his time also, some by the Prayers of the Church were raised from the dead (l. 2. cap. 58.) [Et Mortui jam Resurrexe∣runt, & perseveraverunt nobiscum multis annis.] We have seen the dead to have been raised, who after that have lived amongst us many years. But in all this time the Jews have had no Prophets, but such (as to their cost and ruful ex∣perience) they have found to prophesie the Deceits of their own hearts: while our great Divine in the Isle of Patmos, is receiving the Light of Pro∣phesie, from our Jesus. Their Barcocab, [the Son of a Star,] is abusing them with such palpable Delusion, as this light of theirs, goes out with a stink, and gains himself the name, of [the Son of a Lye] Such Meteors have all the Stars prov'd, that have appeared in their Horizon, since the Star of Jacob set upon them, since then, the Sun is gone down upon their Prophets. The virtue is past, out of their Elijah's Staff, into our Apostles Rod; out of his Mantle, into their Handkerchiefs; out of his body (from which, stretch'd upon the Child, life return'd into him,) into St. Peters shadow (by which they that were over-shadowed as he passed by, were healed, (Acts 5, 15.) the Fleece is dry, and void of all that Heavenly Influence, which bedews the Floor of the Gentile World about it.
CHAP. IV. Gematrian Plaisters too narrow for the Sore. §. 1. The Ark. §. 2. Holy Fire. §. 3. Urim and Thummim. §. 4. Spi∣rit of Prophecy in the Second Temple. §. 5. Exorcisme, and Bethesda's all-healing virtue, the second Temples Dowry. § 1. THeir Cabbalists have attempted to supple and allay the Inflama∣tion of this mortal Wound, by the application of this Oyntment. by a kind of Cabbala, which they call [Gematria] they observe upon (Hag. 1. 8.) it is written [Ekkabbda] [I will be glorified;] where because the word wanteth the Letter [] in the end of it; which Letter, in Numera∣tion stands for [5] they say that the want thereof sheweth the want of 5 Things in the second Temple, which were in the first. The Ark (and its appurtenances, the Mercy-seat, and Cherubims.) Secondly the Fire from Heaven. Thirdly the Majesty of Divine presence, called [Shechina.] Fourth∣ly, the Holy Ghost. And Fifthly Urim and Thummim. From whence they draw these two Conclusions. 1. That their want of their antient Glory, is not to be imputed to their putting Christ to Death; seeing that was departed from them, many Ages before he was born. 2. That the Apostles were not moved, to write the New Testament, by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, for they wrote during the standing of the Second Temple. Though the Answers which are commonly return'd to these Parologisms, are Butteresses strong enough to secure the Christian Cause against these as∣saults, to wit, That though the Second Temple wanted the Shadows, it had the Substance of all these; the things themselves, though not the Types; and therefore was filled with a greater Glory, when he appeared in it, in whom the Godhead dwells bodily, who is the Ark and Propitiation, &c. And that Gods withdrawing these visible Signs by degrees, was an Argu∣ment the Sun was towards Rising, and should have been to the Jews a pro∣vocation to expect so much more earnestly its arising, as they saw the Stars disappearing one after another. Yet because these Answers do not beat the Jew off from his presumption; but, by seeming to yeild, that as to matter of fact, all these were wanting, harden him in his conceit; that he has not sus∣tain'd this loss, upon the account of his being found guilty of our Saviours Blood. I shall here shew, that most of, if not all these five things, were (in the Li∣teral sence) in the Second Temple; and in being, in, or not long before our Saviours Time. That the Ark was in the Second Temple against the Testimony of the Cabbalists, I set the whole Company of the return'd from the Babylonish Captivity to attest; in one of those [Songs of degrees] so called, not be∣cause they were sung upon steps (either the 15 of the ascent into the Tem∣ple, or other places of advantage where the Levites stood) for all Psalms were sung upon Ascents, or Scaffolds, (Nehem. 9. 4.) but because they were Sung at the Dedication of the second Temple, by them that had ascended out of the Abyss of Captivity, as the Chaldee Paraphraseth this Title; up∣on their fixing of which Title, first to the 120 Psalm, grew that wild Tal∣mudical story, of the rising up of the Abyss, at the building of that Tem∣ple: which I would not have nam'd, but that (as ridiculous as it is,) it serves to prove, that in their opinion, the Psalms thus intituled (by whomso∣ever
at first pen'd) were, by the Spirit of Prophecy, fitted, to the case of them that ascended from the Captivity, and accordingly used by them, in their Singing Praise. Of which mind also is Theodoret and Euthymius: and to this agrees the Syriack, making the Contents of Psalm 120. to be a Prayer of the People detain'd in Babel; and of the following, a Song of Educti∣on or Ascent out of Babel, (the best exposition of the Septuagint) [] cùm Cyrus praecepit ut ascenderet Captivitas: These Captives re∣turn'd (in Psal. 122,) mention the Thrones of Judgment there set, [the Thrones of the House of David] one of which Thrones was that of the Glory of God, the Ark of his presence (saith R, David) and ver. 4. they mention the going up of the Tribes to the [Testimony of Israel,] that is, (saith R. Obad.) to be resolv'd in their doubts (that could not by other evidence, be determi∣ned) by the Priest, consulting God before the Ark; as they were directed, (Deut. 17.) The Ark is called the Ark of Testimony, partly because the Law was kept in the Ark, in its Original (by which all Copies were to be exa∣min'd, and what was doubtful in them, by it, to be determined:) partly be∣cause from the Oracle, over the Ark, between the Cherubims, God testified what his will was in such cases, which he had not so distinctly declared in that common Rule: hence the Oracle upon the Ark, or the Ark in respect of that Oracle is called simply [The Testimony,] in distinction to [the Law] in that Text (Isa. 8. 26.) [To the Law and to the Testimony;] where we must not think the Holy Spirit Tautologizeth, in giving so short a direction: but as the Heathens enquired, in their Pontifical Books, and at vive-voyce Oracles, where those Books came short of a Determination; so God appoints his people, first to the Law, and then to the living Oracle. The sence then, which their own most learned Rabbies (and such as flourish'd before their Enmity to the Gospel, put their Expositors to wrest the Scriptures into a thousand forms, that they might not speak for the Christians) put upon those Texts, is such as speaketh the return'd in the Second Temple to have rejoyced in this, that they had an opportunity and invitation to go up to the Ark of the Testimony, to the Throne of Gods presence, the Ark. The lear∣ned Castellio goes so far along with me, and these most antient Rabbies, as to render Testimony by Oracle. In another of those Psalms of ascent, the whole Choire of them ascended out of Babylon introduce the Ark into the second Temple, in this form of words, (Psal 132. 8.) Arise, O Lord, and come into thy resting place, thou and the Ark of thy strength:] the same, in sence, that Solomon used at the Dedica∣tion of the first Temple (saith R. David.) For the Ark, as it went with them into, so it returned with them, out of Captivity, saith Heb. Syr. (upon Verse 6.) [We found it in the Fields,] expounding [the Fields] by (Mich. 4. 10.) [Thou shalt dwell in the Field] thou shalt go to Babylon. I do not mean, it was carried into Babylon; but hid (together with the Tabernacle, and Altar of Incense) by Jeremy: 2 Maccab. 2. 4. an authority, which (though ingeniously confest, by the Writer to be but humane) will, with un∣byast Persons, out-weigh the word of the whole Tribe of Cabbalists. And that the Ark was restored, is further manifest; because the return'd from Cap∣tivity do direct their Worship towards it, (in ver. 7.) [We will worship at his footstool.] Whether of these Opinions is of harder digestion? That those purified sons of Levy (newly come out of the Furnace of Affliction) should offer the Sacrifice of Fools, not considering what they said; should sprinkle God with the Court-holy-water of Complemental Thanks, for what they had not been blest with; should dance before the Lord, after the Pipe of their own deluded Fancy, and praise him with Songs, made in their golden Dreams, of an Ark, when they had not the Ark? or that their degenerate successors should belye the goodness of God, in denying the Typical, as they do the real Ark of Gods presence, to have been in that Temple; and which of these Testimonies is most credible? This of the blinded modern Jewes, (who, that they might with more liberty blaspheme the blessed Jesus) have
conjured out of one Letters want, in a word, the Second Temples want of five things which the First had, and among them the Ark of the Covenant? Or that of the antient and impartial Rabbies, who, in their Comments upon these Texts, introduce their Forefathers blessing God after their Restauration from the Babylonish Bondage, for restoring to them that Symbol of his pre∣sence, upon whose Testimony ('tis so far from being a Fable, as Weemes is pleas'd to call it) I think it may be concluded, as more then probable, that the Second Temple enjoyed the Ark, as long as Jerusalem enjoy'd the Tem∣ple, that is, till it was brought in Triumph to Rome. § 2. But they are more impudent, in reckoning the holy Fire to have been wanting in the Second Temple, against the manifest Testimony of their Progenitors, the Jews of Jerusalem: who, in their Letter to their Brethren in Aegypt, (2 Mac. 1. 18.) give them an account at large, how by the appoint∣ment of Jeremy the sacred Fire was hid, by some Religious Priests in a Pit: and by Nehemiah's Order, search being made for it, by the posterity of those Priests, they found thick Water or Naphthar therein; which being laid up∣on the Sacrifices kindled, as soon as the Sun-beams beat thereon, and consu∣med the sacrifices; the Memorial whereof they pray the Jews of Aegypt, that they would (as they of Iudaea had done) celebrate. Contrary to the plain inference of Nehemiah's, (Nehem. 10, 34.) putting it, among the Articles of that Covenant he made all the Jews seal to, [That they would make provision for the perpetual keeping of the Fire upon the Altar, according to the appointment of the Law] Levit. 9. 24. 10. 1. 3. Which pious act of his, he concludes his Book with, and presents it to God as a Sacrifice of a sweet odour. (Nehem. 13. ult) [And for the Wood-offering, at times appointed, and for the first-fruits; remember me, O my God, for good.] All which, from the beginning to the end, would have been no better than the taking of Gods Name in vain, had that Fire, which consumed the first acceptable Sacrifice, which they offered after their Return, been no more then ordinary Fire: for then they might (without any offence to God) have kindled it anew, every time they sa∣crificed. Contrary to what follows from Gods accepting those Sacrifices which by Nehemiah's order were offered; which upon that consideration, God discriminates from those were offered before the Temple was built; professing they were unclean, because they touched the unclean, that is, had strange Fire put to them Hag. 2. 12. That no burnt Sacrifice was accepta∣ble to God, but what was consumed by holy Fire, was a Maxim so univer∣sally receiv'd in the Church, as Moses expresseth [Gods fire coming down] upon Abels and not upon Cain's Sacrifice by [Gods having respect] to Abels and not Cain's, and therefore Theodosion Translates that Text (Gen. 4. 4) In∣flammavit Deus in Abel & ejus sacrificium; at in Cain & ejus sacrificium non inflammavit Deus;] God sent Fire down upon Abels Sacrifice, &c. For no o∣ther way can be conceiv'd how Cain could know Gods acceptance of his Brother's, and rejection of his own, but this visible Sign, as St. Jerom ob∣serves, in locum. Hence our English Translators parallel, Gen. 4. 4. with Lev. 9. 24. 1 Reg. 18. 38. 2 Chron. 7. 1. where 'tis said the fire came down from the Lord upon the Sacrifice at the Dedication of the Altar, at Elijah's Prayer: and at the Dedication of the Temple. So that the Sons of Aarons offering with strange fire (Lev. 10. 1.) seems to be imputed to their being at that time stark Drunk (vers. 9. 10.) which occasion'd that prohibition to the Priests from drinking Wine when they went into the Sanctuary. If therefore they had not holy Fire to Sanctifie the Altar, the Altar could not Sanctifie the Sacri∣fice, but both remain'd prophane as they had been before; the affirming of which is manifestly contrary to those many and plain Promises, that in the Second Temple [Their Sacrifices should come up with acceptance upon Gods Altar.] And lastly contrary to as good Authority, as Secular Records af∣ford, that the Memorial of that holy Fire was Celebrated, as long as the Temple stood, in the yearly Festival called [] on the 22d day of
Abib: (say Johasin and the Modern Jewish Calendar) but in truth, on the 14. of Lous, as Josephus calculates. So well seen are the modern Jews, in their own Antiquities! and yet their blind conjectures are by some short-reason'd Theologues, embrac'd as Oracles; (de Bel Jud. 2. 17:) [When that Festival came, which they call Xulophoria, on which day the custome was for every one to bring in Wood for the Temple, that the Fire on the Altar might ne∣ver want fuel: for they never let it go out, but kept it perpetually burning.] [.] Rebels would not permit the adverse party, to celebrate that Religious Service—and on the day following (to wit the 15. of Lous) they assaulted the Castle of Antonia. This was in the latter end of Nero's 11 year (as Scaliger ob∣serves) to whom for further satisfaction I refer the Reader, (de emend. temp. l. 7. an. in Comp. Jud. p. c. 49.) § 3. No less vain will the Caballistical Assertion, touching the absence of Urim and Thummim under the Second Temple, appear to him, that has but dipp'd his lips (fonte Caballino) in the Pegasean Spring of mere Humane Learning; and by gargling his Palate with that Water, has so far rectified it, as 'tis able to discern of Tastes, and to distinguish betwixt the insipid Flegme, of frothie: and the savoury juice, of substantial Authors; among which last, the often-quoted (and never sufficiently praised) Josephus gives as full an evidence, against the Caballists as can be desired (in his Jud. ant. 3. 9.) where speaking of the two Sardonichs upon the High Priests Shoulders, how that, that upon the right shoulder (as often as the Priest was to Sacri∣fice) sent forth such a sparkling light (beyond his own Nature) as they that were at a great distance might see it, certainly (saith he) deserves admiration with all men, except those that seek, by their contempt of Religion, to gain a repute of being wise; but that is much more admirable which I am now about to say, to wit, that God was wont to pronounce victory, by twelve precious stones which the High Priest wore upon his Breast-plate: For be∣fore the Army march'd, such a Brightness shone from them, as gave light to all the people, that God was present, and would be an aid to them, that in∣vocated him. Wherefore the Greeks (so many of them as do not abhorr our Religion) having had such certain experiments of this Miracle, as could not be gainsaid, call'd the Breast-plate [] that is, [the Oracle,] But both the Sardonix on the high Priest shoulder, and the Gemms on his Breast-plate have ceased to send forth their brightness, two hundred years ago, God be∣ing displeased with our Nation, for their contempt and violation of his Law: of which I shall speak elsewhere. Thus far Josephus: whom I make consci∣ence of following, rather than the whole College of conjecturing Cabal∣lists, while he plays the part of an Historian; and therefore collect from this Text, that the Urim and Thummim continued under the Second Temple almost 300 years, and to within little more than one hundred, of our Saviours Birth; for Josephus wrote his Jewish Antiquities in the latter end of the Reign of Domitian. Though I may (without impeachment to his credit) suspend my assent to his Conclusions, when he acts the Divine, as he doth in assigning the reason of the Dimness of these precious Stones to be that Nations contempt of Gods Law; which I think may better be ascribed to (what he did not see) the approaching Light of that Pretious Stone, God was about to lay in Sion, to the proximity of that Age, to the appearance of that true Light, of that only infallible living Oracle. (This by the way.) To this Testimony of Josephus, for the Second Temple's enjoyment of this O∣racle, the Son of Sirach seems to give his Suffrage, Chap. 33. [] [The Law is as faithful, as the Responses of Urim and Thummim,] of that Oracle, which (from its Clarity and Veritie) had these names given it, interpreted by the Septuagint, , [Light and Truth.] The first used by Siracides, and is the Radix of that Sirname of Apollo [Delius;] so called, properly enough, if Apollo be the Sun, but can∣not
be applied but abusively to his Daemon or Genius that gave Oracles, most of which were darker than darkness it self. The latter given to that fa∣mous Saphire, which the Antient Kings of Aegypt, who were also Priests, wore about their neck; as Aelian reports (Var. Hist. 14. 34.) This for the illustration of the Terms: as to the Text it self, it imports, that at the ma∣king of that Book of Wisdom (which the Author saith, was in the Reign of Evergetes) the Oracle of Urim and Thummim was still in being: for he brings that in, as a thing Notius notorious and well known, to illustrate the perspicuity and faithfulness of the Law. Lastly, though it was wanting at their first Return before the Temple was finish'd, yet they expected it would be restored: and therefore, (Ezra. 2. 62, 63.) the Tirshata would not take them into the number of Priests, that could not shew their Pedigree. [Till there should rise up a Priest with Urim and Thummim;] and, in all reason was restored, as soon, as the Temple was finish'd: a Vision whereof, Zacha∣ry seeth (c. 3.) where Joshua is cloth'd with that [change of Raiment,] wherein it is promised him, [He shall judge Israel] [Post ablationem vestium sordidarum, & restitutam mundi sacerdotii dignitatem, promittitur, quòd ipse ju∣dex sit domus ejus.] After the taking away of his filthy Raiment, and restoring to him the dignity of a clean High-Priest-hood, it is promised to him, that he should judge Gods house, (as St. Jerom, from the Hebrews expounds that Text) a clear Paraphrase of the Pectoral of Judgment) of the stones whereof Za∣chary affirms, that they are the ingravings of God, &c. and (in the 6 Chap∣ter of Zach. vers. 14. and 10. I find Tobijah, among those that attend upon the holy things; who was one of those whose Pedigree could not be found; and were therefore excluded from the Sanctuary, till a Priest should arise with Urim, (Nehem. 7. 62.) §. 4. As to the Spirit of Prophesie, its being under the Second Temple, (in both those Degrees of it, implied (Revel. 4. 2.) that which inspired ho∣ly men with Prophecy, or to be Prophets and to Preach; and that which in∣spired them to be Penmen, or to write Prophecies) Is so palpable by the date of the Prophecies of Haggai and Zachary, as nothing but malice can hoodwink the Jew from seeing it. And though it be true, the Sun set up∣on their writing Prophets, about the Reign of Alexander the Great; yet they had speaking Prophets as long as the Temple stood; of which Jose∣phus gives many instances: of Judas, whose Prophecies used to prove so in∣fallible, as when he saw Antigonus going to the Temple, the afternoon of that day, on which he had prophesied; he should die, and that at Straton's Tower (which was 600 Furlongs distant) he cried out to his Disciples (in the words of the Prophet Jonah when God spared Ninivie, after he had threatned the destruction of it within 40 days) I now grow weary of my life, seeing Antigonus his life convinceth me to be a false Prophet; for it is impossible he should die this day at Straton's Tower, who is here alive, af∣ter so much of the day is spent, and at so great a distance from that place. But there was a Tower, in the Palace, of that name; in the Vault whereof, Antigonus was Murdered, in his return from the Temple, and news there∣of brought to Judas, while he was tormenting himself, for fear of the miscar∣riage of his Prophesie. (Joseph. ant. 13. 19.) Of one Jesus who four years before the beginning of that War, which ended with the Desolation of Je∣rusalem, (at what time the City enjoy'd as much peace and plenty as ever) coming up to the Feast of Tabernacles, suddenly broke out into these Ex∣clamations, A Voyce from the East, a voyce from the West; a voyce from the four Winds; a voyce against Jerusalem, and the Temple; a voyce against the Bridegroom and the Bride; a voyce against this whole Nation;] and, without ceasing day or night, carried this burthen of Prophesie through all the Streets and Lanes of the City: from which no punishment could restrain him. And (to spare the alledging of more Examples) Of himself who prophesied to Vespasian, that he should be Emperour: against which Vespasian making this
Exception. How canst thou foreknow my Fortunes, that couldst not foresee thine own Captivity, nor the taking of Jotopata (of which thou was Governour?) Why replied he) I told the Jotopatanes, that within 47 days they should be destroyed, and my self become a Prisoner to the Ro∣manes. By this we see how false, as well as blasphemous this Assertion is, that the Second Temple wanted the Spirit of Prophecy: and how far wide of Daniels sence the modern Jews are, in expounding [The sealing of Prophecy] whereby he means the fulfilling and ratifying thereof, by the Blessed Jesus, to be the cessation of it: of which cessation of all Prophecy they sometimes make the Aera to concur, with that of the defiling the Temple by Epipha∣nes; sometimes with that of the League which Judas Maccabeus made with the Romanes; sometimes to the first year of Seleucus Nicanor: Whereas speaking Prophets continued to the end of the Jewish State, and writing Pro∣phets ceas'd long before the eldest of these Dates; and therefore the Author of the Book of Maccabees speaks of that, as falling out a considerable time before the discumfiture of Judas by Alcimus and Bacchides. (1 Mac. 9. 27.) So there was a very great Affliction in Israel: the like whereof was not, since the time that a Prophet was not seen amongst them, that is, a wri∣ting Prophet. (Vide comput. Jud. Scal. de emend. temp. lib. 7. pag. 628. 654.) That the Shechina or Majesty of the Divine presence; wherein God ap∣peared to be present, by the appearance of Angels (those Courtiers of Heaven) either in a lucid, flaming, shining appearance (as that Host of Heaven, those An∣gels of God's presence, that pitcht their Camp before Israels Camp in the Wilderness, appeared in the night) or in a thick Cloud or Smoak, such a bodily appearance as they assumed, on the day (vide Hamond. an. on Mat. 3. 16.) that this Majestick presence of the Lord did fill the Second Temple, as well as the First, is attested by the Jerusalem Jews, (2 Mac. 2. 7.) where they write to their Brethren of Aegypt that Jeremy, when he had hid the Taber∣nacle and the Ark, told the Priests, that when God restored that Captivity, he would shew them his Glory; that the Glory of the Lord should appear, and the Cloud also, as it was shewed under Moses and Solomon. For the Truth of all the Contents of this Letter, they appeal to ocular evidence; wishing their Brethren, if there were need, they would send some to see. Heliodorus would not believe, that God dwelt then between the Cherubims, till he had been soundly beaten into the belief of it, and scourged by the Angel of Gods presence into a Confession, of what he had seen with his eyes, and felt upon his ribbs, advising Demetrius, if he had any Enemy or Traytor, he would send him to rob the Temple: for thou shalt (saith he) receive him well scourg'd, if he escape with his life; for in that place (with∣out doubt) there is an especial power of God (2 Mac. 3. 36.) It was in this Temple, Hircanus (the High Priest) had conference with God, by an An∣gel appearing to him, while he was offering Incense: that Zachary, the Fa∣ther of the Baptist, had the appearance of God by an Angel. A thing so or∣dinary, as the people, without Hesitancie, conclude he had seen a Vision, when he did but becken to them. But what need of proving that by Indu∣ction of Particulars, which naturally follows from the Premisses: for must not the Divine Presence be there, where was the Ark of Gods Presence? Could the Temple which had the Fire, want the Smoak, want the Cloud? § 5. It is manifest then, that under the Second Temple the Jews enjoyed all these Prerogatives. Nay, they were so far from wanting what they had un∣der the first, as even in respect of external indications of Gods gracious pre∣sence amongst them, the Glory of the Second, exceeded the Glory of the First Temple. For under the later House, they had, 1. The power of ejecting Devils out of the possessed, which we do not
find they had under the First Temple: for that melancholy Spirit which David cast out of Saul, by his playing upon the Harp, comes not up to the case, either as to time (being before the First Temple;) or as to the thing, (be∣ing the removal only of melancholly.) But that under the Second Temple there was a stated Order of Exorcists (who by invocating the Name of God, over such as were possessed with unclean Spirits, did cast them out) is manifest from our Saviours urging that practice, in vindication of his own, and professing that he cast out Devils by the same power by which their Children did. [If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges. Mat. 12. 27.] In virtute sci∣licet Creatoris, By the power of the Creator] as Tertullion expounds this Text, (contrà Marcion. lib. 4. 26.) and maintains that Exposition by this Reason, that Christ upbraiding their Children with casting out Devils by Beelzebub, was inconsistent with what he had said before [If Satan cast out Satan, &c.] [Hâc voce quid magis portendit, quàm in to ejicere se, quo & filii eorum, in vir∣tute scilicet Creatoris?] [What can Christ mean by this word, but that he cast out Devils, by the same power, by which their Children cast them out, in the vir∣tue, to wit, of the Creator.] Thus Irenaeus (quoted by Dr. Hammond annot. on Mat. 12. 27.) By the invoking the name of the most high and mighty God, even before the coming of Christ, men were delivered from the wicked Spi∣rits and all kind of Devils. So powerful then, was the Name of the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, saith Origen, (contrà Cels. l. 1. & l. 4.) But the use of this form of Exorcism grew so ineffectual, after Christs Name was called upon them that were possessed, as the Jewish Exorcists were willing to change it into that Form, [We adjure you by the Name of Jesus.] 2. The all-healing Virtue of the Pool of Bethesda, (the house of mercy for the poor) into which whosoever first stepped down, (after the troubling of the water by an Angel at a certain time) was cured of whatsoever disease he had (Job. 5. 4.) of which, thus Tertullian (advers. Judaeos cap. 13.) [Fuit & piscina Bethesda, us{que} ad adventum Christi, curando invalitudines ab Israel; desiit a benefieiis deinde, ex perseveratione erroris sui quo nomen Domini per ipsos blasphemaretur.] [The Pool of Bethesda had virtue to heal infirmities unto the coming of Christ: but it ceas'd to put forth that beneficial gift, after that the name of God was blasphemed by the Jews perseverance in their error.] And (de bap∣tismo c. 5.) Having observed, how the Gentiles (in an Apish imitation of the Israelites, initiating Proselytes in the Sacred Religion, by Baptism) used to initiate themselves, some, to Isis; some, to Mithra; by washings: and to expiate their Houses, Temples, and whole Cities, with sprinkling of holy water; and to sprinkle themselves in the Pelusian Solemnities, and the Games of Apollo, in order to their regeneration and purgation, from the guilt of Per∣jury or Manslaughter. (Plutarch. de oracul. defectu.) And that unclean Spi∣rits (in emulation of the Spirit of God its moving upon the Waters) chose to frequent Waters, gloomy Fountains, solitary Rivulets, Groves, Wells, &c. where they made their appearances, wrought their lying wonders, and laid their baits of  [mischievous benefits.] He tells us, that the God of Israel (to prevent his peoples seeking cure, at the hands of those Quacks; and going a Whoring after those abominations; and to shew, that his good Angels were not behind those filthy Daemons, in their power of communica∣ting a saving influence, to that Element, with the commerce whereof, evil Angels sought to bring men to perdition,) sent his Angel to move the Pool of Bethesda: which virtue that Pool retain'd, till our Saviour (by curing the impotent man, that lay there) gave notice, that the Operation of that Pool was now to cease; and invited the sick to come to him, the Fountain of li∣ving Water. I know Theophilact makes not so great a matter of this Pool as did the Fathers before him (and that the Learned Dr. Hammond strains courtesie with almost every material word in the sacred Text, John 5. to bring that
Story into a compliance with Theophilacts Opinion, that the Angel which de∣scended was but some Officer, who at certain times, that is, at the great Fe∣stivals when the greatest number of Sacrifices was slain, went down and stir∣red up those grosser parts which came from the Beasts washed therein after they were slain for Sacrifice, the congelations of Blood that went to the bot∣tom; by which means they infused themselves more strongly into the Water and conveighed to it such a medicinal Virtue, as is in the Skin of a Sheep newly flead, or the warm vital parts of any Beast. Theophilact was happy in such a second, who by reason of his great Reading, quick Apprehension and solid Judgment might with less ostentation have said to Theophilact than the Philosopher to his Schollar: Do thou invent Opinions and I will make them probable: for doubtless such hath he made this: and that being the high∣est Epithete which the modest Doctor fastens upon it, I hope it will not be imputed as immodesty in me, to take the liberty of shewing my dissent from a person of so deservedly admired worth, and well deserving of the Church, both as to the Opinion it self, and the Reason he brings why he will no fur∣ther insist upon it, than to make it probable; because the Christian Religion is no way concern'd in the miraculousness of this Cure, if such it were, it being afforded the Jews before Christs coming, and continued to them at this time of their resisting and opposing Christ. For as it is of apparent use to the Christian Cause, and to the Conviction of the Jews, to mind them of the Tokens of Gods favour they enjoy'd, till the guilt of that innocent Lamb's Blood cancel'd their Charter: [infaelicis∣simum infortunii genus est fuisse faelicem;] the brighter the Sun shone at its go∣ing down upon them, the more certain indication it gave of its setting. So this Exposition of the Text by Theophilact, beside the force it offers to the Words, offers violence to common Sence; of which I could give several in∣stances, but will content my self with that reply, which Dr. Hammond gives to that Objection (which he conceives the chief) to wit, That 'tis uncon∣ceivable, how the healing Virtue of that Pool, (had it arose naturally from the fresh warm blood of the Entrails of the Sacrifices that were washed there) could be limited to one, to him, that first stepped in after the troub∣ling of the Waters; for that reason of this which the Doctor assigns, ari∣sing from the circumstance of the place containing these Medicinal Waters, which might be of no larger capacity, than to hold one at once: as that is the only circumstance that can be imagined to avoid the force of the Ob∣jection; so that Hypothesis implies a plain Contradiction to all other circum∣stances of the case, as themselves state it; for what needed an Officer go down into so narrow a hole, when he might have stood at the top, and have poakt up the grosser matter from the bottom with a Pole? Nay, what room could there be for him, to bestir himself or to use a Colt-staff in the bottom, to stir up the congeal'd blood in so narrow a compass? or with what wa∣ter must that water be washt wherein so many hundreds of Entrals were wash'd? for doubtless if it was contain'd in so narrow a compass, it stood in as much need of washing as the Entrails themselves: and the immersing fresh Entrails therein, after an hundred (or according to their account ma∣ny thousands) had been wash'd therein, would have been the defiling of them, rather than their cleansing. Besides, had this curing of only one been but once, or at the most three times a year, and that by a natural Virtue in∣fused into the water, the stirring of the Sedements from the bottom; it was wholly in the Officers power, to admit whom he pleased, to step in; and then those multitudes of impotent folk, that lay there waiting for the stir∣ring of the water, and some of them so long (as the man whom Christ cu∣red) must have been more crazie in their mind than bodies, if they could not collect, it was in vain there to expect good, if they could not make the Officer their Friend: Lastly, what need of a Temple-Officer's going down to stir the water? when those whose impotencie lay in their eyes, or any where but in their feet, might themselves have done all that he could
do; to wit, with their Feet, or Hands, or Crutches, stir up the congealed Blood, and make it mix with the Water; and really 'tis hard to conceive, that a∣mong a great multitude of poor Cripples, their should not be some, who, when they saw their time, would not strain courtesie with good manners, and make no more scruple of stepping in before the Angel, than the May∣ors Horse did of drinking before Queen Elizabeths. Had he been no more than a Temple-Officer, and not as the King's Manuscript reads it ,] The Angel of the Lord, whose stirring of the Pool put a super∣natural Virtue into it, which by divine dispensation was so bounded, as to the Effects thereof, as it should but cure one at a time, and that time not to be foreseen (as their stated Festivals were) but purely at the divine Arbitri∣ment; and therefore to be waited for by those that came thither for cure; of which he that first stept in failed not to partake, while the five Books of Moses (the Books of Gods Covenant with their Fathers) as so many Porches encompassed that Nation. (St. Aug. de verbis Dom. Serm. 42.) But, that Co∣venant of Peace removed from them, this Pool (though still to be seen) hath no more Virtue in it now, nor ever had since the Holie Ghost, hath chosen the Christian Font-water to sit upon, (St Jerom. de locis Haebraicis) than the Ca∣stalion or Colophon Wells. I could instance in more Privileges, which the Second Temple was en∣dowed with, beyond the First, which (as if they had been entail'd upon it) fell with it. But it would be an infinite labour, to recount all the Particu∣lars of that Inventory of Divine Benefits, (Arguments of Gods special fa∣vour to that people] which they died seis'd of, at the expiration of their State, and demolishing of their City and Temple. Gods withdrawing of which from them, is as full an evidence of their Rejection; as his vouchsafing them to them, was formerly of his bearing them more upon his heart, than all the Nations of the Universe besides. Alas! how many days hath that wretched Nation continued, without a King, and without a Prince, with∣out a Sacrifice, and without an Idol, without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim, without God or any token of his presence, save that whereby he watcheth over them for evil? under all which heavy stroaks, they are as insensible as Solomon's Fool, that slept upon the Mast: So that to crown his Judgements God hath taken from them that tenderness of Heart, which their Forefathers had in the Babylonish Captivity, who were jealous of them∣selves, that God had hardned their hearts from his fear, to their greater Ruine: but these though that of their own Prophets (Isa. 6.) be palpably ful∣fill'd upon them; and all the Curses written in Gods Book laying, with all their weight, upon their loynes, yet none of them say [What have I done? Wherefore is all this evil brought upon us?]
CHAP. V. The Jews rejected Messias to be called the God of the whole Earth: and all other Gods eternally to be rejected. § 1. The God of Israel every where worship'd where Christian Religion obtains place. § 2. The God of Israel hath his Priests amongst the Gentiles. § 3. No acceptable Oblation but what Christians offer, tender'd to Israels God. § 4. The Gospel hath utterly abolish'd Idols, made Virmin-Gods creep into holes. § 5. Daphnaean Apollo, choak'd with the Bones of Ba∣bilas. Heathen Testimony for the silencing of Oracles; the Vanity of their Reasons. § 6. Gross Idolatry in the Roman Pale by her own Doctors Confessions and Definitions (the Legend of the Golden Calf) yet not in the proper and prophetick sence. § 1. A Third point of Prophecy, the accomplishment whereof is perma∣nent and now in being, (to the beholding of which I refer the Atheist for Conviction, that the Author of our Scriptures hath an infinitely perfect fore-comprehension of Contingencies.) Is that wherein it is fore-told; That this, by them rejected, Messiah of the Jews, was to be called [The God of the whole Earth:] That this Christ, this Son of God, against whom the Jews took Counsel, the Bond of whose Covenant they brake a∣sunder, the Cords of whose Royal Laws they cast from them, was to receive of his Father [The Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his possession] (Psal. 2.) was to Reign [from Sea to Sea,] and to fill [The whole Earth] with his Majesty (Psal. 71.) That to this Shilo, after the Departure of the Scepter from Judah, [The Gentiles should be gathered] (Gen. 49.) That this Branch, out of the Root of Jesse, wherein the Jews saw no form nor comliness, is to reign [over the Centiles] (Isa. 21.) in whom [the Gentiles are to trust] (Isa. 42.) to whom the Nations are to come, saying, [Our Fathers have inherited vanity] (Jer. 16.) That in the days of this Kings Son [All the ends of the earth] shall remember themselves and turn to the Lord, and [all the kindreds of the Nations] shall worship before him. (Ps. 22.) That to him Princes should come out of Aegypt, Aethiopia should soon (with the first) stretch out her hands unto God: That his Dominion shall be so far extended as [all Kings] should worship him, [all Nations] do him homage. (Psal. 68. 31) That it was too small a thing that he should raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and that therefore God would give him for a Light to Lighten the Gentiles, and to be his Salvation [to the ends of the earth.] (Is. 49. 6. That at what time, the Lord of Hosts should refuse to accept an of∣fering, at the hands of the Jews, and take no pleasure in them or their Legal services, his Name should be dreadful among the Heathen, great among the Gentiles: and that [in every place, from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof,] The God of Israel should have Incense offered to his Name, and a pure offering, (Mal. 1. 10. and 14.) Let the Atheist consult his Reason, and then try, if he can conceive, how that God, who spake by the Prophets so many things touching the Messias, which are all come to pass and verified in the blessed Jesus, could possibly be ignorant of, or falsifie in the main, in the Subject it self of all those Pro∣phesies, the Person of the Messias: Or that he, who foresaw the Rejection of the Jews, would not provide himself of another People. But I will not put him to the expence, (of what he hath not, in the purchase of Faith. His own Senses, where ever he comes, will inform him of the accomplishment of
these Predictions: what part soever of the old World he travels through, he may hear the Name of the God of Israel celebrated, he may see the Trophyes of Christs Victories standing there; hear the Confession of all men, with one mouth, that the God of Abraham is the God, that made Heaven and Earth: with which rebound the Mahometan Moscos, the Christian Churches, the Jewish Synagogues; for Pagan Temples he will find none, where the Gospel has been. Let him ask where he comes, at the hearing of what Doctrine it was, that their Gentile Progenitours came in to the acknowledgment of the God of Israel, confessing that their Fathers had inherited Vanity, had made lyes their Refuge: I am perswaded the Mahometan will have so much Ingenuity, as to confess that their Religion found all those parts of the World, whither it hath come, worshipping the God of Israel: and therefore that was not the Light God set up to the Gentiles, to bring them in, to guide them to the one true God of Israel; that theirs found the world inheriting the Chri∣stian Religion, which Mahomet himself will not call a Vanity; but for the time its Virtue lasted, (that is, till he put forth his Alcharon,) confesseth to have been a saving, and the only saving Religion, as being the Appointment of God himself by the hand and Ministry of his Beloved Son Jesus Christ, the greatest Prophet that ever was till Mahomet, by Mahomets own Confessi∣on: And the Jew may easily be confuted, if he shall have the simplicity to say, that that is a Prophecy of the Repentance of their Forefathers when they forsook the Idolatries of the Nations they were mixed with; for 'tis the Gen∣tiles are to come and say, Our Fathers inherited Vanity; and the truth is, the repenting Jews could not in verity make this Confession: for though they for some time took long Leases of the Idolatry of the Heathens, yet those I∣dolatries never obtain'd that Prescription as to become their Inheritance, as they did in the Heathen World, where, long time out of mind from Father to Son, no other Gods but Idols were worship'd. Or if he should have the face to deny that it was the Preaching of the Gospel which prevail'd with the Nations of the World to come in to Israel's God, confessing that the Reli∣gions of their Forefathers were all Vanity. For before the Preaching of the Gospel, 'tis manifest that all Nations walked in their own way, and in the name of their own Gods; and the Jew was so far from introducing the Worship of their sometimes God into the Roman Capitol, as they had much adoe to keep that Monster of all Roman Gods, Caligula, from receiving Divine honours in the Temple of Jerusalem, and could not prevent the erecting of his Statue in their Temple at Alexandria, nor the Adoration of it in the Presence-Chamber of the God of Israel. Besides, let them say by which of their Rabbies India, by which Aethiopia, by which Spain, by which Eritain, the utmost Coasts of Europe, Asia, Affrica, were converted from Idols to the One living God; as we can shew by what Apostles and Apostolical Persons the World was by piece-meal brought under the Obedience of God and of his Christ. § 2. Let him next observe, if Israels God have that service perform'd to him; which by his Prophets he had declared he would only accept, when he should be called the God of all the Earth, any where but in the Christian Church. If since his rejection of the Levitical Priesthood (which then vir∣tually commenc'd, when Christ as a Priest after Aarons order, made upon the Altar of his Cross (by the oblation of himself) a full and perfect Propi∣tiation for the sins of the whole World: and was then actually inflicted, when, in the virtue of that Attonement, God sent him as a Priest after the Order of Melchisedech to bless the Nations, by turning them from their sins. If this God of Israel hath, where he is invocated, any Priests, taken from a∣mong the Gentiles, but those of Christs Institution, that call themselves, and are called (that is known by the name of) the Priests of the Lord. He may find this name scorned by such punie Antichrists, as the Gospel tells us have ever been, and foretells us will ever be in the Church, but not of the Church:
who being under a Form of Godliness deny the Power, and either out of a blind zeal, or for a cloak of Covetousness, decry the Evangelical Priest-hood, casting contempt upon and practising to abolish that Name which the God of Israel hath said the Evangelical Ministers should be called by: do∣ing what in them lay to overturn the Foundation of Christian Faith; For if there be not an order of Men, taken out from the rest, from among the people, called the Priests of the Lord; the Gentiles are not yet called, nor that God whom we invocate, the God of Israel, nor that Jesus whom we worship, the Christ, the promised Messiah; for of the days of Messias it is pro∣phesied (Is. 66. 8.) [I will gather all Nations and Tongues, and they shall come and see my glory;] and this I will do by setting a Sign amongst them, (by ere∣cting the Standard of the Cross, [For those that escape (those of the Jews that save themselves from the untoward Generation, by embracing Christ) I will send to the Nations, disperse them over the World, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, to Tubal and Javan, to the Isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my Glory: and they shall declare my Glory] Preach Christ, the Bright∣ness of my Glory (Heb. 1. 3.) among the Gentiles. [And they shall bring all your Brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all Nations: and of them that shall be converted out of all Nations I will take for Priests and Levites: For as the new Heavens that I create, remain before me; so shall your Seed and your Name remain for ever.] And again (Isa. 61. 6.) [Ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord: men shall call you the Ministers of our God.] See here what ten∣der Consciences those tender ear'd men have, and how well those Laodice∣an Church-men consult the promoting of the honour of Christ, and the sal∣vation of Souls through his Blood, that, rather than we should offend the itching ears of those white Devils, would have us wave the use of so harsh a word, so grating a name as that of Priests: though it be of the mouth of the Lords naming, and the bearing of it among the Gentiles, one of those Demon∣strations of the Spirit of Prophesie, that Christ is come; and that he, whose Priests we are, is the God that made Heaven and Earth. Not but that the Romish Sacrificers have Sacrilegiously abused this name to the abetting their Sacrifice of the Mass: or, as if names or things, whose use is not necessary, may not be laid aside, when abused: as God took the name of Baal out of his peoples mouth, after it had been appropriated to I∣dols, and Hezechiah broke the Brazen Serpent after the Idolatrous use of it. Yet he that upon that pretence would banish the name of Jehovah, or other Names of God out of Christian use, would leave us never a Name to call him by; for all his Names that the Gentiles could get at the Tongues end, they applied to their Idols: and should we exterminate every Word or Thing that has been made an evil use of, we must speak by Signs, renounce our Creed, our Meat, Drink and Sleep. How much more cautious should we be of entertaining those Principles of a squeasie and mis-inform'd Con∣science, as induce us to a disuse of that Name which God himself hath stampt upon the Ministers of the Gospel, as their Memorial for ever. But, Odi prophanum vulgus, & arceo.— I should blame my self for making this excursion before the Atheist, if it were not to inform him, that in case, while he is seeking for the accom∣plishment of this Prophesie, he meet with such as disclaim this, and call them∣selves by another Name, and thereby be confirm'd in his Atheism; the Church is free of his blood; for there never hath been any Christian Church upon Earth, whose Ministers are not known and called by the name of the Priests of Israel's God.
§. 3. Let him enquire what Sacrifices and Oblations have been offered him since his Name was Great in all the World, but that commemorative one of the great Propitiation which our high Priest made once for all; That Thanksgiving-Sacrifice of the Eucharist, that well-pleasing Sacrifice of a sweet odour we tender him in our Works of Charity, in our honouring him with our substance; that living and reasonable Service, wherein we offer up our selves, Souls, Bodies and Spirits to the disposal of his Royal Law? What In∣cense hath been burnt before him, but Prayer from a Devout and flaming Heart? What Libations have been powred out in his presence, but peniten∣tial Tears, flowing from a contrite spirit? Let him travel Aegypt through and through, he will find no Altar there erected to the God of Israel, but that Table-throne of Grace, whereon we offer to him his Creatures of Bread and Wine, and make a Commemoration of his Son's Death. No Pillar there set up to the Lord, but the eternal Monument of his dear Love, the Triumphant Standard of the blessed Cross. He will find the Jew, the As∣syrian, the Aegyptian, serving the God of Israel joyntly in the practise of no Religion but the Christian. And then I leave it to the Atheists Discretion to judge, whether it be con∣ceivable, that that God who was so wise as to foresee, and so powerful as to effect this great Change, we see wrought in the World, by the Gospel; should be so far wanting to himself, and those of Mankind that most sin∣cerely love him, as to have none to worship him, in a way of his own In∣stitution (this sixteen hundred years) ever since he by his Providence hath made it impossible, to tender him that Worship himself had formerly com∣manded: the place being destroyed where God will only accept of such like services; and the Jews having been terrified from rebuilding it under Juli∣an, so, as they never since durst reattempt it. The Story of which their Con∣sternation is thus reported by Greg. Nazianzen, (Oratione 48. in Julianum 2.) Julian invited the Jews to return into Judaea and rebuild their Temple, whereupon multitudes of them repair thither, and busie themselves in that work (with as much zeal as our City-Matrons exprest. When those Forts and Lines of Communication were cast up, whereby they excluded them∣selves from the Protection of the best of Kings, and cooped up themselves to be a prey to the worst of Tyrants; for as ours then, so) the Jewish Ma∣trons, now, spared neither their tender Limbs, nor fine Cloaths, nor richest Jewels; but as they expended their Treasures in hiring Labourers, so they themselves did not disdain to serve the Workmen by carrying Baskets of Rubbish, till both Masons and Servitours were forc'd from their work, by Balls of Fire issuing from the trembling and gaping Earth; by which they that were not kill'd, had their Garments or Bodies inured with the Sign of the Cross: by which Marks of God's displeasure, many of them were so far convinc'd, (that no other Religion was acceptable to God, but the Christi∣an, as they with one voyce invocate the help of Christ, and were by Bap∣tism initiated in the Christian Faith. The substance of this Story I have elsewhere alledged out of Ammianus Marcellinus, one of Julian's Captains. And Nazianzen affirms, that when he wrote this Oration, these Prints and Marks upon their Cloaths were still to be seen, Is't then (I say) imaginable in reason, that ever since the disannulling of the Mosaical Service of Legal Sacrifices, God has been no where worship'd in a way of his own institu∣tion? Or is it possible to point out any People upon Earth, save the Chri∣stian Church, that worship him in that way which God himself foretold he would erect at the vacateing of the old? §. 4. The fourth and last instance I shall give of Prophecies, touching meer Contingencies, that have been so palpably fulfill'd, as the Effect of the accomplishment is now existing, is of those which foretold, That after Israel had cast off their Messiah, and their God cast off them and taken the Gen∣tiles
to be his People; Those Gentiles, as they came into Christ should cast a way all their former Idol-Gods, so as never again to return to them. Of which Tenour are those Texts, (Isa. 2. 18. 20, 21.) [The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day, and the Idols shall he utterly abolish; and they shall go into the holes of the Rocks, and into the Caves of the Earth, for fear of the Lord and for the Glory of his Majesty, when he ariseth terribly to shake the earth. In that day shall a man cast his Idols of Silver and Gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the batts;] This day is that when all Nations shall flow unto the Mountain of the Lords House, &c. ver. 1. The same Prophecy is repeated (Is. 31. 7.) and the Effect of it dated, when the Lord the Shepherd of Israel shall rise up against the multitude of Shepherds, called forth against him (the whole Crew of Idols erected by the Gentile world to affront the Majesty of Heaven) and make no more of them than a Lyon doth of unarmed Shepherds, who would scare him away with their voyce when he comes to take their Flock from them: and when those Flocks shall be turned unto that God, from whom the Children of Israel have deeply revolted. In that day shall every man cast away his Idols, &c. And (Isa. 45. and 46. Chapters.) When all the ends of the Earth shall look unto God, when to him every Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall swear, &c. Then Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their Idols were upon the Beasts, your carriages were heavy laden, they are a burden to the weary Beasts, they stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into Captivity:] That is, the Heathen Great Pontiffs and Philosophers shall not be able to maintain the Cause of those false Gods, whom by office and inducement of State they are bound to support, but shall fall down under the weight of that Vanity and Impiety, the Gospel shall charge them with; and throw off their load, and themselves become Christs Captives; so mighty were the Weapons of the Apostles Warfare, to cast down those vain Imaginations, that had exalted themselves against the knowledge of the true God, and to bring into obedience to Christ the strongest holds that Satan by his Deputies held in the Heathen World. And (Zech. 13. 2.) In that day when a Fountain should be open'd, to those Inhabitants of Jerusalem, to that House of David, that should mourn every Family apart, over him whom they had pierced (which cannot be meant of the Jews after the Flesh, for it was the Gentiles that pierced Christ, it was the Roman Soldiers that platted the Crown of Thorns, and set it upon Christs Head, that Nailed his Hands and Feet to the Cross, that peirced his Side with a Spear: to which external peircing of Christs Body, (and not to that Sword, which the unthankful Jew ran through his Soul) the Evangelist applies this Text, (John 19. 37.) The Spirit of Grace and Supplication is not promised, to the breakers of his Heart, but Bones: the Gentiles Heart that broke his Bones, shall be broken, when the spirit convinceth them of that sin: but the Jews generally lost under Judicial blindness;) in that day, I say, that the spiritual Judah shall repent and be baptized. (St. Jerom ex∣pounds this Fountain to be Christian Baptism, that Laver of Regeneration) It shall come to pass (saith the Lord of Hosts) that I will cut off the names of the Idols out of the Land, &c. and cause the unclean spirits to pass out of the Land. Was ever any thing foretold with more plainness and perspicuity? most of those Oracles (and a great many more, which for brevity sake I o∣mit) are as transparent, as if they had been writ with a Sun-beam: in this co∣pious variety of expressions, there is not one ambiguous Word, not one dark Syllable; a Child may run and read these Visions: Would then such eminent Persons, as their Prophets were, in their several Generations have run the ha∣zard of having their Memories traduc'd in after-ages, by such plain speaking (having no imaginable Secular Temptation to it, but against it:) had they not been (beyond all possibility of mistake) assured of the Infallibility of that Spirit by which they were moved. Now the same Degree of Assurance, which they had à priori (from the Cause) we may have à posteriori (from the Effect;) they could not (by that more then Scientifical Vision of those things
in the Divine Mind; that essential Cognition, that simple Contact and Feel∣ing of God's Will,) [Tactus quidam divinitatis notitiâ melior, essentialis cogni∣tio divinorum, contactus quidam essentialis, & simplex.] [Jamblicus de cognit. di∣vinorum.) be more certain, that this would be; than we may, that it is come to pass, by observing the Event. For never were any Predictions more manifestly fulfill'd than these; not one title of them is faln to the Earth. There is not now, nor has not been, in any part of the World, since Chri∣stian Religion was planted in it, the least Relique of those numberless Pa∣gan Gods, it swarmed with before that. Where, (not only as to their Oper∣ation, but Being) are the Gods of Hamath, and of Arphad? Where are the Gods of Sephervaim, Hena, and Iva (shall I say or) the Gods of Europe, Asia, Affrica? The Aegyptian Nile spawned Fish-Gods, their Land brought forth Gods of Grass, and Gods that eat Grass, their Air was darkned with vollies of winged Deities: In Greece the Genius of every species of Animals and Vegetives; In Rome Pallor and Terror the Fever and Jaundice grew into Gods; They had their he and she-deities, for Conception, Birth, Puberty, Marriage, Merchandice, &c. Gods of the Closet, of the Market; Gods of the Close-stool, and Chamber-pot; such as 'tis a wonder their own Jove did not thunder-strike the adorers of; such, as one would think, Hercules might have scar'd into the holes of the earth with the shadow of his Club, or blown away with his Fly-flap: But that in the Exile of the lawful Sove∣raign, every one has an equal right to the Crown; and in that parity, there is not a chip to chose betwixt a Peer and a Peasant, a Calf will serve the Is∣raelites for a God, when they have forgot him that brought them out of Ae∣gypt. When men delight not to retain the Former of all things in their mind, every Man will be a God-wright and frame an Image of the Deity, of any thing that comes off the Wheel of his ever-running Imagination. Yea Phi∣losophy it self, in those Times of Ignorance, could not castrate the rank Fan∣cies of Democritus and Epicurus of this prolifick God-teeming humour, but that they spawn'd as many Gods, that is eternal Beings, as there are Atoms in their conceipted infinite Worlds. In which particular I should think Laer∣tius and Tully to have wronged their memories, If I did not see (in this Age of improved Learning and divine Light) some mens Wind-mill-heads grind∣ing the God head of the one eternal, into as many and small grains as there are moats in the Universe: If I did not see those Leviathans, who make sport with, and take their pastime in deriding the Notions of created Spirits, and of the adorable Trinity of Persons in that one uncreated Essence (as finding no bottom of that immense Ocean, which Faith makes fordable to the mean∣est Christian;) themselves introducing an Hypothesis of more Spirits (for take Divisibility from Matter and nothing remains but an Incorporeal Sub∣stance; and he that talks of a crooked, an hooked, a three-corner'd Atome, may, with as much reason, tell us of a Square, or Triangular Circle, except he can impose upon the World a new Grammar: as well as Philosophy, or perswade all Greece to forget its Mother-tongue) than can stand betwixt York and Lancaster: I could make infinite more room for them upon the Cartesian Ground, but that is a Field large enough for all the Host of Heaven to incamp in; and I shall enlarge their Quarters in my Reflections upon the other Hypothesis which the Doctrine of Atoms introduceth, to wit, as many Persons in the One Eternal Being, as many distinct individual Subsistencies in the one Essence of Eternal Matter, as we can imagine Moats in the Sun-beams, should they dart themselves ten hundred thousand millions of times further upwards towards the Emperial Heaven than they do downwards to this Globe of Earth, and spread themselves round about that vast Circumference, in comparison of which this of our habitation is but an Atome; For, give E∣ternity to Matter, and you give it the Essence of God: make it subsist in A∣tomes, each one distinguish'd from another, and the result will be so many di∣stinct Subsistencies in that one Essence. Give to these Subsistencies a power of moving themselves (which you must grant them, or say they are moved by another, and what can be elder than Eternity, or by Chance, Chance must
be then before them) and it must be the life of Reason: and that will make e∣every Atome an individual Person, a Rational Hypostasis. So that instead of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, subsisting in one undivided eternal Godhead, This new Divinity commends to us more millions of divine Per∣sons than could be reckon'd up in an age (should all the men of that Age betake themselves all their life to their Counters:) That which we inter∣pret, A Troop cometh, in the Story of Gad's Birth (Gen. 30. 11.) some Hebrews expound, Fortune cometh; upon which our learn'd Antiquary expends the first Chapter of his 1 Syntagme, de Dais Syriis, I will not undertake to deter∣mine which is the best Translation; perhaps they may both stand with that Text, though not better than their conjunction would suit the Birth of the Doctrine of Atomes. For since Leah, that blear-eyed, purblind, Epicuraean Philosophy, grown, under the Age of the Gospel, past child-bearing, hath up∣on the knees of her handmaid, Zilpah, Modern Atheism, brought forth into the Christian Air, her Son Gad or Fortune, as that which made the eternal Atomes so happily meet, as to fall into all those comely Forms whereof the World consists; Gad, or a Troop comes, (shall I say) or a Legion or a My∣riad of Troops of Deities: God the crooked, God the hooked, God the ob∣tuse, God the sharp, God the long, God the short Atome; for it would be a taking of that Name in vain to apply it to those infinite Forms into which those mens Fancies cast those eternal Beings, which (notwithstanding) they call Atoms, with a far greater Solecism than he committed with his Finger; who pointed it to the Earth, when he was speaking of the glorious Furniture of Heaven; and shall rather bestow my time in transcribing that Exclamati∣on which our divine Poet snbjoynes to the History of those and such like va∣nities of the Polytheists. Ah! what a thing is Man devoid of Grace, Adoring Garlick with an humble face. Begging his food of that which he may eat; Starving the while he worshippeth his meat. Who makes a Root his God, how low is he, If God and man be sever'd infinitelie! What wretchedness can give him any room, Whose House is foul, while he adores his Broom: Let my stammering Muse add, Nor dares not sweep't; least from his foot arise, So many Motes, so many Deities. Certainly Epicurus, if he were true to his own Principles, must have been a nasty Sloven, and one whose disciples well deserv'd that compellation which the Satyrist gives them— —Epicuri de grege porci. The Hoggs of Epicurus his Stie. For he and his Litter of Followers must lie battening in their own Dung, for fear of disquieting that eternal Matter; a thing which the Deity does most abominate, in their opinion, and therefore does not interest it self in the affairs of the World, but busies it self in dancing and frisking about, and suffers it self to be carried whither Fortune pleaseth, and not the Scavinger's Broom or Dung-rake. I do not call Cartesius an Atheist, though doubtless his Philosophy has made many; but I think I may well enough call his a Feminine Philosophy, in compari∣son of that of Plato or Aristotle, grounded upon Principles received by un∣interrupted Tradition; though they neither could retrieve all Principles of that Nature, nor, through want of the rest, always rightly apply those they had received; And it seems a wonder to me, that so many, who would be
counted men in understanding, should be so affected with his Systems, which he himself (if my memory fail me not) in his Preface to his Natural Philo∣sophy affirmeth, he could make no man understand or relish so well, as one woman, who, though she was a person of honour, and of as great a capa∣city as any, as all of that Sex, yet sure she was not a competent Judge of such Speculations, had they been truly Masculine. She might perhaps have judged of a Poem, upon the presumption of Sapphos Dexterity; of an O∣ration, and have not gone beyond those bounds to which that Sex reached in the persons of Amaesia, Affrania, Hortensia, she might perhaps have found by enquiring of her Cooks or Scullions, that his Kitchin-experiments were true, and by her own Discretion see some of them subvert some of the Conclu∣sions of the old Philosophy; (as one fool may spy more faults than an hun∣dred wise men can mend.) But that they were a Foundation, firm enough for his Conclusions; that she, and only she, should discern, is an affront to our whole Sex; if indeed his Philosophy be calculated to the sublimest Principles of the most Masculine and Strenuous Wits, and not Female and Vulgar Capaci∣ties (who are easily imposed upon by the fallacy of non causa pro causa, Though It must be acknowledged to the praise of that excellent Lady, that her Phi∣losophical Genius so far transcended the common standard of her Sex, as to make credible that Story which Socrates relates of the Alexandrian Hypatia the Daughter of Theon the Philosopher, who excell'd all the Sophisters of her time, and either preceded or succeeded Platinus in Plato's School, (Lib. 7. 15. Socrat. Scholast. hist.) But I have dwelt too long upon these Minim Deities, were it not that from their introduction we may learn, to what Va∣nity of mind divine Justice gives those men up, that desire not the know∣ledge of the Almighty: and how aptly the Prophet speaks, when he saith, they should creep into the holes of the earth: For at the appearance of the Sun of Righteousness, this whole brood of Vermine disappear'd, these Hod∣madods crept into their shells; these Worms into their holes; these never stood one fight with our. Lord of Hosts; their Adorers never struck one stroke in their defence, as they did for their celestial Gods, the Host of Hea∣ven which they worship'd, the Gods of the greater and lesser Nations: But all in vain: For those strong men that kept the house are all turn'd out of pos∣session by the blessed Jesus, and spoil'd of all their Ensigns of divine honour: Jove of his Thunder-bolt, Christs still voyce drowning the noise of his Thunder: Apollo of his Bow and Arrows, Christ's Arrows proving more sharp in the sides of Python the Serpent, than his: Mars of his Faulchion, Christ's two-edged Sword proving the better mettled Blade: Minerva of her Spear, being not able, with her Target, to defend her self against the Artil∣lery of the Cross: Mercury of his Caduceus, by the more sweet Charms of the Apostles. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah uncas'd Hercules, and pull'd off his Lions Skin over his ears. As that Light of Light appeared in the East, and gradually shone to the West; the World ceas'd to fear those Hobgob∣lins, that had affrighted her in the dark: men learn'd to look upon the Sun without the Ceremonies of Adoration, without kissing the hand or bending the knee. As the Bread that came down from Heaven, hath been broken, to the several Nations of the Earth; they gave over baking Cakes to the Queen of Heaven: As the Gospel introduc'd the fear of the One blessed God, she shak'd off the fear of false Gods, broke down their Altars, demolish'd their Temples, contemn'd their Oracles, and stampt their Images to pow∣der. As the God that made Heaven reveil'd himself by the Preaching of the Gospel; the Gods that did not make Heaven and Earth have been abolish't from off the Earth, from under Heaven. The Romans Celebration of the Fu∣neral of that Coblers Crow two years after our Saviours Passion, Gilbert Ge∣nebrand. (in his Chronic.) conceives to have been a presage, that now the Gospel was begun to be publish'd, the black Crow, that is, Satan, was short∣ly to expire at Rome, where had been his chief seat and babling, (as he is
quoted by Vossius, [Atrium mali spiritûs infractum, imperium obrutum, & qua∣si sepultum iri.] (Vos. de Idol. 3. 89.) This was but short warning, however, all on a suddain as in a Pannick Fear the whole Army of Celestial, Terrestri∣al and Infernal, black and white Daemons, take themselves to their heels, and quit their ancient seats, as soon as the Lord of Hosts appears pitching his Tent amongst men, and Tabernacling in Humane Flesh. So that now a Child may lead those Lions, at whose voice the World trembled, before God utter'd his voyce; none frequent those Fountains, Caves, Groves, Oaks for Counsel; at the lips of whose Oracles, formerly the whole World hung for advice, in all Matters of weight, thither men repaired, there they en∣quired about planting of Colonies, building of Cities, about Peace and War, &c. (Plutarch. conviv. mor. tom. 1. p. 377.) But they have all lost their Tongues since God spake to us by his Son. Jove's Fountain of Castalion, and that o∣therof Colophon, (saith Clem. Alexand. adhaetat.) are commanded silence; and all other Prophetick Springs have lost their divining tast, whose proud streams swell'd (of old) with the honour of being reputed the seats of Sacred Ora∣cles. One of those silenc'd Oracles, (that of the Daphnean Apollo, in the Suburbs of Antioch) Julian would have cured of his dumbness, and he at∣tempted the like elsewhere, (Am. Marcol. Julianus 22. 12.) [Multorum cu∣riosior Julianus novam consilii viam aggressus est, venas fatidicas Castalionis reclude∣re cogitans fontis: quem obstruxisse Caesar dicitur Hadrianus mole saxorum in∣genti, veritus rè, ut ipse praecipientibus aquis capessendam Rempublicam comperit; etiam alii similia docerentur: ac statim circum humata corpora statuit exindè transferri eo, ritu quo Athenienses insulam purgaverant Delon] Julian his curio∣sity (in the matter of Religion, in order to the Defence of Paganisme against the Christian Faith, which he had renounc'd) put him upon this new Project; think∣ing to open the Veines of the Castalion Fountain, which the Emperour Hadrian is reported to have obstructed with a huge heap of stones, fearing least as he was in∣vited to undertake the Empire by the Oracle of that Spring. others also might be taught the like; he forthwith commands the Corps that were there inter'd, should be removed thence, after the same rite as the Athenians purged the Island of De∣los. What success he had here or in other places that Historian doth not relate, which doubtless so great an admirer of Gentilisme as he was would have done, if it had answer'd Julian's expectation. And therefore I conceive he sped no better elsewhere than he did at that Oracle near Antioch, where all the Respond he could get from Apollo was, that the body of the Martyr Babilas (there interr'd) would not permit him to give Oracles, or to do those other freaks wherewith he had formerly deluded the World: whereupon the Emperour commanded the Christians to remove the Sacred Relicks thence, which they did in triumph, singing (saith Ruffinus) those words of the Psalmist, Cursed be all they that Worship Carved images, and put their trust in Idols (Socrat. Ec. hist. 3. 16.) The Skeliton of one Champion of Jesus, ma∣sters their armed Apollo. But when should I have done, should I reckon up all the Trophies of Christs Victories over Idols erected in the Evangelical Histories? or to what purpose would it be to bring in Witnesses thence, when I am pleading with the Atheist? I will therefore content my self with the Testimony of Heathen Writers for the probat of this point. § 5. 1. That Pagan Oracles lost their Speech and Credit in the World, when the Gospel was Preach'd. I have quoted before the Respond which the Oracle of Apollo gave Augustus—. The Hebrew Boy bids me leave this house. And those which Porphyrie relates, in his , may be seen in Eusebius (praepar. Evang. lib. 5. 16.) In one whereof he cries out, oh, woe is me! lament ye Tripodes for Apollo is gone, he is gone: for the bright Light of Heaven, that Jupiter who was, and is, and shall be, Oh! mighty Jupiter, he compells me. Ah woe is me! the bright glory of my Oracles is gone from me. In another to a Priest that asked him which was the true Religion? he
gave this Answer: Thou unhappiest of all Priests! oh that thou hadst not asked me, being now at my last, of the Divine Father, and of the dear be∣gotten of that famous King, nor of the Spirit which comprehendeth and surroundeth all things: for woe is me! he it is that, will I, nill I, will ex∣pel me from these Temples; and full soon will this Divining-seat become a place of desolation. And in another, being extreamly urged by Exorcismes to break off his uncouth silence, he thus laments—Apollo's voice is not to be recovered, it is decayed through length of time, and locked up with the Keyes of never∣divining silence. Zosimus Comes (lib. 1.) hath this Story; at Selucia a Town of Cilicia there was a Temple of Apollo Sarpedonius, about which were great flocks of those Birds they call Seleucides, which Apollo used to send to devour the Locusts that infested those mens grounds which applied themselves to him for help. But, saith he, the men of this age have rejected so great a bounty of that God. [It à loquitur homo paganus, quia inductâ Christianâ Religione, passim ludibrio erat gentilis superstitio.] Vossii de Idololat. l. 3. cap. 97.) This speaks that Pagan Writer; because at the Introduction of Christian Religion, Gentile su∣perstition became every where a laughing-stock; (as the excellent Vossius well interprets that place of Zosimus.) It was in the Reign of Aurelian, that Porphyrie lived, and he reports these abovesaid Responds to have been extorted from Apollo before his Age. And Plutarch who flourish'd under Adrian long before Porphyrie (though a de∣vout Heathen) yet confesseth, that in his days the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon (that had been formerly renown'd) was faln to decay, that all the Oracles in Asia, save two or three, were then grown out of date: and in particular, that Baeotia (which formerly seem'd to be all Tongue, by reason of the mul∣titude of Oracles there resounding) had lost her speech; her Oracles (like Rivers in an extream drought) were dried up, and wholly sunk into the Earth: so that they who came to draw water there could find none but on∣ly at Lebadia. That of Amphiarius, at which Mardonius enquir'd in the Me∣dian War: that at Tegirae, where Apollo was thought to have been born, whence the Grecians (in the Medic War) receiv'd a promise of Victory; were become speechless, and that of late; for I could give (saith Demetrius) one of the speakers in Plutarchs Treatise of the Decay of Oracles, instances of more recent Responses received thence, which Oracles being now altogether struck dumb; it were worth the while to enquire, what the Reason thereof may be. Didimus the Cynick urgeth as the reason hereof, the Impiety the World was then grown to, which had provoked God to withdraw this fa∣vour from it. Plutarch rejects this, upon these grounds, for that God did still continue his favourable Providence to the men of that Age: and that if he had so pleased, he might have taken occasion of as great displeasure a∣gainst those Ages to which he afforded Oracles: for there were then good and bad, and the good as far out-numbred by the bad, as now. Ammonius (by way of Preface to this enquiry) layes down this ground. We must ascribe this Cessation of Oracles unto Divine Providence; (for if we deny that he hath silenc'd them, we lay a ground for suspition, that he did not erect them: and indeed who can Tongue-tie them, but he that gave them a Tongue; and assigns this as the reason, why so many of them were then ceast; because Greece was so depopulated with continual Wars, as that wa∣ter, for the greatest part of it, would have run waste, if Apollo had not dri∣ed up the Springs; what should he do with his hundred mouths, at which he formerly spake, now when he hath no greater an audience, than may all hear from one mouth? Cleombrotus, will not allow, either that God spake in those Oracles, or did by special dispensation silence them: but ascribes this to the Mortality of those Middle Essences, those amphibious Spirits, the mean betwixt God and Man which inhabited those prophetical Seats: of whose Mortality Philippus, (another speaker in that Colloquie) gives an example in that story I have for∣merly
related, of the death of the great Pan. And Demetrius another; in the following story. When the Emperour (saith he) sent me into Britain, I, out of curiosity sail'd to the Isles called Sporades: in a neighbour Isle to which, I found some few Inhabitants, of whom I learn'd that those Isles were ac∣counted sacred, as being the habitations of the Genii, who when they died caused perturbations in the Air, tempests on the Sea, and many portentous sights; such as hapned while I was there, an argument that at that time a Spirit was deceased. Briefly, (for why should I follow him step by step while he is hunting which way Oracles went) after he hath thrown on the whole pack of Phi∣losophers, and in vain smelt for a reason of their then Cessation in Plato's 5. in the Hermits 283. and in Epicurus his infinite Worlds, the best he can find in this, That there was in those places certain breathings of subterraneal spi∣rits which actuated the Divining Faculty of the Mind (as the Light doth the Eye) and made it exert it self in prophesying, which in time were either wasted or diverted to some other place; as it happens to Fountains, which in length of time either dry up or flit, by reason that the subterranean Fire, which distills them, either goes quite out for want of fuel or Creep after its fomes, till it meet with matter enough to feed it, and caverns long enough to be Limbecks for such distillations. A Salvo which is neither broad e∣nough for the sore, for it cannot be a sufficient reason why all the Oracles should at once be silenc'd, nor consist with common Principles touching those delusive Responds; and exploded by Cicero (de divinat.) nor comparable to that which the Christian brings and the Oracle of Apollo himself was forc'd to acknowledge, though so much against his will; As when the obstinate Pagans would not rest satisfied with that answer, but labour'd to overcome his obstinate silence, and by Charms extort a better Respond from his Tri∣pos; that he might be no longer forc'd to speak so much to his own dis∣grace; he stifled his Prophetess, whom against her will they thrust into the Cave; when by all ordinary dumb shows he had first exprest his dislike of their making enquiry at his Oracle, the Victim standing still as without sense at the first libations, and scarce shrugging when they rain'd, powr'd whole showers of water upon him. What could the poor dumb Idol do more to∣wards the rebuking the madness of the enquirers that would still be asking questions of him, after he had so often and with so much passionate grief told the world he was tongue-tied from giving any other answer then this, That he was forbid by an higher power (the Hebrew Child, whom all Gods are commanded to obey and worship) to give answers? What could the poor dumb Beast do more towards the stopping them in that prohibited way, than to stand stone still, neither winnying, as we say in the North, nor wagging the Taile; neither tossing her horns nor shaking her ears, when water was poured on her head: it being a received Maxim in the Pontifical Schools, That when the Libations proceeded not Canonically, it was an infallible sign of the aversion of the Daemon, of his dislike of what they were about, [Ca∣pram argui frigida affusa, si non moveatur. Non enim esse animae secundùm na∣turam affectae, non moveri at{que} affici cum libamenta inverguntur. Constanter ve∣rum est, litare signum esse exiturae sortis; non litando demonstrari responsum nul∣lum exiturum iri.] (Plut. ibid. 677.) And a Principle with the Delphick Priests, that if the Sacrifice during the libation, did not furiously rage and fling about, not her head only, but her whole body, it was a demonstration that Apollo would give no answer, had no mind to speak at that time: Quos perdere vult Jupiter dementat, whom God intends mischief to, he takes sense from; and therefore though the G sullen stupidity spake Apollo's sullen silence, yet Pythia must down into the Cell, she must take the question, and fit brooding upon the Tripos to hatch an Answer: but no Answer she re∣ceives from the Daemon, saving that which stopt her own breath, and all fu∣ture access to Delphos. For at her first entrance into the prophetick Cave she was replete with a malignant and dumb Spirit, and by hideous shrieks
exprest she was not able to bear the burthen of the enraged Daemon by whom after she had been every way tost, she was at last hurl'd up to the mouth of the Den, in so ghastly a posture, and with so terrible a clamour, as frighted a∣way not only the inquirers, but the whole College of the Priests, and Nican∣der the Wizzard. This is the last news we hear in Pagan Authors of the Delphick Oracle. § 6, Of the hitherto-accomplishment of the last Branch of those kind of prophetick Texts, viz. That where the Gospel comes, it utterly abolisheth all Pagan Idols, so as they shall never get footing there again, our eyes may in∣form us: if we carry them through those Countries where Christian Religion hath once been establish'd, though many of them have, by publick Sanction, since exploded it; yet we shall find Christ still keeping possession of those Countries, by parties professing the Gospel there; in all Mahometan Nations there is a remnant of Christians. And though Christian Religion be dis∣countenanced by the Secular Power, yet hath there not been any where a restauration of any of the Pagan Gods, or any God allowed to be worship'd, but the God of Israel, the God that made Heaven and Earth. Though the Christian World be deplorably immers'd in Metophorical I∣dolatry of Pride and Self-adoration, of Avarice and making Gold its hope and delight, of sensuality and making a God of the Belly (which is in us the same translated foolery, that the worshipping of Garlick was in the old Aegyptians.) Though the School-doctrine, touching the worshiping of Angels; Images and Saints departed, bids fair for the restauration of the Pagan Do∣ctrine of Daemons, and would bring the vulgar into extream peril of as gross, as senseless Idolatry, as any the Heathens committed, if it were practised; (which I add because I think the veriest Ideot a wiser man, than to follow the Dictates of those great Clarks, who always musing in their Cells, bring forth sometimes (through want of concourse with men) as inform Notions, as those lumps of Flesh, or concealed Menstra's, which some Virgins are delivered of, without the knowledge of Man, when the Passive Seed of that Sex betaking it self to the Matrix obstructed, and wanting the Plastick male Sperm, to digest it into form; piles it self into a rude heap.) So monstrous are some of the Issues of these mens brains, brought forth upon this subject, as Cassander, that wise and yet zealous Papist, cannot lick them into any tollerable or practicable Form: and therefore adviseth Charles the Fifth, that Biel's Doctrine, which substitutes the Virgin Mary, or other Saints in the Office of Christs Mediatorship, might be exploded; that those Titles given her, of Queen of Heaven, Queen and Mother of Mercy, our Life, our Hope, Light of the Church, Advocate and Mediatrix, might be laid aside, that those Liturgical forms, wherein a power is ascri∣bed to her to command Christ now Reigning in Heaven, might be expung'd. Such as these, Ora matrem, & jube filio. If you pray to the Mother you com∣mand the Son. Oh faelix puerpèra, Nostra pians scelera, June matris impera Redemptori— That he would wholly prohibit all ostentation of Reliques and take care that the people might be taught to reverence the true Reliques of Saints only, to wit, the Examples of their Piety and Vertues. And as to the Worshipping of Images, he wisheth that the German and Gallican Churches had still persisted in the Opinion of the Ancient Church, and of their Progenitors; for it is, saith he, more manifest than that, I should need many words to express it, that the Worship of Images hath proceeded
too far and the Faction or rather the Superstition of the Vulgar hath been indulged more than enough, insomuch as to that height of Adoration, which even the Pagans gave to their Images, and to the extreamest vanity which the Heathens shewd in fashioning or adorning their Idols, there seems nothing wanting among us; And therefore perswades the Emperour that the ancient Doctrine might be restored and the new restrai∣ned. Though the like hath befaln the Roman Church which befell the Jewish in the Wilderness. When Moses (as their Legends tell us) to try who was guilty of forcing Aaron to cast the Golden Calf, order'd them to drink of that water into which he had cast the powder of that Idol, which the I∣dolaters greedily gulping, spilt some of it upon their Chins; whence their Beards became of a Golden colour, and betrayed them, to the avenging Sword of their Innocent Brethren. A Romance hansomly exprest by Pe∣ter Rhenensis, as he is quoted by Mr. Selden in his Syntagme de aureo vitulo; whose Poem hath this close— Hebraei tradunt Mosen fecisse quod audis Vt sciret solos hac ratione reos. Nam rutilans auro monstrabat barba nocentes, Dum patulo latices fluminis ore bibunt, Aurum quod fudit Aaron descendit eorum In barbas tantùm, qui coluere bovem. Let who please dispute the truth of this Story, I shall only give the English and Moral of it. To try the guilty, Moses, (as 'tis said) Made Israel drink the powder he had braid The Calf into. Those Reliques of their sin Greedily hausted, drilling on their Chin, Gold-die th' Idolaters beards, and mark them out, For Levie's Sword from 'mongst the guiltless rout. Thus the Church of Rome hath contracted the colour of the Calf upon the Golden locks of her Shrines and Images, by drinking too deep and too gre∣dily of the Cup of Pagan Abominations, and thereby hath bewrayed herself to have the Calf in her heart, a very strong inclination to the grossest Ido∣latries of Rome Heathen, and to stand in extream need of that Admonition which Cassander gave her, that she would remove the scandall she hath given to the Mahometans, to the Reformed Churches, and the soundest part of her own Communion, by countenancing such Doctrines and Practices, as in the Judgment of her own Doctors, consequentially abett as perfect Paganism as ever reign'd in the Pagan World. Yet notwithstanding all this, if we lay aside this jangling with words, and take Idolatry in its native proper and old prophetick sence; a sence which any thats come to the stature of a man, may stride over at once: And not suffer ourselves to be abused by those over-acute unhappy Wits, who cut this Term into as many Thongs as will compass the whole body of Romish Superstition, and by sub-dividing those thongs, would bring the innocent and pious Ceremonies of the Church of England within the compass of that word Idolatry: by which art thing which we disgust and will not comport with our most carnal humours, may be brought under a suspi∣cion of being Idolatrous: For, Quantitas continua est in infinitum divisibilias; A dexterous hand may cut as many Thongs out of one Thong, with a pair of French Scissers, as a Bungler with a pair of Garden-Shears, can cut Thongs out of one hide. Let us then leave this Logomachie, this contending about shadows, and not presume either to teach the Holy Ghost to speak, or to wrest
his words from their genuine sence to our humours; and nothing will be more apparent to us than that; neither the Church of Rome, nor any other Society of men whatsoever, that once embrac'd Christianity, have Apostati∣zed to the embracing of any of those Pagan Gods whom the Gospel ejected; or to the Worship of any God, but of that only wise and Eternal God that made Heaven and Earth. Him alone the Mahometans, him alone the Papists worship, with that degree of divine honour, which is proper to the Deity. And as to the Church of Rome, she so far abhorrs Idols, in the sence of those Texts which foretell their downfall under the Gospel, as she is famously known to have converted in these last days some Heathen Nations from Idols to the living God. And that not only by force of hand, as the Spani∣ards attempted upon the Americans at their first arrival there; but by force of Argument, and evidence of Miracles; not such feigned and Legerdemain Sleights of hand, as she pretends to do in order to the conviction of those, who have either upon just cause forsaken her Communion (in those things wherein she has forsaken the Communion of the Catholick Church;) or have been shut out of her Communion (though they could have been content for peace sake to have walked with her in point of External practice) meerly because they could not find in their heart professedly to abjure the Communi∣on of the blessed Apostles, the Primitive and Universal Church: Such as cordially believe in Jesus Christ; for whom Miracles were never intended by God, but for them that believe not: And therefore, though her Priests in of∣fering to shew Miracles in Christendom, declare themselves so far to be Mi∣nisters of Satan, or of him whose coming is after the power of Satan, with lying wonders: yet among the Infidel Americans they may, and certainly do work Miracles; not as Papists, but as Christians; not in the virtue of Papal Innovations and singularities, but of the remains of the old and Ca∣tholick Christian Religion mixt therewith: As I believe any of our Ministers might do, did their zeal to propagate Christs Kingdom carry them out, to Preach the Gospel, where it only can be preach't in propriety of speech, to that yet Heathenish part of the World. This Point our Hot-spurrs might do well to consider, who stretch their Stentorian throats with outcries against the Churches Apostracy to Pagan Idolatry: whereby in effect they decry the blessed Jesus, and pronounce him an Impostor, and not the very Christ. For the Prophet Christ is by the power of his Law and Spirit, utterly to abolish Heathen Idols, out of the several Nations of the World, upon their submit∣ting to his Sceptre. So as they should never regain their old Territories, but be and remain totally and finally exterminated from off the face of the whole Earth, and from under the whole Heaven.
CHAP. VI. Touching the Millenium, Revel. 20. § 1. Pagan Idols Fall, and Satans binding Synchronize. Christianity grew up∣on the Empire by degrees. § 2. Charity's Cloak cast over the first Christian Emperours. §. 3. Theodosius made the first Penal Laws against Paga∣nisme: §. 4. Honorius made Paganism Capitall; then was Satan bound. § 1. IN complyance with which Old Testament Prophecies the Spirit of Jesus reveils (Rev. 20. 1. &c.) to St. John, That upon the Roman Empire's embracing of Christianity, Satan should be cast into the bottomless Pit; and there chain'd and sealed up untill the expiration of the thousand years, in which Christ should Reign, as sole Lord upon the Earth; so as he should not deceive the Nations any more (that is, as he had done) till the end of those years, and then he should be loosed for a little space, and go out and deceive the Nations, and draw them into a desperate engagement against the holy City, and the Camp of the Saints. Expositors do macerate themselves and perplex the Church with disputes about the sence of this Text. But they are most at a loss in placing the Aera of the commencement of these 1000 years: and that rightly stated will give light to all the rest. I therefore begin there, and date it at the Em∣pires submitting it self to the Sceptre of Christ, when he gave the World, (as the Empire was then reputed to be) that terrible shake, as made it cast its old Gods. When, at the rising of his Majesty so gloriously, as the Em∣perour acknowledged it; the Imperial Laws were made to serve Christ, which till then had been against him; for awe of which the Idols were hid in the holes of the Rocks, even by such as did not believe, as they had been bro∣ken before by them that were believers, as St. Austin well applies that distin∣ction (Isa. 2.) [Donec projicerentur à credentibus Idola, & à non credentibus ab∣sconderentur] (August. de consensu Evang. 1. 28.) And since which time Sa∣tan hath been wholly restrained from prevailing with the Nations either to erect new Gods or to restore the old. Though I am not very solicitous to assign the precise point of time, when the Kingdoms of this World so be∣came the Kingdom of God and of his Christ, as Satan was ejected out of his; as he and his Angels, the Daemon-Gods, and the Creatures, whom he had perswaded the World to worship before the Creator, were cast out: both these growing up by such degrees, both as to place and thing, as 'tis far easier to see the effects, than observe the steps they made while they were in motion toward that existence: Herbam crevisse apparet, crescentem non cerni∣mus: We must not deny the Grass to be grown at Midsummer, because we can∣not tell in what minute of the Spring it began to put forth, or saw it not growing; yet these Particulars are beyond dispute. 1. That Pagan Idolatry kept possession even of those Provinces of the Em∣pire, whose Local Governours were Christians before the Conversion of the Emperour; of which we have a clear Instance in Paphos; where, though the Governour thereof, Sergius Paulus, was converted to the Faith, early in the days of the Gospel, yet we find the Temple of Venus there long after that: for Titus Vespasian visited it, and had fortunate Responds thence touching the Jewish Wars, and his own Affairs. (Tacit. Hist. 2.) Sergius might, as the Jaylor, as the Centurion, purge his own Family; but the reforming of his Province was no more in his power (saving what his Example
and the exemplariness of his Family contributed thereto) than the Jay∣lor had to reform his Prisoners, or the Centurion had to reform his Band. 2. That after the Conversion of the Empire, every particular Province thereof was not actually brought under the obedience of Christ, but those earliest which were nearest the Imperial Seat, and most under their observa∣tion, and obnoxious to the due execution of its Laws for Christ. Thence we find the Gandavi not converted, nor their Altars of Mercury demolished, until the Reign of Heraclius, (anno 612.) Nor Flanders submitting to Christs Sceptre, till anno 648. Nor Germany scarce attempted by the Preaching of the Gospel, till Gallus and Columbinus communicated it (anno 688.) Nor Westphalia, till that (anno 690.) Abbus and Niger converted it to the Faith. Nor Frisia, till Pippin having subdued their Pagan Duke, (anno 696.) Wilibrod, Bishop of York, planted the Gospel there. Nor Holland or Saxony, till about the year 670. they were brought under Christs Yoak, by the Preaching of Swibert, Winefred, and Aderbert, English Bishops, Nor Denmark, till King Herald their first Christian King, (anno 826.) Nor Hungary, till Geiffa (anno 1010.) received it from Henry the 2d. as the con∣dition of his marrying the Emperours Sister Gisela, that himself and his sub∣jects should be baptized. Nor Pomerania, till anno 1106. Nor the Vandals, till anno 1125. Nor the Prusians, till anno 1164. nor the Rugians till Je∣remare (anno 1168.) became both their Prince and Priest. Nor Livonia, till (anno 1186.) nor Tartary, till 1249. nor Lithuania, till 1387. (Asted chron. Convers.) 3. The Incroachments which Christianity it self made upon the Emperors was by degrees. It prevail'd upon Tiberius his conscience so far, as he for∣bad the prohibition of it, but not as to put him upon the practice of it. It obtain'd of Philip Arabs (who began his Empire, anno 244) so far, as he made Profession of it, but did not enjoyne it to his Subjects. It obtain'd of Severus, to permit his Mother Mammea to profess it, even in the Impe∣rial Court, and Origen to Preach it, in the Royal Family; but himself did not embrace it. Constantius, the Father of Great Constantine, though the Gospel prevail'd not with him, so far, as to make him a Christian; yet he was so much a fa∣vourer of Christians, as to give them a Toleration in his Dition, who fled from the rage of his three bloody persecuting Colleagues, and to retain those as his Domestick Servants in the Palace who stood firmest to the Profession of the Christian Faith, rejecting such as he found (contrary to their better perswasion) conforming to the Pagan Worship, to please him, saying, they that would not be true to their God, would dissemble with their emperour. (Euseb. de vita Constantini, lib. 1. cap. 9, 10.) And toward the close of his Life renounc'd the Politheism of the Gentiles, and betook himself to the service of the one only God; so as his Court bare some resemblance of a Church, there being in it, the Ministers of the Lord dayly officiating for him, and praying with him. (Id. Ib. cap. 11.) It gain'd so much Authori∣ty over Constantine the Great; as he not only profest it, but commanded his Subjects to practise it: but yet the Ethnick Worship was still publickly al∣lowed. [Christianos optavit esse omnes, coegit neminem.] (titulus decret. Eus. de vita Con. lib. 2. cap. 55.) Constantine order'd (as that which was manifestly behooveful for the Tranquillity of the Empire in that time) that every one should have liberty to chuse and worship what God pleased him best. (Eus. Ec. Hist. 10. 5.) And not only in , but his Successors Reign to Gratian, Paganism was allowed in the Senate-house; where the Pagan Senators (the Christians looking on, the Ashes from the Altar, the Smoak from the Sacri∣fice, choaking them) took their Oath at the Altar, before their giving their Vote. To which purpose, after Gratian had demolisht it, the Pagans moved Valentinian to restore it, at the publick charge, as being of publick use: and that this had been their custome, under Valentinian the Elder, appears from
that excuse St. Ambrose makes in his behalf, viz. he knew it not, no person informed him of it. (lib. 5. epist. 30.) Yea, Constantine himself, and his Successors, Christian Emperours (down as low as Gratian) retain'd still the Title and Office of Great Pontiffs, and accordingly order'd all businesses, con∣cerning the Ethnick Ceremonies, by their Deputies. Mirabile dictu! saith the Learned Meed, (2 vol. book. 3. chap. 10. 746.) and because it seems so to him, it seems to me worth a more serious ponderation. That the Christian Em∣perours, unto Gratian, were a kind of Samaritane Christians, serving the God of Israel, with their own Country-Gods (though with a vast disparity of respect: and the later, perhaps, but in complement and policy: as Naa∣man bowed in the house of Rimmon; or Jehu proclaim'd a Feast of Baal, that I may not lay an ignominious blot upon the Memories of those pious Prin∣ces) is more manifest than that it needs more proof than what Pagan Histo∣ry gives. Constantine could hear the Orator of the Hedai; stile his Grand∣father, Claudius, Numen: and his own favours to the Hedai, remedia numi∣nis tui: could indure, to see the Images of all the Gods of that City carried in Procession to meet him, [omnium deorum nostrorum simulachra protulimus ti∣bi occursura:] and to hear, that in thankfulness for the benefits receiv'd at the hands of Constantine, they offer'd gifts in their Temples; (in that Pane∣gyrick was made in their name, Printed at the end of Pliny's Panegyrick for Trajan.) He could with Patience permit the Orator of Triers, to call Claudius, a Companion of the Gods, nay a God in Heaven: (Imperator in terris, & in caelo Deus:) whom the Temples of the Gods waited for; who was now receiv'd into the Council of the Gods; Jupiter himself giving him his right hand: and to commend Constantine himself, for visiting Apollo's Tem∣ple (vidisti Apollinem tuum) (in his Panegyrick, Ibid.) All this to me seems not so strange, as that those Kings of Judah, who were educated in the Law of God, should have God's approbation as men fearing him in the main, though they (contrary to as express a Precept as any is in the whole Law) took not away, but suffer'd their People, and sometimes used themselves to Sacrifice in high places, as Jehosophat and Asa. (1 Reg. 22. 44. 1 Reg. 15. 14.) § 2. How much more might this connivance of the Emperours stand with true Piety, who being some of them nurst up in Gentilism, had not the means of knowing the will of God, which those Kings of Judah had, which was St. Ambrose his excuse for Valentinian the elder, his coming at the Pagan Altar in the Senate house, (in the place forealleged,) and the rest of them, having their Reigns incumbred with Secular, but especially with Ecolesia∣stical Wars, (and those about the main Fundamentals of Christianity) as they had not leisure to inquire into the niceties of practical Points of Christianity. It was much that those of the West imbrac'd Christ as God, and that those of the East prefer'd him before Idols, then when it was disputed among Chri∣stians, whether he were God or no. Or had they had opportunity to study the will of Christ, as to that particular of the Magistrates Duty: yet their temptations against an exact conformity to it, in that case, (wherein their Political Interests were so much concern'd,) were so great and almost invin∣cible, as that may plead for our charitable Censure, except we our selves had never been drawn, by the Loadstone of our Temporal concerns, to strain cour∣tesie with conscience. Or had they been never so willing, at any charge or hazzard, to conform to God's Law once manifested to them; Yet it might have born a dispute, whether, in that Juncture, it were their Duty, to shew any greater discountenance, than they did, to the old, and so much doted on, Religion of the Gentiles? Especially having those great Examples of Jacob's connivance at Laban's Idols, in his own Family, and among his Wives; till he had an opportunity (after the settlement of his affairs) to purge his house of those Idols: and of David's permitting his Wife Michal, to have an Image of the same kind with those of Laban's, as the Jewish Doctors say,
quoted by Mr. Selden (in his Syntag. de Teraph.) and described by them, to have been the head of the first born of their Clan, the Founder of their Fa∣mily, wrung (as the Priests did the heads of Fowls to be sacrificed, Lev. 1. 15. and 5. 8, Texts which they alledge, for the illustration of this Rite,) off, and season'd with Salt and Aromaticks. To which (having placed it upon a Golden Plate, whereon was writ the Name of that unclean Spirit, which they believed they had called into it, by their barbarous Rites, and lighting Candle before it;) they gave divine honour, and applied themselves, for re∣solution of all difficulties as unto an Oracle. Such were the Gods which both David and Jacob tolerated in their own Families, while they had not power to cast them out. Upon the account of the same Law (that of necessity, that has no Law) the first Christian Emperours were forc'd to tolerate Gentilism. Constantine prefaceth his decree of Immunity, with this excuse. It is necessary for the preserving of publick Tranquility, &c. (Euseb. hist. 10. 5.) But where there was no danger of destroying the common peace (by provoking a major part, as in the Case of the Arrians; he orders, that all the Churches of those Hereticks be forth with overthrown, and their Assem∣blies be no where suffer'd, either in publick or private. (Euseb. de vita const. 3, 63.) Whereas Gratian, on the contrary, finding the party of Arrians for∣midable, and swarming in all places (by reason of that indulgence his Predi∣cessor Valens had used towards them) fearing some general tumult, if he should hastily distress so numerous a multitude as they were: gave order that they and all others might have Churches and Oratories with freedom and immunity: But he being once settled, and joyn'd with Theodosius, (and there∣by made strong enough to quell them) commanded that all Heresies should be silenc'd for ever, as interdicted by the Laws of God and Man, that none should any longer presume to teach or learn prophane Doctrines; (Codicis lib. 1. tit. 5.) From which consideration of the difference of Times, St. Ambrose told Valentinian the younger (advising with him whether he should gratifie those of the Senate, who requested that the Altar, at which the Senators, that still adhered to Gentilisme, had used to be sworn: (Note, it was the fashion of the Romans to stand before the Altar, when they took an Oath, —Jures licèt & Samothracum, Et nostrorum aras—(Juvenal. Sat. 3.) As it was also of the Jews, (1 Reg. 8. 31.) and the Oath come before thine Altar.) Before they gave their Vote in the Reigns of his Predecessors Christi∣an Emperours, might be rebuilt, having been demolish'd by his Brother Gratian;) That if Gratian had not had the heart to throw down that Al∣tar, but had left it standing, yet he would advise Valentinian to overthrow it, seeing the Pagan party, both in the Senate and among the Vulgar, was less formidable then, than it was at that time when his Brother had the cou∣rage to demolish it: for they that prefer that request (saith he) do abuse the name of the Senate, while they present that Petition to you in its name, who are only a few Pagan Senators [Pauci Gentiles communi utantur nomine.] As I remember, when about two years ago, the like Petition was preferred, with the like subscription; Damasus, Bishop of Rome, sent me a Libel, which the Christian Senators (far more numerous than the Pagan) gave out, wherein they declared their disowning of that Petition. (Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 30.) A manifest Argument that those first Christian Emperours could not be more rigorous against Paganism, than they were, without hazarding the publick Peace, and danger of turning all into confusion, by a precocious Zeal, by reason of the numerousness of those that then profest it, which as it decreas'd the severity of their Decrees against it increased. Princes must do as they can, when they cannot do as they should: in which case they do
what they should, when they do what they can. God accepting the Will for the Deed. It will be an harder task to free them from guilt, in their retaining the of∣fice of Great Pontiffs, and being present at the Pagan Altar, &c. but for the last it may be pleaded, (for the extenuation at least of their Crime) That they had the Example of Jacob's taking an Oath of Laban, in this form [The God of Nahor judge betwixt us] (meaning that God of the Caldees which Nahor and Abraham and their Forefathers worship'd before Abraham's Call;) and eating with him upon the same heap whereon he had Sacrificed to that God, (Calvin in locum:) [nec dubium est quin jurandi formae responde∣rit sacrificium.] Jacob himself sacrificing to the true God, and swearing by him, whom (to distinguish him from that God which Laban sacrificed to and sware by) he calls the Fear of his Father Isaac, not Abraham; because Abra∣hams Fear (for some time) had been the God of the Caldees, but Isaac (be∣ing born after his Father had left his Country and Country Gods, and entred into Covenant with the only true God) never had any other God, for his Fear, but the eternal God. (Gen, 31.) That Isaac was in presence, while A∣bimelech sacrificed to a false God; and heard him swear by the name of that God, at such time as he made a Covenant with him: (Gen. 26. 28.) Percu∣tiamus faedus tecum, Let us make a Covenant with thee by Sacrifice, and rati∣fie it by Oath; the antient Use being to slay Victims, at their making of Co∣venants (whence the Phrase of Icere, percutere, ferire faedus) (Vossius Etym.) be∣twixt the parts whereof he that swore passed, as he pronounc'd his assent to the Covenant, ratifying that assent with such like execrations, [ità me Dii mactent—si sciens fallo] Let God mangle me as I have mangled this Victim if I wilfully break this Covenant: (Livii. lib. 1. lib. 21.) This ceremony God observed in his entring into Covenant with Abraham. (Gen. 15. 9. 17.) by the deputation of that smoaking Furnace and burning Lamp that passed be∣tween the pieces on that same day wherein the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham. Excellently has the imcomparable Grotius determined this case of Conscience: [Se tamen, si quibuscum negotium erat, adduci non possent ut aliter jurarent, contraxisse cum eis (Idololatris,) ipsos quidem ut opportebat jurantes, ab illis autem juramentum accipientes quale haberi poterat. (Grotii de Jure Bel. lib. 2. cap. 13. 12.) If those with whom the Patriarchs had to do in the point of mutual swearing could not be induc'd to use another Form, than in the names of their Country Gods, they used to contract with them, though they were Idolaters, they swearing as they should, and taking such an Oath from those as they could possibly obtain. I might also alledge the example of Naaman who, (according to the best Expositors) putting this Case to the Prophet: whether he declaring o∣penly, that he believed there was no God, but the God of Israel: and yet bearing that Office under the King, as the King at times, leaned upon his shoulder, when he went abroad (for greater State:) if the King should go unto the house of Rimmon, while it was Naaman's Office to wait upon him; and Naaman should there bow, not in reverence to the Idol, but in a civill respect to his Master, who could not bow, if Naaman, upon whose shoulder he lean'd did not bow; whether, I say, in this Case he should sin against God in committing Idolatry was the Question he put to Elisha. And the Prophet in his answer to it assures him he may go in peace, that is, his do∣ing thus in such circumstances would be no occasion of breach of peace be∣twixt the God of Israel and him. Upon this example the Protestant Di∣vines assured the Elector of Saxony whose Office it was to bear the Sword be∣fore the Emperour, and to whom the Emperor had sent a Command to at∣tend upon him in the performance of that Office, while he went to Mass; that he might lawfully observe that Imperial Injunction; because, [ad suum officium esset evocatus] he was called to the performance of his duty; whereup∣on, the Elector accompanied Caesar to the Mass, [non vel ut ad cultum divi∣num ad Missam accedens,] not addressing himself to the Mass as a Religious duty,
but to the performance of the Civil Duties of his Calling, (Sleidan Comment. lib. 7.) And Lastly, I might urge, that the Pagans themselves (forc'd by the Ar∣guments of our men and their own Mythologists) were at that time brought to an open and avowed confession, that the Gods of the Gentiles were not Gods, properly called, but either Created Spirits, in the invisible; or infused Properties, into the several Species of things in the visible World. So as Jupiter signified no more then (even in the Gentile Dialect) than the Heat; and Juno no more, than the Moisture of the Air, And that their erecting Al∣tars to them, was no more but an acknowlegement, in particular, of the Fa∣vours bestowed upon Mankind by the one Eternall God, by their hands, as his Instruments. The change of the propriety of those Heathenish names must needs mitigate the harshness of their sound, even in Christian ears, if not make them as little offensive then, as the names of Saturn, Sol, Luna, Jupiter. Mercury, Mars and Venus, are at this day: when, for distinction sake, we apply them to the Days of the Week, and as that Verse of St. Austin (contrà Academicos tom. 1. p. 197.) Sic pater ille Deùm faciat, sic magnus Apollo; with that Comment which himself makes of it: or that of the Flocena Oratour, utter'd to Constantine in his Panegyrick, [Quod Ceres mater frugum quod Ju∣piter moderator aurarum, quicquid illi parciùs dederunt nobis, amen ex benefici∣o tuo natum est:] whose contexture speaks no more but this, that Constantine's remitting to the Flavians the Customes due to the Imperial Crown, had made them amends for what they suffer'd, either through unseasonableness of the weather, or barrenness of the ground. But to enlarge here, would carry me too far from my intended Scope, which was to shew how by inches the Gospel gain'd upon the Roman Emperours. To proceed therefore in that discourse— §3. Christianity so far gain'd upon Valens, though an Arrian, as he would not aid the Gothes, but upon condition of their embracing the Christian Faith: which they did so cordially, as when by the Treason of Stillico they were set upon in their march toward Gallia, where the Emperour had allotted them quarters, by some Companies of Jews on the Lord's day, they scrupled to make resistance, though in their own defence, because they would not shed blood on that day which was dedicated to the honour of our Lord; till the Jews, abusing this their over-religious Opinion, in observing no mean in slaughtering them, taught them man by man to betake themselves to those arms which altogether they had resolv'd rather to die than use upon that day. (Vives de Getis. praef. ad August. de civitate dei.) Yet Valens neither received Christ for God, nor restrain'd his own Subjects by any penal Law from the publick Worshipping of Idols; any more than Valentinian the Elder, of whom Marcellinus (lib. 30. cap. 12. [Hoc moderamine principatus inclaruit, quòd in∣ter religionum diversitates medius stetit, nec quenquam inquietavit, ne{que} ut hoc coleretur imperavit, ne{que} illud: nec interdictis minacibus, subjectorum cervicem ad id quod ipse coluit inclinabat, sed intemeratas has partes reliquit ut reperit.] He was famous for this moderation of Government, that he standing Neuter, among the diversities of Religions; neither disquieted any man, nor commanded that any one Religion should be observ'd rather than another: nor did he by threatning interdicts, bend the necks of his subjects to that Religion which he himself profest, but left as he found all those parties inviolated. It prevail'd so far upon Gratian, as he refused the Pontifical Stole, when it was tender'd him by the College of Pagan Priests; saying it was unlawful for a Christian to be installed in, or to manage the Office of Great Pontiffs. But I do not read that he prohibited the College to officiate, or the inferior Priests to sacrifice; for I find Heliadius, the sometimes Master of Socrates Scolasticus, to have officiated as a Priest of Jupiter, and Ammonius, as a Priest of Apis, at Alexandria in the Reign of Theodosius the Elder, and the Temples of Idols
every where standing and frequented, if I may call that frequenting, when, (notwithstanding that there had not yet been made any penal Laws against Gentilisme) the assemblies there were so thin'd and the number of Pagans faln to that ebb, as Julian the Apostate to gain the Empire and the good will of the Provinces was fain to counterfeit himself a Christian: Ammian. Mar. Julianus.) And Jovinian, obtaining the better of him, threatned his Army when they elected him Emperour, with a refusal to accept of that Office, except they would renounce Julian's and accept of the Christian Religion (Socrat. l. 5.) which had been a strange piece of Fool-hardiness, had not the Christian Par∣ty of the Roman Legions been then more numerous, for all that so many Christians had parted with the military Belt, rather than continue in those Commands, which they could not injoy under that Tyrant Julian, except they would forsake the Ensign of the Nay, when the Imperial Laws were against the Faith, it so prevail'd, as the Idol-Temples under Trajan, were in a manner dis-frequented, as Pliny informs him (lib. 10. Epist.) This I here insert, that my Reader may know it was not by force nor might of the Secular Arm, that the new Jerusalem was forwarded in its building. Marrie, that the Idol-Temples should go down without hands, that the Earth should open her mouth and swallow them up quick, or that God should beat them down with Thunderbolts, would have been a most groundless and presumptuous expectation. And therefore this Emperour Gratian, served Christ in putting his hand to that work, by demolishing the Altar in the Capitol, where the Senators till then had been Sworn, and confiscating the revenues of it; which gave a colour of Equity to the Petition of those, that begg'd of Valentinian, that it might be rebuilt, and the service thereof maintain'd, out of the Treasury: a colour which St. Ambrose handsomly wipes off, [quod enim vel fisco vel arcae est vendi∣catum, de tuo magis conferre videbere, quàm de suo reddere. l. 5. ep. 30.] by tel∣ling the Emperour, that that would be a restoring of the Pagan service, at his own proper charges, and not a restoring of what belonged to that Altar, as its Revenues; for being confiscate, they were now become the Revenues of the Imperial Crown, but that Gratian did subvert any but that Altar, or set any mulct upon Idolaters, is more then I can find in any good Au∣thors. Theodosius the Elder was the first Emperour that universally prohibited the publick practice of Gentilisme through the Empire, commanding their Temples and Altars every where to be thrown down, and their Statues to be melted into Pans and Kettles for poor people. The execution of this De∣cree at Alexandria was committed to the care of Theophilus, the Bishop of that See; who in ransacking those depths of Satan, those Cages of unclean Birds, brings to open light those shameful Mysteries and Obscenities, as the Revelation of them drives the Pagans to that rage as they furiously make head against the Christians, and slaughter such numbers of them, as the Go∣vernour, with his Military Bands, was fain to come into their rescue, and to aid the Bishop: by whose help he utterly abolished the Idols Temples, and all their Statues, but one, which he erected in the open Market, to be a wit∣ness to future, of the folly of former Ages, in adoring such mis-shapen Mon∣sters; at which Helladius was more vext than at his destroying all the rest. (Socrates lib. 5. cap. 16.) This Emperour pull'd down the Crows Nests, but restrain'd not the Boyes from climbing the tree: nor hindred the Birds from building Nests in private corners. For the Gentiles were still permitted their secret Chappels and Conventicles, even in the Imperial Cities and Courts: Some of whom were in that favour with the Emperours as that they were admitted to places of highest honour, emolument and trust. Macrobius, a Grecian by Birth, and a zealous Gentile by Religion, was Prefect of the sa∣cred Bedchamber to Theodosius: and had so much interest in his Masters Af∣fection, as for his sake he made that Decree; That they who bore that office,
should, in point of honour be equall to the chief Military and urbane Magi∣strates, among whom Macrobius to have the precedency. (Isaac Pontan. in no∣tis ad Macrobium pag. 1. ex Scaligero.) Optatus, a Pagan had the Military Government of Constantinople commit∣ted to his charge under Theodosius and his Son Arcadius: (Socrates hist. eccl. 7. 16.) with as much impunity was Gentilism practised in the Metropolis of the Western Empire, under his Brother Honorius, at the beginning of whose Reign, when the Gothes, under Alaricus, took Rome, there were very ma∣ny Heathens not only in the City, but Senate, by whose order it was deter∣mined, that the Pagan Worship should be restored and celebrated in those Temples which had by Theodosius been converted to the use of the Christi∣ans: [.] (Sozomen. 9. 7.) for I see no necessity of collecting from this passage, that any other Temples were then standing, but what were transferr'd to a Christian use: to which that passage of Orosius (l. 7. cap. 38.) adds strength, where he writes that Attalus, the Governour then of the City, and a Pagan (for he was Christned by a Gothish Bishop after he was joyn'd with Alaricus) sending for the Thuscian Magi (who promised by Thunder and Lightning to drive away the Barbarians,) enter'd presently into consul∣tation with the Senate, about restoring to their Idol-Gods, their Sacred Pla∣ces, and celebrating their Rites. So I render his [continuò de repetendis sa∣cris celebrandis tractatur] [Sacris] comprehending Places, as well as Ceremonies; and [repetendis] implying the recovering of sacred things out of the hands of those who then had the possession of them, and therefore not applicable to the Gentile Sacrifices which the Christians never touched, but their Temples, which were converted from the service of Idols, to that of the true God; as that Magnificent one of Serapis of Alexandria was, at the same time, and by the same Decree of Theodosius. So numerous were the Pagans then in Rome, as Dr. Hammond thinks (and not but upon good grounds) that it is Pagan Rome is threatned in that Prophecy (Rev. 17. 14.) and according to that Prophecy, punished by Alarius: the Christian Party being some departed with Honorius, their Emperour; some with Innocentius▪ their Bishop unto Vienna: (Come out of her my people, Rev. 18. 4.) as Lot out of Sodom, (saith Orosius l. 7. c. 39.) and the rest overpowered by the Gentile Faction, animated by the hopes they had of Attalus, that he would professedly favour and set up Gentilism, [.] and restore the Anent Temples, and Feasts and Sacrifices: (Sozom. l. 9.) §. 4. Hitherto then we see the Dragon, the old Serpent the Devil, still a∣broad and at work (even in the Imperial City) at his old Trade of sedu∣cing the Nations to Gentilism, and, which is more, prevailing with them to endeavour the restauration of the Pagan Religion, after it was prohibited by penal law by Theodosius: for Eugenius and Arbogestes, with a mighty Army attempted to restore Ethnicism which Theodosius had utterly abolisht, saith Mr. Meed, (vol. 2. Book 3. chap. 10.) after whose subduing of those two Tyrants Ethnicism never made head more in the Roman Empire, saith the same lear∣ned Author. Indeed the whole current of History makes it evident, that Eth∣nicism, never after that, appeared in the field against Christianity: yet we find it after that conspiring in the Senate, to subdue the Faith, by the help of the Gothish Arms, invited thither by the Heathens, and therefore so dreaded by the Christian Party, as multitudes of them upon the irruption of the Bar∣barians, either conceal'd or dissembled their Religion to save themselves from the rage of the enemy, till (contrary to their expectation) they perceiv'd that God had turn'd the sword of the Goths against the Pagans. (St. Jerom. ep. 6. ad prin. & ep. 8.) and that Alaricus had given order to his Soldiers, they should neither touch persons nor goods which they found in the Christian Temples. And we find it after that practised in private Chappels, til Honori∣us made it capital, for any to worship Idols either in publick or private.
[Quis enim nostrum, quis vestrum, non ladat Leges ab Imperatoribus datas, ad∣versus sacrificia Idolorum? at certè, longè ibi paena severior constituta est illius, quippe impietatis capitale supplicium est,] (saith St. Austin to the Patron of the Donatists, epist. 48.) which of ours, which of yours, do not commend those Imperi∣al Laws against the Sacrifices of the Pagans? though the pain inflicted by those Laws be far more severe than that which the Law inflicts upon the Novatians: for those make it death for any to commit those Gentile Abominations. At which period of time, if I would be positive, I would fix the beginning of the thou∣sand years which we have in this long discourse been pricking to its seat. For it is most natural to interpret the Chain wherein Satan was bound, to have been those Imperial Laws; and the Key of the bottomless Pit, that Supream Authority and power of Life or Death, invested by Gods Ordinance in them that bear the Sword; and actually exerted in those Laws, by opening the mouth of the Pit, and making it gape upon such as should persist in those im∣pious and inhumane Idolatries by the Ghastly look of that terriblest of terri∣bles, the Pagan was frighted from that Diabolical Worship, and by that fear of his, shut up Satan, and deprived him of power, any longer to deceive. Inso∣much as immediately after the promulgation of those Laws, though all did not embrace Christianity yet the whole Empire renounc'd Politheism; all strife thereabout being supprest, and so eradicated even out of the most talk∣ive Schools of the Grecians, as if any Sect of Error then rose up against the Church and the Faith, it durst not step upon the Stage to contend with the Chri∣stian, but cover'd with the Christian name; so that the Platonicks themselves, d it not been for some plausible Placits they could adhere to, without fear of incurring the penalties of the Imperial laws, must of necessity have gene∣rally submitted their pious necks to the yoak of the only invincible King Christ: and have acknowledged that Word of God made Flesh who spake and that was believed, which the boldest of them were afraid to reveal to the world. (August. dios. ep. 56.) But I dare not be peremptory in determi∣ning the precise Moment. All that I assert in this is, That if the Thousand years of Satan's binding e begun at all, the beginning of them cannot be da∣ted lower than the promulgation of those Imperial Edicts, neither do any place them lower who are of opinion that the Millenium is not yet to begin. From whence I inferr this irrefragable Conclusion. If the Millenium be pre∣cisely the term of 1000 years (Satan at the utmost was let loose in the year of Grace 1400) that then the Christian World has outlived Grace 270 years, ac∣cording to the least compute of that Hypothesis: And if we begin the account higher up, with those that date its Commencement either at Christs Birth, as the Annotator upon King Edwards Bible, that he may make the Millenium expire at the rising of the Papacy, or at the Passion of our Saviour with St. Austin, when indeed he was virtually bound up, and by sentence of law cast out of his old possession. [Mille anni tempus est à passione Christi, in quo non permittitur diabolo facere quicquid vult,] (Aug. tom. 9. pag. 364.) or at the Fall of Jerusalem with the learn'd Dr. Lightfoot; or at Constantine's embracing Christian Religion with Dr. Hammod; or at the Conquest of Theodosius over Arbogestes, That they may make it comport with the several incroachments which Mahomet hath made upon Christendom, there will remain from that sum of a thousand years so great a space of time, as will by no means com∣port with that [short space] () to which S. John limits the time be∣twixt the completion of the Millenium and the end of the World; There having already been run out (and God only knows how many more hun∣dreds of years may yet be to come) according to the largest and middle ac∣counts [600.] according to the least account almost [300.] years since Sa∣tans loosing: The least of which parcells he that can account a little space, in comparison of [1000.] years, may by that kind of Arithmetick turn every word in the Bible into Cyphers, and make their significations of no value, but what his own preoccupations vouchsafe to put upon them. And there∣fore as those of our Divines, who date the binding of Satan so early, as the
Fall of Jerusalem, should do well to consider, how the Sceptick will be an∣swered, when he can shew Satan at liberty, so many Centuries after that, and deceiving the Empire and its Metropolis, so far as to perswade it to retain its old Gentilism, and to create new Gods, such as Antinous, and their deified Emperours. So those of them who fix the Date thertof 3 or 4 Centuries lower: though they obviate that Objection; (for since then, the Empire has not been prevail'd with, to worship any of its old Pagan Deities:) and right∣ly date the binding up the old Serpent, and spoiling him of power, to impose upon the Empire after his old guise. And leave a far less number of years remaining from his supposed loosing. Again, then they that date his binding so early, yet they should have considered, that the least number that any of them leave, is more, in common sense, then a little space; and to have look'd twice about them, before they had granted the Millenaries their sence of a thousand years, and receeded from the common Opinion of both Schools and Fathers, that that number does not signifie any certain or determinat space of time, in this Prophecy; but indefinitely, that whole time intervening be∣twixt Satans binding and the end of the World, except that little inconsi∣derable moment, wherein he shall again be suffer'd to go loose. Aquinas paral∣lels this Text with Ps. 105. 8. He ath remembered his convenant for ever, the word which he commanded for a 1000 Generations; that is, saith he, for all Genera∣tions, or as the Text expounds it self, for ever: (Summ. p. 3. quest. 77. art. 1.) [Non significat aliquem certum numerum, sed designat totum tempus quod nunc agitur in quo Sancti cum Christo regnant.] Therefore exprest by a thousand be∣cause that is the most perfect number, as Aquinas there shews and as they think who derive the Latine Mille from the Hebrew  plenitudo; est nim millenarius numerus quaedam plenitudo: (Vossius Etymologie.) not to the third or fourth, but to all Generations as R. Obad, expounds, at once that Text, and those words in the second Commandment: well exprest by St. Austin, by a comparison drawn from the ages of men: the last age, saith he, which be∣gins with the coming of Christ, unto the end of the World, is not computed by any certain number of years, as old age, which is our last age, hath not a determinate time, according to the measure of our other ages; but doth it self alone, sometimes take up as much time as all the rest: and because Com∣parisons only illustrate, but are no Probations, he gives this reason of it [ut occultus sit judicii dies, quem utiliter dominus latere oporter demonstravit, de Genefi contrà Manic. l. 1. c. 24.] That the knowledge of the day of Judge∣ment might for our benefit be concealed from us.
CHAP. VII. The Millenium, yet to come, is a Dream of Waking Men. § 1. The Millenaries shifting of Aera's, Apes of Mahometans and Papists. Al∣sed's Boreal Empire. § 2. Mr. Meeds Principles overthrow the Faith, and Placits of the Ancients. Christ will come not to convert but destroy the Jews. Satans binding Synchronyzeth with the downfall, not of Mahometanism, but Gentilism. § 3. America though anciently inhabited, yet unknown to the ancient Church, and therefore implicitly only comprehended in her Faith, Hope, and Charity. § 4, The Millenaries impios and uncharitable con∣ceptions, touching the Gogick-war. Their Triumphant Church-Millitant. § 5. Christ will find more Faith in America than in this upper Hemisphere. § 6. Satan's Chain shortned in the lower, not lengthened in this upper He∣misphere. § 1. THe Opinion of the Millenaries, that the Thousand years are not yet be∣gun, not incumbred with this inconvenience, which presseth them that would have them past; which perhaps is the reason why some able men abett that Opinion, and flie to it as a sacred Anchor, to secure the credit of this Prophesie. And in very deed there can no other Salve be applied to the Hypothesis of a precise determinate number of years. Upon which account I am forc'd to quit that Hypothesis, as being put to this hard choice; that I must either, by adhering to it, conclude that Period of time is finisht so long ago, as will not comport with that short intervall which St. John interposeth be∣twixt the accomplishment thereof, and the consummation of all things; or that those Thousand years are not yet begun: or else by quitting of it vin∣dicate my judgment into the Christian liberty of holding that that is good, rejecting what is manifestly false (even in the Opinion of the far most, ablest, and antientest Divines) by fixing pon these Conclusions. 1. That the Millenium is not yet concluded, though more than a thou∣sand years be run out since its Commencement. 2. That that binding of Satan, that Chain of restraint, under which he shall be held, at least to the dawning of the day of Judgement, hath been laid upon him, ever since the Imperial Law made Gentilism capital. 3. And that the expectation of a Seculum of a 1000. years yet to come, wherein Satan shall be any otherwise bound from deceiving the Nations, than he hath been this 1300 years, or wherein the Saints shall any otherwise reign upon the Earth with Christ, than they have done for the same space, is a Castle-built in the Air of Fancy without Scripture-grounds. I have given my reasons why I cannot subscribe to them that think the Millenium finish'd, and some, why I think it began where the Antimillenarians generally dated it; and shall make further proof of both those Points, in laying down the Reasons why I dare not follow those that think it is not yet begun. 1. I dare not chuse for my Guides, in interpreting Scripture, such as have palpably misled their followers, as often as they have assayed to point out the beginning of their fancied Millenium. Of this Bran were they who a while ago have perswaded the world that Satan was to be bound in that [anno mirabili] that wonderful year 1642. (that very year when Hell broke loose.) And when those ductile Souls, who by their perswasions were in∣duc'd into a belief that at the top of that hill, at the fulness of that Time,
they should touch the Moon with their fingers, found themselves abused. These Crafts-masters in perverting the Word of God, encourage their Idiot∣proselites (who had not so much wit as Children, to dread the fire after it had burnt them;) to lift up their hands that hang down, to strengthen their knees, enfeebled by their disappointment of as great hopes as they have of Heaven, and to walk after those blind Guides (in hope still to see the Dawn∣ing of this day of a 1000 years) from Hill to Hill, from Date to Date; till at last the frustration of their expectations, that the Heavens would fall and Men would catch Larks, anno 1666. converted most of their Scholars into Papists or Atheists; having gaped all that year after Christs Reign on Earth, (which they then hoped to see as verily as the Mexicanes expect the end of the World the last day of their Rota (an Almanack calculated for 52 years) they would have made work for the Tinker, had they, at every approach of their conceited Millenium, broken all their Pots, Kettles, Plate, and all kind of u∣tensils and houshold-stuff; as the Mexicanes do theirs, the last day of their Rota, as conceiving they shall never more have need of such things, (Scaliger de emendat. ad finem lib. 3.) But I wonder more that the Learned and Judici∣ous Alstede should court this Cloud with so indefatigable an importunity, as in order to his laying hands upon it, he runs at one breath, to the top of four Hills, makes no less than four Epocha's for the beginning of it. Upon such Principles as Alsted proceeded upon, (viz. the great Conjunctions) Al∣bumazar foretold the expiration of Christian Religion (after it had reigned a thousand years) above six hundred years ago; And R. Abraham Avenaris gatherd, that the Messias would come in the year of Christ 1444. there being in that year a Conjunction of Jupiter with Saturn in Cancer; or at the ut∣most anno 1464. when there was the same Conjunction in Pisces. [Frustrà Miselli aliûm expectant Messiae adventum, quam gloriosum illum quo in nubili veniet ad judicandum orbem:] (Vossius de origine idolelat. 2. 48.) But in vain (saith Vossius) do these wretched Jews expect any other coming of the Messias, than that glorious one, when he will come in the Clouds to judge the World. Are not Pro∣testants as bad as they, in looking for any other Christian Millenium, than that which is now current? seeing Mahometans expect the expiration of Chri∣stian Religion at the end of this Millenium; upon the very same grounds, that some of us expect the Millenium, yet to come; and that upon no better Principles, than John Aunius a Popish Doctor of Wittenberg) assured to the Emperour, Victory over the Turks; and to the Pope, the whole Worlds coming in to, and continuing under his obedience, for a thousand years, to begin, anno 1481. But the issue, saith Beroaldus (Chron. l. 3. c. 6.) shew∣ed by what spirit he was led, and bewrayed the madness of the Prophet. And doubtless Pope Sixtus the Fourth would have been as mad as he, had he prick'd up his Ears, to have them claw'd by that wide-gaping Promiser; as our Fanaticks did theirs, to listen to the Alarms that Alsted gave them to their holy Wars. For to return to him. His first Aera of the Reign of Saints, of the blessed Millenium, should have commenc'd, Anno, 1622. when I was scarce got out of my Childs Coats; and therefore I my self could not make observation of any glorious Change, then happening: but I was told, that the Sun still kept the same station in the Heavens, and had the same o∣peration upon Earth, which it used to have within the Memory of Man; that the Moon retain'd the same spots in her face, which she had, when Al∣sted first saw her; that Boyes were as towardly, Neighbours as loving, Prin∣ces as Gracious, Subjects as Loyal, the Rich as Liberal, the Poor as well reliev'd in times past, as since that year. His second Aera bore date, anno, 1636. I was then of age to observe, how the Bonny Scot got him up to this Hill to see Christ enthron'd on the Pres∣byterian Tribunal, and all that would not submit to that his Government, sitting on the Stool of Repentance; who have since, without walking in the Counsel of the Ungodly, sate in the seat of truly divine Scorners of all such Bug-bears.
The third an. 1642. upon that Mount were seen the feet of them that preach'd the everlasting Gospel (as they blasphemously called that Form of Government, they were then about to erect upon the ruines of whatever was Ancient, Sacred, and should have been dearer to us than our lives) that pub∣lish'd to our English Sion those glad tydings, that now the time was come that the Saints must reign, St. Rebels, St. Plunderers, St. Murderers, St. Regicides. The fourth an. 1694. But our hot-spurrs had not patience to wait so long; many of these covetous wretches, who under a cloak of Religion trouble the Waters that themselves may fish for Preferment and Estates, may have death gnawing upon them before that time come; and therefore, that they might be guawing the bones, and eating the flesh of the mighty, they antici∣pate the time, and pitch upon an. 1666. as the season appointed of God for the Conversion of the Jews, the Fall of Antichrist, the binding up of Satan, and the Reign of Saints: things ill put together; for though I believe that the Reign of Saints which they look for, will be coetanous to the Jews Con∣version; that is, they will both be ad Graecas calendas, when Geese piss holi∣water, yet I think the Reign of such Saints as they are, will rather be the Rise than Fall of Antichrist, and the effect rather of the loosing than bind∣ing the Devil. As they mist it in the mis-joyning of things incompatible, so they were strangely wide in their Calculation, leaving out the round sum, a thousand, and pitching upon the fragments. However they did wisely at last, to trust to Alsted no longer, after he had mocked them thrice. For all that he himself is so confident of the futuriety of that blessed Millenium he dreamt of, and of its beginning to Commence at one of those Periods he had prescribed, as he concludes that discourse thus: According to the time that I have set down in my Speculum, the Boreal Empire shall arise, which God will erect by the Lim of the North, to the astonishment of all those that vili-pend this our Harmony, which we have demonstrated and pointed out, as it were, by the finger. The Harmony which he harps upon, is the concent of three Vo∣lumes; that of the Bible, or divine Prophesie; that of the Heavens, or ju∣dicial Astrology, and that of History or experience: all which he thinks he hears in consort, playing this Lesson, singing this Song, as verily as the Pytha∣goreans heard the Musick of the Stars. This confidence of the Author threatned one of our Astrologers into an opinion, that this Lyon of the North was that King of Sweden, who proved a dead Lyon by that time the Almanack was out of date, wherein he was proclaim'd. And therefore I would think all that are not resolved to run out of their wits in the pursuit of Chimaeras, should take the grave counsel which St. Austin gives (de Civitate 18.) where he adviseth us to let our fingers rest from all such Figure-flinging; for that all who have hitherto attempted to reckon, or rather guess, when their glo∣rious Time shall begin, have been found to have been false Prophets; and whoever shall yet essay such Calculations, will speed no better in the expe∣rience of after Ages. § 2. The Eagle-eyed Meed fore-saw this inconveniency, and therefore protests against, determining the time when this Millenium shall take place, and the forty two Months end. And in his discribing the State of this seculum, dis∣owns the fooleries of the common Millenarians, charged upon them by St. Je∣rom, (in prologo. in lib. 18. explicat. in Esaiam.) though that Learned man wrongs St. Jerom, in his charging him to have mis-stated the case of the Chyliasts: for those whom he mentions, Tertullian Lactantius and Irenaeus, held those opini∣ons, which St. Jerom affronteth; which the Alexandrian Dyonisius confuteth, and after that confutation Apollinaris standeth up to maintain: viz. [Mille annorum fabulam; auream & gemmatam Jerusalem, instaurationem templi, hostiarum sanguinem, otium Sabbati circumcisionis, injuriam, nuptias, partus, liberorum educationem, epulorum delicias, cunctarum gentium servitutem, &c.] All mention'd by Lactantius particularly, and comprehended in that sen∣tence
in general. [Deni{que} tunc fient illa quae Poetae aureis temporibus facta esse, jam Saturno regnante, dixerunt] (de divino Praem. lib. 7. c. 24.) yet Meed in drawing his conceptions of it, proceeds upon those suppositions, that are very hard of digestion, and draw after them those absurdities, as will make an uninterested person suspend his assent to those Conclusions, which stand in need of such supports, and are built upon such premisses, as not only over∣throw the Foundation of Faith, but bid defiance to the Placits of those An∣cients, upon whose bare authority this new doctrine is built. To instance in such Points, as have both those bad Properties. It is the Conceipt of our Modern Soberest Millenaries, that Christ shall visibly ap∣pear, at the beginning of the Blessed Millenium, to convert the Jews; as he did for the Conversion of St. Paul, wherein he exhibited a Type and Model of that Means and Method he would use for the conversion of the whole Nation: A strange way of interpreting the Gospel-history! But I omit that now, and shall only compare this Assertion with that of Lactantius (de di∣vino praem. 7. 1.) [quem (secundum adventum) Judaei quo{que} & consitentur & spe∣runt: sed frustrà; quoniam necesse est ad eos consolandos revertatur, ad quos vocan∣dos prius venerat: nam qui violaverunt impié humilem, sentient in potestate vi∣ctorem: ea{que} omnia quae legunt & non intelligunt, Deo compensante, patientur, quippe qui peccatis omnibus inquinati, & insuper sancto cruore perfusi, ab illo cui nefandas manus intulerunt, sint ad aeterna supplicia destinati] Such, as that Second coming of Christ, which we Christians look for, the Jews expect and hope for, of their Messias, but in vain: for of necessity he will return to comfort those whom he came at first to call: whereas they that impiously despised him, when he came in humility, shall find him a Conquerour, when he comes in power: and those things which they read and understand not, touching the glorious appearance of their Messias) they shall suffer; God compensating to them the just reward of their rejecting Christ, when he came in the form of a servant; as a generation of men, who, to their other sins, have added that of imbrewing their hands in his sacred blood, and therefore to be destin'd to eternal punishment by that very per∣son, on whom they laid their wicked hands. And with that of Origen, I have formerly quoted, who tells Celsus, he dares say, the Jews shall never have any other Call, than that they have had already: nor never be taken again into Christs Sheep-fold. Now whether our Modern Millenaries, by deserting the ancient in their Opinion of the Jews final Rejection, do not also destroy the truth of as plain Prophesies, as any are in all the Bible, and (by consequence) the Foundation of our Religion, which is built upon the Veracity of the Prophets, I leave my Reader to judge, by what hath already been said upon that Point. 2. The Modern Millenaries make the binding of Satan Synchronise with the Subversion of Mahometanism and Popery: but the Ancients assign its be∣ginning to the downfal of Gentilism: (Lactant de divino praemio, lib. 7. cap. 19.) [Sic extinctâ maliciâ & impietate compressâ (debellato, capto & vincto improbo) requiescet orbis, qui per tot secula subjectus errori, nefandam pertulit servitutem, non colentur ulterius dii manufacti, sed Templis & Pulvinaribus suis deturbata Simulacra, igni dabuntur.] Upon Satans binding, malice being extinct, and im∣piety supprest, the World shall rest (from Idol-worship) which for so many Ages had undergone a most wicked servitude; after that, Gods made with hands shall no longer be worship'd, but their Images shall be tumbled down from their Tem∣ples and Altars, and committed to the flames: according to that of Sibyl. — , . He shall take off that intollerable yoak of our servitude, that lay on our neck, and abrogate impious Laws and tyrannical bonds.
And that of another Sibyl. . Men shall break in pieces their Idols, and tear their rich Fur∣niture. . The manufactures and accoutrements of the Gods shall be burnt up. In which Point, as they spoke consonant to the holy scripture (for that makes the Reign of God alone to concurr with the abolition of I∣dols) so they laid a sure ground for the Fathers of the succeding century to conclude, that the beatum Millenium, the Reign of the Saints on the Earth with Christ, and the time of Satan's binding was then commenc'd when they saw Paganism wholly exterminated from the Earth. Idols ei∣ther broken or cast into holes all the then known World over: For the Fathers generally never dreamt of the Antipodes, but in scorn of their pos∣sible being. For a Millenary I will name Lactantius: (Institut. lib. 3. cap. 24.) [Quid illi qui contrarios vestigiis Antipodes putant? Num aliquid loquuntur? aut est quispiam tam ineptus, qui credat esse homines, quorum vestigia sunt superiora quam capita? aut ibi quae apud nos jacent universa pendere? fruges & arbores deorsùm versùs crescere, pluvias & nives & grandinem sursùm versùs cadere in terram? & miratur aliquis hortos pensiles inter septem mira narrari, cùm Philo∣sophi & agros & maria, & urbes & montes pensiles faciunt?] For an Antimil∣lenarian, St. Austin, who (de Civitate 16. 9. (censures the relation of the An∣tipodes to be an incredible Fable. Now St. Austin, who lived to see the utmost bounds of the Empire, and of this upper Hemisphere, subjected to Christs Septer, and freed from the service of Idols, speaks of those Pro∣phesies which foretel that Christ should reign from Sea to Sea, and to the worlds end, as then fulfilled: and Lactantius would have joyned with him in that triumphant Song, had he lived to that Age, and seen that one God alone exalted in the Earth, who in his time was rival'd with so many false Gods. § 3. But you will say, this was triumphing before the Victory, a mi∣stake of the Fathers, to think the whole VVorld was become Christs, when one half of it stood out against him. In answer to this Objection, some say and have perswaded themselves to think, that America hath not been long inhabited; but that it was first pos∣sest by such Pagans, as from the Light of the Gospel, and the penalties of the Imperial Laws fled thither before the face of Jesus, as the Tyrians to Car∣thage, from before Joshua. If this surmise were true, it would be a good Salvo, and give light to those passages in Old Testament prophesie; where it issaid, the Idols shall go under ground, be cast to the Moles and Bats, to that Hemisphere which was then uninhabited, &c. But it is wholly against reason, that a place so near that part of the World, where Noah's Posterity first seat∣ed themselves, as some question whether it be not the same Continent, (and others confess them sever'd by a narrow Sea, (Fullers Miscelan. l. 2. c. 4.) should not more early be found out; Noah having taught the World how the Seas might be made passable, and those parts where he seated his children so crowded with inhabitants, as men, to enlarge their quarters, and to a∣void hunger which breaks stone walls, forc'd their way to new seats through the most inhospitable Climates. Secondly, I therefore prefer here this answer, that this upper Hemisphere in the common dialect of the Prophets signifies the whole world, God being pleased to accommodate his language to the Conceptions of the vulgar: And
therefore he himself put that new Song into the Churches mouth, wherein she triumph'd in her Christ, as install'd sole King over the VVorld, when he gain'd that eminent part of it into his possession, that had been the Stage of Scripture-history, and of the Apostles Peregrination, and was at that time, both when they were given out, and began to receive their accomplishment, the only known VVorld. Not that I subscribe to that of Mr. Meed, that this Hemisphere is to be solely partaker of that universal Restauration which the Scriptures mention, and what Nation soever are out of its bounds, are reserv'd for Christs Triumph at the day of judgement, and to be destroyed with that fire which shall consume those Armies that shall compass the holy City, which that learned person conceives shall be listed by Satan in America, and thence drawn up against the Camp of the Saints (that is, as he opines) the old VVorld men wholly reigning with Christ. For this is not only con∣trary to Experience, whereby we learn that that new VVorld is coming in a pace to Christ. (Vide Heylin. Amer. 2019.) But other express Prophesies that mention the round VVorld, and all that dwell therein; all Nations whom God hath created, as portions of Christs Inheritance, that mention every Tongue and every Knee, confessing to, and bowing to the God of the whole earth, &c. And therefore, as those that lived before the discovery of this new found VVorld might, when they saw the old converted, appropriate that universal Restauration unto it in Faith and Charity, extending themselves to the utmost bounds of the explicite hope of those Centuries, which pre∣ceded that subjection of that old VVorld to the Royal Law: So we to whom the knowledge of the new VVorld is communicated, by our excluding of that from the benefit of Redemption, transgress the Law of Faith, Hope and Charity. 1. Of Faith; for though the belief of the being of the Antipodes be no Article of Christian Faith, yet the belief of their future Call, upon supposi∣tion of their being, is: that is, he that knows there are Tongues and Knees under the Earth, is bound to believe that in Gods appointed time, every knee there shall bow to, every tongue there shall confess to the only true God: Yea, were I sure by a certainty of Reason, or indubitable Intelli∣gence, that men inhabit the VVorld in the Moon, I were bound to be sure, by an equal certainty of Faith, that the Inhabitants of that VVorld shall have their season of Grace as well as we. 2. Of that Hope which the Primitive Church had, which expresly di∣lated it self to the expected Conversion of all Nations, and implicity (up∣on supposition that there were Nations and Languages there) of those of the lower Hemisphere. And 3. Lastly, of that Charity wherewith the first Christians embrac'd all that VVorld they could grasp with their minds. From which Christian Cha∣rity, how far do they deviate, from whose Pens fall such unmerciful Sen∣tences, such bitter things against the poor Americans, as the defence of their Hypothesis, naturally draws from our Modern Millenaries; from the guilt of which uncharitableness they will hardly be acquitted, by wiping their mouths, and ascribing this severity [justo, at nobis incognito, Dei judicio] to the just, but to us unknown judgement of God, upon that so great a part of the VVorld. For though the deferring of their Conversion so long, may pi∣ously be ascribed to the secret and incomprehensible counsel of the all wise God: at the depth whereof in this case, (of his having mercy upon some of the most barbarous Gentiles, so early in the day of the Messias, and so long before he had mercy on far more civilized Nations) Reason and Reli∣gion call upon us to stand astonish'd, and so much more as we cannot con∣ceive any other Reason thereof but the Divine Will: yet for men to frame to themselves an Image of Divine Justice, inconsistent with that Mercy which God hath proclaim'd, he hath treasured up in his Christ for all Nations, to be manifest in its due and appointed time; and in defence of their own foolish imaginations, to plead Gods secret Counsel, against his reveiled
Purpose, is to add the sin of Sacrilegious Impiety, to that of barbarous inhu∣manity. § 4. Thirdly, In both which, the Placits of the Millenaries, touching the Gogick War are so deeply immerst, as I wonder how such conceits could find place in the pious head of Mr. Meed, as those are which he lays down (rol 2. pag. 714.) where propounding to himself this Question, from what quar∣ter of the World, from what kind of men that huge Army was to come that should incompass the holy City? he resolves it must be raised in America, and consist of the Inhabitants of that Hemisphere that's opposite to ours. And next enquiring into the Cause of that their invading our World; into the Arguments whereby Satan should ensnare them into this engagement; he de∣termines it can be for no other reason, but that they may mend their Quar∣ters, possess themselves of a more fertile Soile and live and die here in this up∣per Hemisphere where they may enjoy a Resurrection; which perhaps they think is a priviledge appropriated to this World of ours. For this it is that they shall invade the holy City, that is, this upper half of the Earth, the sole Seat of Righteousness; and for their making this invasion in pursuit of these ends, God shall rise up against them, as so many Gyants fighting against Hea∣ven, and in an instant destroy them by Fire from Heaven (Volum. 2. book. 3. p. 712.) Let us examine these Responds of the greatest Oracle, of the most refi∣ned Learning, that ever opened its mouth in defense of the Millenaries Cause. 1. Say that World be now as horrid as Germany, or Gallia was in Caesars time, may not the Cultivation thereof, for more than a thousand years, ren∣der it as fertile and delectable then, as our World is now? The old Ser∣pent must be grown into his dotage, if he can (after a thousand years mu∣sing in his Den) study out no better an Argument, than that Topick affords, to engage the Americans to invade this upper World. 2. How can it be a manifestation of the righteous Judgment of God, to de∣stroy the Americans, for that Crime, which the Christian Hemisphere is a thousand times more deeply immerst in the guilt of, than they; who have suffer'd those things by us (while we have been harasing those Countries,) as were enough to prejudice them for ever against the reception of that Re∣ligion, whose professors are so unjust and barbarously cruel, were it not that the Almightiness of Prophetick Truth will carry on the purpose of God, a∣gainst all the blocks that can be laid in their way to Christ, by man. Josephus scarce any where more bewrayes the spirit of a Pharisee, than in lib. 12. cap. 13. of his Antiquities: where he censures Polybius for saying, Antiochus E∣piphanes came to a miserable end, for attempting to plunder Diana's Temple: for (saith he) the intention of Sacrilege, which he did not actually commit, seems not to have been a thing worthy of such a punishment: yet, in the se∣quel of his discourse, he recovers himself, and speaks like a man of Reason: If Polybius think, that to have been a sufficient cause of his ruine: with how much more probability may it be affirm'd, that the vengeance of Heaven overtook him, for that Sacrilege which he not only intended, but perpetra∣ted upon the Temple of Jerusalem: with how much more reason may I ar∣gue against this cause of the Americans overthrow, assigned by this learned man? Must they perish for but designing an encroachment upon us, who have made so many unjust encroachments upon them? Must their thoughts of retaliation, of repaying the inhabitants of this upper Plane, that measure they have been meeting to them, be punish'd (by the Righteous Judge of all the Earth, that respects not persons) with so severe and suddain a de∣struction? 3. How much less can the inflicting of so dreadful a vengeance upon them be imputed to their seeking a place of burial amongst us, where they may lye down in hope of a Resurrection: as conceiving in this part of the World to be that Elizium, beyond, God knows what Hills, where the Souls of
righteous men rest in joy: (as Dr. Heylin reports of them in his America) can any thing be more strange or abhorrent to Christian ears, than that ei∣ther Satan should tempt them to, or God punish them for, such an under∣taking? 4. As it is an Article of Faith that the Church is Catholick, that is, at once, in all its members, in point of necessary Doctrine: they all, and eve∣ry one, in all ages, and places, holding the same form of sound words. And successively, in respect of Place, as well as Time. And therefore to assert the ex∣clusion of any place (much more one half of the Earthly Globe) finally out of that Church, bids defiance to the Christian Faith: So 'tis the confession of all, that this Church shall be militant here on Earth, as to the state of every particular Member, (who have remains of corruption within them to grapple with) and, as to the general state of the whole, being incombred, in all pla∣ces, with the bad neighbourhood of such visibly wicked ones, as either mali∣ciously excind themselves by separation, or are justly (for their contumacy) cast out of her Communion; (such as make up the Devil's Chappel, where-ever God hath his Church: From whence will necessarily flow these infe∣rences. 1. That to put such an Interpretation upon dark and prophetick Texts, as makes them present the Church on Earth in a state so triumphant, as leaves her neither spawn of Corruption within, nor the Seed of the Serpent with∣out, for the exercise of her Repentance, Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience; is a giving of the lye to those numerous, plain, and open-fac'd Texts, whose uncontroverted sence, (and words not capable of perversion) inform us the direct contrary. That the Net of the Gospel gathers good and bad, which shall not be sever'd one from the other till the last day; That the Tares grow with the Wheat till the end of the World; That is, the Local and visible Church shall have a mixture of formal Members in it, that are not of it; Insomuch as when Christ was personally present with the College of the A∣postles, they were not all clean; that Church of his own gathering had a simpering Judas, who could cry, Hail Master, and Kiss his Lord, while he betray'd him. And as all the visible Members are not good; so the best and sincerest Member is not all good, Venus hath her Mole, the Moon her spots, the best Christian his infirmities; there is not a man upon Earth that sinneth not; and whoever saith he hath no sin, he sins in saying so. So that the old Serpent, when he shall be let loose again, will find wicked instruments of his malice against the Church, (his own evil Seed) among the Wheat where-ever that is sown; and therefore the Millenaries, in confining him to the lower Hemisphere to gather his Army in, by which he is to assault the Holy City) not only contradict their own Texts which assigns him the four corners, the four Quarters of the Earth, the whole breadth of the earth, the whole compass of the Globe, from East, West, North, and South (which I could bear with them, in knowing that the Prophets have a peculiar language by themselves in their Proverbials and Hyperbolics:) but the whole cur∣rent of sacred Scriptures, commented upon, by the uninterrupted series of Providence in all ages. § 5. Second. Nay that at the approaching of the general Judgement, when that War of Gog and Magog shall commence, The Churches most eminent Seat, and the most glorious entertainment of the Gospel will be, in those Chambers of the South, in that new discover'd World, to which it is ha∣sting apace, from our Hemisphere. The far greatest part thereof, all the West of Asia, the East, West, and South, of Affrica; and the sometimes most flourishing, and best peopled parts of Europe, being already over-run with Mahometan Barbarousness; and the remaining parts of it (by our great pro∣vocations and impieties against God, and by our dissentions and discord a∣mong our selves) hasting to open a way for the Turk to enter the City of God, (through the breaches we dayly make, and widen, in the Walls of Sion.)
We sin, and he wins, we contend, and he conquers; we presume, that be∣cause we are the Temple of the Lord, the City of God, we are inconquera∣ble; and in the mean while he takes our Forts, and batters our Walls about our ears; our ears which we stop, and will not hear the voyce of the Char∣mer, charm he never so wisely: and therefore I fear, I should but spill my Ink; in bestowing it in recording, the Turks dayly encroachment upon the Christi∣an Pale; his making Conquests, by inches, over the Western, as he did, by Ells, over the Eastern Church: or in describing those Marks of future bane, those Prints of divine displeasure, and certain forerunners of Gods rejection of a people, as deeply imprest upon the Western, as they were upon the Eastern and Southern Patriarchates, when God deliver'd those Churches in∣to his and their enemies hands, If we go to his place at Shilo, where once he put his Name, & enquire for what wickedness he made his Glory depart from Jerusalem, Ephesus, Antioch Alexandria, Constantinople, we shall find the very same provocations reigning in these parts of Europe, the same infatuation of Counsels, the same strong delusions, the same debaucheries and abominati∣ons; and our selves as ripe for excision, (looking as white for harvest, as they did when the Mahometans Sickle reaped those goodly Fields) Suppose ye that they were greater sinners,? I tell you nay, but except we repent, we shall all likewise perish. But I look too long upon the dark side of that clou∣dy Pillar, that has been passing from the East (the place where the Gospel first set out) towards the West, and as it moves deprives the Church of her Head attire (Christian Princes,) of those her dry Nurses and Guardians; yet not of her wet Nurses, or the inward Glory of her Garments; for she shall reign still with Christ, even upon this Earth, in those remnants of her seed dispersed over the face of it: The Sun of a Christian Magistracy shall not be seen, where this Night hath, or shall, encroach upon the Church: but her eyes shall see her Teachers still, and her ears hear; This is the good old way, walk in it and find rest; the Stars will appear behind the Cloud, as they did in the Primitive Church, before Princes became her Nurses; and as they do now within the Turks Dominions, where Princes have ceas'd to be her Nurses. And when Mercy, triumphing over Judgement, shall have left us such a Nail, such a stump of the Tree of Life in our Hemisphere. The Covenant that God has made with the Christian World, being like that he hath made with day and night; of which, he saith, if those ordinances shall de∣part from me, then shall the whole seed of Israel be cast off; the Covenant he made with, the Ordinances he gave to the Carnal Seed, were but Tempora∣ry; and therefore that seed was wholly cast off: but the Covenant he made with the Spiritual Seed, is an everlasting Covenant, and therefore that Seed of Gentile Believers shall never be wholly cast off; The new Israelites, in shew and profession only, when this Sun of persecution for the Gospel ari∣seth (when the Temptations of the World shall be laid before them, when none shall live under the benign influence of their Mahometan Rulers, but those that wheel about with them to the embracing of that Brutish Reli∣gion) shall forsake Christ, and embrace the present World: But the Israelites indeed, (in Faith and Practice) shall never be prevail'd with to renounce Christ, but that poor and peeled People shall bear up his Name, in all Na∣tions upon whom it hath been called, to the end and consummation of the World.) When (I say) the infiniteness of the divine compassion shall be so bounded and streightned (by the circumjacent Guilt of our multiplyed and cry∣ing sins, and by the innate veracity of divine Menacies) as all it can obtain for us, against the pleas of both, is no more then this: when our golden Dreams of glorious days end in this; God will provide Kings and Queens to be Nur∣sing Fathers, &c. to the American Churches, who shall dandle them upon their knees, and that perhaps for as many ages as we have been dandled, I say per∣haps, because I would not pry into Gods secret Purposes, nor limit the holy One in that point, wherein I cannot observe him to walk by any Rule, but that of his own good pleasure, whereby both to Persons and Nations he
lengthens or shortens their day of Grace, so as the Sun hath been set near a 1000. years ago upon most of Asia; and yet shines upon us in the West of Europe, upon whom it rose before it did upon them; I mean the cherishing Light of a Christian Magistracy, for we had our Lucius, before they had their Constantine. However this is certain that (how long or short soever God hath in his eternal Counsel determin'd that space) that they shall have their time of Grace as well as we; and we shall have no more than our time; and therefore as the night shall grow upon us, that had day before them; the day shall grow upon them; and when the Sun is farthest from our Horizon, it will be highest in theirs. §. 6. And this affords us another Argument against those who limit the Millenium to a precise number of years, and yet will have it commence at Constantine's Reign; not considering, that though the Revelation-prophecies have the Roman Empire for their Stage, and therefore we cannot pitch upon a fitter time for the beginning of the Millenium, than when the Laws of that Empire bound up Satan from cheating the World with Paganism; it being the common notion of the World then when St. John gave out his Revelations, that the bounds of the Empire were coincident with those of the habitable Earth: Yet now the bounds of the Earth being found to be of a far larger extent, we ought to stretch our conceptions touching the mat∣ters of those Prophesies that are yet infieri and current (as the Reign of the Saints with Christ on the Earth is, and shall be as long as the Earth is inhabi∣ted, and as far as the earth is or shall be inhabited) to an extent answerable to that of the things themselves. And therefore are not to limit the Time of this Reign to any narrower compass of years than will be sufficient for the perfecting of the Call of that whole new-found World, inhabited by the seed of Adam and within the bounds of that inheritance which was promis'd to Christ: which as it cannot in reason be conceived to take up less time than will make the years since Satans binding so many more than a thousand, as a child may count them to exceed that precise number; so we cannot cast the call of those Nations into any other Epocha, but that of St. John's thou∣sand years: for nothing is to intervene the expiring of that propheticall Millenium, and the Day of general Judgment, but that little space wherein Sa∣tan shall be let loose to deceive the Nations, a very unmeet season for such a work: and therefore I wonder that some, very Learned and Judicious Per∣sons, should so soundly nap it here, as to dream that Satan hath been let loose, ever since the Turks took Constantinople; when on the contrary, God is making his Chain shorter than it was, and not allowing him to Reign all over America as he did before. Neither is he permitted, so much as to tempt this upper Hemisphere, to lick up its vomit of old Gentilism; which is the only thing he is during the Millenium, restrained from: as Dr. Light∣foot well observes, and the sad experience of all Ages demonstrates, wherein he has been, is, and will be, Persecuting the Womans Seed, as far as his In∣struments dare; sowing his Tares among the good Seed, deluding those that receive not the love of the Truth, with as monstrous and damnable Errors, as the Pagan Ages were given up to; and tempting them to all the old De∣baucheries and unnatural sins of that, and the new invented ones of this Age, which were not named among the Gentiles; soliciting the Saints themselves, and sometimes leading them captive to those sins, they feel the bitterness of as long as they live. Briefly, he is bound up from being the God of the World (as he was while he and his Angels were Worship'd as Gods:) but he is permitted still to play all other parts of a Devil in the World; and will be, till the Church exchanges the Armour of God, for the Garment of Im∣mortality, so long as she stands, having her Ioines girt about with Truth, ha∣ving on the Breast-plate of Righteousness, and her feet shod with the pre∣paration of the Gospel of Peace; while she wears the Shield of Faith, the Hel∣met of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit; while shee's arm'd on the
right hand and left; while she stands thus [in praecinctu] upon her guard, and is bid to stand so, by the Captain of her Salvation, (which word of command she must be under till both Christ's and his Apostles Precepts be out of door.) we may be sure, she has not only Flesh and Blood to wrestle with, but Princi∣palities and Powers, the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and spiritual wickednesses in the Etherial places. Besides that, it will be unseasonable, to assign that time, for a season of grace (to one half of the World) wherein Satan is let loose to reinforce Paganism: the shortness of that space of his loosing will not give room enough, for the preaching of the Gospel to such multitudes of Nations and Languages. It is an old Tradition of the Jews (quoted by Dr. Lightfoot upon Rev. 20.) That in the day, when Judgment is upon the World, and the holy blessed God sits upon the Throne of Judgment, Satan, who deceives high and low, shall be found destroying high and low and taking away souls. Me∣thinks St. John, in this Vision, speaks to the heart of those Jews, and Tertullian expounds this Text of the Revelation, by that Tradition: in his Treatises against the Manichees, (cap. 24.) and de Anima (cap. 35. and 38.) where he hath this passage [Post cujus regni mille annos, intrà quam aeta∣tem concluditur sanctorum resurrectio, &c.] after the thousand years of which Reign of Christ, within which age is included the Resurrection of the Saints, &c. I know Mr. Meed would have him to speak here of a Resurrection that shall be at the beginning of the Millenium; but his prefixing before the mention of this Resurrection [post cujus Regi annos, after the 1000. years of whose Reign] seems to assign it to the latter end of the Millenium. And Lactantius dates the loosing of Satan, when the Millenium shall begin, to end [cùm caeperit termina∣ri,] that is, upon its expiring, but within the compass of it: at which time (saith he) the last wrath of God shall fall upon the Nations; and when the 1000 years are fully compleat, the World shall be renewed, and the Heavens shall be rolled up, and the Face of the Earth shall be changed: at the very same time shall be the second and publick Resurrection of all men, even of the unjust to eternal torments: to wit, such as have worship'd Gods made with hands, and have either not known, or denied the Lord of the World, they, and their Lord, and his Angels, and Ministers, shall be apprehended, and ad∣judged to punishment, in the sight of the Holy Angels and just men, (Lactan∣de divino praemio lib. 7. cap. 26.) Having therefore these Authorities before me, I hope the ingenious Reader will not reckon this Problem either a novelty or singularity.
CHAP. VIII. That Satans loosing will not be till the Dawning of the day of Judgment, Problematically discu'd. § 1. Elect gather'd into the Air over the Valley of Jehoshaphat. Chancells not all Eastward; but all toward that Valley. § 2. The Elect secur'd, Satan re-enters, and drives his old Demesne. The wicked destroyed as Rebels a∣ctually in armes. Believers tried as Citizens by the Books of Conscience and Book of Royal Law. § 3. Gogg, (Rev. 20.) a greater multitude than will meet before the day of Judgment. When Prophesies are to be expoun∣ded Literally, when Figuratively. § 4. The Ottoman Army is not this Gogick. § 5. The Fire of the last Conflagration carrieth Infidels into the Abyss. The Goats are cast into it after they are convict by the Covenant of Grace. White Throne. New Heaven and Earth. Flames of Fire divi∣ded. § 6. They that are in Christ rise first: but Infidels are first Judged. The Objection from their being in termino. § 7. The Jews Septimum Millenarium, is the eternal Sabbaoth. The days of a Tree (Isa. 65. 28.) The Text Paraphrased. § 1 THat this loosing of Satan shall not be till the Dawning of the Day of Judgement, touching which I humbly submit to the candid Censure of the Church, these my conjectures, with my Reasons for them. That Text, Rev. 20. [He shall gather them together from the four corners of the Earth] seems to allude to Mat. 24. 31. and to be subsequent to that ga∣thering of the Elect. [He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trum∣pet, and they shall gather his elect from the four winds, and from the one end of the heaven unto the other] touching which first gathering of the Elect, St. Paul tells us, it shall be in order to their meeting of Christ in the day of Judg∣ment; at the sound of which Trumpet the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then those Christians whom that day shall find alive, shall in the twinckling of an eye be changed into the same form and condition of body with those that arose from the Dead, and be caught up in the Air to meet Christ. [Qui merebantur compendio mortis per demutationem expunctae, concurrere cum resurgen∣tibus.] (Tertul. de resur. cap. 41.) They who obtained by that short cut of death cancel'd by change, the priviledge to run together with them that rise, to the place of Judgment. And the ancient Church generally thought, that the Center, to which this gathering of the Saints should be, is the Valley of Jehoshaphat; whither she expected Christ would come to judge the World: and, in testimony of that her expectation (and that she might, in all her religious Assemblies, be found waiting for that appearance of her Lord, and be mindfull of that our general gathering unto Christ) she turn'd her face, while she worship'd, to∣ward that point of the Earth: and therefore the sacred Places of Publick Worship were built with their Chancells (where the Communion-Table, the visible Throne of Grace stood) at the East end, if the place were West∣ward; but at the West end of their Church, if the place were East of that Valley, that so, in what coast soever the Name of Christ was invocated, their Eyes and Minds might be directed thither; this is the very reason, why the Chancel of the Patriarchall Church of Antioch stood at the West-end; and with∣out doubt all the Churches within that Patriarchat, that stood East of Ju∣dea, were conformable to the Mother-Church, as that was to the Practise of the Universal; which, from every point of the Circumference, had its Lines
drawn, to that Navel of the Earth, that Center of the general Assembly: And therefore Socrates is out, in his giving the standing of the Chancel of that Church, contrariwise to the Chancels of the European and Natolian Chur∣ches, for an Instance of the different Usages and Rites of some Churches from others: for though in the rest of the Examples that he produceth, one Church differ'd from another (without breach of Charity, or contempt of Religion) yet in this Ceremony, of looking towards the Valley of Jehosaphat, there was an Universal Conformity; no Church having so little manners, as to turn her breech upon the place of Judgment, while she worshipp'd the Judge, and made Confession of her belief, that she dayly expected his appearance, over that place, where, at his ascension, he was taken out of the sight of his Dis∣ciples into heaven: and his Angels after that assured them, that he should so come in like manner, as they had seen him go into Heaven. Which among other circumstances, must imply, that of the Place, if not mean that above any other: For as to other manner of his second Coming, it will be with a far greater Train of Angels than they then saw him ascend with, and in far greater Glory. § 2. The Elect; that is, all that have profest the Worship of the true God, (or as David calls them, Gods Saints that have made a Covenant with him by Sacrifice) being gather'd to the place of Judgment, (or during their gathering thither: For it seems Tertullian thought, the Pagans would be at the heels of the rising Saints; and that they might not surprise the Saints then living, they should be changed in a moment, and, in the twinkling of an eye, be in readiness to march up to the place of Judgement, with those that are risen, before the Antichristian party (both of the then living, and immediately to be rais'd) could seize upon them. [Hujus gratiae privilegium illos manet, qui ab adventu Domini deprehendentur in carne, & propter duritias tem∣porum Antichristi moriebuntur compendio mortis, &c.] (Tertull. Ibidem) This Election I say being gathered, or a gathering to the place of Judgements; the reprobates, (that is all Idolaters, the whole Pagan World, that have lived and died in Gentilism;) shall be raised, and those that are living shall be chan∣ged: And Satan now let loose (the whole Church waiting in the Air the Judges coming) will re-enter upon his old Demesne and drive all the Cattle he there finds, as his own, as weises and strays from the great Shepherd of Souls; and perswading them perhaps that he raised them from the dead, and would now at last be reveng'd on Christ and his Saints, and, dequoying them into an opinion that they had a fair opportunity of making havock of the City and People of God altogether, of swallowing up the little Flock of Christ at one morsel, now they were all in a body (and a body so contemptible, in comparison of those multitudes which he headed being as the Sand on the Sea-shore;) or by whatsoever insinuations, he will prevail with them to march up, under his and his Angels conduct, from all parts of the World, Gog and Magog, tectum & intectum (as St. Jerom expounds, Ezek. 28. and 29) the hidden Climes of the lower, the known World of the upper Hemisphere, against the holy Land and the Camp of the Saints, which while they are en∣compassing, the Judge appears, and, with that devouring fire that goes before him, destroyes them in a moment. For they being taken in the act of Re∣bellion (as Cora and his Complices) divine justice shall not need to proceed against them in a formal way of trial, but the Earth, chapt with this Fire of the last Conflagration, cleaves asunder, opens her mouth and receives them with the dregs of the whole Creation into that Abyss, whither that De∣luge of Fire, to which the Heaven and Earth that now are, are reserved, shall drive them. [Judicium quod est retributio pro peccatis, omnibus competit, ju∣dicium quod est discussio meritorum solis fidelibus, nullo modo infidelibus nec An∣gelis vel bouis vel malis:] (Aquinas sum. pa. 3. q. 89. art. 7, 8.) The Judgment of retribution appertains to all, the judgment of discussion to believers only, neither to Infidels nor Angels, either good or bad. The holiness of Elect Angels, and
the impiety of Devils and Infidels is so notorious, as they need no discussion. He that believes not, is condemn'd already [Et quoniam de his sententia in ab∣solutionem] and cannot be absolv'd, and therefore they shall be destroyed from, not judged before Christs presence (saith Lactant. de divino praemio. 7. 20. They shall not stand in judgment (Psal. 1.) that is, of the general day, saith Aben Ezra [Nos juxta operum nostrorum mensuram judicabit, illos verò non ju∣dicabit, sed arguet condemnatos,] (Jerom in Mic. c. 4.) We shall be judged ac∣cording to our works, but Infidels God will not judge, but take them up short, as condemn'd already. [Ad judicium non veniunt nec Pagani, nec Haeretici, nec Judaei, &c.] (August. Serm. 38. de Sanctis) Neither Pagans, nor Hereticks, nor Jews, come into judgment; because it is written of them that they are already con∣demned. [Alii judicantur & pereunt, alii non judicantur & pereunt: alii judicantur & regnant, alii non judicantur & regnant, &c.] (Greg. Mag. moral 26.) Some are judged and perish, viz. the Goats of the Flock: some are not judged and perish, viz. they that are not of the Flock; some are judged and reign, viz. the sheep of the Flock: some are not judged and reign, viz. the Guardians of the Flock, Elect Angels, &c. [Qui intrà Ecclesiam mali sunt, judicandi sunt & damnandi; qui verò extrà Ec∣clesiam inveniendi sunt, non sunt judicandi sed tantùm damnandi (Isid. Hispal. Sent. lib. 1. cap. 27.) 3. After the Infidels are thus dispatcht (of the method of Gods proceeding with whom I know no Text in the whole Book of God that purposely and plainly speaks, but this of Rev. 20.) the great white Throne shall be erected, for the trial of such as have made Profession of worshipping the one God, through the seed of the Woman, or of embracing the Covenant of Grace in the various dispensations of it; the whole Flock of Christ, both Sheep and Goats, who shall have allowed them the benefit of the Book, (the Book of the Covenant) and be judged according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace (implied by the white Throne.) [Fideles qui fuerunt saltem numero cives civitatis Dei; judicabuntur ut cives.] (Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 90. art. 7.) Be∣lievers who were at least in account, the Citizens of the City of God shall be jud∣ged as Citizens. In order to which Trial, the Books are open'd, the Books of every mans Conscience (as many Books as there are Consciences) so as e∣very man shall be his own Judge (as to matter of Fact) accordingly as his own Conscience shall accuse or excuse. St. Jerom in Daniel 7. The judgment shall be set and the books shall be open'd, i. e. [Conscientiae, & opera singulorum in u∣tramque partem, vel bona vel mala revelabuntur.] (St. Austin de civitat. 20. 14.) That is, Of the Conscience, and the works of every man on both sides, whether good or bad shall be reveiled, [Qua fiet ut cuique opera sua cuncta in memoriam re∣vocentur, & mentis intuitu mirâ celeritate cernentur:] (St. August. Serm. 67. de tempore.] By which opening of the Books of conscience, it shall come to pass, that every man by the inspection of his mind, shall by a strange celerity remember all his works: and the Judge (the testimony of Conscience standing by) shall demand of every man an account of his Life. [Adstante conscientiae testimonio, rationem vitae caeperit postulare] Bonaventura Breviloq. par. 7. cap. 1.) Fiet apertio Libro∣rum, scilicet Conscientiarum.] There shall be an opening of the Books, to wit, of every mans Conscience. And for the Trial of Right, another Book shall be open'd, the Book of Life, the Covenant of Grace, wherein all mens names are writ (by their Qua∣lifications, which will only be ponderated then) that therein had salvation promis'd them; and whosoever is not found to be qualified, as that Book describes the Heirs of Life to be, shall, by the Angels of God, (after Christ has pronounced the comdemnatory Sentence upon them) be gatherd out of Gods Kingdom, as tares, as things that offend, and be cast into the Lake of Fire, provided for the Devil and his Angels. [Hanc omnium revelationem comitatur separatio: quae (Mat. 25. 32.) comparatur separationi pastoris, segregan∣tis oves ab haedis:—hanc separationem excipit sententiae dictio] (Vossii. theses. theol. disp. 15. Thes. 1. 2. & 3.) After this revelation follows the separation of the Sheep from the Goats; and after this separation the Judge pronounceth Sentence.
§ 3. These are my Conjectures, as to the Order of Gods proceeding in the day of Judgment; my Reasons for my placing the loosing of Satan, and the Gogick war, and the confusion of both Captain and Army, betwixt the Resurrection and Judgment of the Elect (or profest Believers.) I shall now tender, before the Churches Tribunal to whose Sentence (of approbation or reprobation) I am indifferently willing to stand, as one that espouses no other interest, but that of truth. 1. That this going out of Satan, to deceive the Nations into an engage∣ment against the holy City, will not be, till after the Resurrection of the just, may be inferr'd from the numerousness of this Heathen-army; for mul∣titude, as the Sand of the Sea; large enough to march upon the breadth of the earth, listed out of the four quarters of the earth; such a multitude, as (doubtless) shall never be seen together, but when the Heathen shall be awa∣ked, and come up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat: where God shall sit to judge all the Heathen round about; even those multitudes of multitudes, in the valley of decision, Sept. [,] whither the Heathen are to come, and to gather themselves round about, [,] under the conduct of that mighty one, whom the Lord will cause thither to come, and there bring down, Joel 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.) [.] the great Warriour shall be tamed. 2. Indeed Prophetical terms are not to be stretcht always to the utmost extent of the letter, nor, in every word, to be expounded according to the Li∣teral sence; for those burthenous words proceeding from the mouth of God (like Bullets) do often graze, before they reach their utmost mark; and spend not all their force, where they first light: and therefore though particu∣lar, locall, and indeterminate Judgments, be denounc'd in words borrowed from, and make as great a crack as the last; (to awaken us to repentance, in order to the diverting or procrastinating of the effects:) yet, when through our impenitency we provoke God to inflict them, they are mixt with mercy: God, in his every days anger, is strong and patient; strong in sparing; spends but part of the Arrows in the Quiver of the Menacy. Propheticus mos est Summam consternationem, , describere, petitâ trans∣latione, ab iis quae efficient consternationem in adventu Christi, quo veniet ad judi∣candum mundum.] But the burthen of Prophesie, where it shall fall last, will fall with all its weight: when it is to have its accomplishment, it will have its full accomplishment. Ezech. 37. 12. The Prophet understands the Me∣taphorical Resurrection of Israel from that forlorn estate, but he alludes to the Resurrection that shall be at the last day: and from his alluding to that, Tertullian concludes, that that Text will have a fuller accomplishment then, [Hoc ipso quòd recidivatus Judaici status de recorporatione & readunatione ossi∣um figuratur, id quo{que} eventurum ossibus probatur, non enim posset de ossibus figurâ componi, si non id ipsum & ossibus eventurum esset: de vacuo similitudo non compe∣tit: de nullo, parabola non convenit:] (Tert. de resurrectione cap. 30.) St. Je∣rom (on Ezek. 37.) [nunquam poneretur similitudo resurrectionis ad restitutio∣nem Israelitici populi significandam, si non staret ipsa resurrectio.] The Pro∣phets would not borrow words from the last judgment, from that notion and con∣ception which the world, by tradition, had thereof, to describe particular judgments, if those words were not to be fulfilled at that last judgement. Tertullian affirms that divine Promises are of the like nature, fully accomplishable at the last day: [quum igitur ultimorum temporum statum Scripturae notent, & totam Christianae spei frugem in exodio seculi collocent, apparet aut tunc adimpleri totum quòdcun{que} nobis à deo repromittitur, &c.] Tertul. de resur. cap. 25.) Franc. Ju∣nius notes the corrupt reading of [exordio for exodio seculi:] Seeing there∣fore the Scriptures denote the state of the last times, and place the harvest of Chri∣stian hope at the latter end of the world; it is manifest that then shall be fulfill'd whatsoever God hath promis'd otherwise. And therefore we do but adulterate Prophecies, touching the last day, in receding from the Literal sence, in al∣laying
the briskness of that Cup of Fury, with the sober Nymph, the wa∣ter of figurative Expositions: any farther, than to tame the killingness of the Letter, (its manifest either Iniquity or Impossibility) of which the Li∣teral Exposition of these words which I give, are out of danger; for 'tis pos∣sible enough that at the Resurrection of the unjust, when all the Infidels and excommunicate persons shall stand up out of the dust together, they will co∣ver the breadth of the Earth: the Wings of that Army, of Aliens from the Covenant of Grace, will reach North and South; and their Files be as deep, as from East to West; though they stand at no greater distance one from a∣nother, than an Army in Battalia. It has been doubted by some, how so great a multitude could make their appearance together before the Judge; and therefore they have thought the judgment of the Heathen would take up a thousand years, while God called them one after another: but my Hy∣pothesis salves that doubt, without the help of such a subterfuge. However the raising of such doubts is an argument, that in common sence, there will be people enough, to fill the whole face of the Earth, saving that part of it that shall be railed in about the holy Mount. And that's an Argument, that the far greatest part of that Army must rise out of the Earth; for from whence else can so many be gathered, as shall cover the whole superficies of the Earth? (Caelum non habet unde cadat) and so many living together in a mortal state, would put the world into such a crowd, as might well excuse the Americans for seeking to enlarge their quarters. As for that other ex∣pression, [as the sands on the Sea shore for multitude,] he that thinks it an Hy∣perbole may think it so still, for me, and without prejudice to my Position: for as it is manifest, that so many men as there are grains of sand upon the shore, would not have room to stand upon the Earth, and therefore (according to the caution I have given) we must fly to the Figurative sence here, the Literal being manifestly impossible, so all that I need affirm is this, that this Gogick and Magogick Army shall, for multitude, come as near the Sand on the Sea-shore, as an Army can do, that is pitched on the Earth. § 4. Secondly, When Satan marcheth in the head of this Army, the Saints must be locally imbodyed: for it encompasseth the holy City, and the Camp of the Saints assembled, and in procinctu; into which posture how they could be drawn but by the summons of the last Trumpet is not conceiva∣ble: except we fancy that some lesser City and Assembly than the general of the Saints, shall be besieged by this General Army of Infidels: As the Lear∣ned Dr. Hammond applies it to the Turks taking of Constantinople: whereas there is no mention, in the Text, of taking, but only of encompassing the ho∣ly City; in the act and attempt whereof, they are said to be destroyed, by Fire coming down from God out of Heaven. And though the Ottoman Family (the off-spring of the Lydians, who are called the People of Gog, from Gyges, their first King) or Scythians (stiled by Josephus Magogaei) might be a Type of St. John's Gogs and Magogs, encompassing the Camp of the Saints in their besieging Constantinople: yet as they did not in all points Ty∣pifie this Gogick Army, so they did not in any one point Typifie it fully: not in multitude, for instance, for though the Ottoman Armies be very nume∣rous, yet they are not comparable to the old Scythian Armies, under Tomy∣ris; nor the Lydian, under Gyges; much less to that Muster of this Army, which St, John brings in, and therefore, in that respect, cannot so much as be an Antitype of Ezekiels old Gog, much less the very Gog of St. John. For Prophecies acquire strength in their motions towards a perfect accomplish∣ment: Vespasian's sacking of Jerusalem, and captivating of the Jews, came higher up to the terms of the old Menacy, than that which was inflicted by Nebuchadnezzar, and the Judgment of the last day will out-doc Vespasian's Desolation, and make up whatever that wanted of fulfilling every tittle of that Prophecy, which described those Judgements in Terms borrowed from the horror and greatness of this.
§ 5. Thirdly, It is the common Tenet of the Schools, that [Ignis ulti∣mae conflagrationis,] that Fire that shall refine and purge the Sublunary World, shall go before Christ when he comes to his Judgment-seat; and, by purging its dregs from the old, make a new Heaven and a new Earth wherein his white Throne shall be erected. [Quòd per ignem conflagrationis ultimae futu∣ra sit elementorum purgatio, probatur: in Ps. dicitur, [in conspectu ejus ardebit ig∣nis,] & posteà loquitur de judicio [advocabit caelum desursum & terram dis∣cernere populum suum,] 2 Pet. ult. Caeli ardenter solventur, & elementa ignis ardore tabefient.] (Aquin. sum. par. 3. q. 74.) And that this Flame and Tempest shall burn up Gods enemies round a∣bout, [inflammabit in circuitu inimicos] Aquinas proves out of the Psalms, and Dan. 7. [Fluvius igneus rapidus{que} egrediebatur à facie ejus,] A Fiery stream shall go out of his mouth. Upon which he alledgeth this Gloss [ut malos pu∣niat & bonos purget;] That he may punish the evil and purge the good. And thence draws this conclusion, [Ergò ignis finalis conflagrationis in infernum cum reprobis demergetur:] Therefore the Fire of the last Conflagration shall sink into Hell with Reprobates, and carry with it the Lees of the whole Creation; that is, all the Lees which that fire can naturally separate, and finds unseparated; to wit, the corruptible properties of, and the stains which sin hath cast upon the whole sublunary world. And therefore we must except, here, humane mortality (for that shall be removed by the resurrection of the dead, and the change of the living.) By the way, take notice that Thomas his [bonos probet] is a Popish No∣velty, the dreggs of the School doctrine of purgatorie, brought in to doe that in instanti, which they fancy the fire of Purgatory to effect by degrees and in time. Except he thereby mean, that this fiery cataract, by not touch∣ing them, by leaving no more smell of burning upon them, than that fur∣nace Fire did upon the three Children, will prove the Elect to be, at their Resurrection, Fire proof, though that is more than need, for the Church will be in the air higher above this flood of Fire, than Noah was above the Flood of water. But that which I observe, as truly Catholick, in the School Do∣ctrine, concerning this last Conflagration, is, that this stream of Fire, that shall proceed out of the judges mouth, at his appearance, that flaming Fire wherein the Lord Jesus, when he shall be reveiled from Heaven with his mighty Angels, shall take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not his Gospel, (that is, Infidel-Jews and Gentiles.) 2 Thes. 1. 7, 8. 9.) will deluge all those Infidels, and drive them and the Devil into the Abyss, or (in St. Pauls stile) shall punish them with everlasting destruction, from that presence of the Lord, and from that Glory of his power, wherein he shall appear, when he cometh to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe. That this Fire (I say) shall carry Infidels in the stream of it, into the pit; from the presence of Christ, Whereas the Goats shall be dis∣mist into it, [Depart from me ye wicked into everlasting Fire.] In its proceed∣ing from Christs presence, it drives Infidels before it, but the Goats are sent after them, into it. It casts the whole Kingdom of Satan, all his profest Subjects, with its rowling waves into the uttermost Hell. But after that; the Angels gather whatsoever (upon trial) is found offensive, all the Tares in the Field of the Church, and shall cast them into it, after they have bound them in bundles. That at this Fiery appearance of Christ, at which the Saints shall lift up their heads, (they that are so indeed, confidently, and they that are so only by calling, hopefully; the first being assured of Heaven, the last not altogether despairing to receive Absolution:) For, [Aliud est ad veniam stare, aliud ad gloriam pervenire, aliud pendere in die judicii ad senten∣tiam Domini, aliud statim a Domino coronari.] (Cyprian, ep. 52. Anton. fratri. lib. 4. epist. 2.) and the foolish Virgins stand at door, and knock and wait and hope for entrance till they hear the sentence.) That at this Fiery ap∣pearance (I say) the Heaven and Earth that now is shall pass away, and bear
down with their dregs, the whole Company of Infidels into the place of tor∣ment, into the sink of all the Scum of the Creation, That God shall thus divide the Flames of Fire, before he divide the Goats from the Sheep; as both Goats and Sheep shall warm themselves thereat, while the strangers to the Covenant flie from their scorching heat, and are beaten down by the beams of it into the everlasting Dungeon, is well exprest by St. Jerom, in his First Epistle to Heliodorus; [Pavebit terra cum populis, & tu gaudebis; Ju∣dicaturo Domino, lugubre mundus immugiet; tribus ad tribus pectora ferient; potentissimi quondam reges nuda latera palpitabunt. Exhibebitur cum prole suâ Ve∣nus; tunc Ignitus Jupiter adducetur, & cum suis stultis Plato discipulis; Aristoteli sua argumenta non proderunt. Tunc rusticanus & pauper exultabis, & videbis & dices, ecce Crucifixus meus qui obvolutus pannis in praesepio vagiit: hic est ille operarii & questuariae filius; hic qui matris gestatus sinu, hominem Deus fugit in Aegyptum; hic vestitus coccino, hic sentibus coronatus; hic Magus demoni∣um habens, & Samarites. Cerne manus, Judaee, quas fixeras; cerne latus, Ro∣mane, quod foderas; videte corpus, an idem sit, quod dicebatis clam nocte sustu∣lisse discipulos.] The Earth shall tremble with its inhabitants, when the Lord comes to judgment, the World shall lament; Tribe by Tribe shall smite their breasts; the most potent Kings of old their hearts will be at through their naked sides; Ve∣nus will appear with her off-spring; Fiery Jupiter shall be brought into the Court, and Plato with his foolish Scholars. Aristotle's arguments will stand him in no stead. Then shalt thou who art a Christian, though never so clownish and poor, ex∣lt and laugh and say, Behold, this is he who was Crucified for me, who was wrap∣ped in swadling cloaths, laid in a Manger wayling, this is that son of the Car∣penter and of her who earn'd her bread with the sweat of her brows: this is he who being God was carried in his Mothers bosom, and fled into Aegypt from the fury of a man; this is he that was arrayed in purple, and crowned with Thorns; this is that Samaritan Conjurer that had a Devil. Behold those hands (Jew) which thou nailedst; see that side (Gentile) which thou piercedst: see whether this be the same body which you said his Disciples stole away by night. And as plainly asserted by St. John; who not only mentions the erecting of the white Trone; on which Christ is to sit in Judging the Saints by calling, after the destruction of the Infidels, and after that Heaven and Earth was fled away from the face of the Judge, at his first appearance. (Musculus in Thes. 4. We shall be caught up into the air to meet the Lord;) [Tum sane expiabitur & repurgabitur aer ab immundiciâ malorum spirituum, quemadmodúm & terra ab inhabitatione impiorum hominum.] But, after the mention of those things going before, giveth a punctual account of Christs way of proceeding in judging his own flock (for those he judgeth from his white Throne, can be no other, but such as could claim the benefit of the Covenant of Grace, such as could say, Lord, Lord; and plead, we have prophesied in thy name; in thy name we have cast out Devils, we have eat and drank in thy presence, or something of that nature; whereby they will challenge the benefit of the Book, and pretend their names are writ in it; till Christ open the Book, lay before them the Terms of that Covenant; and, by the evidence of their own Conscience, convince them they cannot claim that Salvation was tender'd in the Gospel, for that they have not observ'd the Conditions on which it was offerd; they have not fed the hungry, cloath'd the naked, they have not been merciful, humble, meek, pure in heart, peace-makers, (by which names, the heirs of the Evangelical blessings are set down in the Book of Life) of the same tendency, is that description of the general Judgement which our Saviour gives, wherein he passeth over the judgment of Infidels, and confines his discourse to his way of process with his own Flock, with e∣lect and reprobate Professors of worshipping the one God through the Seed of the Woman. The Goats are part of Christs visible Flock, the excrescen∣cies of his Mystical Body; that serve for Ornament: and therefore the Chur∣ches hair is compared to a Flock of Goats, (Cant. 4. 1. Cant. 6. 5.) and the Kidds of the Flock mentioned, as well as the Lambs (Can. 1.) Hence St. Jerom
well observes, that the barren and Fetid Hee-Goats (not the Shee-Goats that go up from the washing and bear Twins (Cant. 4. 2.) shall be separated from the Flock (in Mat. 25.) Rhem. Test. note in Mat. 25. 32. They are separated, who in the visible Church lived together: as for Hereticks they went out of the Church before, separated themselves: and therefore not separated here, as being judged already. There being none amongst the Goats of that Flock who could plead, they had not seen or known Christ, but only that they had not seen him so and so; they believed he was ascended into Heaven, and sate at the right hand of God: but little thought he was hungry and thirsty, and opprest, in his poor Members on Earth: and the only thing that is laid to their charge being their transgressing the Royal Law, their not living up to Evangelical Precepts, their not practising those Christian Duties they had an opportunity to perform, living in the Communion of Christs Mem∣bers. No larger bounds doth David or Asaph set himself (Ps. 50.) where ha∣ving only hinted Gods destroying the Infidels at his glorious appearance, by the fire that burnt before him, and that horrible tempest round about; he giveth an account at large, how God, after that, will proceed to the trial of such as were in Covenant with him, called his people, vers. 4. his Saints that have made a Covenant with him by Sacrifice, ver. 5. that have enter'd Co∣venant by Circumcision or given up themselves as a Sacrifice to God by pro∣mising to be his Servants, as R. David explains that Text [Faedus per Sacrifi∣cium, ut Exod. 24. 8. Moses faedus ferit, & offerebat sacrificia dicendo, ecce san∣guis faederis: in Daresh faedus Circumcisionis,] (Rab. David in p. 50.) de die ju∣dicii futuro quando redemptor venit (ut Joel. 3. 1. ver. 4.) advocabit caelum: ad Angelos caeli ut vindictam, sicut in exercitum Assur, exequentur, (2 Reg. 19. 35.) that they being dispatcht, he may judge his people, [Postquàm Deus vindi∣ctam in hostes suos ex gentibus ostendit, tunc ex Israele peccatores exterminat, (Zach. 13. 8.) duae partes exterminentur.] (Isa. 4. 3. [omnis scriptus in libro erit sanctus.] Not only by calling, but election: when the Lord shall have washed away the filth, and shall have purged the blood from the midst of Jerusalem, by the spirit of judgment. Before these, and these alone, the Book of Life, the Covenant is open'd, vers. 7. Hear O my People, and I will speak, O Israel, I will testifie unto thee. I will call Heaven and Earth to testifie against thee [Quod fdere me Deum tuum agnoscere obligatus es, & pro peccatis tuis reprehendam te, non pro sacrificiis, quia in Decalogo non est mentio sacrificiorum, nec est haec res magna in oculis meis, utrùm sacrifices vel non,] That by covenant thou wast bound to acknowledge me thy God, and I will re∣prove thee for thy sins, not for Sacrifices, because in the Decalogue there is no mention of Sacrifice, neither is this a thing of any value in my eyes, whether thou sacrifices or not.] Vicars. decupla. in Psal. 50.) And then the Books of Con∣science are open'd; their sins, the Transgressions of the Royal Law, are ser in order before the faces of such, as have taken the Covenant in their mouths, but hated to conform unto it: when thou sawest a Thief, thou consentedst unto him, and hast been a partaker with the Adulterer, &c. Of the same Tenour is the discourse of St. Paul, 1 Thes. 4. upon which Musculus hath this note, [Non recenset omnia quae futura in adventu Domini, sed ea tantùm, idque in summa, quae concernunt salutem fidelium, de perditione vero impiorum De{que} rui∣na & mutatione totius mundi nihil meminit.] The Apostle doth not rehearse all things future at the Advent of the Lord, but only those things, and that briefly which concern the salvation of the faithful, but of the perdition of the wicked and change of the world he makes no mention. § 6. 4. Though I approve not the Sentence of Lactantius and the old Mil∣lenaries, that the Saints shall rise a thousand years before the wicked: yet I cannot cordially subscribe to that of Gennadius Massiliensis (de eccles. dogmat. cap. 6.) [Erit resurrectio mortuorum omnium hominum, sed una in simul & se∣mel; non prima justorum & secunda peccatorum, ut fabula est somniatorum, sed una omnium.] There will be a resurrection of all men, but one, at the same in∣instant
of time; not the first of the just, and the second of the unjust (as some men dream) but one of all men. This opinion (I say) I cannot subscribe to, as conceiving it to thwart the Assertion of Saint Paul, (1 Corin, 15. 23.) all shall be made alive in Christ: but every man in his own order; Christ the first fruits, then those that are Christs, at his coming, then the end, &c. and (1 Thes. 4. 16.) the dead in Christ shall rise first, first not in re∣spect of those in Christ, that shall be alive, (for as we that are alive shall not prevent them that are asleep, so neither shall they that are asleep prevent us that are alive; seeing we shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, in a moment, in the same moment that they shall be raised, so that there will be no more prius & posterius, betwixt us than is in a moment; neither can they whom that day finds alive rise at all.) But, first, in respect of them that are out of Christ; as the antients generally, and the best modern Expositors gloss upon these Texts. Musculus, [Non soli resurgent qui sunt Christi, resur∣gent omnes, sed ii primi. sic. 1 Thes. 4. mortui in Christo resurgent primum, post illas surgent & reliqui.] Not only they that are Christs, but all, shall rise; but they that are in Christ shall rise first, and afterwards the rest, as the Apostle saith. St. Athanasius conceives St. Paul to give to them that are Christs both priori∣ty of time as to their Resurrection and change, and of place as to their trial and receiving of sentence: [Oportet namque ut aliquod habeant privilegium justi vel resurgendo; nam ut in aera obviàm Christo procedant rapiendi: ita & primi à mortuis excitantur; quemadmodum contra & peccatores in terra & lo∣cis inferioribus hisce judicem ut damnati operiuntur.] (Ex Christoferi translatio∣ne in 1 ep. ad Corin c. 15.) It is meet that the righteous should have the privi∣ledge of rising before Infidels: for as they are snatcht up into the Air to meet Christ, so they also shall be first raised from the dead: whereas on the contrary in∣fidels as being damn'd already, shall wait for the judge upon earth, and these inferior places. 5. That the Saints, though they rise before the Infidels, yet shall not be judged till the Devil and his Worshippers be cast into Hell, is the assertion of Tertullian, (de Resurrectione carnis cap. 25.) [Hîc ordo temporum sternitur—Diabolo in abyssum interim relegato, primae resurrectionis praerogativa de soliis or∣dinetur: dehinc & igni data universalis Resurrectionis censuta de libris judi∣cetur.] The order of time is here laid down. The Devil in the mean while being sent back again into the bottomless pit, the Prerogative of the first Resurre∣ction, (that is, their being gathered in the air to the place of Judgment) shall be put into order: and after that they are assembled, (the Fire of the last Confla∣gration having changed the world) the sentence shall pass out of the books upon them that rose first, that is, the Saints by calling. From these premisses it necessarily follows, That all the time that Satan hath allotted him, after his loosing, to go out again and tempt the World to Gentilism, to deceive the Nations after his old wont, is that , that small season that intervenes betwixt the general Resurrection of the Saints, and the Condemnation of Infidels; that short space, wherein the Saints shall, all in a body be waiting at the place of Judgment (whither the An∣gels shall gather them) for the appearance of Christ. Against which Hy∣pothesis I cannot imagine what now can be excepted; but that it seems to suppose, that Infidels after their Resurrection shall be in a capacity to de∣merit, contrary to the common, (and in my judgment the true) Opinion: that they will be then as they were since their dissolution, in termino. But there is no ground of such a suspicion in this case, as I state it: for I do not make their following Satan with their rebellious Arms, a contraction of new guilt (because it proceeds from that height of judicial obcecation, that di∣vine Justice inflicts upon them, as their punishment) but an occasion of Gods justifying himself in their condemnation: (as that which speaks them, to have lived and died impenitent,) for all their willfull rebellions. I do not affirm, that God inflicts more punishment upon them, because of this, than what they had deserved before: but only takes the opportunity (of these
Rebels being in Arms) to proceed against them, and to destroy them altoge∣ther as enemies. I cannot express my mind in more significant terms than those of Aquinas, (Sum. 3. q. 90. art. 7.) [Civcs judicabuntur ut cives, in quos sine discussione meritorum sententia mortis non feretur; sed infideles con∣demnabuntur ut hostes qui consueverunt apud homines abs{que} meritorum audientia estimari:] Citizens shall be judged as Citizens, against whom the sentence of death may not be pronounced without the discussion of their desert of it: but Infi∣dels shall be condemned as open enemies, who use among men to be doom'd without hearing. That God may not keep his Citizens in suspence, and demurr the trial of their cause longer than need, he will not appear in his Glory, till his Rebels be all in arms; that so finding them, at his coming, in the Field, set in Battalia against his Subjects, he may cut them off at once. § 7. I have but one Argument more, against the Chyliasts limitting the Saints Reign with Christ on Earth, to a precise thousand of years, to try the patience (as well as Judgment) of my Reader withal: to wit, the im∣pertinency of the Authorities which they alledge for their Opinion. Of which I shall give but two Instances, because I would not quite tire my self or Reader. 1. They alledge the Authority of the Jewish Doctors, whereas the Mil∣lenium they speak of, is the Septimum Millenarium (as Carpenter observes, in Plato's Alcinous, pag. 322.) at the beginning whereof they think God will judge all men; and as Mr. Meed proves by several quotations (volume 2. pag. 667.) Now the seventh day thousand of years is confest by all to last to all Eternity, as being the holy Sabbath, wherein the Saints shall rest from their six days labour. And for any day of a thousand years long, before that, the antient Jews are wholly strangers: so they reckon the three Ages, before that, by two thousand of years apiece; two thousand before the Law, two thousand under the Law, and two thousand under the Messiah, before the eternal Sabbath: in which compute they intend not that any of those Ages shall be of so many precise years continuance; (if they do, they have foully mist it, in the two already past) neither do they mention any innova∣tion of the World, after the giving of the Law; but the Age of the Messiah (that is to begin with their fifth Millenium from the Creation) and the Sab∣bath of eternal rest, the seventh Millenium. So that if they, at any time, call the day of the Messias a thousand years, they mean by that number, about two thousand of precise years, that is, an indefinite Num∣ber. 2. How groundless then must be their building their Doctrine of a precise thousand upon those Texts, which the Jews first, and they from them alledge: for first, if they be sueh Texts, as the Jews do ground their Millenium upon, they cannot import a precise Millenium; that being more than the Jews conclude from them (and perhaps St. John might take up the Jewish use of that term, thinking none would be so simple, as to understand it in any other but that sence which their custome had put up∣on it:) and secondly, the Texts alledged imply not any precise number. I will instance in that which Irenaeus stands so much upon: Isa. 65. 28. The days of my people are us the days of a Tree, that is, the Tree of Life; as the Septuagint expounds it; and the Chaldee Paraphrase, (out of the Tar∣gum on Psal. 1. 4.) he shall be like a Tree Planted by the concourse of Waters; i. e. those four streams that water'd the Garden of Eden, where the Tree of Life was planted: this they rightly understand to be a Pro∣phesie of the dayes of the Messias; but the Chyliasts misapply it to their thousand years, when they make this to be the resemblance, That, had A∣dam eaten of the Tree of Life before he fell, he should have lived a thou∣sand years, before his Translation; but eating of the forbidden Tree he died
in the day that he eat of it, that is, before the great day of a Millenium was expired. But first, Adam notwithstanding lived so near to a thousand years—(930) as makes the Divine Menacy (if that be all it imports) as good as ineffectual, and his returning to the dust so few years sooner, than he should have done, had he kept his innocency, so unproportionable to the severity of it, as speaks him in a manner to have sinned impune. And secondly, if we will choose rather to sit at Gods feet, than Gamaliel's and take his Comment, before the Glosses of those blind Hebrew Doctors; (to whom their own Scriptures are a Book sealed) we shall hear him teach, that that Tree was a Sacrament of a Life, not for a thousand years, but for ever, Gen. 3. left the man put his hand to the Tree of Life and eat and live for ever. So that if I would single a Text out, for the probat of my As∣sertion, that the thousand years, (answerable to the life Typified by the Tree of Life) of the Messias Kingdom, shall be for ever, shall last as long as time, I could not pitcht upon one, that more clearly proves it, than this does (accor∣ding to the Jewish application of it to the time of the Messias) which the Millenaries, from the Jewish Doctors application of it, alledge to prove a precise number of years. We see with how great absurdities, the limiting of the Saints Reign on Earth with Christ, to the precise time of a thousand years, is encumbred on all hands; whether we reflect on that Opinion, which presents these years as already run out; or on them, who to prevent those absurdities, assert the Millenium to be not yet begun, and fall into grosser absurdities. By which discourse we have gain'd that light to this Text, as presents that to be the mind of it, which is so much inculcated by the Old-Testament-Prophets, viz. That after Satan is once bound up, by the Imperial Laws commanding for Christ, he shall never have power granted him, either to erect any new Sect of Gentilism (to introduce any new Gods, such as the Gentiles gene∣rally before that, worship'd) into any part of the World; or to restore the old, into those parts, out of which it hath been ejected. In which state the world shall continue a thousand years, that is, for ever, a certain being put for an indeterminate time; than which there is no figure of speech more common, either in the Language of Scripture, or the Tongues of all men. During which period there shall be Christian Assemblies, Worshipping the one God through Christ, and thankfully commemorating the Martyrs that died for, and the Saints that died in, the Faith of Christ, so as they shall live again, in their blessed Memorials: and they that had been condemned for∣merly by the Pagan World, as irreligious Atheists. [Si quis impius, aut Epi∣cureus mysteriorum explorator accessit, discedat.] (Lucian Alexand.) If there be here present any prophane person or Christian, or Epicurean Sifter of sacred Rites) shall openly be proclaimed to live and reign with Christ, as the only truly re∣ligious persons. But as for the rest of the dead, (the old Idolaters, who li∣ved and died either for, or in Gentilism) neither they nor the Idols whom they worship'd, shall ever be received again, or gain their ancient credit: but lye for ever under contempt; as they that are buried and out of mind, Satan, indeed, when that term is expired, that is, at the Resurrection of the Just shall be permitted to do his utmost, to tempt all the Idolatours that e∣ver were, to own him, for their God, as he by whose power they were raised from the dead; and they will so far comply with him, and put their trust in him, as to march under his Banner against the whole Assembly of Belie∣vers, then gather'd to the place of judgment, and attending the appearance of Christ; who shall no sooner appear, but a Fire before him, and an horri∣ble Tempest round about, shall seize upon all the corruptible parts, and inha∣bitants (visible, and invisible) of the etherial, and earthly World; and de∣vour and deluge the whole World of Infidels, as the world of the Gyants was formerly drown'd and purg'd by Water. And thus the wicked Idolaters and their Idols, (Margin. text. Mosora. in Psal. 1, [impii & idola eorum non
stabunt in judicio justorum.] not being able to stand in the judgement of the righteous, but receiving their judgment a part from them, by themselves, while they attempt to take the City of God (as those Gyants of old are feigned to have done) by force; Christ the judge will proceed to pass sen∣tence upon all such, as can lay any claim to the benefits of the Gospel, the white Throne shall be erected, &c. CHAP. IX. The force of the general Argument from Prophesie urged. § 1. Prophetick Events demonstrate the Reveilers infinite science. § 2. And Omnipotencie. § 3. The Divine Original of the Gospel. § 4. Christ Circumstantiated old Prophesies of Jerusalem's Fall. § 5. When her Fall was most unlikely. § 6. Precognition demonstrates Pre-existence. § 2. I Have been forc'd in the Explication of that part of this Prophecy, that is not yet fullfill'd, to larger excursions from my propounded Theme, then will stand with my Readers patience; or indeed with the Rules of Art; were it not that the right understanding of that, is a Key to unlock that part of it, that is fulfill'd: and the misapplication of either is a dangerous inlet to Atheisme, and a spawn of Infidelity; for when such Expositions and Applications of this Prophecy, as I have been opposing, are taken for the Word of God, upon the credit of their Authors, and found to make the time of the binding of Satan from deceiving the world, (after it hath been converted to Christianity) as he did under Gentilism, either to be past, or not yet come: who can be so short reason'd, as not to perceive how palpably St. John is hereby made to contradict the old Pro∣phets: whose constant Song is this, that as the Light of the Gospel should arise, the Darkness of Paganism should vanish, and once vanish'd never come more to light. A truth so palpably experienc'd, as Porphyrie is driven to this confession [.] Since the time that Jesus began to be worship'd, no man has perceiv'd any be∣nefit to be reap'd by the common Religion of the Gods (Euseb. praepar. Evan. 5. 1.) Whether in vindicating St. John from all suspicion of clashing with other, and elder, Prophets, and tuning his words into a consent with theirs, we have strained them from their most native sence, I leave to my Readers Judg∣ment, while I press the present and manifest Effects of all Prophecies, upon this subject, upon the Atheists Conscience; as evidence of the infinitely com∣prehending foreknowledge of the first Author of the Revelation of the Fu∣turity of such pure Contingencies, so many Ages before they fell out: as ar∣guments for Faith from Sence, his beloved Medium, through which only he will see Truth. Let him then put his Perspective to his Corporeal Eye, look through Galilaeus his Glass (by help whereof he can spie a World in the Moon, not only Earth and Seas; but Woods and Hedge-rowes; yea perhaps, if he look more wishtly, Men or Boyes spreading Mole-hills.) Let him take a standing with Baethius, in that Orb, and then cast down his eye upon this earthly Globe, East, West, North, Sout , if that be impossible, let him travel the World in the length thereof and breadth thereof. Or, if that be too pain∣ful, let him send to the Isles of Chittim, and see, unto Kedar, and consider di∣ligently, if there be such a thing as a Pagan God any where, where the Gos∣pel was once embrac'd, though it be now renounc'd there. Let him inform himself of the present state of those Nations, which of old, when Israel for∣sook the God that made him, could not by any means be induc'd to forsake
their No-God-Gods; whether all those Gods be not crept into holes, where the Light of the Gospel hath been communicated. Has there been any place for any of them, upon this upper Hemisphere? Are they not all descended into shades, ad inferos, as the Ancients call'd the Antipodes, since the Gospel made the one God known to it? hath any God been exalted, but the Lord alone, any where in all the earth, since it became the possession of Christ. If the Prophets (saith St. Austin de consensu Evang. 1 16.) in foretelling such great Changes to Fall, in the Christian Times, were deceived, how come their Prophecies so manifestly to be fulfill'd? And when we find, by the event, that they spake true, who can have the face to resist so clear a demon∣stration of their being guided by an infallible Spirit. § 2. But from these events is not only demonstrated the Omisciency of the Reveiler of those Prophecies, but the Omnipotency of him also, in bring¦ing those things to pass. If he that foretold his own Reigning alone, were not the Omnipotent God; how comes he now to be alone worship'd, and all other Gods rejected? who can this God of Israel be, who was once so un∣known among the Gentiles, as they could not find him in that croud of Gods whom they then worship'd, but is now so well known, as, of so ma∣ny Nations, he is alone worship'd? who can that God be who would not have any other God worship'd but himself; and whose will is of more force, to overturn the Temples; Altars, and Images of all other Gods, than all theirs to hinder the embracing of his Rites? Whereas the Gentile Gods were such tame fools, as they could endure to be rival'd by Gods of their own proclaiming: Jupiter Hammon himself induc'd Alexander into a belief that he was begotten by a God, and should share with him in divine ho∣nours, (Diodor. Sicul. Bibl. l. 17. p. 550.) Must not he be the All-knowing God, whose Prophets, not only answer'd those that consulted them concern∣ing present emergencies, but being not consulted, foretold, so long time be∣fore, those strange and unlook'd for changes, concerning whole Humane kind and all Nations, which we now read and see: Must not he be the All∣powerful God who hath brought to pass what he foretold; to wit, that the Romans and all Nations should, by means of the Gospel, be brought to be∣lieve in one only God, and overthrow the Images, and discard the Worship of their Fore fathers Gods? Legant si possunt—Let them produce, if they can, any one of the Gentile Gods, that have had so much boldness as to boast, that time would come, that the God of Israel, and the rest of the Nations Gods, should give place to him. Nay, their thrice great Mercury (whether by guess, or peculiar dis∣pensation, that those Devils might be tormented, with the forethought of it, before it came to pass) foretells the fatal day of the Aegyptian Idols, and the restauration of the Worship of the one Omnipotent God, that made and go∣verns the whole World, and shall restore it, and reform it, and bring it forth anew. [Tunc terra ista sanctissima, sedes delubrorum at{que} Templorum, sepul∣chrorum erit mortuorúm{que} plenissima? Oh Aegypte, Aegypte, Religionum tuarum solae supererunt fabulae, & ae{que} incredibiles posteris suis, sola{que} supererunt verba lapidibus incisa: Et tanti operis effector, & restitutor, Deus, ab omnibus qui tunc erunt, frequentibus praeconiis, benedictionibus{que} celebretur.] (Asclep. partit 9.) Then shall this most Religious Land, now the seat of Fanes and Tem∣ples, be full of Sepulchres and dead men, (that is, the Gods whom thou wor∣ship'st shall be detected to be no other than dead men, and their Temples no other than Sepulchers, than places e they lay interr'd.) Oh Aegypt, Ae∣gypt, of all thy Religions there will nothing remain, but the stories of them: and those thought unworthy of the belief of posterity: nothing will be left, but some Motto's engraven in stone. And he that brings so great things to pass, the God that made, and shall restore the world, shall then be celebrated of all with dayly Praises and Benedictions. Their most Divine Prophetess Sibyl sung the Fu∣neral Elegy of the Provincial Gods and the Genethliacon of the World to
the acknowledgement of the one God. And their infallible Tripos, and Py∣thian Oracle was forc'd to tell the World that Phaebus himself must pack to Hell and be eternally deprived of Divine honour, by the Hebrew Boy the Child Jesus. But of which of their Gods, did any of the Pagan Divines speak at this rate, that he should turn all other Gods out of their Temples, subvert their Altars, and root out their names and Memo∣rials from under Heaven, and Reign as a Monarch-Deity over the Universe. Sure it concern'd the Gentile World, not to suffer such Oracles to have been spilt upon the ground as water, but to have preserved them in everlasting Tables, which they might have hung forth, upon the Pillars of their Temple, to affront the Oracles of the God of Israel, and to have born up the Spirits of Idol-worshippers, sinking under those burthens, which Gods Prophets saw against false Gods: whom according to their Prophe∣sies, we have seen broken to pieces like a Potters vessel, with the Iron-rod of that Son of God, whom he hath set up as King upon the Hill of Sion; to whom he hath given the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his possession: Who coming out of his Chamber as a Bride∣groom, (that is, [Conjugatum carni humanae Verbum processit de útero virgina∣li,] August. de consens. 1. 16. the Word Married to humane flesh came out of the Virgins Womb.) Rejoyceth, as a Giant, to run his course; not only from one end of the Hemisphere unto the other (as they would bound Christs King∣dom who exclude America from the hopes of it) but from one end of the Heaven to the other: and (if that be not plain enough) nothing is hid from the heat thereof; not any part of the round World, that the corporeal Sun visits. Mankind receives the cherishing warmth of its Beams; and basks it self in that Fountain of Light. The Serpent feels their scorching heat, and flees therefrom. [Et adhuc isti fragiles contradictiunculas garrientes eligunt, ma∣gis isto igne, sicut stipula in cinerem verti, quam sicut aurum à sorde purgari?] And, will the crazy-headed Sceptick yet chatter and gaggle out his petit and bublie Exceptions, which break with the least touch, with the gentlest blast? and choose rather to be consumed to ashes in this fire, as stubble, than to be purged by it from his dross, as Gold. § 3. Or is he of so thick-skin'd a Soul, as not to feel the heat of Christs Divinity, in those Prophetick Rayes, emitted from his Spirit, before he came in the Flesh; as not to conceive that the accomplishments of Old Testament-Prophecies, is a demonstration, not only of their own, but of the Gospels Divine Original: which can be the Workmanship of none other Architect, but of him who drew the Model and Idea of these new Heavens, that new Creation, that new face of things, which we see produc'd in the Age of Christianity. Humane Wit indeed might have drawn another Model per∣fectly resembling that, might have fram'd an History parallel to Prophecy. (though they that could make the Counter-part, so exactly answer the Ori∣ginal, and write so perfectly after the Copy, as the Apostles have, must be Persons of a steady Hand; excellently composed Spirits, and solid Judge∣ments. And therefore all the Inference we drew, in our Second Book, from the Apostles proportioning every Limb and Line of their Story to the Old Testament-Draught, was, that they had thereby demonstratively acquitted themselves from all suspicion of being themselves deluded.) But it is out of the reach of Humane power, to bring the Matters, there prophesied of, unto Birth, the erecting of the Structure it self; the production of what was fore-told into real existence, cannot be the Effect of any, but of him alone, who hath as great an Infinity of Power, to bring to pass, as he hath of knowlege to foresee them. And therefore having proved, the Truth of what the Apostles reported, that what they say was done, in order to the accomplishment of Prophecy, was done indeed; he must be a person of very short Reason, that from the im∣provement of the Premisses, cannot improve the Conclusion, and draw this Inference. That as nothing but Omnisciency could foresee, so nothing less
than Omnipotency could effect, That a Virgin should bring forth a Son, ex∣ternally so mean, as those, among whom he convers'd, saw so little comli∣ness in him, as they Crucified him, (as an Impostor, for saying he was the Son of God, the King of the Jews, that Messia promised in the Law, and so much predicated by the Prophets) and yet really so full of Majesty, as he is become King of Kings, hath subdued the World to his Obedience, abo∣lish'd all the Gods of the Nations, and erected every where the Worship of that one God, that made Heaven and Earth: that God of whom Moses writes, known formerly only in Jewry; but now no where less known than among the Jews; they being the greatest strangers to their own Pro∣phets; and their Fathers God being the greatest stranger to them; of any Na∣tion upon the face of the Earth. § 4. But that I may not put the Sceptick to the expence of all the Rea∣son he hath, and that he may not think it is through penury of New Testa∣ment-prophecies, that I pitch upon those of the Old: and that he may grope out the Divinity of the Blessed Jesus, in some palpable accomplishments of the Predictions he made in person, as well as by Proxy: I shall here mind him of this Note. That Christ espoused all the Old Testament-prophecies, commented up∣on them, applied them, and not only attested the coming to pass of what the Prophets had foretold, in general; but, as it were individuated those gene∣rals, by more particular and punctual Circumstances, not so much as hin∣ted, by them of old: and appeal'd to their accomplishment, in that way, and with those Circumstances, wherewith he cloath'd them: The prophets gave only the rough draught of what Christ drew to the life; he lickt their rude Lumps into so distinct and explicite forms; as the Prophecies became his own: his Gleanings were more than their Vintage: To instance in one for all, Christ, in his Prophecy of the Destruction of Jerusalem, referrs to Daniel (when you shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel) thereby appealing to its accomplishment, as that which he was content to stand or fall by, as to mens belief that he was the Messias: as if he had said, if you see it not within the Term of Daniels Weeks, within so many years after my offering an Attonement for sin, as Daniel states it, after the Oblati∣on of the Messias, believe me, not that I am he. But withal he leaves it not in such curious Calculations as Daniel did, but what he had writ in figures, Christ transcribes in words at length; and applies it to that Generation, with that perspicuity, and in such particularities, as an Historian can scarce tell what has been done more punctually, than Christ foretells what should be done. 1. As to the time of its taking Effect: there be some (saith he) standing here, that shall not tast of Death, till all these things shall be fulfill'd; and in par∣ticular, St. John shall tarry till Christ come to avenge himself on the Jewish Nation. 2. As to the Instruments to be employed by Christ, for the destruction of their place and Nation, he describes them by their Banners, the Eagles, under which the Roman Legions, those Birds of prey, march'd, when divine Justice conducted them into Judaea, that they might flesh themselves upon that Na∣tion, whose Inhabitants (their sins being ripe) were as Carcasses fatted and prepared for them; signified (as Tacitus thinks) by that prodigy of a Dog bringing to Vespasian a dead mans hand, as if that Dog had set the Game for the Roman Eagles, and had wagg'd his tail before Judaea, as the place where the Carcasses (their prey) lay, 3. As to the Deliverance of the believing Jews: in the Mountainous pla∣ces of Judaea, whither Christ warned them to flee when they should see the Roman Standards advancing towards Jerusalem: or at Pella, whither those that had not understood Christs direction repaired, after that voyce was heard in the Temple [migremus Pellam;] Let us march to Pella,] or into
whatsoever by-places or holes of the Rock, the Dove of Christ had betaken her self, till that indignation was over past. There was not one Christian re∣maining in Jerusalem when Titus laid siege to it, they being all removed up∣on the opportunity which Providence offer'd them by Gallus his suddain rai∣sing of the siege some moneths before: (Euseb. hist. 3. 5. ex Josepho:) And being put in mind of Christs direction, a little before the Ruin of Jerusalem, by the Prodigies reported by Josephus, and foretold by Christ. Such as mens not attending to them, mens not believing them to be signes and fore-run∣ners of the approach of Divine Vengeance, neither Josephus a Jew, (Josep. de Bel. Jud. 7. 12.) nor Tacitus an Heathen, (Tacit. hist. 5.) can impute to any thing else, than Gods dementating that people, whom he meant to de∣stroy: A Starr in the form of a Sword brandishing it self a whole year to∣gether over Jerusalem: a light shining, for the space of half an hour, about the Altar and Temple, at nine of the clock at night, while the people were assembled to celebrate the Feast of unleavened bread, (then falling on the eighth of April) so bright as one would have thought it the light of the clearest day. There were signs in the Air: they had some nearer hand un∣der their feet. The same day of unleavened bread an Heifer as she was led to be sacrificed, brought forth a Lamb in the midst of the Temple; could any thing more significantly shew, that the Legal Sacrifice, about to die, had left the Lamb for its heir: the first part of which Lesson was bellowed out to Vespasian, by that Ox that came into his Pavilion, and fell prostrate at his feet, pointing him out as the man at whose feet the Mosaical Sacrifices were to fall. The East-gate of the Inner Temple of Massie Brass, so heavy as twenty men could scarce shut it, being made fast over-night with iron Locks and strong Bolts, was seen at the sixth hour of the night, to open of its own ac∣cord: of which Accident the Magistrate being inform'd, by the Keepers of the Temple, goeth up to the Temple, and with much ado got it shut again. This, though the ignorant and interessed party expounded it in favour of the Jews, yet the wiser sort (saith Josephus) understood it to presage, that the Temple wherein they trusted would, as it were by the instinct of that God who dwelt in it, deliver it self up into the enemies hands; and Rabban Jo∣chanan, by name; applyed to this Prodigy, that Text of Zachary, Open thy doors, oh Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy Cedars; of the truth of which he was so confident, as he caused his Scholars to carry him forth, as a dead Corps, upon a Bier, and by that means made his escape to Caesar, as Doctor Lightfoot, (Harmony pag. 182.) tells the Story from R. Nathan: A few dayes after this Feast, May 21. appeared a Sign beyond belief (saith Josephus) but that those who saw it are yet alive, and such desolations followed, as were worthy to be usher'd in by such presages: Before Sun-set, were seen Chariots to be driven in the Air, and armed Bands sallying through the Clouds, and beleaguering the City. And on the Feast of Pentecost following, the Priests going after their custome into the Inner Temple to officiate, perceived, at first, a kind of rustling and confused noise; and after that, heard a suddain voice, saying, Lets depart hence. Of these prodigies Tacitus makes mention, (Hist. 5.) [Visae per caelum con∣currere acies, rutilantia arma, & subito nubium igne collucere Templum: Ex∣passae repente Delubri fores, & audita major humanâ vox, excedere, simul ingens motus excedentium, quae pauci in metum trahebant.] Fourthly, as to the miseries accompanying this Desolation falling, through the extremity of the Famine, most heavily upon Women with Child; that laying siege to two lives in one body, and on such as gave suck; they being in perpetual fear, either to have their little ones taken away from them (to relieve the hungar-starv'd Soldier) or to be forc'd themselves, either to pine them at their dry Breast, or to bury in their Stomack the fruit of their Womb: of the completion of which Josephus, an Eye-witness, gives us sad examples, (de Bel. Jud. 7. 7, 8. upon whose stories, touching that inundation of mise∣ry,
that rowled in upon that people of Gods Curse, it was a very signal Pro∣vidence, saith Isidor. Pelus. (lib. 4. ep. 75.) that God stirred up a Jew, and one zealous of their Law and Traditions, to communicate to the World those Tragical disasters, which befell that People, at such time as Christ had threat∣ned to take vengeance of them, for those Narratives do so far exceed all Example, as they could not possibly have found credit, if they had been reported by a stranger, or by any other person than such an one as Josephus, who thus describes the extremity of the Famine: An infinite number died through hunger, 'tis inexpressible how many fell, either through the extre∣mity of the Famine, or by striving to relieve themselves against it: you might see men at Daggers drawing in every house, where was the least mor∣sel of Meat or crum of Bread; the dearest friends snatching victuals out of one anothers mouths, and rifling the bosoms of them that were a dying. You might see men in a rage (through disappointment of their prey, which they sought in desolate places) run like rabid Dogs up and down the City, search∣ing twice or thrice over in the same house, and through want of better food greedily feeding on such things as the most fordid Brutes abhorr, sparing neither Girdles, nor Shooes, nor the Leather upon their Targets; esteeming the Orts of Hay so great a dainty, as a small quantity of it was sold at four Attiques; to stuff their craving bellies; buying at any rate the stuffing of Padds, Saddles, &c. Nay so lamentable were the afflictions that came upon that People, and especially by Famine, as Josephus protests he could wil∣lingly have passed over the mention of them, for fear that Posterity should account him a Liar; but that he had many Eye-witnesses to attest them, and might seem, perhaps, to disregard and overlook the afflictions of his Coun∣trymen, if he should lightly touch their heavy sufferings; being some of them such as were never felt either by Greeks or Barbarians, things horrible to speak, incredible to hear: Of which I shall only mention one particular story, of one Mary the Daughter of Eleazar, a wealthy Matron, and of a no∣ble Family; who flying to Jerusalem (moving counter to Christs direction) was there, among the many thousands, that upon the occasion of the Pass∣over, were at that time in the City, when the Romans lay siege to it, coop∣ed up; and being by the rude Souldiers plunder'd of her goods, and at last of all provision for the Belly: she takes her child and (saying to him, poor Child thou must be meat for me: a Fury to fright those sedicious Zealots, who have brought us to this extremity; and a Fable to all posterity) sacrifi∣ceth him, to the asswaging of her hunger; and at one meal devours one half of him, reserving the remainder till the strong man that breaks stone walls, should return again so arm'd, as to force her to break the bonds of Na∣ture, and Female delicacy once more; but she was prevented of the second Course of that Thiestean Banquet, by Souldiers (that had got the scent of it) breaking in upon her, and threatning her with death, if she did not bring forth and present to their eye that roast-meat which they had the smell of in their Noses. The wretched woman sets before them the reliques of her Babe, bids them fall too, if they had an appetite: but if they were more nice than a Matron, more pittiful then a Mother, they might be wellcome to leave it for her, to sustain her loathed life with. Of which and the like Immanities Titus being inform'd, made a solemn appeal to the Gods, that they, whom his Clemency could not induce to accept of Peace, and an Act of Oblivion, by him offer'd, were worthy to feed on such cates; protesting he would bury this abominable fact in the ruines of the Country where it was com∣mitted, and not leave that City standing, for the Sun to behold, where Mo∣thers fed on so detestable food. 5. Of that degree and measure of the Wrath that was then to be poured out upon that Place and People of Gods Curse, according to the Predictions of Christ, that it should be levell'd with the ground; not have one stone left upon another; be an utter and perpetual desolation, if I would give a punctu∣al Account; I must transcribe all Josephus his Books of the Jewish Wars,
whose Theme that is; and a great part of Tacitus his fifth Book of Histories, I therefore referr my Reader to those Authors, whose Relations, if he compare with Christs Predictions, he will find them accomplish'd in every Circum∣stance. And as to that Cities never being able to this day to obtain a Re∣surrection from those Ruines, wherein Titus buried it; Infidelity it self need no other proof, than ocular Demonstration, nor can require a better reason, why it has not so much as been attempted for above this thousand years, than the frustration of Julians purpose to rebuild it, (meerly to affront Christs Predictions) of which Ammianus Marcellinus an Heathen Historian gives this account, (lib. 23. initio.) [Ambitiosum quondam apud Hierosoly∣mam Templum, quod post multa & interneciva certamina, obsidente Vespasiano posteáque Tito, aegre est expugnatum, instaurare sumptibus cogitabat immodicis, negotiúmque maturandum Alypio dederat Antiochensi, qui olim Britannias curà∣verat pro prefectis. Qúum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret Alypius, juvarétque provinciae rector, metuendiglobi flammarum propè fundamentum crebris assultibus e∣rumpentes, fecere locum, exustis aliquoties operantibus, inaccessum; hócque modo elemento destinatiùs repellente, cessavit incaeptum] Julian had purposed to be at excessive charge, in the Restauration of that sometimes stately Temple at Jeru∣salem, which after many and mortal skirmishings, being besieged, first by Vespasian and then by Titus, had been with much difficulty demolished. The care of ma∣naging this work is committed by Julian to Alypius of Antioch, who had former∣ly been the Deputy-governour of Britain. Alypius therefore setting amain upon the rebuilding of this Temple, and the Governour of the Province assisting him; dreadful Balls of fire breaking out and squibbing about the foundation, and many times burning the labourers made the place inaccessible: and the Element thus obstinately resisting, the place it self peremptorily rejecting the stones which were laid upon it, as refusing to bear such a structure, the enterprise was given over. And no man ever since hath been so fool hardy as to put his hands to that work which burnt the fingers of Julian's Labourers. §. 5. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem! How art thou faln from Heaven! God was thy wall of Fire once, to burn up them that besieged thee; but he sent now, Balls of Fire, to consnme those that would have rebuilt thee. Who would have believed that this would have befaln thee and thy children, when thy rejected Christ dropt his Tears, and with them, those Predictions upon thee, which we now see fulfill'd! What Sign was there, in Reason, or Nature, or Politicks, of this thy fatal Catastrophe? didst thou ever lift thy cloud threatning head higher above, or cast a more supercilious look upon Mount Olivet, than when Christ from thence, facing the sumptuousness of thy building, and the Ornaments of thy goodly stones, pronounc'd this fatal Sentence against thee? Thou wast then adorn'd with Donatives sent thee from Caesar's houshold, honour'd with dayly Sacrifices offer'd, at Caesars cost, and by his appointment, on thy Altar to the most high God, who dwelt between thy Cherubims. Philo Jud. (legat ad Caium) tells, how high the Jews were in Augustus his favour, in particular, a great part of the trans-Tiberine City was possest by Jews, who were allowed their proseucha's there; and permitted to send their first fruits and offerings to Jerusalem; whither most of Caesars family sent gifts, which remain (saith Philo) to this day, where Augustus commanded Sacrifices to be offered at his own charges to the most high God for the Emperours health, which custom (saith he) continueth to this day, and will for ever continue as a Monument of his Royal virtues; (he proved a false prophet in this, but in what follows he is a true Historian.) He appointed the Jews, at Rome, to have their share of the monthly largesses of corn and mony, and if the day of distribution happen'd on the Sabbath, he order'd, the Jews should have their shares the day following. These privile∣ges were continued to them during the reign of Tiberius, notwithstanding the spight of Sejanus against the Jews. Thy Children were indulged, thy Sabbaths reverenc'd, by Augustus and
Tiberius, whose ears were always open to their Complaints, against their own Deputies; whose greatest friends at Court could not procure their continu∣ance, if thy peoples Legates made motion for their removal out of Office. If Caligula's Sacrilegious Pride would prophane thee, by affronting the divine presence with his own Image; it was no greater an indignity, than he put upon the Temples of his own Gods; and what they wanted, thou found, an Agrippa to intercede for thee, and a Petronius to suspend the execution of the Imperial Decree against thee. Claudius banish'd thy Children from the Roman Suburbs: but it was for their contempt of thy holiness; for daring to abuse the piety of Roman Ma∣trons towards thee; for diverting to their proper use the presents and rich donatives, which the proselytes of thy religion committed to their hands, to conveigh to thee: he vindicated thy honour, upon thy bastard Sons, not their crime, with thy ruine: as he did that of the Priests of Isis, at the same time: he left thy walls standing, and thy Religion free, and under the care of thy most indulgent foster-father King Agrippa, one of his greatest Fa∣vourites. Thy Clients under Nero found that favour in the Imperial Court (by means of his Wife Poppaea a zealous Votary to thy Religion) as they obtain'd a Decree, for the Demolishing of that Tower, which the Roman President had erected, to out-face thy holy of holies. Yea, by Poppaea's interest in Ne∣ro's affection (so great, as to gratifie her jealousie (that the Womb that bare him corrival'd Poppaea, and had a greater share of Nero's love, than she would spare from her self) that womb must be ripped up.) So benign an aspect did his Reign, (malevolent to all other) cast upon thy Children, as they were thinking once to have added twenty Cubits to thy height, and dimensions to those parts of thy Foundations that had proved too slender to bear that weight of magnificence, Herod had laid upon them, (Joseph. antiq. 15. 14. Under the Monster of men, the Bane of the World, thou makes shew of rising to greater renown, and when thy Children waxed so wanton, under the Indulgence of the Empire, as to kick against its Majesty (as I have seen children, when they are strutted with the Milk, Play with the Breast, till their scratching it procures them a Motherly blow) and play with its Au∣thority, and to call for stroaks. Good God' what gentle correction was designed for them: Vespasian (the Love and Darling of Mankind, he who counted that day lost wherein he perform'd not some office of Humanity) is the Rod that's laid upon their back, the Empire takes up an handful of Marsh-rushes, to chastise her Rebels with; was she like to draw blood with such a Rod? Could the stroak of so soft an hand have caused blewness, much less Mortality of wounds, had not the vengeance of Heaven gangren'd the place? Could that gentle silk twine have pull'd down thy Towers, that Lambs Horn have pusht down thy walls, had they not been secon∣ded with the unseen power of that Sentence Christ had past upon thee? Ask thy Neighbours, the Chaldeans, whether they could observe any Signes of thy Ruine among those Lights, God had plac'd in the Firmament to be Signs. That book was never more studied by the Eastern Astrologers than in that age, when the expectation of the arising of the Star of Jacob (that bright Morning-star) had put the whole East into as passionate a Contest who should see it first, as that betwixt the seven Princes of Persia, who hung forth the Imperial Crown, as his prize, whose Horse should first Neigh after the Sun was up. And for nothing more was that Book then studied, than to know the Fortunes of thy Children, when and where that person was to be born, who was to be King of the Jews; that thy King whose Star three of the Magi saw; but to the rest it appeared not. Howe∣ver, had there been any sign, in any of the Heavenly Houses, of thy Ruine;
they would certainly have discovered it, whose eyes were then so intent up∣on that Heavenly Volume, on purpose that they might there read thy Con∣cerns, but in vain shouldst thou solicit the wisest of them; the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, which neither thou nor they observed, was the only Sign was given thee; that Sign of Jonas, his coming out of the Whales∣belly, the Bowels of the Earth, after he had been three dayes and three nights therein buried; that Sign thou mightst have known (if thou would) when time was: but now, that and all other Signs, of Christs coming against thee, are concealed from thee. And as vain am I in discoursing with thee, whose head layes so low in the dust, as thou canst not hear me. Nor have I more to say to my Reader upon this Argument for the divine Original of our Religion; but only, §. 6. First, that he would weigh, not only the strength of the Argument but the Modesty of Religion, in her begging no more of the Sceptick pro concesso, than what Cartesius himself begs, and hath granted him without all dispute, as a Ground of his Philosophical Discourse; all he begs is the Con∣sequence of this Proposition, [Cogito, ergò sum] All that she begs, for the probat of her Author, is the consequence of this [praecogito, ergò praesum.] And if Thinking be an indisputable evidence of Being, Fore-thinking must be as good an evidence of Fore-being. If finite Cogitation will prove fi∣nite Being, then infinite Precogitation will prove an infinite Fore-being, if the Argument à Conjugatis be of any force. And by what evidence can a Philosopher prove to another that himself thinks (without the proof where∣of, no man is bound to believe that he is) by the like whereto it may not be proved, that there is an Eternal Fore-thinking Being. If he present me with a well framed Poem, or Oration, or some exquisite piece of Art; I should conclude, that his thoughts were not a wool-gathering, while he composed them; but is this any whit more evident, than that he must be all mind, who has form'd so excellent and comly a piece as the World is, which the Grecians therefore called , because it is so beautiful and of so exact a Symmetry of parts. Nay, (to speak properly) no man can prove that he thinks, but only that he hath thought: for the Medium, he proves it by, must be the Effect of thinking: be it a wise Word, or Action, before either of them can come to the knowledge of another person, the thinking which fram'd them, is past and gone. But God, by Prophecy, giveth us fore knowledge of his fore-knowledge, before the Effect thereof take place, and during that intervall, exposeth himself to the Censure of the World, giving us a larger time to think of his forethinking, and to ponderate the infiniteness of it, and to arm our selves against delusion, than we may with good manners, expend in dis∣cussing the thoughts of men. And by this means we are render'd more expedite to judge thereof, when the Event falls out, than we can be of a∣ny other kind of humane thoughts, but such as are employ'd in framing Prognostications; the sufficiency whereof any Child may judge of, when the time is come when the Effect should follow. 2. That to this Argument for the divine Authority of Scripture, this con∣sideration will add no small weight; That All the Old Testament-Prophecies, according to their several times of accomplishment, have been fullfill'd to a Tittle in their Evangelical sence: but in any other sence thats put upon them, are a pack of as palpable Untruths as ever were asserted. Not one of them wants its mate, as we apply them to the blessed Jesus, and the things appertaining to his Kingdom. But they are barren of Effect, and most of them past Child-bearing, if they have not brought forth allready those Chil∣dren which the Christian Church fathers upon them. If their Messias be not already exhibited, he can never be exhibited in that place, at that time, and with such other Circumstances, as the Prophets assign. The Temple which he was to fill with Glory, is demolish'd; the Polity, during the standing
whereof Shilo was to come, is dissolv'd; the Weeks, within the compass whereof, Messias was to make attonement for sin; at the end whereof, desolation was to come in like a flood, are long since expired. The Idols, which at the appearance of his glorious Majesty were to creep into holes, are already exterminated from off the face of this Earth: so that if he has not already appeared, it is impossible that at his appearance he should find any Gentile Idols to abolish from off this Earth, and from under those Heavens which the Prophet pointed at, and taught the Jews to point at, during the Babilonian Captivity, in making this profession, Jer. 10. 11. Thus shall ye say unto them, the Gods shall perish from under those Heavens; that is, which are over Chaldea. Let the Atheist search if he can find in all that Tract one Heathen Idol. CHAP. X. The Demonstration of Power. § 1. Christians Gleanings exceed Pagans Vintage. § 2. Christian stories of undoubted, Pagan of dubious, Credit. § 3. Pagan Miracles mis-father'd § 4. Rome's Prosperity whence. § 5. Wonders among Gentiles for the fulfilling of Prophecies. § 6. For the punishment of Nations ripe for Exci∣sion. § 7. Empires raised miraculously for the common good. § 1. VVE have seen the Prints of incomprehensible Wisdom upon the Creatures, and thence demonstrated the Being of a God: we have seen the like impresses upon the Sacred Scriptures, and thence pro∣ved that God to be the Author of them, who contrived the Universe. The next demonstration of a Deity is the impressions of infinite Power stampt up∣on his Works; those Rhetorical Figures sprinkled in the Book of Providence, which render the Contents of it more illustrious, the divine Eloquence of it more august and specious: For as in humane speech, the moderate and de∣cent aspersion of new and unusual words add a splendour to it; so Miracles add a grace to the divine Eloquence and an Emphasis to that discourse, God entertains the World with, while he speaks to it by the Dumb Creature. [Si∣cut humana consuetudo verbis, ità divina potentia etiam factis loquitur; & si∣cut sermone humano, verba nova, vel minus usitata, moderate, & decenter asper∣sa, splendorem addunt: ita in factis mirabilibus, quodammodo luculentior est di∣vina eloquentia.] (August. ep. 49. quest. 6.) In which strain the God of Isra∣el, the Father of the blessed Jesus, hath as far out-stript all other pretenders to Divinity and Authors of Religions; as the Feates of the Artillery Garden are exceeded, by the wisest Stratagems of the greatest Captains; the products of a Wheel-wright, by Archimedes his Engines; A blind mans catching an Hare by chance, by the success and Achievements of Diana and her Quire of Huntresses: or, Don Quixots Windmill engagements, by the Exploits of Caesar; or the Sorcerers Serpents, by that of Moses; which if we compare to∣gether, we shall find the stupendious Effects wrought by the Heathen Gods, to have been, 1. So few as an hundred of those Deities may be allowed to club for the production of one Miracle: though no greater than the swelling of a Lake, while the Romans besieged the Vejentes, [Exoptatae victoriae iter miro prodigio Dii immortales patefecerunt.] (Val. Max. 1. 6. 3.) a multitude of Gods are fain to joyn hands to open this light door; What is this in compa∣rison of the way through the red Sea? No less than two durst venture to cast the scales, at the Regil-lake, on the Romans hands, when their Army
and the Tusculancs were so equally pois'd, as neither would give one foot back. It was as much as two of them could do, and (that on horse back,) to bring P. Vatinius word to Rome, in a whole day, of King Perses his over∣throw, in Macedonia. Briefly, put together all the miracles, that Authors of any credit have father'd; upon all their Gods, or have reported to have been done in their names: and the Miracles wrought by Moses alone in the Name of the God of Israel, to prove that he was his Messenger, the Mi∣racles wrought by Christ alone, in his own Name and Person, to prove that he was the eternal Son of Israels God: the Miracles wrought by St. Peter a∣lone, in the name of Christ, to prove his Masters Resurrection, and his own Delegation, will far out-vie them. Nay, the after gleaning of Christs Mi∣racles, I mean those which were wrought at the Memories of Martyrs, as low as the third and fourth Centuries, are more than the whole Vintage of Pagan Prodigies; deposited in Authors of undoubted credit, as in Barnes (Cypriani tract. 1. cont. Demetrianum) [O si audire eos velles & videre, quando à nobis adjurantur & torquentur spiritualibus flagris & verborum tormentis de ob∣sessis corporibus ejiciuntur: quando ejulantes & gementes voce humanà & pote∣state divina flagella & verbera sentientes, venturum judicium confitentur. Veni & cognosce esse vera quae dicimus. Et quia sic Deos colere te dicis, vel ipsis quos co∣lis crede, aut si volueris & tibi credere, de teipso loquetur audiente te, qui nunc tuum pectus obsedit, qui nuno mentem tuam ignorantiae nocte caecavit. Videbis nos rogari ab eis, quos tu rogas, timeri ab eis, quos tu times, quos tu adoras: vide∣bis sub manus nostras stare vinctos, & tremere captivos quos tu suspicis & veneraris ut dominos. Certe vel sic confundi in istis erroribus tuis poteris, cùm conspexeris & audieris Deos tuo's, quid sint, ad interrogationes nostras statim prodere & prae∣sentibus licèt vobis praestigias & fallacias suas non posse caelare. So plentifully was this sweet and powerful savour of the Ointment of Christs Name pou∣red out, in the Age of St. Austin; as that Learned Father, having (in his Book de vera Religione) given Reasons, why Miracles were not then so fre∣quent as formerly, lest he might thereby be understood to deny that the Church retain'd the gift of Miracles in his time: upon second thoughts, dares not commit that Tractate to the hands of Posterity, without this a∣nimadversion upon it (in the unparallel'd Books of his Retractations, (lib. 1. cap. 13.) I argued indeed (saith he) in that Book (of the true Religion) that the Pagans had no reason to expect Miracles now: but I never affirmed, that no miracles are wrought now; for, even then when I writ that Trea∣tise, I knew a blind man who was cur'd at Millain, and several others: nay there are now so many Examples of the like miraculous Cures wrought in these times, as I cannot possibly know them all; and yet I know more than I am able to reckon up. And the same Father (epist. 137.) tells us, that at the memory of St. Felix at Nola, Miracles were then so usually wrought by Invocation of Christs Name, as he purposed thither to send Boniface, (a Priest of his Church) and one who accused him of Incontinency; the one firmly attesting, the other as peremptorily denying; conceiving that though in Africa, where no Miracles were wrought. (A thing which he wonders at, see∣ing that Climate abounded more with Religious persons, than Italie; and I wonder as much at his wondring; for that which he alledges as the reason of his astonishment, was the reason of the thing he admires, and therefore should have put a stop to it, because Italy swarm'd more with Pagans than those parts of Africk, therefore was that power of working Miracles continu∣ed there; Tongues, and all other supernatural Gifts, being not for those that believe, but for Infidels.) One of them might persist in their lie against Conscience: yet that the reverence of the very place, where the power of Christ had been so manifestly seen, would extort from them the confession of the Truth. To which he was encouraged, by what had happen'd at Millan, in the like case; where a Thief, who strongly denyed he was guilty of a Theft that was laid to his charge; when he came to the Church, there to swear in the presence of that God, in whose Name so many Miracles had
been wrought in that very place, durst not swear as he had boasted he would, but confessed the Fact, and restored the goods he had stoln. Before I close this point, I will give one Instance more, of the multitude of Miracles wrought, for the Conversion of one peevish Heathen, reported by this great Light of the Church, who for Learning, Judgment, and Integrity, deserves more credit, than the whole Tribe of Pagan Scriblers, who (in his 67. Epi∣stle) gives this account of the Conversion of Dioscorus the Architheater. It was not like that this mans stiff neck would be bowed, nor his petulant Tongue tamed without a Prodigie; It pleased God therefore to smite his only and exceedingly beloved Daughter, with a dangerous sickness, of whose recovery, without Miracle, he despairing, implores the aid of Christ, promi∣sing if he might see his Daughter restor'd, he would embrace the Christian Faith, his request is granted, his Daughter recovers, but he procrastinates the payment of his vow: he hath not long seen her restored to health, when Christ retracts the benefit, and strikes him blind. He vows, the second time, to become a Christian, if he might recover his sight: he obtains his sute, regains his sight, and sets forward toward the receiving of Baptism: but they could not get him to learn the Creed, till he is surprized with such a Palsey, as deprives him of the use of his Tongue: upon this he betakes himself to his Pen, and writes the Confession of his former Hypocrisie, and subscribes to the Confession of the Christian Faith: upon which he is resto∣red to the use of his Tongue, and to perfect health. I am perswaded, up∣on an impartial search, here are more indications of a Supernatural power made out, for the conversion of this one man, than ever God permitted all the Heathen Daemons to shew, in proof of all false religions: Of which perswasion I make no question but my Reader will be, by that time he hath well weighed this example, and studied an Answer to that Question of Ar∣nobius: To what purpose is it for the Defenders of the Pagan Impiety to shew one, or perhaps two, cured by Esculapius, when none of their Gods relieve so many millions, and all their Temples are throng'd with wretched, and unhappy Pati∣ents, who tire Esculapius himself with their Prayers, and invite him with their most miserable vowes to help them. [Quid prodest ostendere unum vel alterum fortasse curatos, cum tot millibus subvenerit nemo, & plena sint omnia miserorum infeliciúmque, delubra? qui Aesculapium ipsum precibus fatigare, & invitare miserrimis votis.] (Arnobius.) And that by that time I have laid down the rest of the differences, betwixt those which occur in prophane Authors, and those reported in the Sacred Scriptures, §. 2. 2. For as to the Miracles reported to have been wrought by the God of Israel (or by his servants in his name and power) they are repor∣ted with the greatest Evidence of Truth, that matters of Fact are capable of, (as hath already been demonstrated.) But the Prodigies, said to be done in confirmation of Paganism, labour under the burden of a very great suspicion, that they are (most of them) lying Miracles. Not one hath been found, among the various Sects of Christians or Jews, that ever question'd the Truth; those of the Old, those, of either Old or New Testament-relations, Though some of their Princi∣ples (had they seen the tendency of them) would have necessitated them to it. The Manichees, who denied the God of Israel to be the best and greatest God, did yet believe that the History of the Old Testament was true. The Sadducees, who denied the Existency of Angels or Spirits, yet owned the Books of Moses wherein the God of Israel is declared to be both great and good, by the merciful wonders he wrought, by the Ministry of Angels. The Arrians denied Christ to be the Eternal God, yet confest he did those stupendious works, which none but God can do (some whereof he profes∣sedly did, on purpose to manifest himself to be equal to his Eternal Father,) Monsters of men! they deny the Conclusions, and yet grant Premisses, most necessarily and demonstratively proving those Conclusions. But of all those
Pagan Writers, that have escaped the Teeth of time, and made mention of Pagan Prodigies; there is not one, but hath question'd the Truth of their own Legends, so far as by the diligent reading of them, I can find. To the many instances that have allready been produc'd in my First Book (Sect. 3. chap. 5. I shall here add the Censure of that Famous Critick Agellius, who (in his 9. 4. noct. Attic.) telling a story, how that upon his coming to Brun∣dusium, he heard a fellow crying Books, to whom he repairing, bought the works of Aristaeus Proconnesius, Isagonus Nicaeensis, Ctesias, Onesicritus, Polyste∣phanus, and Hegesius, Authors of great Authority (as he stiles them) and yet he calleth their Histories of such miraculous Accidents, as made most noise, and had been most universally believ'd, in the Age of Paganism, Books full of Miracles and Fables: out of which, repeating those that had best born up their credit unto his Age, he mentions none but such stories, (of men with one eye, of Pigmeis, &c.) as there is no man, vers'd in the Affairs of the World, but knows to be as meer Fictions, as any of the Poets Fables. And of that greatest of Humanists, Plutarch, who, in his Book de Pythiae oraculis, brings in Diogenianus suspecting that Apollo's Oracles were meer forgeries, because they were given out in such beggarly Verses; when he himself, upon whom they were father'd, was the God of the Poets, and in Eloquence did far ex∣cel Homer and Hesiod: and Boethus comparing those over-religious persons, who, in spight of their native Draught, would invert those Oracles into good and plausible Poetry, unto Pauson the Painter, who being hired to draw the Picture of an Horse tumbling on his back, painted one running; at which he storming who had fore spoke that Picture, Pauson turns the Ta∣ble so, as presented the heels of the Horse upwards: and Bio thus concluding that Argument: We ought therefore not to conclude they are good Verses because of Apollo's making; but that they are not of Apollo's making, because they are naught. To these I might add Herodotus, the Collector of all such strange stories, who gives his Reader a caution, not to be over hasty of belief, by his stiling his Books by the Names of the Muses, and by his frequent sorting such pas∣sages as that which he subjoynes to his stories of Rampsinitus: whosoever thinks them credible may believe them, (Euterp.) and that wherewith he concludes the disapparition of Zamolxis [ego autem de hoc neque non credo, neque valde non credo,] (Melpomene.) And Pausanias who in his Corinthiacis, makes the same of Aesculapius his raising of men from the dead (upon account whereof he was deified,) dwindle into the pittiful story, of his bringing Archias out of a Convulsion Fit, which took him as he was hunting: for which cure Archias bestowed Divine Ho∣nours upon him, and built him a Temple at Pergamus. But it would be endless to number particulars: and it may be enough to invalidate all strange Pagan Stories that the most antient and authentick History in the Gentile World (which was thought worthy to be hung up in Apollo's Temple (Hen∣ry Stephens Fragments of Stesichorus out of Athenaeus) the Homerial Histo∣ry of Troy, is confuted by Herodotus in his Euterpe. §. 3. 3. A great part of the Miracles father'd upon Demons, are manife∣stly mis-father'd; they are made gay with the Lambs-wool, and trick them∣selves with the Feathers, which the eternal Word of the ever-blessed God made to grow. For all forreign Miracles that have been delivered by indubita∣ble Tradition, and were really such as exceeded the whole power of the Creature, were not effected by those Heathen Deities, that bare away the praise of them, but the products of Israels God, To instance in the most eminent of them; Diod. Sicul. (Bib. 16.) reports that the Phocians (after they had rob'd the Temple of Delphos discumfited by the Beotians, 500 of them took Sanctuary in a Temple of Apollo; where by a fire by accident, they were all burnt alive, and the Temple it self consumed: had this been Apollo's doing (and not that Gods; who equally abhors Sacrilege, and such Idols as that sacrilege was committed against, he would, sure, in punishing the Sa∣crilegious,
have had a care of his own Temple: and not have punish'd it, with a greater Sacrilege than they committed. When the Ship, wherein the Mother of the Gods was, was brought from Phrygia, and was so stranded in Ty∣ber, as all the strength of Men and Oxen, that they applied thereto, could not make it stir; Claudia the Vestal Nun, being suspected of Incontinency, tying her Girdle to the Ship, and praying the Goddess, that if she were an immaculate Virgin, she would follow her forthwith, haled the Vessel to shore: this Virgins Statue, in memorial of this, was erected in Cybel's Tem∣ple, and stood firm and perfect upon its own base, after the Temple had been twice consumed with fire, (Livii 2. de bello Punico.) He must be wholly un∣acquainted with the Legend of this salacious Goddess, that can think she had any hand in vindicating the innocency of this Virgin; who her self was the veryest Strumpet and impure Drabb that ever liv'd, and whose Mysteries, wherein her story was represented, were so obscene, as common Harlots would have blusht to have such obscenities laid to their charge (Aust. de Civit. cap. 4. lib. 2.) as Cybeles Priests celebrated her memory with. It was not therefore through her procuration that Claudia's Chastity was thus miracu∣lously vindicated but by his Providence, who hath declared himself the Ad∣vocate of oppressed Innocency, that filthy Goddess was forc'd contrary to her own Genius, to follow the halings of that unjustly accused Vestal; who had made her appeal to the Tribunal of the Deity, generali complexione, in an interpretive and general sence, though she mist it in the application. (Gro∣tius de jure 2. 13. 12.) Quia quanquam sub falsis notis, generali tamen com∣plexione numen intuetur. The same only true God, who divides the Flames of Fire, protected the Image of Claudia, when the Temple of Cybele, where∣in it stood, was consumed with Fire, the Goddess not able to secure her own Image and sacred Utensils. The greatest part of the Victories the ancient Romans obtain'd, were im∣puted to the favour of this unclean Goddess; to whom thanks were return'd, when any notable and extraordinary emergent fell out, contributing to their advantage, (Val. Max. lib. 1. cap, 1.) [Matri Deûm saepenumerò Imperatores nostri, compotes victoriarum suscepta vota Possinuntem profecti solverent.] It is like that such a Deity who could not endure that any should touch her My∣steries, but Gelt Priests, would take care of the concerns of that Masculine State, and those virile Roman spirits? The Army, which Xerxes sent to burn and rifle Apollo's Temple, was de∣stroyed with Thunder, Tempest, and Stones rent by the Tempest (Diodor. Sicul. Bibl. l. 11. lib. 13.) The Athenians, having rob'd the Temple at Delos of ten thousand Talents, fail'd into Sicily, with 200 Triremes and an Army of a∣boue 40000 fighting men, where they were beset with those calamities, and so utterly overthrown, as not so much as one Vessel escap'd, nor not one man to tell those sad news. Brennus, making the like attempt, met with that o∣verthrow of his Army, as forc'd him, in a desperate mood, to fall upon his own Sword. The Romans, who at the taking of Carthage disrob'd the I∣mage of Apollo of its golden Vest, left their hands among the Fragments of the Image. [Acer sui numinis vindex Apollo;] Apollo severely vindicated his own Divinity, (saith Valerius Max. l. 1. c. 1.) But with what face could that pil∣fring God punish so severely that crime, whereof himself was more guilty than any man? If Apollo and Hercules be all one; as Macrobius▪ (in Sat. 1. 20.) affirms them to be: [Hercules quid aliud est quam , aeris spendor,] &c. And Porphiry confesseth (in Euseb. praep. 3. 4.) Briefly, for it would be an endless labour to enumerate all particulars; How could any of those miraculous castigations be inflicted upon impious persons, by those Gods, who as they never gave any precepts of virtue or pro∣hibitions of vice. (Vide Aug. de Civitat. 2. 4. tit.) [Quòd cultores Deorum nulla unquam a Diis suis praecepta probitatis acceperint, & in sacris eorum tur∣pia quaeque celebraverint.] & cap. 6. tit. [Deos Paganorum nunquam benè vi∣vendi sanxisse doctrinam,—nec nobis nescio quos susurros paucissimorum auribus
anhelatos, jactent, quibus vitae probitas castitásque discatur; sed demonstrantur lo∣ca talibus aliquando conventiculis consecrata: non ubi fugalia celebrarentur effusa omni licentiâ turpitudinum, & verè fugalia, sed pudoris, sed úbi populi au∣dirent quid dii praeciperent de cohibendâ avaritiâ, ambitione frangendâ, luxuriâ refrenandâ, ubi non discerent miseri quod dediscendum,] Persius increpat Satyra tertia:) dicatur in quibus locis haec docentium deorum, solebant praecepta recitari; sicut nos ostendimus ad hoc ecclesias institutas quaquà versum religio Christiana dif∣funditur:] That the Worshippers of false Gods did never receive any Precepts of virtue from their Gods; who in their Sacred Rites had all manner of turpitude represented. That the Gods of the Pagans never enacted the Doctrine of living well, are the Themes of two whole Chapters. Do not let them boast that some∣thing was whispered into the ears of some few teaching honesty and chastity; but let them shew the places dedicated to such meetings, not where the fugalia, full of all licentious filthiness, (fugalia indeed, for thence was all modesty exil'd) but where people might hear what the Gods commanded touching the prohibiting of ava∣rice, violence, ambition, or where they did not learn what must be unlearn'd (as the Satyrist checks them:) let them say in what places the Precepts of their Gods, teaching them virtue were wont to be publish'd, as we can shew Churches erected for this purpose wheresoever the Christian Religion is scattered. As these Gods, I say, never either commanded Virtue or prohibited Vice, and therefore could not, in common equity, punish mens transgressions before they gave out a law to the contrary,) so by their own Example, men were more instigated to all manner of lewdness, than, in all reason, they could expect they could have been deterr'd from, by the severest menacies of humane Lawes: [qua fronte notatur actor, si adoratur exactor,] How could they for shame punish those things in others, which they so far delighted to have charged upon themselves, as they compel'd the Romans, to erect those Scenical Playes in the honour of the Gods, wherein they are introduced as contaminated with the greatest and most barbarous Immanities imaginable; threatning, that the Pestilence that they were then afflicted with, should not cease, till those Playes were erected? [Diis exhiberi potentibus, & nisi fieret irascentibus, eorum admonitione dedice∣rant,] (Aug. de civ. 2. 11. 8.) and endeavouring by their own example to give divine authority to wickedness; moliuntur suo exemplo velut divinam authorita∣tem praebere sceleribus (de civit. 2. 24.) And taking more delight, to see their own Rapes, Incests, Murders, Sacrileges, &c. represented, than to be honou∣red with Sacrifices, as Labeo, a person well seen in the Laws and Antiqui∣ties of the Romans, attesteth. [Malos propitiari caedibus & tristibus supplica∣tionibus, bonos autem obsequiis laetis atque jucundis: qualia sunt, ludi, convivia, lectisternia.] Dr. Hammond (on Rom. 8. 20.) [not willingly, but by him that had subjected them:] that is, the Devil, who being worshipt by the Heathens, did by that means infuse into their worships all the villany in the world, made all unnatural sin part of their devotions; and so what they did, they did not willingly of their own inclination, but in obedience to this, , the Devil, who had gotten such authority among them, and kept them in this slavery of corruption, doing it at his command. In which kind of Celebrations of the honour of those Gods they esteem∣ed select and best, there was not one of them but was painted out, in those colours, as would put the most impudent man to the blush; except Janus, whom therefore (saith St. Austin) they painted sometimes with two, some∣times with four faces, either that they might conform him, in the Monstroci∣ty of his Body, to the rest, who were such Monsters in Soul: or that seeing the rest had lost their fore-head, and were grown past shame, by doing things and glorying to have things imputed to them, which they ought to have been ashamed of, they might hereby signifie, as by how much he was more innocent than they, he might so much more boldly hold up his face amongst them, and without shame reflect round upon himself. [Erubescenda perpetrando ami∣serant frontem: quanto iste innocentior esset, tanto frontesior appareret,] (Aug. de civit. 7. 4.) Can we think then, that such beastly Deities would be angry
with men, for imitating them: or impute those Revelations of wrath from Heaven against notorious impiety and unrighteousness, to them: who, as often as they were permitted, did countenance and abet, and encourage the World unto all Villany: by whose Oracles, Sacrifices, and Presages, as well as Examples, such as were the Bane of Mankind, were forwarded to the Ruine of their Countries, the mixing of sacred and prophane, and the com∣mitting more audacious outrages, than otherwise their own most barbarous dispositions would have prompted them to; (Euseb. lib. 4. cap.) tells us that of Carpocrates, that it was his avowed Doctrine, that there was no other way of escaping or appeasing the  worldly Princes,, but by pay∣ing them their dues, by all their  unnatural filthiness. The Ro∣mans may thank the prosperous Omens their Gods gave Sylla, for all his Cruelties; to whom, when he sacrificed, they gave such encouragements by the Entrails, as Posthumius, the Aruspex pawn'd his Head, (as Livy reports,) that whatsoever he had in his mind, the Gods would assist him to bring to effect: when such were his intendments, as, had they regarded Virtue, or the common good of Mankind, they ought rather to have forsaken their Altars, before which so impious a Wretch consulted; or at least have rebuked him, for entertaining such inhumane Councels, (St. Austin de civ. 2. 24.) Would such Deities punish vice, as could not appear in giving Testimony against the Adultery of Paris, the Perjury of Laomedon, in their destroying of Troy, but they must condemn themselves? (Aug. de civit. 3. 3.) [tit. non potuisse deos Paridis adulterio offendi quod inter ipsos traditur frequentatum.] Or if they had had a mind to express their displeasure against the greatest Debaucheries; they might have found greater provocations to it, among the Romans (their darlings) than in all the World beside, whose Founders were Bastards, Aeneas by Sacrilegious Incest of Venus, and Romulus of Mars, whose Judges, in passing Sentence; whose Juries, in giving in their Verdict, whose Vulgar in passing their Suffrages, minded nothing less than the observation of their Oaths. (Lucan. phars. 1.) Hine rapti fasces pretio, sectórque favoris. Ipse sui populus, letalis{que} ambitus urbi, Annua venali referens certamina campo. And lastly, such Gods as when they had a mind to protect the Innocent, or punish the guilty, could not, which Impotency they exprest by their tears, as Women and Children use to do, when they cannot have that Re∣venge which they seek. Thus the Image of Apollo Cumanus, when the Romans waged War against the Achaians, and King Aristonicus, was repor∣ted to have wept for the space of four dayes (Julius Obsequens, fragm. de pro∣digiis.) Thus the Image of Juno Sospita at Lariniunt (L. Aemilio Paulo. Cn. Balbo Pamphilo. Coss.); wept before a great Pestilence. Thus in the Civil Wars, Lucan brings in the native and houshold Gods weeping. Indigitos flevisse Deos, urbis{que} laborem Testatos sudore lares.— And therefore (as St. Austin well observes) Numa considering, that the Trojan Gods which Aeneas brought into Italy, could neitr preserve the Kingdom of Troy nor Lavinium from ruine, did wisely pde other Gods to be either the Keepers or coajutors of those, (de civitat. 3. 11.) We must then find another Father, for these miraculous punitive Accidents, even that God who hath both severely prohibited all un-natural Brutishness (in the Book of Conscience,) and all sin (in the Books of Sacred Scriptures) as that which he abhors and his pure Eyes cannot endure: and proportion'd his Menacies to the several degrees of Guilt, and of mens impenitencies, who therefore punish'd impiety against, and perjury, by the names of false Gods,
upon them that thought them Gods indeed; not for what they did, but for what they thought: to wit, that those Temples, which they rifled; those Statues, which they disrobed, had the spirits of the living Gods dwelling in them; that those Idols, by whom they sware, had Ears to hear, and Eyes to see, and Hands to revenge; and yet they would venture upon their displea∣sure. [punitur, quia tanquam deo fecit:] The Sacrilegious person is punish'd, though he rob that that is not God, because he doth it unto that, he thinks is a God saith Seneca. (de Ben. 17. 7.) [Opinio illum sua obligat paenae:] his opinion makes him obnoxious to punishment. It is St. Jeroms opinion (in Daniel 6.) [Quamdiu vasa fuerunt in idolio Babylonis, non est iratus dominus (videbantur enim rem dei secundùm pravam quidem opinionem, tamen divino cultui consecras∣se) postquàm autem humanis usbus divina contaminant, statim paena sequitur post sacrilegium.] God was not angry while the Sacred Vessels, that were taken out of his Temple, were in the Idols Temple of Babylon, (for they did as it were, con∣secrate the things of God to a divine use, though according to a false opinion;) but after that the things consecrate were prophan'd by a common use, punishment immediately followed that Sacrilege: And St. Austin's saying: [Et qui per la∣pidem jurat, si falsum jurat, perjurus est: non te audit lapis loquentem sed punit Deus fallentem.] The Calf which was cut in twain, when the King of Ba∣bel took an Oath of the King of Judah, and made him pass through the parts of it, was divided and laid in twain by Nebuchadnezzar's Priests, was on his part a Sacrifice to the Gods of Babel, for he that administred the Oath, was to divide and lay the Calf in parts; between which he that made Oath was to pass: as is manifest in that adorable instance of Gods condescen∣tion; that Abraham should take him sworn, (Gen. 15. 9.) The whole Ce∣remony in this Form of Swearing, will be best conceiv'd, by comparing this Text with two passages in Livy: [Tu Jupiter ita illum ferito ut ego hunc porcum:] (lib. 1. pag. 15.) [Deos precatus, ita se mactarent quemadmodum ipse agnum mactasset, lib. 21.] (and perhaps on the King of Judahs part:) yet the God of Israel calls it his Oath, and the Covenant which was made before him, (Jer. 34. 18. Ez. 17. 19.) and threatens to avge the breach of it, by a judgment sutable to that form of words was used in that form of swearing [Let God divide or scatter me, as this Beast is divided, betwixt whose parts I pass,] I will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, that have not performed the words of the Covenant, which they made before me, (, Sept. bis.) when they cut the Calf in twain and passed between the parts of it; to wit, the Princes of Judah and of Jerusalem, which passed between the parts of the Calf. I will even give them for meat, unto the Fowles of Heaven and the Beasts of the Field. Ver. 17. I will give them to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth, Sept. , for a dispersion: the very curse they invocated upon themselves, in case of Perjury. Our English makes it doubtful whe∣ther the Jews or Babylonians divided the Calf, but yet the mentioning of the Jews passing through the parts of it in the 19 verse, without that other circumstance, the dividing of it, and the Translation of Junius and Trem. [quum transiverunt inter dimidiatas partes ejus vituli, quem dissecuerant in Duo] plainly divides those actions between the Babylonian and the Jew, and then the Septuagints , parallel to Virgils Cùm faciam vitulâ— The Calf which they Sacrificed will clearly infer my other Observation, that the Calf was at least reputatively a Sacrifice; now a Sacrifice to the true God it could not be, as being not offer'd in the Temple, into which it was not lawful for the Gentiles to enter; and sure the Babylonians were present at the King of Juda's taking the Oath in this form. To proceed to such in∣stances as Pagan records mention, Cleomenes in a fury divinely inflicted, kil'd himself; whether this judgment befell him, for his inhumanity towards sup∣pliants, (as the Argives) or for violating Orgades, a Region consecrate to
the Eleusine Gods, (as the Athenians;) or for corrupting Apollo's Interpreter (as the Delphians interpreted it,) we can permit them to dispute: but that their Apollo inflicted this madness upon him, who himself conspired with him, the death of the innocent Demaratus, by giving out lying Oracles; or at best connived at his Prophetess Sacrilegious complying with Cleomenes; is as far from all likelihood of truth, as that Oracle was. The Megarenses, after they had prophan'd the Land which belonged to the Eleusine Gods, never en∣joy'd good days, neither could they by any means mitigate the anger of those incensed deities, saith the same Author, (Pausanias, Laconicis.) Had those Gods inflicted upon them that punishment of their Sacrilege, their wrath would certainly have been appeased, upon their applying themselves to them, in so supplicant a way, (as Israels Gods was towards the repenting Ninevites) clemency to the penitent, being so essential an Attribute of good Spirits as Plato (in Phaedro) ascribes it to the deified soul of Helena, whose anger con∣ceiv'd against Stesichorus, for his invectives against her, was expiated by this short Palinody,— &c, This discourse is not true; nei∣ther didst thou ever come at Troy. In order to his making this Recantation, he was inform'd by the Muses, that he had offended Helena, (a favour which they would not do for Homer) saith Plato, (in the fragments of Stesi∣chorus, put out by Henry Stephens.) Nay Pausanias affirms, that Helen sent him word of her displeasure, on purpose that he might attone her: so propense to mercy are deified Souls in the judgment of sober Antiquity! how much more the Deity it self! (Pausanias, Laconicis.) Though as to this story of Stesichorus, Isocrates fathers his blindness upon his writing impiously of God, (Isocratis Busiris) upon whose Testimony we may rank him with Theopom∣pus and Theodectes, who (as Demetrius told Ptolomy) were struck blind, for inserting some Sentences of the Law of Moses into their prophane Writings. (Joseph. Anti{que} Jud. lib. 12. cap. 2.) And verily if we may judge of Hercu∣les by his foot, of that Poem of Stesichorus by the Fragments remaining, He∣lena had no cause to be angry with the Poet: for there is nothing extant of his works relating to her, but what is in her commendation; as that in the Scholiast on Euripides, where Stesichorus is said to have represented Hele∣na: in such an admirable form of Beauty, (the only thing wherein she pri∣ded her self) as when the incensed people did but cast their eyes upon her face, they let fall out of their hands, the stones they had taken up to fling at her. (Stesichori carmina:) Whether in his Story of the Suns putting it self into a golden Cap, and descending down through the Ocean into the infer∣nal World, to visit his Virgin-wife and dear Children, he hath not perver∣ted the Sacred Story of the Suns shadow going back on Ahaz his Dial, and the Prophecy of the Virgin-birth, I leave to the judicious to determine, after they have perused that Fragment of his in Athenaeus. But I digress—These Examples show that the wisest of Heathens accounted the true God to be the avenger of Impiety. §. 4. Unto the same head are to be referr'd those miraculous effusions of the divine Goodness upon some Gentile Nations, who were less brutified, and better moralized than others, and retain'd a Reverend, though erroni∣ous Opinion of the Deity. The Observation of Valerius Maximus, (cap. 1. tit. 8.) is in Hypothesi very sound. [Non mirum igitur, sipro eo augendo im∣perio, custodiendóque pertinax divina indulgentia semper excubuit: quod tam scru∣pulosa cura, parvula quo{que} momenta Religionis examinare videtur: quia nun∣quam remotos ab exactissimo cultu ceremoniarum oculos habuisse nostra civitas ex∣istimanda est.] It is no wonder that God should work wonders for the safeguard and encrease of those Empires, that are strictly Religious and scrupulous of the least matters touching the Worship of God: though he, and his unthankful Countrymen, mist it, in ascribing that indulgence, in the lap whereof the an∣tient Romans were dandled, unto the Roman Gods, imputing their prospe∣rity to the favour of those Gentile Deities, who favour'd nothing less than
Virtue and Innocency, of which every Act was an upbraiding of those beast∣ly Gods, upon their embracing of whom, that State degenerated into a con∣formity to them, in Epicurism, Uncleanness, Cruelty, Perjury, and all that Debauchery they learn'd of those Gods: before their reception of whom, the Roman Nation was both better manner'd, and more successful. Before they had any of those Gods to swear by: in those Heroick Times of Rome, when their Kings word, or consent to a proposal, exprest by the dumb shew of lifting up his Scepter, (perhaps of Hazel) would more oblige him to keep his Promise, than the most sacred Oathes could tie their Posterity, [Heroicis temporibus sceptrum erectum pro regum jurejurando valuisse notatum,] Aristot. 3. polit. 14) When, what the Orator flatteringly said of C. Caesar. (Orat, pro Deiotaro.) a mans right hand (not stretcht out to Jupiter or any of his Fel∣low-Gods but) to Heaven, the habitation of the true God, gave a greater testimony of its strength, in plighting troth, and forcing him that held it up, to keep his promise; than by handling the Martial Sword. When the im∣presses of a Deity, and innate Principles of Honesty did so ballast their heart, as they naturally so far abhorr'd an impious or uncomly act, as their Word was better than the Bond of their degenerate Off-spring: and that infant, in∣nocent Age of Rome, render'd the generality as reverable for Virtue, as was that Grecian, of whom Tully (pro Cor. Bal.) tells this lovely story. [Athe∣nis aiunt, cùm quidam apud eos qui sanctè & graviter vixisset, & testimonium pub∣licè dixisset (ut mos est Graecorum) jurandi causa ad aras accederet, unâ voce om∣nes Judices, nè is juraret, reclamasse.] It needs not the Panderage of Rhe∣torick, to obtain for it, the attention of rightly affected ears: I will there∣fore turn this Story after my wont into this plain English. A certain Gre∣cian, who had lived an holy and grave Life, being brought in to give testi∣mony, in a case depending, and in order to his taking his Oath, making his approach to the Altar (as their manner is) was with the general vote of the Judges dispenc'd with in that Ceremony, they conceiving that the Gravi∣ty of his Life added weight enough to his bare Word. Rome never expe∣rienc'd the industry of Fate, the indulgence of our common Father more, than during her Infancy: while she went in her Mothers hand, and scarce stirr'd from her side: [prima aetas, & quasi infantia, qua circum matrem suam luctatus est cum finitimis, quam habuit sub regibus septem, quadam fatorum in∣dustrià, tam variis ingenio, ut reipublicae ratio, & utilitas postulabat. Nam quid Romulo audentius? tali opus fuit ut invaderet regnum: Quid Numa religio∣sius? Talem res poposcit, ut ferox populus Deorum metu mitigaretur. Quid il∣le militiae artifex Tullius? bellatoribus viris quam necessarius, ut accueret vir∣tutem ratione? quid aedificator Ancus, ut urbem coloniâ extenderet, ponte junge∣ret, muro tueretur. Jam vero Tarquinii ornamenta & insignia quantam principi populo addiderunt, ex ipso habitu, dignitatem? actus à Servio census quid effe∣cit, nisi ut ipsa se nosceret respublica?] (Elori proeem & lib. 1. cap. 8.) When (I say) it was thus with them in point of Virtue: it was best with them in point of Prosperity: while they lived tollerably up to the Light of Nature, they were more indulg'd, as to the concerns of this Life, even by the God of Israel, than his own people were, when they frowardly walk'd contrary to the Light of Grace. Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisq. Ennius. Plutarch, in his Treatise of the fortune of the Romans, moves this Questi∣on; Whether Virtue or Fortune had the greater hand, in elevating the Ro∣mans, to that stupendious height? and resolves it thus: That they joyned hands, and by united forces raised that famous Structure. [Equidem hoc rectè opinor censere, fortunam & virtutem ad tanti compagem imperii at{que} poten∣tiae tantae structuram, pace composita, coivisse; humanorúmque operam pulcherrimam communicatis operis absolvisse.] in the building whereof, that those that were emploied, were both instructed with all kind of Virtue, and in most of their
affairs aided by Fortune, he demonstrates in the sequel of that Discourse. [Quem qui machinati sunt, eos & omni virtute instructos, & à fortuna plurimis in rebus, adjutos fuisse, &c.] (by fortune he means, not that blind versatil Chance of the Epicureans, but that all-seeing and Judicious Sister of Justice, and Daughter of Providence.) [Non incerta qualis apud Pindarum, sed quae rectius dicitur justitiae & suadae soror, ac providentiae (siquidem ea est Prometheia) filia: quomodo genus ejus Alcman. describit. This he introduceth, conducting Romulus, Numa, Servius Tullius, &c. and following those incomparable per∣sons, for Heroick Virtue, the Fabricii, Camilli, Lucii, Cincinnati, Fabii, Marcelli, Scipiones, Caius Marius; Mutius Scaevola, M. Horatius, &c. From this ancient Roman Gallantry when that Commonwealth degenerated, its Affairs went so backward, as Livy complains thereof, and that upon that account their History was so interrupted, as nothing could certainly be known touching the state of those Times, [Sed quid in his refert immorari quae certi nihil habent? cum & res Romanorum perierunt, & confusi commentarii sint ut Livius narrat.] The same Observation Florus makes. [Ut ad constituendum ejus imperium virtus & fortuna contendisse viderentur: Florus.] So that to the constituting of that Empire virtue and fortune seem to have striven which of them should contribute most. §. 5. Unto the same supreme Cause must be referr'd those manifest mi∣raculous growths of some Kingdoms, conferr'd by the God of Israel, in or∣der to the accomplishment of the Oracles of his own Prophets. That wonderful success, which Nebuchadnezzar's Arms found in Aegypts Conquest, though he ascribed it to his Gods, was given him by the true God, in pursuit of making good the Menacies of his Prophets, against that Nation. I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar, my servant, and will set his Throne upon these stones, that I have bid (at the entry of Pharaohs house) and he shall stretch his Royal Pavillion over them, and I will kindle a fire in the houses of the Gods of Aegypt, and he shall array himself with the Land of Aegypt and he shall go forth from thence in peace, (Jer 43. 10.) Cyrus his victorious arms over Chaldea and the circumjacent Countries were born up upon the wing of that Prophecy, which named him an 100 years before he was born, (Isa. 43. 28.) in order to the fulfilling whereof (Isa. 44. 1, &c.) Gods right hand upheld and strengthen'd him, to subdue Nations before him. God loosed the Loines of Kings, and open'd the two leaved Gates before him: he went before him, made the crooked places straight, brake in pieces the Gates of Brass, and cut in sunder the Bars of Iron. It was not the Heroes of Media, Persia, Assyria, whom he so religiously supplicated, and so devout∣ly thank'd, but that God of the Jews, whom he knew not then, but at last acknowledged his hand to have been alone, in all thosegrand Transactions. As Nebuchadnezzar also understood not, who that God was, that had done such great and marvellous things for him, till convinc'd (by the deliverance of the three Children) he proclaimes to all the World, that their God is he, that had shewed signs and wrought wonders towards him, &c. (Dan. 4. 2. 3.) Daniel had prophecyed of Alexander the Great, that he should be Mighty, and do according to his Will, (chap. 11. 3.) when God raised him up against the Persians, to destroy that Empire, and he had no other way thither, the Pamphylian Sea open'd to him and his Army, as the Red Sea had done to Moses, (Joseph, Jewish antiq. l. 1. cap. 7.) This Story saith Josephus is mention'd by all, that write the Acts of Alexander. §. 6. In order to the punishment of other Nations, God frequently does, as it were by Miracle, advance some one Nation, perhaps no better than the rest. The Assyrian was the Rod of Gods anger, and the Staff in his hand, that that sustain'd him was Gods indignation; though he thought not so, but triumph'd over the God of Israel, as one of those feeble Idols that was not able to defend his own Territories, any more than the Gods of Calno,
Carchemish, Hamath or Arpad. (Is. 10. 5, 11.) In which case, the wicked may oftentimes devour the man thats more righteous than himself, (Hab. 1. 12.) And when that Nations sins are brim full, and Gods whole work done, for which God raised it up, some of those subdued Nations are raised up, (by no less a Miracle) out of the Grave, out of the ashes, to bringdown that stout heart, and avenge the blood he hath shed. Thus Greece was stirred up for the Ruine of the Caldean Empire, and Rome for the destruction of the Gre∣cian; in all which great and stupendious Mutations of States, the strange ac∣cidents that fall out, are the Effects of divine Vindicative Justice, though each Nation, for whose raising they were wrought, conceiv'd them to have been the Fruits of the Favour of their Idol-Gods. It was an higher wisdom than Minerva's, that managed the affairs of Athens: the Lord of Hosts, not their God of War, that put courage into the Spartans. The unknown God, not any of their Tutelars, that made them great, and arm'd the Sons of Greece against the Bratts of Babel: all the wonders of that age (reported by Thu∣cidides, and Diodorus Siculus,) and of the next Empire, (reported by Dion, Dionysius, Livy, &c.) were the Operations of his hands, that only doth Won∣ders; that sets up the low Tree, and brings down the high Tree, by ways past finding out, Judgments unscrutable, either as to Methods or Cau∣ses. §. 7. Lastly, if at any time the World hath been so equally pois'd, in respect of the Virtue or Vitiousness of her several Inhabitants, as it seemed not good to vindictive Justice, by extraordinary impulses, or incanonical courses of his Providence (as St. Austin calls Miracles) to animate one Nation to a∣venge its quarrels upon another: By what prodigious accidents hath God made the Empires that then were in Being or arising, conspicuous, in order to the preservation of the general Peace, and that the whole Earth might sit still and be at quiet. Melanchon (in his Epistle Dedicatory to Carions Chro∣nicle) tells us, that Philip Prince Elector Palatine was wont to say, that in reading the History of the World, he all along observ'd manifest Testimonies of the Divine presence in the constitution of Monarchies; because it was im∣possible they could be erected, or continued, by Humane strength: and were to that end appointed by God, that they might be keepers of humane So∣ciety, the Umpirers of Difference among the Nations of the World, the pre∣servers of the Laws, Judgments, and Peace, &c. The truth is, it is a Miracle of it self, that wheresoevet the Order of ruling and obeying hath once been received, it remains for ever; that some or other form of Government should be embraced all the World over; That some Forms should last so many Ages, in some certain Countries: as the Regal, among the Assyrians, Ae∣gyptians, Francks, &c. This would not be if God had not a peculiar care of them, and gave ma∣nifest tokens of that his care; by his wonderful erecting of them by mean persons (in respect of such undertakings) such as Cyrus, Alexander, Julius Caesar, made famous by nothing, but Gods signal owning of them, in his giving them success beyond their own expectation, and the natural accom∣plishments of Unity, Power and Policy: and by his furbishing and setting a new gloss upon the splendour of his own Creature, when at any time (through length of time) it was grown obsolete: and in some places fixing a standing badge, of an honourable discrimination of them from others, upon the persons of the chief Governours, as that wonderful gift of healing, otherwise incurable Maladies, by a touch, intail'd upon our Kings. Instances of that other way of Gods setting occasional Remarks, upon his own great Ordinance, when it grows into contempt, occur every where in History. God choosing rather to work Miracles (and permit the Devil for the present to carry away the honour of them) than to let the Grandeur fall of that Or∣der which he had set in the World. He the God of Order (as St. Paul calls him) that supreme God who rules the World, to whom there is nothing up∣on
earth more acceptable than Councils and Societies of men rightly associate (Cicero som. Scipion.) whose Providence is as much seen in the erecting of Em∣pires, as in framing the World. [Itaque praesens disputatio Romae magnam suspiciendamque conciliabit dignitatem si de ea id quod de terra, mari, caelo, si∣derihus solet fieri, disquirimus: fortunam ne an providentiam authorem habeat?] (Plut. de for. Ro.) God erected the Roman Empire, saith Plutarch (de for. Rom.) [Ut omnibus hominibus conceret vestam, re vera, sacram & beneficam, ac stabile retinaculum, & elementum sempiternum, & quod rebus fluctuantibus at∣que sublabentibus anchora esset, (ut cum Democrito loquar.) Alexander's Em∣pire being faln into pieces, the fragments of it (like the first Qualities in the Chaos,) never ceas'd clashing, and putting the World into combustions, and continual changings, (while each of his Successors sought to be that, which not any one of them was, Lord Paramount, like the Cyclops in Euri∣pides, , A confused rout, where none minded nothing that no body said; till the Majesty of Empire becken'd to them to keep silence,▪ till Rome having attain'd to a Consistency, and constringing in it self as well the neighbouring as foraign and transmarine Kingdoms; the great affairs of the World obtain'd a firm basis, whereon to lean and rest, and were laid to sleep in the bosom of that Empire: For the erecting of the Roman Empire (Polib. l. 1.) It was a won∣der to see how Fortune made all the Affairs of the whole World lead one way, and incline to that one point, . The Hebrews had a Proverb, [Nisi potestas publica esset, alter alterum virum deglutiret:] (Chrysstom de statuis 6.) If it were not for Governours we should lead a more wild life than wild Beasts, not only biting, but devouring one another: (Livii l. 26.) [Respublica incolumis & privatas res salvas facile praestat, publica prodeundo tua nequicquam serves.] It is not at all strange then, that that God, whose Phi∣lanthropie, is so apparent, should for the maintenance of this common good, do such strange things, as made the Gentiles conclude the persons of Princes to be Sacred, [regium nomen, gentes, quae sub regibus sunt, pro deo colunt (Q. Curtius.) Artabanus Persa: (apud Plutar. in Themistocl.) . Among our many and good Laws, this is the best, That we reverence and honour the King, as the Image of God, who preserves all things in safety. Though Gods using a standing Miracle to convince us hereof, who have the Example of the blessed Jesus, and the Injunctions of his holy Apostles to revere our Supream Governours, seems to be an up∣braiding us with that Proverb, The King of England is King of Devils: and speaks them to be right Devils incarnate, to have their Intellects blinded with malice, who, when the divine Clemency doth thus superrogate, in af∣fording us means of knowledge, yet cannot, will not see the Majesty of the Lord, visibly sitting upon his own Ordinance. Yet how the Rabble of Gentiles (who had not Reason enough, to see every mans private weal was imbark'd in the publick; nor Religion enough, to teach them, that the powers that are, are ordain'd of God,) those waves of the Sea, should be kept in order, and within their own bounds, is hardly conceivable, If he that rules the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the people, had not set them bounds, beyond which they must not pass, had not rayled in the Mount, the Majesty of Supream Authority (so as to make it unapproachable) by the Thunder and Lightning, the stupendious manifestations of Divine Power exerted, for the common behoof of Mankind, to beget and uphold, in the vulgar, an awe and reverence of that Order, under which they were Mar∣shal'd. And therefore whatever miraculous events, of that tendency, fell
out in the Age of Paganism, were not the operations of Pagan Gods (among whom there was not one, but he was a profest enemy to Mankind,) but of Israels God, the Creator and Conserver of the Universe, and upon that ac∣count are to be taken into the Christians bill of miracles. CHAP. XI. The Deficiency of false, the Characters of true, Mira∣cles. § 1. Heathen Wonders unprofitable. § 2. Of an impious Tendency. §. 3. Not above the power of Nature. § 4. Moses and the Magicians Rods into Ser∣pents. § 5. The Suns standingstill and going back. The Persian Triplesia. § 6. Darkness at our Saviours Passion. § 7. Christs Resurrection, the Broad-seal set to the Gospel. § 1. ANd for the rest of the reputed Miracles, that come not within the compass of these Rules that will not come over to us, as 1. being such as the Pagan Gods Genius was against; 2. Or such as the God of Israel rewarded the Morality of Heathens with; 3. Or such as he foretold he would do in Heathen Nations, for the Discipline of his own people; 4. Or such as he wrought for the punishment of those Nations, whose sins were ripe: or 5. Such as were of tendency towards the erecting or maintaining of Order in the World. For the rest, (I say) we can easily and freely let who will father them, without impeachment of our Gods Prerogative; as having a threefold Mark of differenee from true Miracles stampt upon them. 1. They are as to their immediate Effect useless. 2. As to their Tendency impious. 3. As to their Nature deficient. 1. Miracles reported to have been effected by Pagan Deities; or persons in league with them, as to their immediate effects were useless for the most part, and insignificant, producing nothing to the benefit or emolument of humane kind, comparable to what our Scripture-miracles con∣ferr'd. Pagan Jove, by keeping the Sun from rising, and making one night as long as two, gain'd only to himself the opportunity of a longer dalliance with Alcmena; putting the world in the mean time, to the irksome incon∣venience of an impatient waiting for the Morning-watch, and the torture of an imprisonment in their uneasie Beds. But our Jehovah, by keeping the Sun from going down, till one day grew to the length of two, gave his chosen People an opportunity of prosecuting their victory, to the extermination of his and their enemies. Orpheus went to Hell on a Bootless errand, and returned immerst in a double sorrow to that which he carried thither, being forc'd to leave his Euridice behind him, and putting her to the anguish of a second death. Aristaeus Procounesius, (Herodotus, Melpomene, brought nothing out of the other World (after seven years perambulation through it) but one pa∣per of Verses (stiled by the Grecians Arimaspaei, because therein relation is made of a Country, inhabited by men so called, who have but one eye in the midst of their forehead:) nor at the end of his second Translation (which lasted 262 years) did he return with any news, but this, that he was grown a God, dub'd Phaebus his Esquire, and (that he might keep pace with his swift footed Lord) was turn'd into a Crow. What gain'd Ceres either for the behoof of the World or her self, by her visiting the infernal shades, seeing her Daughter Proserpina chose rather to stay in the bosom of her Ra∣visher,
than return to her Mothers lap? Was the World any better for Her∣cules his haling Cerberus from Hell, and leading him up and down the Ar∣golican Cities: had he sold him to a Tanner, he might possibly have made so much of his Hide, as to have paid the Apothecaries Bill for the Ingre∣dients of that Bolus wherewith he intoxicated his three Heads and lull'd a∣sleep his six Eyes; but not to defray the trouble of his undertaking: where∣as his leading this Captive in triumph, had this only issue; that the scow∣ling Curr drivel'd his moody foam upon the Earth, and impregnated it with poisonfull Aconite, the only fruit of this Herculean Labour, if he had here v crified the Proverb, (, Herculean Labore, prover∣bially, Labour in vain, (Erasm. adag. chil. 3. Cent. 1. num. 1.) of labour in vain, his pains would have been less mischievous. And it had been better for humane kind, that a thousand Bastard-sons of Jove had faln into the jawes of inexorable Dcath, than that he should return from thence with such banefull spoiles; without compare betwixt his and those gifts our Jesus received for men, when he led Captivity Captive. The Memory of Ramp∣sinitus (Herod. Euterpe.) (a King of Aegypt, Successor to Proteus) his returning from Hell, and bringing thence spoiles, was universally celebrated, within the Memory of Herodotus: But the whole Legend of his atchievements, in that lower Region, amounts to no more but this; That while he remain'd there, he past his time in playing at Tables with Ceres: where, by the for∣tune of the Dice, sometimes winning, sometimes losing; The Goddess, at last staing a Wallet (it was that, I suppose, her Daughter was gathering flowers into, when Pluto ravisht her) lost it to Rampsinitus; who bearing away this prize, returns to the upper World, with one half of that blessing, which the Proverbial Promise; (of a grain'd Staff and a Budget) estates Spend-thrifts in. Abaris Hyperboreus was of that agility, as he could flie in the Air, as fast as an Arrow out of the Bow; which Arrow, when it came to a period of its bor∣rowed strength, he snatch'd into his hand, and flew with it round about the Globe of the Earth. I shall not (with Herodotus) laugh at the unlikelyhood of the Story, (for if there had been no other ground of that, but what he pitcheth upon, to wit, the impossibility of the Earth's Orbicularness, I could well digest it:) but only demand (with Origen in his Answer to Celsus (cont. Celsam l. 3. cap. 8. &c.) who introduceth those Examples to vie with the Blessed Jesus (and therefore I have instanc'd in them,) what profit came there of this miraculous Agility? What was the World better'd by those mens descending into Hades and returning thence? Did Abaris drop down any blessings upon the several Regions he took his flight over. Of all the Examples, introduc'd by Celsus, not one, but that of Zamolxis, was of any tendency toward the bettering of the World, or benefitting any single per∣son. He indeed, by etiring for the space of three years into a subterraneous house, which he built on purpose, to make the Scythians believe he had been so long dead; perswaded them into the belief of the Souls Immortality: but this was only Pious Fraud, no Miraculous disappearance, as Herodotus himself (Herodot. Melpomene) tells the story; and therefore vainly alledged by that half-witted Epicurean, to spare the labour of reckoning up more par∣ticulars. Agellius passeth this Censure, upon the Miracles reported, in the stories of Aristeas, Isigonus, Ctesias, Onesicritus, Polystephanus, and Hegesias; that though, when he first got them into his hands, he had thought he had got a prize: yet he grew weary of reading them, they being Writings impertinent and conducing nothing at all to the meliorating of mans Life (Noct. attic. l. 9. c. 4.) But now our Saviour (as Origen replies) at his Resurrection, bore away the Gates of Death, and the richest spoiles of conquer'd Hell, he in his 40 days Converse with his Disciples, betwixt his Resurrection and Ascen∣sion, entertain'd them not, with Fabulous Tales of Hyperborean Chimera's, but with Discourses touching the Kingdom of God. He, after his Ascensi∣on, gave gifts to men, poured down the gift of the Holy Ghost upon his A∣postles, impowring them with ability to cast out Devils, to heal the sick, to
cure the lame, to bless the blind with the gladsom benefit of sight, to give convincing testimony of their Master's Resurrection, &c. Briefly, Christs Miracles were beneficial to Mankind, even in their im∣mediate Effects; how many went from him rejoycing in the recovery, of their own health, of their limbs, sight, &c. in the restauration of their friends, from death to life? The Old Testament-Prophets indeed (sutably to the courser grain of that Dispensation) sometimes called Fire down from Hea∣ven, but Christs Miracles were all healing his very cursing the fruitless Fig∣tree, was advantagious to the owner, whose ground was hereby cleared of that, that did but cumber it, and takeup the room of a more fruitful Plant: there was [Nihil nocens aut noxium, sed opiferum, sed salutare, sed auxiliaribus plenum bonis, potestatis munificae liberalitate donatum:] (Arnobius contra gen∣tes, l. 1.) In Christs miraculous acts no harmful, no burtful, ingredients; all was healthful, helpful, full of relieving goods, and flowing from the largess of courteous Power. And the Apostolical Rod, (though it had its Prickles to let out impostum'd matter) budded Almonds, and brought forth fruit, for the healing of the Nations; being never inflicted, but in order to the saving of the Soul, by bringing down the Body: towards which if it was not avail∣able upon the persons, on whose backs it was laid, it was always of use, to∣wards the bettering of others. The Deputy gain'd spiritual, by Elimas his miraculous loss of corporeal Eye-sight, the Church learn'd to beware of Sacrilege, by the exemplary punishment of Annanias and Saphira; and if Hymeneus and Alexander, by being delivered to Satan, did not learn not to blaspheme; the Prints of the strokes of that Apostolical Rod could not but deterr others. Not one of all theirs or their Masters mighty Works was labour in vain, but accomodated to Humane use, to common Good, to the benefit of Mankind, even in their natural operations, and immediate products. § 2. 2. How much more advantagious were they to the VVorld, in re∣spect of their ultimate tendency and designed end? viz. to convince men of the Truth and Divine Original of a Doctrine, so every way suited to the procurement of all sorts of Happiness to Humane kind: a Doctrine, which (if observ'd,) would restore those golden Times, which preceded Astraeas Flight from the corrupt Earth; would have turn'd Devils into Men, and Men into Angels; so as Ideot-Christians, that are true to their Religion, are so far free from all Lust, Rapine, Injustice, &c. as they live at the rate of most per∣fect Priests; and exhibit in their Manners, that Gravity, Purity, Probity, and Simplicity, as is not to be found amongst the wisest of any other Sect (as Origen tells Celsus, (lib. 7. cal. 14.) and evidently declare the Author of so pious and just a Religion, to be the holy God, to all who have not lost all sense. It being impossible, that an enemy to Mankind should promote the embracing of a Doctrine so beneficial, either by revealing it, or confirm∣ing its Authority by the Seal of Miracles. (Origen. lib. 1. cont. Celsum.) But the design of all Pagan Miracles was, to bring into credit a Doctrine of ano∣ther tendency, to countenance such brutish Immortalities, as Humane Na∣ture, under the greatest degree of Debauchery, it can possibly degenerate into, would certainly have abominated; if they had not been commended to the VVorld by its Devil gods, and urged upon men, by lying VVonders, (Austin de Civit. l. 4. cap. 26.) Gods Ape, the old Serpent, scarce ever counterfeit∣ed his hand more dexterously, than in his practising upon T. Latinus, in or∣der to his sorcing him to acquaint the Senate, that it was the Divine plea∣sure to have the Scenical Games renewed: the story is mentioned by Cicero (de divinat. 1.) out of Fabius, Gellius, and Caelius, by Livy, Val. Maximus, A∣gellius, and Macrobius, viz. That the Games, in the first Day of their Cele∣bration, being profaned, by the execution of a Malefactor (the Gods for∣sooth, being displeased, to have the delight, they look in beholding those Games, interrupted by so sad a Spectaticle:) this Titus was warn'd in his
sleep, to go and tell the Senate, that they must begin anew their Celebration; he not daring the day after to communicate this Dream, as he was appoin∣ted, is the next night more severely charged; which he neglecting the per∣formance of, that day looseth his son by a suddain death; and being the third night threatned with suffering a more grievous punishment, in case he would not obey the Vision; and still not daring to tell the Senate, he himself fell into a sharp and horrible sickness: and then, by the advice of his friends, carried in his bed to the Senate, he acquaints them with the whole business; upon which he is presently restored to health, and walks home on foot as sound as a Roach: the Senate, astonisht with so great a Miracle, forthwith decrees the instauration of the Sports. Who, in his right wits (saith St. Austin) may not here see persons in vassalage to malig∣nant Daemons, compel'd by force to exhibit to such Gods such things, as in right Reason may be judged dishonest. For in these Games, which those Gods compell'd the Senate to restore, are repeated those flagitious Crimes, which the Poets father upon them: such as the veriest Wretch would blush to have laid to his charge; the Scenical Actors of those turpitudes of the Gods sparing neither filthy words nor actions; (Herod. Commod.) upbraid∣ing them (with a strange kind of lasciviousness) with the most foul and sordid Actions imaginable: and by those upbraidings and representations, insinu∣ating to the World the laudableness of the most dishonest Vice, as having the Gods for their Fautors, and cancelling at once all the Precepts of the Mo∣ral Philosophers; which if they had not been retunded by this basilick Ar∣gument (by counter-ballancing their Reasons with Divine Authority) might have bid fair for the civilizing of the World, and the ridding it of Barba∣rism and Devillism: [Magis intuentur quid Jupiter fecerit, quam quid docu∣erit Plato,] (August. dc civitat. lib. 2. 7.) [Exemplo suo velut divinam authori∣tatem praebere sceleribus] (Austin de Civ. 2, 25.) They designed hereby to give the face of Divine Authority to the most impious kind of Villanies. To the no less impious, though less frequent, secular Games, were the Ro∣mans invited, by a like Satanical Sign and lying Wonder, wrought upon the Children of Valesius Sabinus, (Vives in Aug. de civit. 3. 18.) who as he was offering Prayers and Vows, for his three Children, dangerously sick, even un∣to Death, heard a voice that assured him his Children should recover, if he would carry them up Tyber, at a full water, vnto Tarentum: and refresh them with (what they desired) warm water fetcht from the Altar of Fa∣ther Dis and Proserpina, Valesins thinking that the Oracle meant the City Tarentum (though that was a great distance from his Habitation, and had no passage to it by Tyber) in obsequiousness to the Oracle, Ships himself and his Children, and Sailes as far as Campus Martius: There, to ease the tedi∣ousness of Navigation, he brings his Children on shore; and desirous to kindle a fire, asketh the Pilot where he might fetch fire, from Tarentum (re∣plies the Pilot) a place hard by, where you see the Shepherds fires shining: he over-joy'd at the hearing of that name, conceives that must be the Taren∣tum, to which the Divine voice directed him: commands the Vessel to stear thither, and while he hasts to the City to buy an Altar, orders his men to dig a place, where he might erect it: they digging twenty foot deep, find there an old Altar, with this Inscription [To Dis and Proserpina.] The Fa∣ther, returning from the City, sacrificeth upon that Altar to those Infernal Deities, and three nights together (answering the number of his late sick, but now recovered, Children) makes Funeral Banquets to the Gods with Songs and Dances. With what strange obscenities those Games were celebrated, is more obvious, than that it needs be related. It is sufficient to evince the Diabolicalness of those seeming Miracles and therefore only seeming) that they manifestly tended towards the erecting of the Worship of infernal Fiends, to the robbing the one Supreme God, of that honour, thats his peculiar due: and to the introducing of most barbarous Immoralities into the VVorld. And therefore (being Seals set to a Law directly thwarting that Law of God
writ on the hearts of all men,) if they had more exactly counterfeited the Scal of Heaven than they did, may easily be deprehended, to be nothing else but feigned Miracles. § 3. This should have, at least, awaken'd the VVorld, to a more scrupu∣lous inspection and prying into them: and to have weighed them with those Sels which were set to the contrary Doctrine. In comparison with which, they would have been found if not lighter than vanity; yet at least wanting many grains weight of real Miracles; that is, productions by the God of Nature, above the power of Nature, and beside its ordinary Course. I insert this last clause into the description of a Miracle, to distinguish it from the Effects of ordinary Providence: which though they proceed from infi∣nite Power, yet are not Miracles, but issue from the natural order of Con∣version, Mutation, and Mutability of Bodies. The water (saith St. Austin de Trinit. lib. 3.) is poured ordinarily upon the earth: but when, at the Pray∣er of Elias after so long a serenity, when there was no appearance of a cloud, it was made to fall; this was the immediate effusion of Divine Power. God ordinarily makes the voyce of his Thunder to be heard, and sends out the Lightning from the bright Cloud: but when on Mount Sinai, after an un∣usual manner, those thundering voyces were sent forth, which did not make a confused din, but articulately sounded forth the VVill of God, this was mi∣raculous: who draws moisture, by the root of the Vine, to the Clusters, and by degrees ripens the Grapes; but God? who giveth the increase, while Man Plants and VVaters? But when, at our Lord's beck, VVater was turn'd into VVine by an unusual celerity; he must be a fool with a witness, who denies that to be a witness of a divine Power in him, who commanded and it was done. Earth is the common Matter, for the bringing forth and nourishing of all Plants, and of all Bodies of Animals; and who produceth these things from the Earth, but he that said to the earth, bring forth? But when, of a suddain, he turn'd the same Matter, out of Moses his Rod, into a Serpent; and back again out of that Serpent, into a Rod (immediately and in an instant) he wrought a Miracle, the things indeed were changable, but this change of them was unusual. Who but God cloaths the Shrubbs with Leaves and Blossoms? But when the Rod of Aaron blossom'd, the divinity did, after a sort, discourse with doubting Humanity. Who is he that giveth life to every living thing thats born, but he that gave life to that Serpent of Aa∣ron for an hour? Who restored to Bodies, when they were dead, their Souls; but he that animates flesh in the Mothers Womb, which is born to die? of the same common Matter, which subsists in the Elements, God produceth (in time, or ex tempore,) a Ram, or a Dove, who are of the same fleshy vi∣gour, at their coming in and going out of the World; whether they were made in an instant or by degrees, they are not of different constitutions: on∣ly that which was produced ex tempore, appeared after an unusual manner; but when those Creatures are brought forth, by a kind of continued Flux of sliding and remaining things, passing out of secret into open light, and out of light into obscurity, in the usual road, they are called natural, which same Creatures, when they are thrust in upon us (for our admonition) by an unusual mutability, are called Wonders. 2. And yet, it is not every unusual Conflux of those primordial, seminal Causes, towards the production of a thing into being, that makes a Miracle, for, (as St. Austin observes upon the story of the Aegyptian Magicians,) Ex. 7. de Trin. 3. cap. 8.) there are certain seminal Causes, hid in corporeal things (through all the Elements of the World) which Daemons may pick out (more easily than the cunningest Gold-finer can single parings of Gold out of heaps of Sand into one Mass) and make up into strange Effects; and of them produce new Species of things in a trice. [Omnis spiritus ales est mo∣mento ubi{que} sunt: volocitas divinitus creditus quia substantia ignoratur:] (Ter∣apol. 22.) But it is farther requisite (as I have exprest in the first Clause of
the Description) that it be a production, beside the Order of whole created Nature; such as cannot be educ'd out of the active Powers implanted in the Elements, nor their natural passive Powers, whereby they are made recep∣tible of any form by natural Motion. (Aquinas. sum. 1. quest. 115. 2.) [Prae∣ter virtutes activas naturales & potentias passivas quae ordinantur ad hujusmodi virtutes activas.] But out of a bare obediential Possibility, or Non-resistency of the Creature, whereby it throws it self at Gods feet, and becomes plia∣ble in the hand of Omnipotencie, to embrace any shape he is pleas'd to mould it into, by an act of Power, equivalent to that of creating, and edu∣cing forms out of the first Abyss of inform Matter. (Alensis. sum, 2. quest. 42. art. 5. memb. 5.) [ad opera miraculosa possibilitas tantùm secundùm obedientiam creaturae, de quo Deus potest facere quod vult—& est possibilitas pas∣siva.] Briefly and plainly, proper Miracles exceed Nature in a threefold de∣gree 1. As to the Substance of the Fact; such are the Glorification of the Bo∣dy, the Retrogradation of the Sun, &c. 2. As to the Subject wherein it is wrought, such are the restoring Life to the Dead, giving Sight to the blind, &c. Nature can cause Life, but not in a dead Body; can give Sight, but not to one that's blind: for there cannot be a natural recess from a total Privation to an Habit. 3. As to the Manner and Order of working, such is the restoring of Lame, the healing of Sick, the multiplying of Bread, Oyl, &c, in an unusual course, on a suddain, without applying natural Causes, &c. To the first of these Degrees the Pagan VVorld, never so much as pre∣tended. To the second, none ever attain'd, who pretended to act in the Name of any God, but the God of Israel. For all Pagan Stories, that commemo∣rate such Mutations, are either so manifestly fabulous, as they carry their condemnation on their foreheads, or else ascribe those strange Effects to Art; or, at least wise, impute them to the true Gods designing, thereby, to ren∣der the person that wrought them, more august and conspicuous in the VVorld, for a common good; as is manifest from the account which both Josephus, Suetonius, and Tacitus gives of Vespasian's curing a blind man. [Au∣thoritas & quasi majestas quaedam ut scilicet inopiniato & adhuc novo principi do∣ceat: haec quoque accessit, &c.] (Sueton. Vesp. 7.) Vespasian coming thus unex∣pectedly from a new Family to the Empire, wanted Authority, and as it were a kind of Majesty; but this also he obtain'd, by Omens and Prodigies. Suetonius indeed, siath, that the blind man was directed in a Dream by Serapis, to pro∣cure Vespasian to lay Spittle on his eyes (and it is no wonder, that an Alex∣andrian should fancy, that Serapis injected that motion into him; since the chief God in that Country went under that name) but that Serapis was so much as invocated by Vespasian, when he applyed himself to perform the Cure, is not in the least hinted, but rather the contrary implyed: not only in the Historians silence, as to Vespasians applying himself either to that or a∣ny other particular Deity, but from his mentioning that Alexandrian Dei∣tie's putting the blind man upon the business, who was to Vespasian a strange God, and therefore not to be invocated by him; and from his in∣troducing this, amongst other instances, as a subsequent to and an accom∣plishment of the Oracle of the God of Carmel, deliver'd to him (or at least commented upon) by Josephus. [Apud Judaeum Carmeli Dei Oraculum con∣sulentem, ita confirmavere sortes, ut quicquid cogitaret volveretque animo, quam∣libet magnum, id esse proventurum, pollicerentur, & unus ex nobilibus captivis Jo∣sephus—] (Sueton. Vesp. 5.) When he consulted the Oracle of the God of Carmel in Judaea, he was confirmed by this answer, That whatsoever he purpo∣sed and had in his thought, he should accomplish, though it were never so weighty, See my first Book, chap. 9. §. 8. The third and lowest Degree was the highest that the ambition of Hea∣then
Gods climbed to, that is, the introducing of a Natural Form, into a Subject naturally capable of it, in an unusual and extraordinary way. In which attempt how far the greatest VVonders they did came short of true Miracles wrought in the Name of Israels God; will be evident, if we com∣pare them, first, with such of this Rank which were done in the Name of the one true God: and secondly, out-vie them with those of the higher Formes, the second and first Degrees. § 4. To give them more than Huntsman's play: we will yield them more, than they can challenge by the evidence of their own VVritings, grant them a greater power than any Records, but those in the Churches custo∣dy, make mention of. Seek their Books from end to end, and all we find them say, as to this point of the exerting a miraculous power, amounts not to the one half of what Moses reports (Exod. 7.) That the Aegyptian Magici∣ans did, by their diabolical Inchantments, affront the Messenger of the high God in three of those VVonders, he did before Pharaoh; (the turning of Rods into Serpents, of VVater into Blood, and Slime into Frogs; by an im∣perceptible celerity) when he challenged Aaron to shew his Credentials, to make it evident by some Miracle, that the God of Gods had sent him up∣on that Embassie, which he delivered in his Name to the King of Aegypt. The Contest there was betwixt the God of Israel and the Gods of Aegypt, the Question to be Determined, whether of them were greatest? as is mani∣fest from Pharaoh's demanding, who that Jehova was, that sent to him to re∣lease the People of Israel (a People who owed their lives to Aegypt, for its sustaining them in the seven years Famine, and who had, by so long a pre∣scription, been Subjects to the Aegyptian Crown:) from his challenging Mo∣ses and Aaron to shew a Sign of their being Commission'd from a God, whom Pharaoh was bound to obey; and from his summoning the Magicians, that they (by invocating the names of the Gods of Aegypt) should doe the same VVonders, which Aaron (by divine appointment) was commanded to show, as Seals of his Mission from a more mighty (the Almighty God. We will grant (I say) that after so solemn an Appeal to Miracles, after the Litigants had here joyn'd issue, Janes and Jambres resisted Moses, and stood out a trial by three of the first Miracles. Neither will we retract with one hand, what we give with the other, as some do; who blame St. Austin for yield∣ing, that the Magicians did more than cast mists before the Spectators Eyes, even really turn Rods into Serpents, the Waters into Blood, and caused Frogs to swarm; for it is clear from the facred Text, that the Magici∣ans did the like to what Aaron did [ (the Hebrew word comes of . fecit. effecit, is used Gen. 1. 31. to express Gods making the World.) ,] not the like in appearance, but really, for they cast down every man his Rod, and they became Serpents, [ (the Hebrew word comes of  fuit; whence is derived the name Jehovah.) .] Calvin, from the Hebrew appellations given to these that withstood Moses, argues, that they only fascinated mens Eyes; and Aben Ezra will have  (which is render'd, in the Text, Sorcerer) to be no more than a Jugler, who transforms things in appearance only: but this is to make words fall out with the sentence, and bid defiance to the whole series of the discourse, and to turn the Emphasis of the divine Miracle, into a Plantasme too: for if their Rods were turn'd into Serpents, only in appearance; Aarons could not eat theirs, but in appearance only, as St. Austin argues: The Septuagint better under∣stood both the Matter of Fact, which was kept on foot as to the Circum∣stances of it long after their time (either by Oral Tradition, or in their Secu∣lar Records, as appears from St. Paul's naming the Ring-leaders of that Di∣abolical Crew which opposed Moses) and the importance of the Hebrew Phrase, than the whole College of the Rabbies; and they, to prevent all possible mistake through the ambiguity of words, stle the Actors, [,]
and the Inchantments they used, sometimes [,] sometimes [,] which though they be words of a middle signification, yet when they are taken in an evil sence, and applied to Magicians or Sorcerers, im∣ply the using of the Rites, and invoking the aid, of evil Spirits; being joyn'd in prophane Authors, with the most Diabolical of all the black Artists and Arts, Goetia, [,] (Polyb. apud Suidam,) and in Sa∣cred Writ among the most Capital Heathenish Abominations. Briefly, God permitted the infernal Powers to run the whole length of their Chain, in this Contest. But yet they cannot reach to the lowest Form of a real Miracle in these real Transmutations. For, 1. They only prepared the Matter, but did not introduce the substantial Form: that being the natural result from the last preparation of the Matter; so that Nature did the same office here, that the God of Nature performeth, in introducing the rational Soul, after the Body is organized and ultimately prepar'd for its reception, whereupon St. Austin (de Trinitate lib. 3. cap. 8.) piously and wittily saith, as we neither call Parents the Formers of Men, nor Husbandmen the formers of Fruit: though the Divine Power makes use of the one, to prepare the matter for the reception of the Reasonable Soul; and of the other, for the accelerating the disposition of Plants, not only to bear Fruit, but Fruit of such a colour, taste, smell, &c. so we must not think, that Angels (whether good or bad) are introducers of the substantial Form; but that they (by reason of their subtilty) knowing where the Seeds of things lay (which we cannot discern) and secretly sowing them through congruous∣ly mixed Elements, do only administer occasions, of the Birth of things, and of hastening their growth. 2. What the Gods did, whom the Magicians invocated, they took time to do. It is like that they singled out a time most convenient for such like operations, in respect of the Planetary hour, and Positions of the Heavenly Bodies. Macrobius (Sat. lib. 1. cap. 17.) observes that the victory which the Romans obtain'd over the Carthaginians, when they implored the aid of Apollo, that is, the Sun, upon the motion of the Prophet Martius, (who pro∣mised them victory, if they would observe the Oracle which he delivered to them) was in such a Juncture as the Sun was then, in the vertical point, directly over Rome, and therefore strongliest abilitated to heat their blood, and put courage into them, who were born under that Planet. Aaron's God in an instant both alter'd the Matter, and chang'd the Form of his Rod into a Serpent: but the Egyptians used Inchantments, in order to the Transmu∣tation of their Rods, and thats enough to evince it not to have been instan∣taneous. Had nature, indeed, been left to her own Genius, she would have taken far more leasurely steps, than those Daemons did; that Handmaid of God keeps that state, in her ordinary pace, as a club-footed Vulcan may out goe her: she perhaps may spend a thousand years in making such Transmu∣tations in Mettals, as a Chymist will perform in a week, and yet not come near the celerity of these winged spirits in their Operations; there being a far greater disparity betwixt them, and the most dexterous Operator in the whole Colledge of the Virtuosi, than there is betwixt these and the most dul∣pated-club-fisted Mechanick. Briefly, the change of the Egyptians Rods was indeed subitaneous: Nature was there put out of her pace, but not out of her way; The workers of that Wonder gain'd time enough to perform that feat in, while the Magicians were at their Inchantments (and doubtless one Reason of the institution of such Diabolical Ceremonies is the advantage of gaining time) time enough for such agil Creatures to procure all those alte∣rations in, which in a natural way of causation were pre-requisite towards the ultimate Change. But the instantaneous change of Aaron's Rod put Nature beside her course, for seeing no Body can move, but in time, as well as place, [Natura non agit per saltum,] it implies a Contradiction, that the Rod should pass into a Serpent, by any other kind of Corruption, than that of Annihilation: or the Serpent be produc'd out of it, by any other kind of act, than that of Creation.
3. VVhereas some scruple whether that saying [Aaron's Rod devoured the Rods of the Sorcerers,] imply not the returning of their Serpents into Rods; St. Austin, by removing that Scruple, clears our way to the observing ano∣ther material difference betwixt these wonders. This (saith he) is spoken [initialiter & finaliter,] in respect to what they had been, and to what one of them (that is Aaron's Serpent) would return to be; but whether the Egyp∣tian Serpents became Rods again, I will nor dispute. However 'tis most pro∣bable they did not; it being the common Opinion, that Aarons Rod, when turn'd into a Serpent, did devour their Serpents, and prevented their beco∣ming Rods again, (Alensis sum. 2. quest. 43.) which Opinion seems to be well grounded upon that word in Moses Text, [swallowed up]  ab∣sorpsit.] which, though applied to men it sometimes hath a metaphorical sence, yet in the History of Animals, doth so naturally signifie, the swallowing in at the mouth, down the throat, into the stomach, (so  is rendred by Scapula, deglutiatio; Cibi & potionis ab ore in ventriculum descensus) as the Greeks derive from hence, not only , which, in Dioscorides; but , which, in common use, signifies the Gula or Throat (or, as we say in the North, the Swallow, herein purely Grecizing,) and , both the under Jaws (at which the Swallow begins) and the Orifice of the Stomach, where it terminates. In a word, ransack this Term from the be∣ginning, through the middle, to the end; and you will find it speak such a swallowing, as an inorganized Body is uncapable of; and to imply in this Text, that it was not Aarons Rod simply, but turn'd into a Serpent, that did devour the Magicians (sometimes Rods but now) Serpents, as if they had been but so many Pills () prepared for this Dragons swal∣low, by which it not only appears that (as all Gods things have, and there∣fore whatever hath a transcendent excellency is stiled Gods, as Gods Hill, Gods Host, &c.) this Serpent had the priority of theirs, and kept the Pit after them: but that their Rods were devour'd, as well as Serpents, and ne∣ver became Rods again. The old Serpent may croud Serpents into the World, but he can't lay them; he could pester Egypt with bloody VVa∣ters, but leaves the cure of them to him, thats higher than himself: He could make Nilus be delivered of Frogs, before the time came of her ordina∣ry travel, and in all likelihood plague Goshen with that crawling Vermine (for I cannot find any room for them elsewhere, in all the Land of Aegypt, since Aaron's Frogs had already fill'd all the VVaters and Houses of the E∣gyptians.) But his Ministers cannot, with all their Inchantments, free so much as Pharaohs house of those unwelcome guests, who is forc'd to be beholding to Moses Prayers, for their riddance out of his Bedchamber. A clear evidence, that the Devil cannot rectifie those Irregularities, which he is sometimes permitted to introduce into the Course of Nature; that he can make knots and snarles on Natures Skeane, but not unravel them, nor untie them: that he can rend the seamless coat of her orderly progress, but not darn it up again. 4. Say he had kept pace with God in these three steps (which he mani∣festly did not) yet Israels God outgoes him at the fourth, and the rest of the following VVonders: he that could turn (God permitting him) Rods into Serpents, could not turn Dust into Lice: but his Instruments at that Mi∣racle, are forc'd to quit the Field, and confess, that was the Finger of God. He cannot without a toleration from Heaven, produce the most contempti∣ble Insect: the divine Art out-vies him in the frame of the vilest Ani∣mals. § 5. VVe have seen the God of this world beaten upon his own Dung∣hil, the Prince of the Air worsted in his own Region, outvied by the lowest degree of divine Miracles, lagging behind Omnipotency, while it lights and walks afoot: how less able is he to Lacquy it by its side, while it rides tri∣umphing in the production of Miracles of the first and second Rank. Such
as was, the Sun's standing still in the days of Joshuah, and its going retrograde upon Ahaz his Dial, at the request of Hezekiah; which I instance in, as be∣ing Accidents indisputable as to Matter of Fact: the first being so famously known, and universally taken notice of, as it occasion'd that Fiction of the VVorld's expending a whole day upon the Birth of Hercules: [Cujus in ortu mundus expendit diem. Senec. Her. fur.] though Asterages turn'd day into night, and misapplyed that to the Grecian, which belonged to the Phaenici∣an, Hercules, Joshua, and the last being observed as far as Babylon, whence Merodac Baladan (having heard it was done in favour of Hezekiah) sent his Embassadors into Judaea, (who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land (2 Chron. 31. 31.) to congratulate Hezekiah, and to enquire concerning the Circumstances of that Miracle, so famously known, as Dionysius the Areopagite, Ep. 7. ad Polycarpum, affirms that the Persian Priests and Magi, kept up the Memorial thereof in the Rites [] of the triple Mithra. Not because this day was almost as long as three days (as Pachymerius and Maximus mis-expound Dionysms,) for that makes this day longer than that in Joshua, whereas the Text, (Josh. 10. 14.) saith, there was no day like that (equal to it in length) before or after it. Nor is their Argument so conclusive; if we expound it of the Sun's going back as well as the shadow (with St. Austin de mirabil. script. l. 2. c. 48. and the Fathers generally) as that Vatablus, Burgensis, and Montanus needed, by its force, have been put to that miserable shift, they betake themselves to: viz. that the Sun kept its ordinary motion, and its shadow only, by the Ministry of Angels, was made to fall back on Ahaz his Dial. For it might go ten Degrees back, and over those ten degrees forward again, and so on his daily Course, and not make that day from Sun-rise to its Setting 32 hours; If the degrees of Ahaz his Dial were either Quadrants or half-hours, the Sun might keep his ordinary pace, in going back and forward, and not reach the length of Jo∣shua's day: or he that could make it go back, might make it to mend its pace, as to redeem so much time, that that day might possibly be not much longer than an ordinary one: and yet sufficiently miraculous, and so conspi∣cuous (for the Sun's going back) as the Persians might well take notice of it, and celebrate its memorial in the Rites and Denomination of the Triplifi∣ed Sun; because of that threefold course it then took, first forward, next backward, and then forward again. So that the authority of Dionysius, still stands firm, notwithstanding the Learned Vossius his so easie rejecting it, upon that mistake which Pachymerius and Maximus led him into: as if the Areopagite had affirm'd, the Persians to have given that appellation to Mi∣thra or the Sun, by reason of its tripling the length of that day: when in truth all he affirms of them is, that they kept the Memory of this Miracle, in the Celebrities of the Triplasia: which he might certainly know they did, (that being a Matter of Fact) and which they might do, in commemoration of the Suns tripling his Course. It is true indeed Dionysius thought that day to be tripl'd, and from thence to have arisen that Persick Name; but in this (being matter of Opinion, and an Opinion so directly opposing the Text in Joshua) we may safely forsake him, and question his judgement. But we cannot reject him, in what he barely reports, as a Matter of Fact, with∣out questioning his honesty; to wit, that the Persians kept up the remem∣brance of the Suns going back and changing its Course. I will not here enter a Debate, with our Modern Philosophers, about that question, whether it be the Sun or the Earth that moves: for let it be gran∣ted, that it is natural to one of them to move, in that course, that hath been traced above 5000 years; and I matter not, to whether of them they assign the Task of Motion, or bequeath the Privilege of Rest: which of them so∣ever it be that moves, what Second Cause can be imagin'd to make it once stand still, and once to move back ward? Did some hooked prominent A∣tom catch hold of some weightier quiescent Body, and forc'd the Earth or Sun to lie at Anchor a whole day; or put a stop to one of them as a long
Skewer (for Kitching-similies are fittest to illustrate their new Kitching-Phi∣losophy) stays the Spit from turning, if it touch the Drippin-pan. What second Cause can be imagin'd of its going back? ubi pedem fixit? Where set he his foot, while he wheel'd one of those Orbs, Westward and Eastward, backward and forward, as we turn a Globe in a Frame? Or was it with so great a violence, as lasted ten hours, driven back by falling foul upon some other Vessel, sailing in the Super-lunary Waters, through neglect of crying, Ware Oars? untrain'd curiosity may quest through the Universe, before it can set any other Author of this Motion, but him that is the Author of Be∣ing: none could set back this Universal Watch, this measure and standard of every Inch of Time; none could slacken or hasten the going of it but its Maker. §. 6. Though it will not be granted me, that 'tis natural for the Sun to move, yet I hope Providence will bless these Lines out of the hands of such Brutes, as question whether it be not as natural for the Sun to shine, as for Fire to burn; whether its Beams of Light flow not necessarily from its very Being, as streams from the Fountain. I demand then, whence proceeded its Opacity, and the suspension of its Light, at our Saviour's Passion? That it was at that time exempted from the Dominion of all second Causes, which by their intervention could possibly rob the lower World of its Light, may easily be made appear, by an enumeration of such Particulars, as have been observed (for this 5000 years) to hinder its illuminating at once the Hemis∣phere of the Earth: and so much more easily, as the impediments are fewer, than to take up a long discourse, being but these two. 1. The Interposition of the Body of the Moon, which in that juncture could not be the impediment: for at the Passover, when our Saviour suf∣fer'd, the Moon was at the Full, and visibly arising that evening in the East when the Sun set in the West: we may therefore with as much reason charge a Theft committed at London, upon a person that was in India when that fact was done, as charge the Moon with this Robbery of the Suns Light, I shall run no hazard of my credit, before equal Judges, by becoming her Com∣purgator in this case. 2. The Cloudiness of the Skie: But the Air was at that time so serene, as the Stars appeared, and might be seen all over the Heavens, as Phlegon a Gen∣tile Chronologer, hath left upon Record: [Dies horâ sextâ in tenebrosam noctem versus, ut stellae in caelo visae sunt:] (Chron. Euseb.) and that record, probably, taken out of the Roman Rolls, where it was extant in Tertullian's time. If the Clouds were not so thick, but that the Stars might be seen through them, they could not hinder the shining of that greatest Light, the Sun. Besides, this Darkness was universal, [Mark 15. 33. , Darkness was over the whole Earth.] Erasmus indeed limits this to the Land of Judaea: but Melchior Canus (lib. 11. cap. 2.) Doth suf∣ficiently confute that Opinion: which needs not any other Confutation than this, that it was observ'd at Heliopolis in Egypt: and if that Testimony of Di∣onysius be scrupled, that of the Graecian Historians who write of it cannot be excepted against. (Scaliger animadvers. in Chron. Euseb.) But Clouds do but screen, and stand in the light of some particular and small Regions: so that, when the Sun hath nothing else to hinder its shining, it will cast its beams on one City, on one part of a City, when the other part is clouded. This Darkness therefore could not proceed from any Natural Cause, but was simply and nakedly the Effect of the suspension of its most natural power of giving Light, [Ex retractione radiorum solarium,] (Voss. harmon, Evang. l. 2. cap. 10.) the retraction of its Beams, from the unthankful World, at the Will of its Creator (on purpose to convince men, that that Jesus who was then a crucisying was both Lord and Christ, or as the Centurion (from that Argument concludes) the Son of God, the King of Israel.) according to the sign given by the Prophet Zachary (chap. 14. 6.) In that day the light
shall not be clear nor dark, it shall be one day, (a day by it self) at evening time it shall be light, the Sun shall be turn'd into darkness and the Moon into blood; and Joel chap. 2. 31, &c, as St. Peter applyed those Texts, (Acts 2.) this is that that was spoken of by the Prophet Joel, &c. § 7. I will conclude with that, which is both the sum of the Christian Faith, and the seal of it, the Resurrection of the blessed Jesus. The sum of it; (If thou shalt believe in thine heart, that God raised up Christ from the dead, thou shalt be saved; Rom. 10. The Seal of it; whereof he hath given assu∣rance (made demonstration) to all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. (Act. 17. 31.) Shall I need to shew the demonstrableness of this Argument? so cogent, as he must shut his eyes against the clearest and most undoubted Sentiments of common Reason, that does not acknowledge the Finger, the Hand, the Arm of inconquerable Omnipotency, to have been at work, in breaking the Chains of Death, and bringing Christ thence, after the pains and anguish of the Cross had exhausted his Vital Spirts, and made his sacred Body inhospitable to that his precious Soul, which he breathed into the hands of his Father; after they who were set to watch him, were so well satisfied that he was dead, as they thought it needless to break his Legs, and yet (to make all sure) ran a Spear to his Heart; whence issued (as an indication that there was no need of that neither, in order to his dispatch, but only that the Prophecies of him might be fulfill'd) Water and Blood. And lastly, after he was buried, and a Guard of Soldiers set about the Sepulchre, by the procurement of his most watchful Adversaries, who feared he would rise again (as he had said) and thereby declare himself to be the Messias. These Circumstances speak a total privation of Life, the extinction of the vital Flame, the breaking of the golden Cord and Marriage-ring, which coupled together that lovely Pair (the Humane Flesh and Reasonable Soul) whereof the Man Christ consisted. And I appeal to common Principles, to give sentence and determine those Que∣stions. Whether the Flame of Lifes Taper can be blown in again, but by the blast of that Breath; which blew it in at first? Whether that Cord can be knit again by any hand, but that which drew it? Whether the Bowels of the Earth (our common Mother, whither Bodies return that they may see corruption) be a fit Matrix, wherein the Corps may be ripen'd, naturally, in∣to an aptitude for the reception of the Soul? In our first moulding, the Spermatick Matter Courts the humane Form, and when by Second Natures hand (the Hand maid of the first Nature) its gradually purified into an imme∣diate fittedness for the reception of its Bridegroom, God knits first the Band. And after the Band, is broke, the Soul (after a sort) courts the Corps, by its propensity to a reunion to that, without which it cannot be perfect. But the fullen Corps is deaf to all such motions, resists all methods of cure; all applications of Medicines, which the (now more illuminated and intelligent) Soul can possibly make (and doubtless if an herb grew any where, that could restore these beloved Mates; the Souls of Philosophers, that could see so well through the Casement, being now in the free Air, and having their eyes cla∣rified with the dust of Death, would spy it out) are fruitless; this work must be let alone for ever: as no man can redeem his own Soul, so no Soul can restore its own Body. As the matter in the Womb, would never have had its desires of Union to a reasonable Soul gratified, if God had not infused the Soul: so the Soul in a state of separation, will never have its longing after reunion gratified, till God restore to it its Body. He that brought the Man to the Woman at first, must after the sleep of Death bring the Woman to the Man, or they will never meet. Nay the bringing of soul and body together again, after their Divorce, implies that seeming Contradiction, as the Disciples by the Illumination of Faith, could not understand what Christ meant, when he spake to them of his Resurrection, and were ready to give up their hopes that he was he that
should redeem Israel, when they saw him giving up the Ghost, and hanging down his Head upon the Cross; as St. Thomas though he had seen Lazarus rais'd from the dead, and heard it reported by credible Witnesses that Christ was risen, would not believe it. As Celsus, (Orig. cont. Cels. l. 2. cal. 41.) rather than grant the Truth of the Christian Hypothesis, denied the pos∣sibility of it. As it seemed good to the holy Ghost, to confirm the report of Christs Resurrection, by all those Signs which the Apostles wrought after his Ascension, by the name of the Holy Child Jesus; while with great power they gave witness of his Resurrection, (Acts 4. 33.) Yea so much did divine Goodness condescend to Humane imbecility, as to give a fuller proof of that point (so far above Reasons comprehension, and much more out of the Sphere of Natural Power) than the report of Eye-witnesses, than the Confes∣sion of Adversaries, than the Seal of those Miracles afforded; by that Grace, that was upon all the Publishers; and fell upon all the Receivers of that Do∣ctrine: a Grace enabling them to live up to the Gospel, and to bring forth those Fruits of Holiness, Righteousness, Temperance, Meekness, as sufficient∣ly commended, to the morallized part of the World that Root of Faith, from whence they issued; as far outstript the most glorious glittering productions of the Moral Philosophers; as infinitely transcended the results of fantastick Credulty, and put all other Religions to the blush, at the sight of their own impotency. CHAP. XII. The Supernatural Power of Salvifick Grace. § 1. The Church triumphs over the Schools. § 2. Christianity layes the Axe to the Root. § 3. The Rule imperfect before Christ. § 4. The Discipline of the Schools was without Life and Power. § 5. Real exornations before Verbal Encomiums. § 1. HEre (Christian Reader) I must crave thy help, and beg thy aid, towards the convincing the World of the Divine Original of Chri∣stian Religion; which, though it apparently bear the stamps of heavenly Wis∣dome, in its Prophecies: of in finite Power, in its Miracles; commends it self more to the Consciences of men by engaging its Fautors to a Conversati∣on answerable to its Sacred Rules; than by affording the most substantial Grounds of discoursing in its Defence by any other Arguments. Religion is better maintain'd by Living than Disputing. A Gospel-becoming Con∣verse falls under the Observation and speaks to the Hearts of all men; even of those who are not able to fathom the depth, nor feel the ground of the most rational verbal Discourse: well exprest by the Apostle of the Circum∣cision, (1 Pet. 3. 1. Dr. Hammond annot.) in the Argument, whereby he per∣swades Christian Matrons to be in subjection to their own (though Gentile) Husbands: that if any obeyed not the Word (submitted not to the Gospel upon the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power) they also without the Word (which the Apostles preach'd in confirmation of the Resurrection of Christ) might be won by the Conversation of their Wives: while they be∣held their chaste Conversation, that Modesly which the true fear of God, Christian Religion (which alone rightly Disciplines persons in that fear) taught them. In his motive, (1 Pet. 2. 12, 13.) to Christian Subjects, to yield obedient subjection to their Heathen Magistrates, and in that point, par∣ticularly, to lead an honest life, among the Gentiles: that whereas they were evil spoken of (as Jews, by reason of the turbulency and frequent rebellions of their Countrymen) the Gentiles might see that Christian-Jews were of
another spirit, than the rest of that Nation: and upon that account might revere them for their good works, and glorifie God (the Author of a Reli∣gion) that had made them so much more meek, regular, and quiet under the Heathen Government which was over them, than the other Jews were,) when the Proconsuls should be sent, to make enquiry of the Commotions made by the unbelieving Party of that Nation. It was by this Argument that the old Laic-Confessor silenc'd, convinc'd, and converted that proud and subtile Philosopher, who bore up himself against all the Reasonings of the Learned Teachers of the Nicence Council, (Crab. tom. 1. pag. 249.) In the name of Jesus Christ (saith he) O Philosopher, hear the Dictates of Truth: There is one God, Maker of Heaven and Earth, who Created all things visi∣ble and invisible, by the power of his Word, and confirm'd them by the San∣ctity of his Spirit. This Word therefore (which we call the Son of God) having mercy on Mankind, vouchsafed to be born of a VVoman, to converse with Men, and die for them, and will come again to give sentence upon the Lives of all men. By the belief of those things we Christians are freed from Error, and from that Religion, wherein Men live like Beasts; into a state of living like Men. Upon this the Philosopher cries out, that he is a Christian, and assures his Fellows he was drawn to it not upon light grounds but by that ineffable Vertue which attended the embracing of Christianity. In this Argument the ancient Patrons, of the Christian Cause triumph'd, over all other Religions, and Disciplines. The Christian Churches (saith Origen contr. Cels. lib. 3. cal. 8.) compared with other Societies, are really the Lights of the VVorld; who is there that must not confess (if he make an impartial collation of them) that the worst part of the Church excells vulgar assem∣blies? for the Church of God at Athens (for instance) is meek and quiet, &c. the Pagan Assemblies, seditious, turbulent, &c. And to that Calumny of Celsus, that the Christians invited the worst of sinners, Origen makes this Reply; that the Christian Philosophy did dayly reform the most dege∣nerate Natures, not by converting one or two in so many Ages (as Phaedo, who coming Piping hot out of the Stewes into Plato's School, took those impresses from his Doctrine, as Plato in his Dialogues brings Phaedo in dis∣coursing of the Immortality of the Soul; Or Palemon who by attending to Philosophical Discipline, became, of a Ruffian, so temperate, as he succeeded Xenocrates in his School: (but great multitudes. Christs Fishers of men caught them by whole shoales, when these Philosophical Anglers drew them up by unites. Tertullian (apolog. 46.) outvies the greatest Philosophers with common Christians. Thales, one of the seven VVisemen, could not satisfie Craesus, when he askt him, what God was? but required time for the return of an answer, and the more he thought upon it, was further off from find∣ing a solution: when every Mechanick Christian hath found, and can shew all that can be askt concerning God; though Plato says the framer of the U∣niverse is neither easie to be found out, nor to be exprest. If we compare them in point of Chastity, we read that one part of the Attick sentence, a∣gainst Socrates, condemn'd him of Sodomy with Boyes: when the Christian hath to do with no more, of the Female Sex, than his own Wife. Democri∣tus, for all his Moral Rules was forc'd to put out his eyes, to keep him conti∣nent; he not being able to command them to look on fair women, without lust. But a Christian, his Soul being averse to Lust, can save his Eyes, and look on Women without danger of sin. If in point of probity. Diogenes, for all his pretence to Humility, trampled on Plato's Pride with greater Pride: whereas a Christian doth not insult over the poorest man. If we strive, who shall carry away the praise of Modesty, Pythagoras affected to Lord it over the Thyrians, Zeno over the Prienenses; But the Christian will not seek, nor thrust himself into the lowest Office of command. Who of Equanimity? Lycurgus pin'd himself to Death, because the Lacedemonians would have corrected his Laws: but the Christian gives thanks, when himself is con∣demn'd. Who of Fidelity? Anaxagoras denyed to restore what was commit∣ted
to his keeping, because they were his enemies to whom he ought to have restored it: But a Christian is esteemed, and found to be, a man of his word, even amongst them that are without (how far were Tertullian's Christians from that Papal Maxime, Fides non est servanda haereticis?) If we compare them in point of Innocency, Aristotle did shamefully thrust out of place his familiar friend Hermias: but a Christian will not injure his enemy. The same Aristotle slatter'd Alexander, Plato hung by his Teeth, as a Trencher chap∣lain, to Dionysius, Aristippus in Purple, plaid the good fellow, under a super∣ficial shew of Gravity: Hippias was slain, while he was traiterously conspiring against his City. This no Christian at any time hath attempted, for the deli∣verance of his brethren, though scatter'd and harrass'd with all kinds of cru∣elty. Athenaeas, (Dipnosoph. l. 11. cap. 22.) Argument, [quòd Plato in omnes e∣rat implacidus, contumeliosus, gloriosus, &c.] (lib. 11. cap. 23.) Argument, [Platonis Discipuli tyrannici, sunt ex Academicis qui irreligiose vivunt, & mi∣nùs honestè, &c.] This is the Argument of one whole Chapter in Athenaeus. That Plato was inappeasable to all men that affronted him, a reproacher, vain glorious, &c. Of all which charges he gives several proofs. And he spends another Chapter upon this Theme. That Plato's Schollars are tyrannical; and divers of the Academicks live irreligiously and dishonestly. Nothing is more obvious than the complaints of Plutarch, Seneca, Macrobius, Ageius, and who not of the whole learned Tribe of Gentile Writers, that Philosophical Precepts were not able to pluck up Vice and plant Virtue in their Disciples hearts: But how powerful Christian Philosophy was to tame the most savage Natures, is apparent from infinite Examples even of whole barbarous Nations, amongst whom it is observed for Instance, That the Cappadocians while they were Pagans, were of so ill a report, so Monstrously addicted to all kind of wicked∣ness, that beside the share they had in the old Greek Proverb; of [,] i. e, (There are three Countries whose names begin with C. of very vicious and lewd lives.] They had some Proverbs peculiar to themselves,  and : a man of Cappadocia, and a Cappado∣cian Monster, being proverbially used, to signifie a man most extreamly wick∣ed: and they made good the Proverb, even in the times of the Gospel, before they had embrac'd the Faith in the sincerity of it: for Gregory that bloody Butcher of Alexandria, Auxentius, Asterius, Eustathius, principal Patrons of the Blasphemous Arrians, and that Arch-Heretick Eunomius, were all of this Country! yet such is the influence of the true faith where once entertain'd, that this lewd disposition of the Cappadocians was so corrected and restrain'd by it; that this Country afforded as many godly Prelates and couragious Martyrs, as any other whatsoever; for which Nazianzen doth highly com∣mend it, who, with Gregory Nyssen, and St. Basil, were Cappadocians, and a∣mongst many Martyrs of great fame and constancy, St. George the Patron of the Noble Order of the Garter, was a Cappadocian Colonel, under Dioclesi∣an, (Heylin. Asia Minor. p. 649.) § 2. Fuimus Troes; time was when the Christian Church could make these boasts (Lactan. de falsa sapient l. 3. c. 26.) [Dà mihi virum qui sit iracun∣dus, maledicus essraenatus; paucissimis Dei verbis tam placidum, quàm ovem, reddam: da cupidum, avarum, tenacem; jam tibi eum liberalem dabo & pe∣cuniam suam propriis plenis; manibus largientem: da timidum doloris ac mor∣tis; jam cruces, & ignes, & Phalaridis Taurum contemnet; da libidinosum, a∣dulterum, ganeonem; jam sobrium, castum continentem videbis: da crudelem & sanguinis appetentem; jam in vera clementiam furor ille mutabitur: da inju∣stum, insipientem, peccatorem; continuò & aequus & prudens & innocens erit: uno enim lavacro malitia omnis abolebitur. Tanta divinae sapientiae vis est, ut in hominis pectus infusa, matrem delictorum stultitiam uno semel impetu expellat—Philosophi cùm aetates suas in studio sapientiae conterant, ne{que} alium quenquam, neque seipsos possunt facere meliores—pauca verò Dei praecepta, sic totum ho∣minem immutant, &, expolito vetere, novum reddunt, ut non cogn scas eundem
esse.] Give me a man (saith her eloquent Patron Lactantius) thats angry, and who vents his fury by revilings and wild curvettings; And, by a very few words of God, I will make him as gentle as a Lamb: Give me a greedy, covetous, griping Miser; and I will restore him back to thee, so liberal, as be shall scatter abroad, and give to the poor his own mony, with his own, and those full hands: Give me a delicate piece, that affraid of pain and death; and he shall forthwith contemn Crosses, Fires and the Bull of Phaleris: Give me a Fornicator, an Adul∣terer, a Brothel-house-haunter; And thou shalt, by and by see him sober, chaste, continent: Give me a blood thirsty Tyger; and that rage will presently be exchang'd for true Clemency. Give me an unjust and unwise offender; and he shall on a sud∣dain become, just, prudent, and innocent. For all wickedness shall be abolished with one washing.—Such is the force of Divine Wisdome, as being infused in∣to the hearts of men, it expells at one thrust the folly bound up there, which is the Dam of all misdeeds—The Philosophers after they have worn out their whole age in the study of Wisdom, neither make others nor themselves better men; but the Precepts of God (which are but few and soon learn'd) do so transmute the whole man, and wholly stripping of the old, make him new, as you would not take him for the same person. St. Jerom passeth upon this Christian Cicero this Censure, [Utinam tam nostra affirmare potuisset, quam facilè aliena destruxit.] I could wish that La∣ctantius had quitted himself, as well in maintaining ours, as in overthrowing the Gentile Religion. Why? what better Defence can be made, what more full proof can be brought of the Divine Authorlty of the Gospel, than what is here produc'd? what more convincing evidence of its divine Original, than such supernatural Effects, so infinitely surpassing, what the best improvement of humane Nature, by Art, could bring forth? what could that be, but the breath of the Almighty, that could inspire Life into such slain (and cover those dry bones, with flesh, that flesh with skin, that skin with so perfect a beauty) as had lain dead so long at the Philosophers door, and peremptorily resisted all their methods towards a recovery; whose Schools were but so many Charnel-houses and Graves of the dead; till the Apostle of the Gen∣tiles, stepping into them, distilled the word of life into their Patients Ears, stopt to all former charmings of the wisest Moralists. (Act. 17. 18.) Most of their Cures of natural pravity, were but palliations, such as Lucian and the Satyrists laugh'd at, and the rest but partial, amounting to no more, than the lopping off of some Branches of the corrupt Tree, and the grafting in their room some particular Virtues. But their Ax did not reach the Root, their Art did not alter the Tree, it still put forth its Malignity, in other Bran∣ches; they did not drain, but divert, the current of vitious Inclination, which with so much more violence broke out, where it could find vent, as it was more pent up by the Banks that were cast against it. There was in∣deed a sound of universal Justice ringing in their Disciples ears (that Justice which equally distributeth to every one their due: to God, to Man, to a mans Self, to Soul, to Body:) But the seed of this was never cast into mens hearts, till the immortal seed of the Word fell there. § 3. The art of cultivating Man, till Christ perfected it, labour'd under a two fold defect, which frustrated its intendment. 1. In point of the insufficiency of the System. It comprehended not all the Precepts and expedients of a truly virtuous and perfectly honest Heart and Life: the Rule came short of the end pretended, which was, to reduce man into a Conformity to God (as the Platonists) [Unares est, virtus, quae nos immortalitate Donare possit, & pares diis facere:] (Seneca de immatura morte.) to Discipline him into an habit of perfect virtue, (as the Aristoteli∣ans promis'd.) Socrates, the Prince of all Moralists, by that Aphorism, [quae suprà nos nihil ad nos] as Lactantius (de falsa sap. l. 3. cap. 20.) proves, pro∣hibited all religious care and meditation. Plato, in his Precepts for Com∣munity, overturns the vy foundation of that Concord he seems to esta∣blish,
and expels from his Commonwealth, Frugality (for which there is no place, where no man hath ought of his own:) Abstinence (which cannot be exercised where there is nothing of another mans to be abstain'd from,) Tem∣perance, Chastity, Modesty, Love of Parents to Children, Piety of Children to Parents, conjugal Fidelity, &c. and is so far from bringing men into a con∣formity to the divine, as he professedly commends, to the imitation of his Citizens, the most bestial manners of Brutes, and such as wherein they re∣cede further from Humanity, than the Fowles of the Air, most of which ob∣serve the Laws of Marriage, are faithful to their Mates, with Concord of mind defend their Nests, as their Marriage-Beds: and because they know their young, love them. [Redegit ergo humanam vitam ad similitudinem non dico mutorum; sed pecudum & belluarum: nam & volucres penes omnes faciunt ma∣trimonia & nidos suos tanquam genitales toros concordi mente defendunt, & faetus suos quia sunt certi mutuò amant, &c.] Lactan. Ibid. cap. 21, 22.] These An∣cient and wise men taught the Communion of Wives saith Tertullian. [Ex illa credo, majorum & sapientissimorum disciplina, Graeci Socratis & Romani Ca∣tonis: qui uxores suas amicis communicaverunt—ô sapientiae Atticae, ô Romanae gravitatis exemplum! Leno est Philosophus, & Censor.] (Tertul. apol. 39.) Oh the exemplariness of Grecian wisdom, of Roman gravity; their Philosopher Socrates and our Censor Cato, were Panders. When these were so wide of the Rule, how wide must they be, who took aim from them (the rest of the vulgar Philosophers who succeeded) or who wanted that light which those travelling Philosophers convey'd into Greece out of forreign Countries (the wise men who preceded them) of whom to speak particularly, would be to transcribe the greatest part of Diogenes Laerti∣us: I will therefore but point to the defect of their Morals, in regulating mens contempt of Riches, for which they esteemed themselves, and were accounted of others wise: in which particular they taught their Disciples, to precipitate themselves in a calm: for fear of suffering Shipwrack in a storm: to cut their own throats, for fear of having their throats cut; while they condemn'd Wealth, as evil; and run from the Patrimonies, which their Progenitors left them; while they threw their Treasures into the Sea, which, charitably expended, might have reliev'd the poor from hunger, thirst, and nakedness. I instance in this, as that which our Saviour hath rectified, in that Subjuncti∣on to his Precept of selling all a man hath: [and give to the poor. Briefly, upon the account of this defect of them, and the perfection of the Gospel-rule, I may without fear of meeting with that sharp retort, that La∣ctantius gave the Author of that Distick, in praise of Epicurus (except it be from some of that grunting Sophisters Litter) apply that to the Blessed Jesus. Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, & omnes, Restriuxit stellas, exortus uti aethereus sol. Who outstript all the Sophs in this Essay, Quenching their Star-light with his Solar Ray. Which was so ill applyed to Epicurus, as the Author well deserv'd that Cen∣sure of our Christian Cicero, [Poeta inanissimus Leonis laudibus murem non or∣navit, sed obruit & obtrivit,] (Lactant. de fals. sapient, l. 3. cap. 17.) This most vain Poet by heaping the praise of the Lion upon the Mouse, did not adorn that contemptible insect, but overwhelm and crush it: For the Scholer not only of Epicurus, but the most Divine Moral Philosophers, might be all, that these Masters of Civility were, or enjoyn'd them to be, and yet remain an uncivi∣lized person; the Philosophick Robe was too short, to keep warm the whole body of Virtue. But whoever puts on that of Christs weaving, or rather Christ himself (for he was one and the same, both in Rule and Ex∣ample) is cloathed with Virtue, from head to foot, perfectly ac∣coutred
for all Duties, Personal, Relative, Private, Domestick, Pub∣lick. § 4. 2. The Discipline of the Schools came short of Christs, in point of power and operativeness: their Precepts were so smewless, as they had not strength to draw the Teachers of them to a compliance with them, but left them as they found them, slaves to Anger, Covetousness, Lust, Arrogancy, Rudeness. 1. Being neither commended to mens Consciences, as the Dictates of God; but barely propounded, as the Results of Reason, as the collections of humane Ratiocination: while in the mean time their Gods taught them, by their Examples, the quite contrary, [Ut ab ipso caelo traduci in terra satis idonea videatur authoritas,] That the inartificial argument (that of divine Authority) for Debauchery (as drawing its extract from Heaven) might counter-ballance all the most artificial perswasions to Virtue. (August. de civitat. 2. 10.) Those Gods (saith St. Austin, Ibid c. 6.) Not only permitted men to be overwhelm'd in their minds with loose opinions, and to grow to the height of Villany, with∣out their interposing any terrible threatnings, (for they are not able to name the place, or time, when any of them perswaded to virtuous actions, or disswaded, by menacies, from avarice, ambition, fraud, cruelty, luxury, &c.) But they spurr'd them forward to all manner of licentiousness by their own Example. 2. Nor prest with such Motives of eternal retribution as the Gospel pro∣pounds. 3. Nor seconded with that aid of Divine Grace, which attends the Preach∣ing of the Word of Life rightly administred. Hence all Philosophical In∣structions became so ineffectual, as it became a question, Whether it was possible to discipline men to Virtue? [de virtute disputamus, docerine possit,] (Plutarch. ethic. tom. 2.) and though Plutarch affirms it may, yet the best proof he brings of his Assertion, is the absurdity of the contrary: that men should learn all other Arts and Sciences, and be incapable of learning the Art of right living, seems to him highly absurd; but he either labours with such penury of Examples, or thinks those that were commonly alleadged, so in∣concludent, as he doth not produce one, for an Essay to the Probat of his Opinion; but leaves the Virtuous Man (for all the Culture of the Schools) in the rank of black Swans, even where his Antagonists had placed him: [Viri boni nominantur tantùm eo pacto, quo hippocentauri,] Good men are (entiàra∣tionis) fancied only, not really existing. And ully (after the perusal of both Greek and Latin Authors) was as far to seek for a good man of the Philosophers making, as Plutarch; what one of the Philosophers (saith Tully) is so well manner'd, so disposed in mind and life as reason requires? which of them look upon their own Discipline, not as an ostentation of science, but the law of life? who listens to himself, or observes his own decrees? you may see some of them to be persons, of that light, and yet supercilious carriage: that they would have been better, if they had never gone to school. Some so coveting mony, others praise, and many such slaves to lust; that their speech and life are at greatest enmi∣ty. And his Nephew Cornelius beats upon the same string. I am so far (saith he) from thinking, Philosophy to be the Mistress of Life, and that which perfects virtue: as I rather incline to this Opinion, that no men stand in more need of an instructor how to live, than the most of them, who spend their lives in discussing the rules of living well: For I see the greatest part of them, who in the Schools do most subtilly give Precepts, ing Mo∣desty, and Continency, to wallow in the Mire of all nthy Lusts. To this Sene∣ca gives his suffrage in his exhortations: Most Philosophers (saith he) are such kind of men, as they are eloquent in reproaching themselves, whom if you heard declaiming against Avarice, Lust and Ambition, you would think they had receiv'd a ee to plead thir own Condemnation, so do their revi∣lings
of Vice (which they send abroad) recoile upon themselves, as you can∣not conceive any otherwise of them, but as Physicians, whose Boxes have, on the outside the Titles of healthful Druggs, but are within full of Poyson. Yea, so palpable was the inefficacy of their own Rules, to make the best of them throughly honest: as Seneca is forc'd to cast over them (and himself for company) the Cloak of this Excuse. [Omnia quae luxuriosi faciunt; quaeque imperiti, facit & sapiens, sed non eodem modo, eodemque proposito.] That the wise man may do the same things which fools and the luxurious do, but af∣ter another manner, and to another end, (as if the goodness of the Intention could either rectifie the pravity of an Action, in it self vitious; or remove the scandal, seeing the badness of the example is apparent, but the drift of the mind out of sight.) Thus Aristippus defended his Familiarity with the Strumpet Lais, by saying, there was a great difference betwixt him and the rest of Lais servants: for Lais had them, but he had Lais. Oh brave Wis∣dom (cries Laciantius) and deserving to be imitated by good men! who would not send his Children to this Philosophers School, to learn to have a Whore? who can assign no other difference, betwixt himself and persons of profligated honesty, but this; That they wasted their Fortunes in that Lux∣ury, which he enjoy'd gratis? In which point yet, the strumpet overwitted him; who so held the Philosopher for her Pandar, that all the Youth be∣ing corrupted (by the Example and Authority of their Master) might flock unto her without any shame. And yet this is he whom the Censors of Manners, the Satyrists prefer, before the rest of the Gown'd Crew. Such an empty sound of words were all Philosophical Precepts, as the Teachers of them could not hear themselves speak, with an obediential Ear: whom therefore Cicero affirmeth, not to have sought the bettering, but delighting, of themselves, in the study of Morals. In good sooth (saith he) I fear that all their disquisition, though it contain most plentiful Fountains of Virtue and Science, yet if we compare it with their actions and things that are brought to perfection, may seem only to have been a pleasant diversion from busi∣ness. The Emperour Antoninus Philosophus his Sanctity grew almost into a Proverb for its perfection, but Julius Capitolnus suspects it to be counter∣feit (dederunt ei vitio quod fictus fuisset, nec tum simplex quod videretur) and (for all the oftentation of virtue which that Royal Philosopher made) makes this the main point of difference betwixt him and Verus, that Verus could not dissemble as he did. [à cujus sectâ, lasciviâ morum & vitae licentioris nimieta∣te dissensit. Erat enim morum simplicium & qui adumbrare nihil posset.] (Jul. Cap. verus.) And Lampridius hath this Note upon Commodus, [Sed tot dis∣ciplinarum magistri nihil ei profuerunt.] But Evangelical Precepts do not only gingle in the Ear, but ring in the Conscience, and come, not in word only, but in power, being accompanied into the hearts (of such as do not resist the holy Ghost) with such a Majesty, as commands Obedience, (like that Word, whereby God called things, that were not, into being) by vertue of that Spirit, which in the Old Testament-prophecies, God promiseth shall never be separated from his Word: and which, in the New Testament, and subsequent Ecclesiastical History, we find always moving upon the Face of those sacred Waters, making the Souls of men take the Impress of the Soul of the Gospel, forming in them the I∣mage of God, and converting the most wicked persons (that embrace it) from all their Debaucheries, wherein they were immerst, to a life most sutable to Nature, and Reason, and to the practice of all Virtues, [] (Orig. Cont. Cel. lib. 1. cal. 30.) Whereupon to Celsus his Calumnie, that Christ chose the worst of men for Apostles, Origen replies that Christ thereby made it appear how Soveraign a Medicine his Doctrine is against Soul-plagues, and that therefore Celsus ought rather to have admired the Physicians skill, than to have upbraided him with the pristine maladies of his Patients, who could do more, than all Chrisippus his Rules, towards the curing of unrulie
Passions. How many (saith he) did Christ recover from the Plague of their head strong Affections? From the colluvies of their vitious distempers, how many had their beastly Manners tamed, by occasion of the Evangelical Preach∣ing? which ought to have been embraced of all men, with thankfulness; if not as true, yet as a new, and compendious, Method of curing Vice, and ex∣ceedingly advantagious to Humane kind. He that can think the malignant Powers would contribute towards the bringing of such a Doctrine, as this, into credit, by their Sealing to it, in those wonderful Operations, which gain'd it an Authority over Conscience: may, with an equal likelihood of Reason, conceive it worth the while to milk Hee-Goats. To which labour I remit him, while I commend to wiser persons the conclusiveness of this last Argu∣ment, for the Divine Original of the Christian Faith, in general; and in spe∣cial, for the probat of Christs Resurrection, the Center wherein all the Arti∣cles of the Christian Faith meet, and the demonstration of the Divine Au∣thority, and heavenly Mission of the blessed Jesus, to communicate that way of Salvation to the World: as being the Doctrine of Christ, that dyed, or rather, is risen again from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, whence he communicates that Grace, of which we have been speaking, and wherein Christianity triumphs over the greatest pravities of corrupt Nature as sub∣dued by her Discipline, and overall other Methods of cure as insufficient as unable to reduce lapsed man to a state of health. §. 5. The strength of this Argument would be more apparent, if we of this Age could make good the assumption; as easily as those Primitive Chri∣stians did, of whom the Patrons of the cause of Christ made these holy boasts, and such as that, [Non aliunde noscibiles quam de emendatione vitiorum pristinorum,] (Tertul. ad Scapulam.) Christians are not to be known from other Sects but by the emendation of their pristine vitious manner: were we, who embrace the form of those sound and healing words, as much under the power of Godliness, as they, whom that saving Grace taught to deny ungod∣liness, and worldly lusts; and to live godly, righteously, and soberly: did we more study the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ; so as to know him, in the power of that Resurrection of his, which we make profession to believe the truth of: and in the fellowship of his sufferings, so as to be made conformable unto his Death. In which point (notwithstanding that, never to be enough bewail'd, Apostacy of these latter times) God hath not left himself without witness: But reserv'd a remnant of persons, who cordially embracing the truly Catholick Religion of Christ, (as it is profest in the Church of England) and mourning over the Irregularities of, and Scandals given, by such as conform not to its sacred Precepts; really exhibit to the Worlds view a Specimen of ancient Holiness; in their harmless and blame∣less Conversation, with, and towards all men: in their serious piety towards God, their reverential observance of their Superiours, their Justice, Charity, Love towards all men; their Continency, Chastity, Sobriety, Temperance in respect of themselves. And for the rest of the Professors of the pure and un∣defiled Religion, (who deviate from the rule of this Sacred Discipline) they cease to be Christians, [Sed dicet aliquis; etiam de nostris excedere quosáam à regula disciplinae, desinunt tum Christiani baberi penès nos: Philosophi verò illi cum talibus factis in nomine & honore sapientiae perseverant.] (Tertul. apol. 46.) Some men may say, that even some of ours deviate from the Rule of Discipline: They cease then to be esteem'd Christians by us, Philosophers with such debauche∣ries, retain the name and honour of Philosophers. Fanaticks though unrighteous, unmerciful, unpeaceable, pass among their own Tribes for Saints; but no man can pass the Muster for a Christian indeed that keeps not the Commands of Christ, that conforms not to his Example. The Church owns them not for hers: Christ owns them not for his: but will profess unto them, I know yee not, depart from me, ye that work iniquity: and will expostulate with all who hate to be reformed, for their taking his Covenant in their mouths
Christ has past the same Decree against all vitious Livers, that Severus past a∣gainst Thieves: [per praeconem edixit, ut nemo salutaret Principem qui se fu∣rem esse nosset, ne aliquando detectus capitali supplicio subderetur,] That none salute him with Lord, Lord, who knows himself to be guilty, under pain of be∣ing Convict and suffering the extream punishment. None must enter into his Courts any more than to the Eleusine Rites, or into the Emperours Palace, [Nisi qui se innocentem novit,] but he that knows himself free of those sins, which by the sanction of the Royal Law exclude from the Kingdom of Hea∣ven. And who so presume to contravene those Edicts, must expect the same entertainment that Severus gave Septimius Arabinus, when he came to salute him. [O numina, O Jupiter, O dii immortales! Arabinus non solum vivit; verùm etiam in Senatum venit; fortassis etiam de me sperat, tam fatuum tam sul∣tum esse me judicat ac Heliogabalum.) (Lampridii Alex. Severus.) Oh mon∣strous▪ Arabinus dares come into the Senate, dares appear in the Assembly of Christians, does he think he can deceive me, as he did the world with vain shews, as he did himself with vain hopes: he's deceiv'd indeed if hetake me for such a fool, if he think I will be mock'd. Can he be ignorant that the sentence is past, the prohibition [à mulieribus famosis matrem & uxorem suam salutari, vetuit,] (Id. Ib.) is seal'd, that none presume to joyn themselves to my Church, to associate with my Love, my Dove, my undefiled Spouse, whose Lives are infamous, Christians may not eat with such; and can they expect to eat bread in my Kingdom? And therefore they who either by go∣ing out from us do more openly declare; or by a Conversation unbecoming the Gospel (while they are with us) more secretly insinuate, that they were not, that they are not of us; in an impartial judgement should neither preju∣dice the holiness of that Society, whereof they are no Members: nor the Efficacy of that Religion, they either never came under the power of, or have rejected the yoak of; what, must it be presum'd that the Sun shines not, that its beams warm not; because those men, see not its Light, are not refresh'd, and vegetated with its Warmth; who either shut their eyes, or remove in∣to a Clime it never visits? Dr. Hammond (An. in Heb. 4. 2.) But the word that was heard did not profit those, who were not by Faith joyned to them that obeyed it: Shall we condemn the Seed, because it thrives not to matu∣rity of Fruit, in the ground of a dishonest heart: where either the fowles of the Air, pick it up, or it wants depth of earth, or is choak'd with Thorns and Weeds? Shall we question whether Christ be risen; because men, whose affections are so strongly set upon the earth, as they cannot elevate them to∣wards Heaven, are not risen with him, when we see such palpable Effects and Demonstrations of it, in his raising those to a newness of Life, who do not resist, grieve or quench his Spirit; but, with an humble teachableness, follow its conduct, in that way of holiness his Word hath chalk'd out before us. In order to our perseverance in this way, and confirmation in our assurance that it will infallibly lead us, to Peace here, and eternal Glory hereafter: I have undertaken this vindication of the Christian Faith against the prejudices which our modern either Scepticks or Atheists have taken up against it; which as they took their rise from the Scandals which have been cast upon Religion, by the woful miscarriages of men professing it in guile and hypocri∣sie, so they must fall before a Spirit of Grace and Glory, resting upon the em∣bracers of it in Truth and Sincerity, and shining out upon the World in their so peaceable, humble. meek, and every way Christian deportment, and men seeing their good works may glorifie their Father who is in Heaven, and re∣vere that Discipline (as proceeding from that Father of Lights) by whose in∣fluence the wildness of common Nature is abated, and its vertuous Seeds so improved, as to bring forth Fruit chearing the heart both of God and Man. To which if thou beest instigated (Christian Reader) to aspire by the peru∣sal of this Discourse, and so become one of Christs Witnesses, by sealing to the Truth of the Gospel, by a Life answerable to its most holy, just, and yet easie,
Precepts, thou wilt lay up for thy self a good Foundation for time to come, and contribute towards the conviction of the Adversaries of the Christian Faith, by an Argument so familiar, as it incurrs into every mans sense; and so strenuous, as the most stubborn Atheist will not be able to resist it: but be forc'd to confess the unreasonableness of his own Exceptions, against a Religion that brings forth such Divine Effects. Would we all study thus to adorn the Doctrine of God our Saviour in all things; such real exornations would render Religion more venerable in the eyes of the VVorld, than all verbal Encomiums; those whom the close fist of the most Logical Arguings cannot force the commanding beck of that open-handed Eloquence would allure to a silent admiring of that sacred Fountain whence they see such heal∣ing VVaters flow. That this my Request to my Readers may take effect, I shall back it with that Request to God, which my Dear Mother, the Holy Church of England hath put into her Childrens mouth. [More especially we pray for the good estate of the Catholick Church, that it may be so guided and govern'd by thy good Spirit, that all who profess and call themselves Christians, may be led into the way of Truth, and hold the Faith in Unity of Spirit, in the Bond of Peace, and in Righteousness of Life. And this we beg for Jesus Christ his Sake. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honour and Glory world without end, Amen. FINIS.
