S50 12288859 58840
The Conviction of Worldly-Vanity: OR, THE WANDRING PRODIGAL, And his RETURN: IN TWO PARTS. PART I. Containing his debate with himself about his setting forward in search of the Palace of Worldly Felicity; his hearkning to the Advice of Folly, and submitting himself, to her Con∣duct; the manner of her furnishing him out; of the Progress he made, and the various Adven∣tures he met with by the way: As also the En∣tainment he found at his Arrival, and his Riotous Living there; With his Description of the Vices Reigning therein. PART II. Giving a full Account of his Miraculous Escape from the Palace of Worldly Felicity: Of the glorious Prospect he had of the Celestial City, And of the Progress he made towards it, under the Conduct of Divine Grace: With the manner of his Proceeding, and the several Occurrences he met with by the way: His Arrival at the Palace of Vertue and True Felicity, and his Joyful Reception there: His Excellent Description thereof, and of the Divine and Mo∣ral Vertues which he found therein. Both Pleasant and Profitable. Deliver'd under the Similitude of A Wandring Youth. London, Printed by G. L. for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the Poultrey. 1687. Price Bound One Shilling.
Licensed, November 27th. 1686. Robert Midgley
TO THE READER. MAN is naturally an Inquisi∣tive Creature, continually hankering after Novelties; and tho for the most part a meer Stranger at home, regardless of the Geography of his own Breast (the worst and most deplorable Ignorance!) would yet seem Acquainted with all the World besides. How Solicitous are we about the Af∣irs of Hungary! How Curious to un∣rstand the Rarities of China! The Scituation of Grand Cairo! The Magni∣ficence of the Mogul! And uncertain Tales of Prester John! But in the mean time, how supinely negligent in managing our Domestick Talents, or improving our Understandings in things of real use! How careless to Rescue our Cap∣ivated Minds from the Assaults of lewd Passions, the Scndal of Folly, and Tyran∣y of Vice! How wretchedly Remiss, or ather wholy Averse, from doing That hich is the main Errand we are sent in∣to
the World upon, viz. The Gloxi∣fying our Creator, and securing our Eter∣nal Interests! In Complaisance to this wandering-deprayed-Green-Sickness-Appetite of Mankind, a multitude of Books of Tra∣vels into remote Regions have been pub∣lished in several Languages, and greedi∣ly bought up and perused: The Relati∣on of such various difficult Adventures, the description of Places, Modes and Customes, new uncouth and far different from their own, being very Grateful, and in some respects not altogether Ʋn∣profitable to the Readers. Nay, so far is this Itch of Curiosity indulg'd, that not only True Histori or such as pretend so to be, but Car∣loads of Romances, (whose Authors pro∣fess them to be meer Idea's of Fancy, Coyn'd on purpose to Divert and Amuse) are with Applause entertain'd; whence too many People of either Sex, spend their most precious Minutes upon the Exploits of imaginary Knighss: Errant, Enchanted Castles, Monsters, Gyants and all the Riff-Raff of Amadis of Gaul, and the seven Champions; or the more resin'd and sublimated Follies of the Grand Cyrus, Cassandra, Astraea, &c.
Not only to the loss of irretrievable Time, but further Hazards; For in these kind of Writings, the Passion of sensual Love being display'd with the highest Advantages, and (as it were exposed Naked) in the most soft and delicate Ex∣pressions, 'tis difficult for such as read them, not to be Sing'd with that wanton Flame; or preserve their Hearts free from being Infected with the like Ama∣rous Idaea's; by which means a Thousand young Men and Women have been in∣veigled and undone. Physicians instub born Diseases, which they cannot directly Master, advise to change them by Art into some that are more mild and tractable: Since therefore we cannot hope altogether to Cure this Fanciful Humour in Man, it will not be amiss to try, if we can by a little Ad∣dress, husband and imploy it to whol∣some Ʋse. To this purpose I here pre∣sent thee, Courteous Reader, with a small Book of Travels, but great in its Subject and Design; an Expedition more Glorious than Jason's to Colchos for the Folden Fleece; or that of Columbus for discovery of a New World: In short, A Voyage to the Holy Land, such as every Mortal must of necessity undertake and
goe through with, or else be everlasting∣ly Miserable. Here are the Two Roads of all flesh, graphically described; The one Broad, Smooth, and Plain, as the Treacherous Ocean before tis Ruffled with a Storm, and all the way down hill, bestrow'd with a Thousand Baits and Allurements, al∣ways full of Jolly Company, but ending in the Dead Sea, or Lake of Perdition and Destruction: The other, that turns off short on the Right hand, through the Temple of Virtue, leading to that of Glo∣ry, the Passage Strait and Craggy, beset with Thorns and Bryars, Way-laid by Wolves, Foxes, Bears, Tygers, and all sorts of Beasts of Prey; Lonesome, Unfrequented, and seeming Melancholy, were it not for the still Musique of the Bird of Paradise, which Chears up the fainting Traveler, with its refreshing Notes; and a Beam of Light from the Son of Righteousness, that directs his trembling Steps, till it Conducts him in the End, to the Royal Palace of End∣less Felicity. Though the Discourse be throughout Allegorical, be assured here is nothing Romantick, nothing Fictitious; but all Re∣al, Substantial, and Important. 'Tis
said of those feigned Histories before mentioned, that they inspire such as pe∣ruse them, with ardent desires of Imita∣tion; I wish this serious Parable may have the like Effect, to caution and de∣ter thee from the pernicious Tract of Vanity, and excite and encourage thy en∣deavours in the pursuit of Vertue, Religi∣on and Piety; which will be thy best Antidote in an infectious Season; A se∣serious Godly Conversation and Pra∣ctice, being an excellent Preservative a∣gainst Error of Doctrine. Keep the Heart right, and there is no great dan∣ger of the Brain; whereas on the con∣trary, a loose Prophane Life, and False Opinions, like Ice and Water, do naturally beget each other. 'Tis delivered in a homely plain Fa∣milar stile, that it might be serviceable to the meanest Apprehensions; on whose Memories and Affections perhaps this mode of writing may be more taking, and make deeper Impressions, then more learned Treatises, nakedly laid down by way of Precept and Positive Instructions. This, Reader, whoever thou be, remember, That thou art or hast been that very Prodigal here intended in the
first Part, And if thou dost not amend thy Course, and Return with him in the Second, thou must for Ever have thy Portion with the Devil and his Angel, in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. To avoid which Dreadful Sentence on any poor Soul, If this mean Essay may, by the Divine Blessing, prove any way instrumental, It will Supera∣bundantly Reward the pains taken in Compiling it, by Thy Christian Friend and Servant, J. S.
The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS. PART I. CHap. 1. The Introduction. Page 1. Chap. 2. How the Wandring Prodigal be∣ing resolv'd to set forward to the Palace of Worldly Felicity, Folly (by the help of Evil-will) provides him Cloaths, Armour, Horse, and other Necessaries after a strange manner;  Description thereof, with an Excellent Dis∣course of the Ʋncertainty of Man's Life; and in what manner he proceeded. Page 10. Chap. 3. How on the Way to the Palace of World∣ly Felicity, he was Entertain'd by Folly, with a Discourse of many of her Exploits in the World, &c. Page 29. Chap. 4. How standing doubtful at the parting of two Ways, which to take, Voluptuousness counsell'd him to take the Broad Left-hand-way, &c. Page 36. Chap. 5. How Wisdom (with many perswasions) Entreated him to Enter at the strait Gate; and how by the Counsel of Folly, he refus'd her Advice, &c. Page 44. Chap. 6. How at the Perswasion of Folly, he took
the Broad-way, leading to the Palace of World∣ly Felicity, rejecting the Counsel of Lady Wis∣dom; and how she threaten'd him at parting, and what else happened. Page 53. Chap. 7. How in the Company of Folly and Vo∣luptuousness he Rid to the Palace of Worldly Felicity; and in what manner he was Receiv'd and Entertain'd; with some Observatious there∣on, &c. Page 58. Chap. 8. Of his farther Entertainment and Pro∣gress in the Palace of Worldly Felicity; and how (amongst other things) he had a Prospect of the Tempter in his Deluding shape; and at Night was Entertain'd by Lust, &c. Page 69. Chap. 9. He Discourses of other Recreations in the Palace, and how he was carry'd by Voluptu∣ousness and Folly to Visit the seven Towers, and desoribes the Wonders he saw there, with other things; as also a Prospect of its Situation, &c. Page 79. Chap. 10. He is Entertain'd in a spacious Ban∣queting-house, and declares what Entertainment he met wiih there; as also what further Pro∣mise Voluptuousness made him, &c. Page 101 Chap. 11. A Description of his Fearful Dream, and how thereupon he became Pensive; his Ex∣cellent Reflections on the Estate of a Sinful and Voluptuous Life: Yet continues his former course, &c. Page 106. Chap. 12. How Riding to Recreate himself in the Forrest of Conscious-guilt, he suddenly perceiv'd the Ruine of the Palace of Worldly Felicity, sinking into the Gulf of confusion; and finds himself in a Wretched and Miserable Estate: Reflects upon his past Life, and becomes a True Penitent. Page 117.
PART II. CHap. 1. He is Rescu'd from the miserable Condition he was in, by Divine Grace; has a Prospect and Description of the Coelestial City, and of the Joy he conceiv'd thereat, &c. Page 1. Chap. 2. After a true sence of his Sin, he resolv'd to Travel towards the Coelestial City; and of the difficulty he met with at his setting out; how he Enter'd the Strait gate, where he met Evange∣list, and the Comfort he gave him. Page 11. Chap. 3. How having Enter'd the Value of Hu∣mility, he came to the House of Repentance, and how he was there Entertain'd; with Ad∣monitions and Extolling the Divine Goodness. Page 20. Chap. 4. He is affrighted by the Terror of Consci∣ence, but is at the earnest Intercession of Sor∣row for Sin, spar'd at the Command of Divine Grace; and crying out against Presumption, is humbled under a Sense of Sin. Page 27. Chap. 5. Remembrance opens her Book, and Reads him a Comfortable Lecture, mostly con∣taining God's gracious Promises of Mercy and Forgiveness to True Penitents; and thereby al∣lays his Fears. Page 32. Chap. 6. He acknowledges his wonderful Change, is Assaulted by Discouragement, resists him, and puts him to flight; he goes from the School of Repentance, is like to run into the Path of Er∣ror, but is prevented by Understanding, and convey'd to his House, with other matters of Note. Page 37. Chap. 7. Understanding gives him Cordial Ad∣vice,
and prepares him to proceed to the House of Religion; and how after sound Counsel he went on his way, and what else befell him. Page 44. Chap. 8. How he came to the House of Religion (being inticed in the way to turn aside by Hy∣pocrisie and others) and of the Entertainment he found there; the good Instructions he recei∣ved, with many other matters. Page 47 Chap. 9. Being well Instructed, he passes on to the Palace of True Felicity, desr it, and is there Entertain'd with great Joy, and has from thence a full Prospect of the Colestial City. Chap. 10. He gives a Description of Virtue, toge∣ther with her Noble Qualities, the means where∣by she Operates in the Soul of Man, and why to be desir'd. Page 59. Chap. 11. He gives a brief Account of Faith, so far as is warrantable; to what end she serves, and the especial Marks of her Appearance, &c. as also of Hope and Charity. Page 62. Chap. 12. He gives a Description of Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance, excellently Representing them in their several Capacities, Motions and Operations, &c. Page 69. Chap. 13. He is brought to Perseverance, by whom and Understanding, he is further Instru∣cted; He is Recommended to her by Divine Grace; and has a Prospect of the Coelestial City from the Tower of Faith, whore he continues in Expectation. Page 73.
THE WANDRING PRODIGAL. PART I. CHAP. I. The Introduction. BEing Enter'd upon the Stage of this World, to Act my Part in the Scene of a Short and Uncertain Life, compar'd (by the Wise and Learned) to things of the least Duration and Moment, viz. Grass, the Flower of the Field, Smoke, a Shadow, a Vapour, &c. And having spent my Nonage, or the Morning of my Days, in pursuing Things lighter than Vanity; in following (with Toil and Weariness) Recrea∣tions
and Pleasures that created Trouble in the Aquirement, Folly in the Possession, and a Reluctancy (if not a Loathing) in the Injoyment; I began to consider with my self, That Man was made to a nobler end, and furnished with larger desires, then to content himself with such Airy Trifles: Man, thought I, En∣du'd with an Immortal Soul, In∣spir'd with Reason, and made capa∣ble of Immortality hereafter, ought not (like the Bruit, whose life, when at a period, mingles with the common Air, and renders him no more) to drown himself in Sensu∣ality, or be satisfied with things that yield no true Content, no real Pleasure, no sincere Delight; and therefore giving my Imaginations scope, they wander'd over spaces immeasurable, and ruminated on va∣rious matters, but could fix on no∣thing permanent. I had heard in∣deed,Psal. 16.11. Psal. 87, 3. of the Land of True Felicity, where unspeakable Joys and Pleasures for overmore are found; I had heard very Glorious things spoken of it, but found my Understanding so clouded and darkned with the overshadow∣ing
of present matters, that I knew not readily how to set forward to that desired Region; and the more I paused, the more I found my self at a loss; which made me somtimes conclude I was in the case of one that is newly awaked from a Dream, who all on a suddain grasp the flying Air, and for a while re∣mains in doubt whether those seem∣ing Pleasures or fantastick Forms that flatter'd his Slumbers, were real, or only the effects of a roving Fancy. Thus puzled and confounded, like one that is lost in a Pathless Wilderness, and fears to advance or retreat, as not knowing by which to be most or least Intangled, I still ood musing. When in this con∣usion, Folly, (with whom I a little before suppos'd I had shaken hands, and well hop'd I had shaken off) came slyly behind me, and whispe∣ring me in the Ear, suggested, Tha being in the prime and strength of my days, full of Sprightful Blood and  Vigor, I ought not to leave the World, who courted me with her miles, met me with her Favours, and rew'd my way with Pleasures and
Delights; who inforc'd her utmost Charms to please me, and expos'd her gaudy Beauties in their greatest Lustre to tempt me, to woo and invite me t take Pleasure in her: I ought not (she said) to leave her, to seek I knew not what, to run through Hazards and Dangers, Hardships and Extremities, to find out Pleasures I knew not where, but rather to content my self in the possession of such things as I had and might further experience: Nay further (continued she) of such things as yet you are a stranger to: For truly my Son (said she) there are many Pastime and Recreations that the World ca afford; nay will afford you, if you prove not so ingrateful as to forsake her who has had such Care of you, who ha so often laid you in her Bosom, and lull'd you in her Arms, nourish'd yo from your Infancy, & spread her down Softness to invite and charm swee Slumber to your Eyes: Can you thin that I, who am so Antient, would tak all this pains to follow and  to this, if you were not a Son that  intirely doat upon, though you hav been so unkind as to go about (for  know not what reason) unnaturally t
banish me your Company? Do you think (said she) that I that am Antient as Time, I who saw the first Man in Paradise, and Oblig'd him to hearken to my Advice, have not had long Ex∣perience of things, and consequently know what best will suit your Years? Come, come, (continued she) you must, you shall lay by these Doubts, these Scruples, and return with me to your kind Mistress: O, do but think with what Smiles she'll receive you, what new invented Pleasures, what Pastimes, with what Delights she'll please your Sences! nothing she'll think too much, no Expence nor Cost too great. Folly having utter'd these Words with the most winning Eloquence nd smoothest Oratory, my former Thoughts began to vanish, or at least my Resolution, to search out The Land of True Felicity, began to stagger; such Power and Force had this bewitching Charmer to darken my Understanding, so that now I egan to frame in my Mind nothing ut Worldly-Pleasures, Pastimes, nd Recreations, which taking the pportunity of such an unexpected
Advantage, fail'd not to Unite themselves with my Desires, and Insi∣nuate into a Familiarity more then ever with my Will and Affections, so that by over-powring my Reason, they soon gained the Fortress; and now wholy submitting my self to the Conduct of Folly, I run into Extravagance and Excess of World∣ly-Delights, foolishly imagining to find therein somthing that I might call True Felicity; notwithstanding I had formerly  the Opinion of him, who by Experience found them to be no other them Vanity and Vexation of Spirit;Eccles. 2.17. and at that very Juncture, heard or fancy'd I heard a Voice sounding in my Ears,Col. 3.2. viz. Set your Heart on things above, and not on things below: But now Folly prevail'd to that Degree, that  Esteem'd nothing better then her Council, and became so far Ena∣mour'd with her, that I not onl Listen'd to all she said abroad, bu Resolv'd to take her into my House, or Heart, that she might be alway at Hand to Negotiate between me and the World; for now my Sense being altogether Stupified, I hop'd
by her Assistance to procure what ever might contribute to my Felici∣ty; but in the sequel found my self strangely mistaken, as all those must xpect to do, who depending on Folly for Advice, put their trust in d rely upon Riches, Worldly-Dlights, Pleasures, Honours the Arm of Flesh, or overwhelm them∣lves in the depth of Snsuality.  or as well may Men imagine to atch Fish by Angling in the Air, or ccessfully pursue their Game with ounds in the Ocean, as to expect True Felicity in those things wherein it is not, was not, nor ever will be;Mat. 7.16.or who can expect Grapes on Thorns, or Figgs on Thistles? Who can expect hat those things which are Momen∣ary and perishing in themselves, ould satisfie an Immortal-Soul, hould fill and satiate the Mind of Man, for whose Desies the Earth is uch too strait? Nor is there any ing less then the Centre of Eternal clicity, that is able to render that atisfaction; nothing but the Abun∣dance of Gods House can satisfie, &c.Psal. 36.8.or if we consider the World at best,Deut. 29.18.t's Honey is mingled with Gall, Wine
mingled with Wormwood, even it's seeming Pleasures carry a Sting in themselves, and are frequently mingled with bitterness, as Hunger, Thirst, Heat and Cold, Weariness, Toit, Perplexity, Vexation, Anger, Hatred, Envy, Disdain, Distrust, Flattery, Deceit, Intemperance, and the like; who are Link'd, as in a Chain, to their Contraries, although not easily discern'd by those who Folly blinds and deceives with a fal Glass of Seeming-good. As t Wise Man says when she sits to ca Passengers who go right on thei way: Whose is Simple, let him turn  hither; and as for him that wanter Ʋnderstanding, she saith to him Stolen Waters are sweet,Prov. 9.15, 16, 17, 18. and Brea Eaten its Secret is pleasant; but  knoweth not that the Dead are ther and that her Guests are in the depth  Hell; he is deluded by her Flatter & foresees not the danger of runnin rashly on in the ways of Wickedne till he is too frequently past Recove∣ry, and must be Irreparably lo unless Wisdom (who is a Queen  great Command and Power) Resc him, by opening his Eyes, and i
lightning his Understanding by put∣ting Holy Fear into his Heart, and Teaching him her ways; wherefore, Happy is the Man that findeth Wisdom,Prov. 3.13. he Man that getteth Ʋnderstanding. But leaving her a while, I shall pro∣ceed to tell what Progress (by the Advice and Direction of Folly) I ndertook, and what befel me on e way, &c. as it falls in order  the Ensuing Chapters.
CHAP. II. How the Wandring Prodiga being resolv'd to set forward to the Pallace of Worldly Fe∣licity, Folly (by the help of Evil will) provides him Clothes, Ar∣mor, Horse, and other Necessaries after a strange manner; his D∣scription thereof, with an exce∣lent Discourse of the Ʋcertain∣ty of Mans Life; and in wha manner he proceeded. Folly having Reconell'd me to the World, and Indulg'd me with trifling and momentary plea∣sures, I found my self uneasie; fo yet methought I had not met wit what I desir'd; and being Ambiti ous of Novelty, and possessed with a Itching mind, of seeing strang Places and Things, Incited thereto by Reading and Considering the Tra∣vels and Adventures of many, wh are stiled Heroes, spur'd on b
Pride and Vain-glory, whome Folly had ately brought to my House, & made y Intimate Acquaintance, nothing ould serve my turn, but Imust set orward in like manner as others had one; but to what intent or purpose,  could scarcely give my self any sa∣iafaction; wherefore I resolved to nsult Folly,; And to her, taking a onvenient Opportunity, I open'd  Purpose, and began with weak rguments, to Inforce the little Rea∣n I had for such an Ʋndertaking: ut she Interrupting me, told me, hat without any more trouble, she highly approv'd of my Resolution, and that nothing could better please er, then that I had put it by such n Ʋndertakeing, into her Power to ive me a full Prospect of the Pallace f Worldly Felicity, whose varioty  the Buildings, Rare Devices, No∣ Entertainments, and Magnificent ghts, with many other things of  mean Romp and Grandeur: She ex∣ll'd me to the Skies; But above  excelled me for my Wit and Judg∣ent, Courage and Brave Resolution; ll by the help of Vain-glory, She ff'd: me up so that degree, that I
came wise in my own conceit.Prov. 26.12. Nor (said she) shall you go unprovided or alone, but Referring the care of all to me, I shall so well furnish you, that nothing necessary for this Undertaking shall be wanting: And hereupon she made a further Vow, to accompany me in all my Ʋndertakings of this kind, giving me to understand that she had accompanied many in this Jour∣ney, and that to their no small satis∣faction; for knowing all the Places, and being well known is many of them, She doubted not to procure me such entertainment as none that had been there before me had, or few who should come after were likely to find. These Promises of Folly being made with such earnest Expressions and Protestations, and with such an Innocent Look, I conclu∣ded my self a happy man that I had got so kind a Guide, especially such an one as was so well acquainted with the World, by whose means I was to find such High Entertainment: So that I leaped for Joy, and hugg'd my self in such security, that now  doubted not to possess what ever my blinded desires could form: And
though I took Evil for Good, Dark∣ness for Light,Isa. 5.20. and Falshhood for Truth; yet at that time I was so Ob∣stinate, that I would not consult the saying of the Wise Man, (viz.) There is Counsel, and he that taketh good Advice, shall not repent him here∣after; altogether forgetting it is for∣biden to take counsel of Fools, because such as is the Counselor, such must needs the Counsel be: Nor is it con∣sistent with Reason,Prov. 16.22. but that the Counsel of a Fool must be Flly: For as well may a River Run backward, or Nature do her Work preposte∣rously, as Wisdom and Folly cohabit together: for as Solomon says,Prov. 14.8. The Wisdom of the Prudent is to understand his way, but the Folly of Fools is deceit: And again,Prov. 15.14. The beat of him that hath understanding seeketh Knowledge, but the Mouth of a Fool feedeth  Foolishness. And as nothing is better then Good Counsel, so nothing is more destructive than that which is Evil; for by that, Great and Flou∣rishing Kingdoms are often brought to misery and desolation, Sacred things Poluted and Profaned, Cities Sack'd and left in Flames, Laws sub∣verted,
and all manner of Villany com∣mitted, all manner of Vce exalted, and Vertue trodan under and oppressed. Yet at that time these things came not into my Head, for being Intent upon my Journey, I left all to the managements of Folly, who according to her Discretion, was wonderous busie in providing me Horse, Arm, Armour, and other necessaries. Now it so happened that Folly had a Kinsman of hers called Evil will, who was an , and upon occasion could furnish such Rash Travellers as my self, who were Recommended to him by Her, with all materials; this Man she made acquainted with my design, who not only seemed to approve it, but promised me whatever should be conceived necessary or convenient, contenting himself to take Folly for his Ray Mistress; and so giving my self no further trouble on that Oc∣casion, I took my Leave till the next Morning, but could ocarcely sleep for thinking of my Journey; and when I did sleep, I Dream'd of nothing else; such deep Impressions had the words of Fllay made both in
my Mind and Fancy. All Night long methought nothing but Pleasant Gar∣dens, Stately Buildings, Beautifull Women, Hounds pursuing their Game, Hawks flying in the Air, Horse-Racing, Running-matches, Dice, Cards, Bowls, Banquets, Ca∣rousings, and the like, presenting themselves to my Eyes and Taste; and to my Ears, Charming Voices and Melodious Strains. In fine, All my Senses were delighted beyond degree such Power has Folly over the Imaginations of those she makes her Slaves, and lulls into a fond Security. Night being past over in the Effects of a fantastick Fancy, no soo∣ner began the Sun to shine in my Face, but Folly and Evil-Will (who was ever ready to take the advan∣tage of doing an Evil Turn,) en∣ter'd my Chamber laden with the Trumpery she had provided for my use: As a Shirt of Lasciviousness, a Doublet of Lewd Desires, Hose of Vain Pleasures, and a Cap of Pride and Vain-glory, a Croslet of Inconstany, and a Steel Coat of Ignoran, Can∣lets of Idleness, and Ʋmbraces of
tinency a Gorget of Luxury, and a Head piece of Lightness, a Bucklet of Arrogancy, and a Girdle of Intem∣perance, a Sword of Violence and Re∣bellion, and a Launce called hope of long Life; then a Horse being the only thing wanting, Folly called to Vanity her Principal Groom, to bring out the Horse call'd Timerity or Rashness; and having placed each thing in order, Folly gently raised me from my Bed of soft Delights, and Saluting me with an Amorot Ki with a Charming Tongue said in a Whispering Tone, See see, my Joy, your trusty Hand-Maid is return'd to Crown your Wishes with all you can desire; therefore rise, my gentle dearest Love, my tender Happiness and chief∣est Care, and accept the Present I make thee. At these words, shaking off Drousiness, I made her a return of thanks, and told her that I had not only now, but wou'd likewise for the future, cast all my care upon her, and live supinele, since I had found her Diligence so great, and attended with so much Expedi∣tion, that I could no: choose but wonder how she had brought to pass
so great an Undertaking in so short a time. To this, Folly smilingly replye'd, I am ever Industrious in serving those hat confide in me, and am restless till I accomplish whatever is in my Power; and thereupon she singled out what she had procured, that she ight the better put them on in Order; and first, my Shirt of Lascivi∣usness, which suddainly wrought a trange Alteration in me, for no soo∣er was it over me, but I could not endure to be roughly handled, but coveted Delicacy and gaudy Attire, oft Couches and downey Repose, coveting and desiring nothing more hen unlawful Love and forbiden Enjoyments. Then she put on my Doublet of Lowd Desires, which altogether pall'd my Fancy as to Sa∣red things, and render'd me sitting or any base and unseemly Enter∣prize; and the better to render me utterly insensible of any thing that was Virtuous, she put on my Mose of Vain Pleasure, and fastned them with Points of Vanity, which put me upon many Extravagances, too edious, or at least, not conveni∣ent
to be Recited: And now, least  should faint by the way, she call'd Ill-government my Cook, to pre∣pare a Breakfast of what Eart Air, or Sea wou'd afford; which b her direction he contriv'd at so Lavish and Profuse a Rate, that the Epicurean Luxury was not to b Compar'd there with; and whilst  was Pampering my self to inflam or increase my youthful Blood, there by to stir up lustful Desires and con∣cupiscential Imaginations. Bolly stil urging me to Eat and to Drink  Excess, I had Leasure somewhat more seriously to ask her a few que∣stions; my drift being, if possible, t know her Original, and how she had manag'd her affairs from time to time: To which she was 10th to re∣turn an Answer as to particulars, but I urging her to give a brief Account, for indeed all her exploits might fill the Largest of Volumns, and tire an Age of men to write them, she said, She stood in doubt whether her first Exploit, from whence she Dated her being, was in Heavener on Earth: Whether in Prompting or Perswa∣ding the Aspiring Angels to Rebel,
against their Creator, by which Da∣ing and Unsuccessful Attempt, They lost the seat of Bliss and Hap∣yness, and Changed the glorious ealms of Light for Seats of Woe, arkness and Despair; or on Man a Paradice, who by her Counsel dis∣beyed his Maker, defac'd his age lively Impressed on him, un∣ing himself and his Posterity; t of these she rather believ'd the mer, but however from Mans Fall e might be confident, and from at time (she said) she had been sel∣m Idle; but on the contrary, Active, Strong and Vigorous, never ck nor fearing Death so long as Mankind lasts, for though Fools ie, yet she had by experience ound that whilst succeeding Gene∣tions supply the Vacancy, she ould not want a Stock to live on, till Time was swallow'd in Eter∣nity She would have proceeded, but  being desirous to be as Expeditious  my Journey as it was possible, and not caring to lose any time, treated her that I might hear the st on our way to the Palace of
Worldly Felicity; For, said I, b such an Entertainment the way wi seem much the shorter: she lik' my motion, and quickly gave co sent. And by this time Breakfa being ended, I prepared to put o my Armour; which swell'd me wit so much Pride and Folly, that  forgot Heaven and Heavenly things and Atheist-like, Laugh'd at Immo∣tality, ascribing all to Fate an Chance; So that being Blinded an Stupified with Ignorance and Sel conceit, I followed my own va Inclinations, saying and doing wha I pleas'd, or such things as seem' good in mine own Eyes; forgetting That the way of Sinners is Paved wit Stones, but at the end thereof is Hell Darkness and Pains;Eccles. 2.10. Psal. 61.12. and that Go Rewardeth every Man according to h Work. Nor what the Apostle say Look what a Man Soweth, that sha he also Reap;Cal. 6.7, 8, he that Soweth to th Flesh, shall of the Flesh Reap Corruption. &c. For these things were justle out of my Head and Heart b Darling-Lusts and Crouding-Iniqui∣ties, that left no thought of any thing that was good; So wretche
the Man that gives himself up to e Rul'd and Guided by Folly; so uch he Degenerates, that he is not ting to bear the Name or Cogni∣nce of Man, but rather that of uit, which in it's kind surpasses m: For all Creatures (Man Excep∣d) perform the End and Office for ich they were Created, and tinue in their pristine Estate of tive Innocence, as not being bled, by reason of their Irratio∣ty, to discern between Good and il, and consequently are left cusable; but,Psal. 49.20. Man that knoweth, d will not consider, is like the Beast t perisheth, and far more unhappy en he; For when the Beast dies, he verts to Dust, and is no more; but  for Man,Eccles. .9. God will bring him to dgment. And now as I was saying, Folly beginning to put on my Armour, observed this Method: First she put on my Steel-Coat of Ignorance, and  Croslet of Inconstancy, where∣on I became not only forgetful of od things, but likewise variable d inconstant as the Wind, conti∣ally Altering and Changing, not
Caring or Regarding what I sai or did; being altogether one  them of whom St. Paul speaks,Rom. 1.21, 22. vi Because that when they knew God, th Glorified him not as God, neither w they Thankful, but became Vain  their Imagirtations, and their fool Hearts were Darkned; profess themselves to be Wise, they becau Fools. Then she put on my Umb∣ces of Arrogance, by which mea I rew Cateless and Presumptio undertaking to do and perfo things that were too Mighty for  which I neither understood, nor  able to fulfil; yet I Proudly boas great Things, and lifted my self  in Conceit above my Fellows. Th on went my Gorget of Glutton which prompted me to commit  cleanness; for fill'd with Wine a sumptuous Fare above measure, t boyling Blood inflam'd my Vei and prompted me to strange desire For as the Poet has it,
Ceres and Bacchus are to Venus Friends, For charg'd with them, Mankind to Leudness tends. Now so it came to pass, that over hese she strip'd Presumption; the hich, though it swell'd me to a onsterous Bulk, I could little or othing perceive, and being Wise in y own Conceit, what others told e, I was far from believing; though me of them, and those none of the eanest, seeing I was not to be eclaim'd, dealt plainly with me, d said to each other,Prov. 26.12. viz. There  more hopes of a Fool, then of him: nd the better to secure these, on ent my Girdle of Intemperance, hich made me Launch out beyond asure, by letting loose the Reins  Letehery, and all other fleshly Lusts and Affections; and to this he fastned my Sword of Violence and bellion, so that putting my Confi∣nce therein, I spar'd not to Rebel ainst Heaven and Earth, by ansgressing the Laws of God and , and Violating the sacred Vows
of my Baptism, without Reluctancy or Regret; so that it might justly be said, whilst I liv'd, I was dead in Sins and Trespasses.Ephes. 2.1. Then on my Head, she plac'd a Helmet of Wan∣tonness, deck'd with the gaudy Plumes of a Roving and Restle Fancy, and an Evil Imagination, whereby I might Contemn or Brave my Superiours. Next to these came the Gantlets of Idleness, which being on, I took Pride, and bega to Glory in the sufficiency of my Riches and other Abilities, especially in my Wisdom and Strength; whe indeed I had neither; and rathe then want somthing to Brag of, i Boasted as a Glory, what was indeed  my Shame, as my Drunkenness  Debauchery, and other Vices an Inimities, So apt is Man, whe void of Grace and True Wisdom to abuse himself, when he think what he does, resounds to his Credit And of such as these the Prophe Hosea speaks,Hos. 4.7. when he says, I wil turn their Glory into Shame. Then that I might not Blush at the Com∣mission of any known Sin, she ca about my Neck the Buckler of I∣pudence,
so that I bogled at nothing, ut set my Face like a Flint against ose that Reprov'd me: And now thing wanted, but my Horse meritie, and my Lance, call'd, e Hope of long Life, which were ewise at Hand, little considering e Danger of the one, and the ncertainty of the other: As for  latter, upon which all my Hopes pended, if I had consider'd and sulted Wisdom, I should have and by Comparison, That the World being as one continued orm, Men rise up like Bubbles in eir several Generations, descend∣ing à Jove Pluvio, from God and e Dew of Heaven, from a Tear d Drop of Man, from Nature and ovidence; and some of these in∣ntly sink into the Deluge of their t Parents, and are obscur'd in a et of Water, having no other business in the World, then to be Born, that they might be able to ie; others float up and down two  three turns, and suddainly disap∣ar, giving place to others; and ey that Live longest upon the ce of the Waters, are in Perpetual
motion, and restless, till being crush'd with a greater drop of a Cloud, they sink into flatness, and are no more visible to mortal Eyes: So is every Man born in Vanity and Sin; he comes up like a Mushroom, that in a Night thrusts its Head into the Air, and before the falling Sun it droops and dies; some of them without any other Intrest in the Af∣fairs of the World, then that they made their Parents a little glad, and very sorrowful; others ride longer in the Storm, it may be till seven years of Vanity be expired, & then the Sur perad venture shines hot upon their Heads, and they fall into the shades below, into the coverture of Death, Darkness and the Grave, where they are lay'd up till the Resurrection a but if the Bubble stand a bigger Shock and escape Innumerable Danger that threaten it, then the young man dances Empty and Gay, shining like a Doves neck, or the Image of a Rainbow, which has no substance but only the representation of Co∣ours, and so dances out the gayety o his Youth, being all the while in  Storm; and the reason why he en∣dures,
is because a greater drop falls not on him to crush him, or that he sink not under the pres∣sure of a Load of Indigested Meat, or be quench'd by a disorderly Surfeit, or by the effects of a prevalent Hu∣mor; wherefore to preserve a Man alive in the midst of so many and so various Hazards and Chances, is as great a Miracle as to Create him; o raise him out of Nothing, and to preserve him from falling into No∣thing, are equall Issues of Almighty Power: And therefore the Sages of the World have contended for words most Properly or Emblema∣ically signifying the shortness of Mans Life; Homer calls it a Leaf, the he smallest part of a weak and fading Plant; Pindar calls it the Dream of  Shadow; and another, the Dream f the Shadow of Smoke: but to conclude, St. James,James 4.14. Inspir'd by a more Excellent Spirit, says That our Life is but a Vapour. But these Consi∣derations, as I said, were justled out of my Head, as indeed they are out of the Heads of too many in the World, ho put far away the Evil Day;Amo 6.3 Wherefore mounting my Horse Te∣merity,
and taking my Launce in my hand, Folly likewise mounted in an Airey Garb (which much expos'd her to the Wind, and seem'd to most that beheld it lighter then Va∣nity) upon a Jennet called Simplicity; and Evil-will trudged it on foot, as our Attendant, and so we set for∣ward at a venture.
CHAP. III. How on the way to the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, Folly en∣tertain'd him with a Discourse of many of her Exploits in the World, &c. YOu cannot but Imagine that be∣ing Accouter'd and Accompa∣ed as I was, that, I thought my self mething, when I was Nothing;Gal. 6.3 and gan to cast great things in my thoughts, being no less Possessed with Pride and Haughtiness of mind, then Nebuchadnezar, when he boasted of s Magnificent Structure, saying,Dan. 30. Is  this great Babel, which I have Built  the House of the Kingdom, and for the Honor of my Majesty? Nor indeed did I altogether desist from fram∣ing Castles in the Air, Folly had so besotted my Reason and blinded my Understanding. By this time the Road being som∣ at Winding, we had lost sight  my House, and I calling to mind
the Promise of Folly, renewed my re∣request, Entreating her that she would proceed to give me a further account of her managing Affairs, to reherse what People she had Gover∣ned, how they were Ruled, Condu∣cted, and Councel'd: To which she made the followign Reply. My Exploits (said she) are so many, and Managements so great, that neither my Memory nor my Tongue can contain nor render an Account thereof; but of such as do Occur, I shall give a brief Account. You have heard how Angels and Man Embraced my Counsel, though they came off Losers, by being unsuccessful in their Attempts, as what could they less expect in undertaking matters of so high and mysterious a qua∣lity and consequence? I counselled Cain, Adam's first born, 4.4, 5, 8, 11. when he saw his Sa∣crifice (which he offer'd up without Faith) unsuccessful, to Remove his Bro∣ther Abel, (who found Acceptance) out of the way by Murthering him; for which he entailed Gods Wrath and Displeasure upon himself and his Po∣sterity. I caused the Ancient Giants t fill the Earth with Violence,Gen 6.11. and t corrupt their ways before their Ma∣ker,
which Incensed him to send a De∣uge, and destroy all but Eight Persons;  Lull'd them likewise into a security hilst the Ark was Building, that so ey might make no Provision for their fety. I Counselled Ham the Son of oah the Patriarch, after the dread∣ul Inundation,Gen. 9 22, 25, to despise his Fathers akedness, whereby he Incurred a urse upon himself and his Posterity. Counselled the Children of the East, der the Mighty Nimrod,Gen. 11. to build  Ridiculous Tower upon the Plains of hinar, for which Vain-glorious At∣mpt to get themselves a Name, their anguage was Confounded, and they atered to the Ends of the Earth; nd being so scater'd, I taught them to rget their Maker,Rom. 1.25. and Worship the Creature instead of the Creator I Coun∣lled the People of Sodom to commit natural Folly,Gen. 19 for which themselves and their City were Consumed with Fire. I Counselled Lot's Wife to dis∣obey in Looking Back, for which she was turn'd into a Pillar of Salt;Gen. 19.26, 33, 35 and I  was that caused his Daughters to make him Drunk and Commit Incest ith him.Gen. 39 7. I Counselled Joseph's Mi∣ress to Attempt his Chastity. I Coun∣selled
Pharoah to Oppress the Children of Israel in the Land of Goshen,Exo. 1.11, 16. an vainly attempt to hinder their Increas by destroying their Male Children; an overcome by my Perswasion, notwith∣standing the many Judgements th might have deterred him fre striving against Heaven, he rash pursued them into the Red Sea,Exod. 14.27.28, where he and all the Memphian Cavalry we over whelm'd by the Returning Wav I Counselled the Israelites to murm against their Superiour, and to da about the Calf in Horeb,Exod. 32.6, 27, 28. for whic many of them fell by the Sword, Earth quake and Pestilence.Numb. 22.6, 12. I Cause Balack to send for Balaam to curse th Israelites, when on the contrary he was forced to Bless them. I Caused Acha to conceal the Wedg,Josh. 7.20 21.25. &c. for which  lost his Life. I Caused Sisera to seck fo safety in the Tent of Jael,Judg. 4.18 19, 20, 21. wher he lost his Life. I caused Holofernis to drown himself in Wine and Lustfu Thoughts,1 Sam. 2.12. whilst he gave Judith a opportunity to take is Head. I Counsel∣led Ely's Sons to commit those Wicked∣nesses and Abominations, for which Incensing Gods Displeasure agains them,2 Sam. 4.11, they fell in Battle. I Counselle
e Philistians to send for Sampson,  order to make them Pastime, when eaning on the Pillars of the House,  pull'd it about their Ears,Judg. 16.25, 30. and ew more of his Enemies at his Death en he had done in his Life-time.1 Sam. 15.9. I aused Saul to spare Agag and his ocks, for which disobedience the ngdom of Israel was Rent from him  his Posterity. By my Advice he  to Enquire of the Estate of his Affairs at the Oracle of Hell,1 Sam. 28 7. and the  Day fell on his Sword at Gil∣a. I Counselled David to commit Flly with Uriah's Wife,2 Sam. 11 3, 4 & 15 13. & 13.14. for which he was Obliged to fly before his Son Absa∣lom. I Counselled Amnon to defile Thamar his Sister, for which he Lost  Life. I caused Jeroboam to set up Calves in Dan and Bethel.1 Kins. 12.18, 29. I caused Haman to procure a Decree for the Distruction of the Jews,Esth. 3.12 13. which fell upon himself and his House. I Caused Ahab to covet Naboth's Vineyard and Jesabel to cause it's Possessor to be Slain,1 Kings 21 for which she and her Posterity were Rooted out.Jonah. 1.3. I Caused Jonah to disobey his Maker, by foolishly at∣tempting to fly from him who is every where, for which he suffered a three
Days Imprisonment in the Whales Belly. I caused the Servants of Darius  procure Daniel's being cast into the Den of Lyons,Dan. 6.7. which turned to theirs their Wives and Childrens Destructi∣on. I counselled the two Elders to at∣tempt the Chastity of Susanna, and ∣terwards accuse her of Adultery, wh turned to their own Disgrace and Ru∣ine.Mat. 14.7. I caused Herod to make that ra Vow, by the means of which John t Baptist lost his Head.Mat. 26.47. I counsell Judas to betray his Master, and th to Hang himself.Acts 5.1, 2, 3. I caus'd Ananias a Saphira to Be-ly themselves, for whi they lost their Lives. Folly having proceeded thus fa in declaring her Tragical Adventures, I was so terrifi'd with the Thought of them, that I found my self Obli∣ged to entreat her that she wou Desist; for I had enough of this kin of Discourse to Create in me  Dislke of her further Conduct, lea she should shew me some such slipe Trick, as she had done to others yet much a doe had I to Perswad her to give over; for when he Hand was in, she would have ru over Ten-thousand other Stories
mention'd as well in Civil as Sacred History; in which it seems, she was a Party or Counsellour. But omit∣ng them, as I said, at my entreaty,  began to question her how far it  as to the Palace of Worldly-Felicity, hither we were going; and also, that I might not be altogether a ranger when I came thither, that  would give me a further Descrip∣tion of it, then yet I had heard from any Hand; which she promis'd to : But just as she was about to gin, we came to a place where the way parted.
CHAP. IV. How, standing Doubtful at t parting of two Ways, which  take, Voluptuousness Cou sell'd him to take the Bro Left-hand-Way, &c. WHether of the two Ways  take at the first Sight,  found Folly, by her pausing was a loss, and that which made her mo carefully consider (if Folly may ev be said to do so) was because th the Sun grew Low, and drew neart it's Setting: Now whilst she wa Musing (which was not long) I ha opportunity to Discover that t Right-hand-Way was exceedi Narrow, enclos'd with Threatni Rocks and Precipices; as also full  Mountains, which hanging over,  a manner met each other, so that a Noon-day they cast a sullen Shade besides, it was mostly over-grow with Thorns and full of Clumper
that made it seem Unpleasant to ravelers, especially such as took olly for their Guide. When on he other Hand, the Way was Broad, een and Smooth, Border'd on her side with pleasant Rivers and reading Trees, that cast a fragrant nell, Enamel'd with Flowers of vers kinds; and this Way Folly on Pitch'd upon: Nor was my Horse less Resolute (which appear'd by his Flouncing and Floundering when I attempted Rein him in) then she, to Carry me that way; nay, indeed my Inclinations were not Uncomplyant; yet Remembe∣ring what Stories my Guide had told me, I was not altogether without some doubt, that I might meet with oughs, Quagmires, Snares, or somthing of the like nature; and the rather, because I fancy'd at the same time I heard a Voice, saying,Mat. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the straight Gate, for wide is the Gate and broad is the Way, that leadeth to Destruction, and many there  that go in thereat; but straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that deth unto Life, and few there be  find it. This made me a little
startle, and the more because I foun somthing Checking me within, as I at∣tempted to go forward towards th green way, and suggested the Da∣ger on this manner,Heb. 12.25. viz. See that y Refuse not him that Speaketh; for if th escaped not who Refused him who Spo on Earth, how much more shalt n thou escape, if thou turnest from hi that Speaketh in Heaven: Thou a the Man that hast Refused his Couns and wouldest have none of his Advice thou art Running from the Ways  Peace,Prov. 1.24, 25. even almost to the hazar of thy Eternal Welfare. This notwithstanding, Folly, w began to deride my Fears, and pr mise me a Thousand Felicities whipt on my Horse (who was  himself too free) began a little  cool my Courage, and make  more apprehensive of Danger; an the rather (which was a great won∣der) because I at that time perceiv' no body upon the Road, though th prints of Innumerable Foot-step appear'd, especially of such as ha∣gon forward, yet but a small num∣ber in Comparison of those that ha return'd. But so it happen'd, tha
whilst Folly and I were in some De∣te about the matter, I espy'd at a stance two Ladies coming towards e place of Parly; which did not a tle Rejoyce me, for I thought now  ight enquire somthing, that one y or other might turn to my Ad∣tage; but my Eye was most upon  that came down the broad Way, ad that for two Reasons: First be∣cause she was Nearest: And Secondly because she was exceeding Gay, be∣ing Cloath'd in Purple and Scarlet, broyder'd with Gold, and studded over with Pearls & Gems of inestima∣ble Value; her Locks, that waved in careless Ringlets in the Wind, dang∣ upon her rising Breasts, which m'd two Hills of driven Snow; her Hands seem'd Wax cast in the choi∣est Mould, and to her Lineaments of Body, for Neatness & Shape, nothing that I had seen might be in my Eyes Comparable; her Brows bent Arch∣wise, like a Bow; her Forehead, on which the Curling Amber flow'd, seem'd Alablaster, and her Eyes two Sears or Orient Diamonds; her Nose was comly, bending by degrees from it's Foundation, or it's Rise; and in
her Cheeks the Roses and Lilies strove for Mastery; her Lips, that blush'd with Rubies, inclos'd Trans∣parent Pearls; and her smooth Chin seem'd polish'd Ivory; the Horse she Rid on, I must confess was Dark, yet of the largest Size, and trapp'd with Silver, proudly Neighing, and seeming by his proud and lofty Bounds to scorn the Ground that Bore him: This Sight I beheld with some Delight, and for a time won∣der'd what it meant, especially that so great a Personage should come without Attendance; but long my wonder lasted not, before I was con∣vinc'd she came to meet me, and con∣gratulate my Arrival; having (as I afterward understood by Folly) chang'd her Name, the better to de∣ceive me, from Worldly-Pleasures, who was my former Mistress, to that of the Lady Voluptuousness, by some call'd Excess of Pleasure, Riot, Dalli∣ance, and a hundred other Names; but I had scarce leisure to make any further Observations, before she Accosted me in this manner, her Eyes sparkling Love and Lascivious Desires:
O my Lovly Youth (said she) how happy am I made this Day, that I have found you thus Attir'd, thus bent, and thus resolv'd; the Sight's so pleasing, nothing could have pleased me more; I heard indeed of your approach by your Servant Evil-Will, who ran be∣fore to bring me tidings: Therefore came I forth to meet thee, and deli∣gently to seek thy Face,Pro. 15, 16, 17, 18 19, 20. and I have found thee; I have decked my Bed with Tapestry, with carved Work, with fine Linnen of Egypt; I have Perfu∣med my Bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinamon: Come, let us take our fill of Love till the Morning, let us Solace our selves with Loves; for the Good Man is not at home, he is gone a long Journey, he hath taken a bag of Money with him and will come home at the day appointed. Upon this, pausing a while with an amorous Leer and winning Gesture, casting an Eye with half a Face, the better to en∣snare my Affections, after she had whispered with Folly, she thus pro∣ceeded: I perceive (said she) by your Attendant Folly, my Dear and Af∣fectionate Kinswoman, that you are in doubt of your way; Alas how could
you in the Gayety of all your Youth and Blooming Glory, harbor such a Scruple, when so great a disproportion is evident. Think you, or at least can  enter into your Imagination, that you craggy Path, incompass'd with threat∣ning Dangers on every side, into which whomsoever enters, must be sure to meet with Wearyness, Toyl, Watchings, Fastings, Mortifications, and find it (beside what appears at a distance) hung with Sighs, and overflow'd with Tears, Ecchoing Groans from every Rock, and strew'd with Hands, Eyes and Feet, which Pilgrims by reason of the Thorny Way, have been oblig'd to leave behind them; besides, he that enters there, must leave behind him that which he most esteems, the dearest, nearest, and greatest Sollace of Life, that is,Mat. 11.25. Mark 8.35. Luke 8.24. Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Brethren, Sisters, Yea, and what is dearest of al to him, his own Life; and all this to take up a Cross. Consider again, and think by the Pleasantness of this Left-hand-way, by the Gayety and Gaudiness that already offers, what the rest may be; have not you heard of Soft Repose, Pastimes, Recreations, Tuneful Voices, & Melodious Sounds,
with Charming Ladies, whose quaint evices to please their Lovers, Create ach hour a Thousand Transports, sides the other Recreations that ntervene, in Reciting which, my Tongue ould faulter, and your Patience tire. ut let it suffice that I am come to be our Guide and Governess, and leaving  Folly and Me the Conduct and Disposal of your Affairs, you shall not nly instantly arrive at the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, but there be enter∣ain'd beyond your Wish: And with that, She caught me, and kiss'd me with n Impudent Face. But overcome with the Dread of the one, and the Allurements of the other, I knew not at that time that she had cast down many Wounded,Prov. 7.26.27. nor that many strong Men have been slain by her, neither that hers is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death.
CHAP V. How VVisdom with many Per∣swasions Intreated him to enter at the Strait Gate; and how by the Counsel of Folly, he Refu∣sed her Advice, &c. SO it happen'd, that before I had time to reply, or she to proceed, the other Lady came up, in whose Countenance Wisdom and Virtue were lively Pourtray'd; Modesty, Chastity, Sobriety, and Gravity sat on her Face; her Garb was Comely and Neat, though Plain; notwithstanding which, it seemes she is the Kings Daughter,Psal. 45. and is all Glorious within, for in that her Beauty consists; At her approach, the other gave some∣what back, as being dash'd with the presence of so noble a Lady; when with a Look that darted sweetness and cordial Love,Num. 22.23. she thus began: Because (said she) thy ways are Perverse before me, therefore came I out to withstand thee: Knowest thou
continued she) wretched Man, to whom ou hast harkned? What Syren it is that Attempts to Charm thee into security ith her deluding Voice? Knowest thou at her Footsteps tend to Hell,Prov 7.27. that er ways (how pleasant soever they ay seem) Lead to Death and De∣ruction? Consider how thou hast lready Rebell'd against the King of Heaven, thy Lord and Maker, dally'd ith, him, and even Provoked his atience and long Suffering: how has e born with thee, and with an Eye of bservation beheld thy youthful Follies d Vanities? How often have I (in his Name) wooed thee that thou would'st urne away from Iniquity? How ften won'd I have turned thine Eyes rom beholding Vanity, and yet thou as pursu'd thine own vain Imaginati∣s, and hatest to be Reformed, blindly Rushing on like a Horse upon a char∣ged Spear;Prov 22. & 23 Ver. going like an Ox to the laughter, or a Fool to the correcti∣on of the Stocks; as a Bird hasteth o the Snare, and knoweth not that  is for his Life. Consider then, at ast in this thy Day,Luk. 13.24. before it be too ate, and enter in at the straight ate; for I say unto you Many shall
strive to enter in, and shall not  able: for those that attempt it witho my assistance, will find it altogethe Impossible, What is it you can ask,  this Flaterer Promise, that I am  able to give? She indeed may Prom fair, but all her Gifts and seems Pleasures are but gilded Baits, thi Lighter then Vanity, and prove b terness in the End:Sam 2.26. What if the w I wou'd lead you seem at first hard a difficult? It will (when you are p that difficulty) seem Pleasant and Ea And then consider the Reward that t King, whose Kingdom is not of th World, will give you,Johu 18.36. viz. a Crow of Life, an Exceeding weight  Glory,Rev. 2.20 2 Cor 4.17. &c. Consider again, that I a the Daughter of the King, who cond∣scend to Invite you to prepare a Weddi Garment, that you may come to t Marriage Supper; and can you deny  If you doubt that I am able to ma those that take my Counsel truely happ Consider what the Wisest of Men  Testified of me,Prov 3.13 14 15 16 17 18. viz. Happy is  man that findeth Wisdom, and  man that getteth Understandin for the Merchandise of it, is bett then the Merchandise of Silver, a
he gain thereof then sine Gold: she  more precous then Rubies, and l the things thou can'st desire are ot to be compared unto her: Length f days is in her Right Hand, and  her Lest hand Riches and Ho∣our: her Ways are Ways of Plea∣ntness, and all her Paths are Peace; e is the way of Life to them that y holy upon her, and happy is very one that retaineth her. If this  true, what can you more expect? That greater Felicity can you desire? And yet you see I bear not this Testi∣ony of my self. At this discourse I could not but and amazed; but when I considered e difficulty of the way she inten∣ed to lead me, and that it was a ath frequented but by a few, I fell to a trembling fitt, through e disorders of humane Frailty; nd being a little Recovered, I took eart, and told her what the other ady had said concerning it. I cannot deny (said she) but the way ard and difficult, especially at the  out; but then consider in, the Reward will abundantly compence the Labour: What Hus∣bandman
can expect to Reap Corn where he has not sowed it? Or who i so mad to Imagine he can have Perfec Felicity, and come to the Possession  those things which are lay'd up for th Righteous, things That the Eye hat not seen,1 Cor 2.9. the Ear heard, neithe hath it entered into the Heart  Man to conceive them, without  Sow in this Life his Field of a goo Concience, with Virtue, good Deed Faith, Hope, Charity, Prudence Patience, and all other Virtues a Graces? The Harvest of which is on Expected, or ought to be Expected i the other Life. For though the Hus∣bandman somtimes failes of the fruit of his Labour, yet those that sow in th Spirit,al. 6.8. shall of the Spirit reap Eve lasting Life:Rev 14.13. Those that Die in th Lord shall Rest from their Labou and their Works shall follow them. The Lady having said thus muc none of which I was able to deny  contradict, I began to give serio attention; which the lady Volupt ousness perceiving, and fearing  lose me, whispered to Folly w thereupon began to beckon me o but being desirous to know furth
hat the Lady I discoursed with as (though I could give a shrewd uess at her Name) I addressed my lf in this wise, Madam (said I) if ithout offence I may speak, let me ntreat you to tell me your Name. To hich, without any hesitation, she ply'd: I am one (said she) greatly in fa∣ur with the Highest, much acquain∣d with Saints, all in all with Angels, nd highest in Esteem with all Good en; ithout me nothing is done in eaven, nor without me can any thing e well done on Earth; and in either ingdom I am known by the name of isdom, Vertue, true Felicity, and warder of those that hearken  me and obey my Counsel,Prov. 2.13. to alk in the ways of Truth and prightness; I stop the mouths of lse Prophets, and false Teachers, overn Kingdoms and Families in the storder; I am a Companion to the vers of Learning and True Piety,  a Husband to chaste Wives, Wid∣s, and Virgins: I reward my ends in Prosperity with Holiness, d in Adversity with Sound Coun∣ and Advice; Ministring unto
them Food, Lodging, Cloaths, Pat∣ence, Strength, and all other conveni∣ent Necessaries; and enable them t bear their Afflictions: and no less m you expect, if in time you contract true Friendship with me, and th thought, thou walkest through t Valley of the Shadow of Death,Psal. 23.4. tho need'st not fear any Evil, for I wi be with thee. This Familiarity embolden'd me enquire into the Estate and manne of those she term'd her Friends,  such as had contracted a strict Friend∣ship with her; Wherupon, My Friend (said she) are such as when they ar Afflicted, Pray; when Merry,  Psalms,Jam. 5.13. Hymns, and Spiritual So and rather chuse to Fast,  giv themselves up to Excess: They conside the night is far spent, and the Day Retribution is at hand, therefore the walk honestly as in the Day, not  Rioting and Drunkenness; not  Chambring,Rom. 13.12.13. and wantonness, but p on the Lord Jesus, not caring for th Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof: Fai counsels them, Charity enflameth the Justice and Uprightness is their Rule whereby they square their Actions
These are they that chearfully submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man for Gods sake;1. Pet. 2.13 These are they that Reverence and Obey those that are set over them in Power and Au∣thority, not for wrath,Rom. 13.5. but for Con∣science sake, and Live in perfect Charity with all Men; and to these, though Sorrow may last for a Night,Hebr. 12.14. yet Joy undoubtedly comes in the Morning;Psalm. 30.5. though their Bodies set in the shades of Death, yet their Fames shall Live for the example of others, and their Souls shall ever remain Im∣mortal like unto the Estate of Angels,Hebr. 12.23. and are known in Heaven by the name  the Spirits of just Men made rfect. These Excellent Discourses and Admonitions succeeding each other, began to make an impression upon my mind, to that degree, that now my fears of the way began (like the shade or thin mist of twilight) to fade and vanish, and I was almost come to a Resolution to follow the advice of this Excellent lady, what∣ever Difficulties or Dangers might threaten or oppose me; Which Vo∣luptuousness
(who all this while had narrow∣ly marked my Speech and Gesture,) perceiving by the alteration of my Countenance, and fearing I wou'd go over to her she termed her mor∣tal Enemy, commanded Folly to use her utmost Diligence to prevent it.
CHAP VI. How at the Perswasion of Folly, he took the Broad way Leading to the Pallace of Worldly Fe∣licity, Rejecting the Counsel of Lady Wisdom, and how she threaten'd him at parting, and what else happened. FOlly having Received her Charge from Dame Voluptuousness, or Worldly Pleasure, for (as I said) by both these and many other names she went, as Opportunity and Business required; she came up to me, and pulling me by my Coat of Ignorance, desired to speak a few words with me; to which, in my Simplicity, I consented, though Wisdom strictly forbade it; and having the freedom of my Ear, she so far Insinuated (but in an Evil hour) into my wavering Affections, that I was contented to put it to her Arbitrament which of these I should follow; which Road,
or whose advice I should take; who not a little glad to have gain'd so much upon me, thus began: I am Right Joyful, my Lovely Youth, (said she) that you submit your self in this case to my Counsel; therefore I will assuredly advise you to what I think is most convenient for your ad∣vantage; you have heard what these Ladies have offer'd, how on either side they have Wooed and Courted you: Now for my part, I am for Ease, Plea∣sure, and a short way to Felicity, in which this Lady (pointing to Voluptu∣ousness) in my Judgment can best conduct you; nay you may take it on my word, who am very well acquainted with her, and no doubt, you will find such delights as must needs be sutable to your Youthful Years, such Recreations as will leave you no place for Repen∣tance: As for the other Lady, who calls her self Wisdom, Vertue, and I know not what, (for in truth I am lit∣tle acquainted with her) you may per∣ceive by her discourse, she intends no∣thing else, if you follow her, but to lead you a tedious Pilgrimage all your Life Long, through rough and uneasie ways, and often in stead of a Pleasant Inn,
that should be well furnished with where∣ithall to Recreate and Refresh you, e will Lodg you in a House of Mourn∣ng, where your Drink will be Tears, our Food Sobbs, and your Musick ighs and Groans: and though she omises you fair now, yet when she has t you far from Home, amongst Rocks, ountains, Wildernesses, and Craggy ays, If you never so little displease er by Complaining or Drawing∣ack, she will leave you desolate and orlorn, void of help, or comfort, there  become a Prey to Savages, or the Wild Beasts of the Forrests; and if it o happen you escape these, yet to live Desolate, and wander in the Region of Uncertain Hope, which borders upon the gloomy Land of Despair: Wherefore I advise you to consider, and not suffer her to train you into these Dangers, but rather to take the offer f this Lady my Friend and Acquain∣tance; for the performance of whose Promise, I will become Surety, and bear the blame if she fail in ought. Or f the Entertainment please you not, where's the danger, I pray you, when being so near your own House, you may return at Leasure, without being Oblig'd
to scale shatter'd Mountains, Rock and Precipices? Then give this Lady your hand, and stand no longer doubtful. Now whilst I stood amazed an confounded in my self, Folly put m hand into that of the Lady Voluptu∣ousness, who drawing me forward whilst Folly pushed behind, force me in a manner into the broad way which my Horse Temerity percei∣ving, fell a Running at such a Rate that I could not stay him; thoug indeed I did not much strive to d it, so great a Power had Folly over me. The Lady Wisdom, otherwise Ver∣tue, observing what had passed, observing that her wholsom Counsels and Advice were Slighted, and Rejected and that I had Plunge my self headlong into the ways of Ruine and Destruction, she changed her Lovely Countenance into Terror, and with a contracted Frown,Prov. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.29. Soun∣ded these Dreadful Words in my Ears, viz. Because I have called, and you Refused; I have Stretched ou wy Hand, and no man Regarded; but ye have set at nought all my Counsel, and
wou'd have none of my Reproof; I I will mock when your Fear cometh; when your Fear cometh as Desolation, and your Destruction cometh as a Whirl∣wind; when Distress and Anguish cometh upon you; then you shall call up∣on me, but I will not Answer; you shall seck me early, but shall not find me; for that ye hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. And thereupon she estrang'd her self, and vanished from my Sight. O that these Words had Sunk into my Heart! That Sacred Zeal had sent his Flaming Dart. To Fire my Soul! That so I might have view'd What Life I shun'd, what Death I then Pursu'd
CHAP VII. How in the company of Folly and Voluptuousness he Rid to the Pallace of Worldly Feli∣city, and in what manner h was Receiv'd and Entertain'd; with some Observations there∣on, &c. HAving (as I said) lost the sight of Lady Wisdom, and passed a considerable part of the Broad way, cheer'd by Folly and Voluptuousness, the one with Counsel and by the other with kind and pleasing words, I began to forget what had passed at the parting of the way, and found my self like those whom Fables report to have been Inchanted; nothing seeming more delightfull then my Company, and nothing pleasanter then their Discourse. Now as the Sun gave half its Light to us, and half to the Antipodes (that is, just as it was setting) Voluptuousness gave me a Prospect of the Pallace of
Worldly Felicity, which at a distance seemed very Stately and Magnificent, nd on that Prospect I feasted my Eyes, till Evil-will (who had been ent before to give notice of our coming) met us, who with a low Reverence, though with an Envious and Ill-favour'd Look, told us that Divers Ladies of the Pallace were in a Readiness to Receive us, which message he had no sooner perform'd, but he fell in our Rear, making Mouths and wry Faces, for Joy that he had been Instrumental in my set∣ting forward to a place where he well knew, that without the Assist∣ance of Gods Grace, I was sure to be Lost. Wee had no sooner turn'd the Corner, or the winding of the way that bear's directly upon the Pallace, but I perceiv'd the Ladies, who had placed themselves at the entrance of the Palace whose Names were Em∣broider'd upon their Vestments, which were exceeding rich; nor did they themselves seem less Beautiful at a distance; and foremost of these, I discover'd Lust, Prodigallity, Lasci∣viousness, Wantonness, Ambition,
Pride, of the Heart, Gallantry, Brave∣ry, Drunkenness, Luxury, with ma∣ny others; all of them seeming very Joyful at my Approach, and read advanced in their order to welcom me, and do me Service, all of them, as soon as Folly had discovered m Face by taking off my Helmet, salu∣ted me with the kindest and winning Endearments Imaginable, each in a Soft and Amorous Tone, crynig Wel∣com, my Love, my Life, my Joy; wel∣com to the Palace and Repose of World∣ly Felicity; striving all they could to exceed in Courtesie, and every one wishing to have most of my Compa∣ny, and enjoy me oftenest: then sped forward Ambition and Prodigallity, and taking me by the Hands, led me on (as in State) whilst Bravery went before to make the way. As for Lasciviousness and the rest, they fell in order to the best advan∣tage: Folly who for that time serv'd as a Herald, every where Proclaim∣ing my arrival;Luke 15, 13. So that we entred the gate as in Triumph: which put me in mind of the Prodigal's Son go∣ing from his Fathers House into a far Countrey; but at that time
Puff'd up with Presumption and Vain-glory, I looked not to the Lat∣ter End of his Progress, nor what befel him when all his Substance fail'd him, though (as by the sequel you will find) being in the End dri∣ven to the like Distress, I bethought my self what advantages I had lost in pursuing Vanity, and by the good motions of the Spirit, came to a Re∣solution of Returning to my Fathers House. But of that hereafter. The Gates we enter'd were ex∣ceeding large, and the Pallace as bigg in proportion; affording as much plenty as can be Imagin'd un∣der the Sun, which did not a little increase my wonder: whereupon Vo∣luptuousness whispered me in the Ear, saying It could be no less, seeing she kept open House for all Comers & Goers all the Year long, at any Time or Hour, either Day or Night, And when I had well view'd the outward Court, which was pav'd with Marble and Alablaster, and enclosed with Cloi∣sters, over which were Chambers of Eoney and Cedar, supported with Pillars of Ivory and Tressels of Gold, Enamel'd with precious Stones
(for so they seem'd to me at that time, so much Folly had blinded me; But afterwards I understood they were meer delusions, the work of Enchant∣ment) having view'd these, I say, I was led into a spacious Hall, which to me seem'd the fairest that ever I beheld; for though by this time it was Night in that part of the Pallace at which I enter'd, for it had many Gates, but this the Chief, yet for the number of Light  that were conti∣nually burning, Darkness was put to flight, unless in the secret places of Retirement;John 13.19, for there they choose Darkness rather then Light; and the Reason, as I since understand, was because their Deeds were Evil. Here I beheld all the Tables spread with every Variety; Oderiferous Spices, Balms and Gums, perfuming the Air; Musick of all Instruments Melodi∣ously Sounding, Charming Voices and Charming Ladies, with the Jovi∣allest Crew, methought, that ever I had seen; and now I thought my self in Paradise, nor did I Repent the advice I had taken, nor of the paths I trod. Having in this place made many
Observations too tedious to be Re∣ted, Lust came with her Atten∣ants and disarmed me; after which, ith a tender Embrace, she sweetly issed me, and told me, That that Night I should take my Repose in her Arms, on a Bed of Down Perfum'd with ragrant Spices, and dek't with fine innen of Egypt, Cannopy'd with Gold, nd studded o'er with Gems. When aving by this means heighten'd my Fancy, she order'd Bravery, or rather Pride, (who had attended me at my setting out, but left me at the cross Way, and got thither before me) to give me such things to put on as he aw convenient, to prevent my atching Cold; whereupon he rought me a Crimson Gown lin'd with costly Furrs, Embroider'd with Gold, and Precious Stones, and pla∣ed on my Head a Cap of Peacok's Feathers, telling me that being thus Invested, I must not only despise, contemn and trample on, as much as in me lay, my Inferiours and Equalls, but lift my self in Lofty maginations above my Superiours; making such Instructions as I should from Time to Time receieve from a
waiting Gentlewoman, call'd the Pride of Life, my Rule. Being thus Habited, over my clo∣ser Habilliments, Lady Voluptuou∣ness came, and taking me by th Hand, placed me in a stately Chai at the upper end of a Table, pu∣posely spread for my Accomodat on, and furnish'd beyond wha Luxury her self could form, eve in Imagination; who then sat e my Left-hand, whilst Drunkennes took place on the Right, and sh her self sat opposite to me, that sh might have a better prospect of my Physiognomy, commanding her Ser∣vitures to load me with the mo delicate Dainties, and ply me with the choicest Wine, whilst innume∣rable Voices (but from whence the proceeded I knew not) invaded m Ear; and amongst the rest, I di∣stinctly heard the following Lines. SONG. Now welcom, welcom, welcom, Gal∣lants all, Into the World's large and delicio Hall:
Here worldly Pleasures do in height abound, Here, here, what Worldings seek, is to be found; Here without fear or further care, each Guest, May both securely and supinely rest; Or drown in Pleasures, Pleasures of all kind, Such as they love, such as they wish to find: Both Young and Old may here with Joys be Crown'd, And in Excess of Pleasures may abound; The Miser or the Prodigal may meet Equal Alurements, that make haste to greet Their kind Pursuers, and with Ea∣ger Arms, Bewitch their Reason, like Circean Charms. This and many more were Echo'd by Tuneful Voices; and indeed, our Service and Attendance was ve∣ry sumptuous, our Meats were well order'd, our Cooks wonderful han∣dy and neat in the performance of
their part, our Butlers bountiful even to lavishness, our Waiters vi∣gilant and dexterous in giving their attendance, our Musick excellent, and Singers melodious: In fine, eve∣ry Officer strove to exceed in delica∣cy and expedition: There was Fee∣ding, Drinking, pleasant Parlying Discourse of Love and Business, Contrivances, Policies and Machi∣nations, the Affairs of Kingdoms, and Provinces; Drunk or half Drunk, was held a goodly Game; Ribauldry was our Recreation, and as for Kna∣very of all kinds, it was not want∣ting, as occasion serv'd to prove it's Force and Dexterity. Supper being ended, Lady Wan∣tonness came to me, and with an amorous Tone and wanton Glance, requir'd me to Dance, as she had done many besides me; and after that Lust, who had before as good as bargain'd for my Company, us'd many Arguments to convince me, that it was not convenient to lie alone, when I might have a soft and tempting Bedfellow; but being weary with the many vain Recreati∣ons I had pursu'd in the Palace; but
especially by reason of my Journey,  was not behind-hand in using as any Argument, to Excuse it for at Night; as being not only de∣ous to take my Rest, but also to use a little on what had befallen e since my setting out from my wn House; wherefore Requiring  go to Bed, Lady Lasciviousness ad me to my Chamber, which was rnish'd in the best manner, with hat-ever I could wish: As Tape∣ries, Embroyderies, fine Linnen, carlet, Velvets, Purples, Silver, old, Spices and Perfumes, and what se might serve to heighten my Fan∣ and create new Wonder. Being  Bed, Voluptuousness came in, and aving sweetly Kiss'd me, bid me rewel till the Morning, in these ords, Sleep, sleep, my Love, and give Di∣gestion way; That when the early Lark calls on the day, Arising from Repose, you may renew Those Sweets you tasted, and fresh Joys pursue.
Being left to my self, I coul scarcely Sleep for thinking of wha was past; and when I chanc'd to Slumber, nothing but Dreams an strange Imaginations fill'd my Hea insomuch, that I now began to wi for the Morning.
CHAP. VIII. f his further Entertainment and Progress in the Pallace of Worldly-Felicity; and how amongst other things, he had a Prospect of the Tempter in his Deluding shape, and at Night was Entertain'd by Lust, &c. WHen Aurora had Unfolded her Purple Gates, and gave e Firey Horses of the Sun free cope to mount the Eastern Skies, iving me a more perfect sight of e places Magnificence; Lascivi∣usness enter'd my Chamber in a ose and wanton Dress, her Breasts aked, and her Hair slowing on her houlders; and having bidden me  good-morrow, she Invited me to Rise; whereto, without any Reply,  willingly prepar'd my self, as be∣ng desirous to see more of the Pal∣ace, and have more of the Jovial Company I found in it; So being
up, she lead me into a withdrawin Room, where for Privateness sak Luxury and Ebriety had prepar'd m a costly Breakfast; and there whilst I was Feeding and Carousi at a Lavish rate, Voluptuousness a Lust, with some other of their At∣tendants, Enter'd; who sweetly ∣luting me, render'd me their Goo morrow, and bid me pursue n Riot: The which, whilst I was d∣ing, methought I hear'd a dread Sound behind me,Isa. 5.11. of, Woe unto the saith the Lord, that Rise up Earl that they may follow Strong Drink, & This made me start, and suddain turn about to see from whence  proceeded; but Ambition, w stood at my Elbow at that very l stant, clapping on my Head t Cap of Curiosity, it fill'd it with  many Proclamations, that th thoughts of what I had hear'd, ei∣ther altogether vanish'd, or lost  much of their impression, that the were but little regarded; and no nothing but the desire of seein strange things, and variety of wh the place afforded, could at a please me; whereupon Voluptuo∣ness
Reading my Mind through my Looks and Gesture, promis'd me whatever of that kind was in her power; and so leading me into her Wardrobe, cast over me a Mantle of Gold, Embroyder'd with Gems, and seeded with Pearls, and gave me in my Hand a Staff, which was call'd by her, The Staff of Trust and Confidence, which I found to be no other then a broken Reed: And when I had been pleas'd a while with beholding all the Pomp and Gallan∣trey, she told me, That seeing I had Resign'd my self to her Care and Con∣duct, she would shew me what, but few of those that dwelt in the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, though they had many of them desir'd it, had the opportunity of beholding, till they had ass'd through a gloomy Postern long and dark commonly call'd Sepultum, r the Grave, which leads into the ast Region of Eternity. Upon this  thank'd her for the Favour, be∣fore I understood what it was she ntended or meant thereby; and so without delay, she introduc'd me into the largest Chamber that ever I had beheld, and there she gave me
a pro∣spect of one sitting (though at a great distance) in a Chair of Gold and Ivory, very pompously Attend∣ed by many Legions, all appearing very bright and shining. Now whom this should be, I was much at a stand, but being directed by my Guide to make my Reverence,  rashly did so; and having taken  view of his seeming Pomp and Mag∣nificence, I concluded it to be the Richest in the World; and being a little Retir'd, I took the boldness to enquire who he was, and receiv'd for an Answer, That he was the Prince of the Air and of Darkness, and Governour of those that gave them∣selves up (as I had done) to follow the Direction of such as were the Mana∣gers of his Affairs, who were both h Servants and Children; and what ever had been said of him by some, he could when he pleas'd Transform him∣self into an Angel of Light; and though he indeed, (since he lost that Place,) had nothing to do in Heaven, yet that his Rule in the Children of Disobedience was great on Earth. This methought was a kind of wild discourse; but being where I was, I
conceiv'd it at that time convenient to hold my Tongue, least I might be in some more then ordinary danger, though I wish'd my self further off, for I took him to be no other then the Old Serpent, the Roaring Lyon, and the Accuser of the Brethren, the Red Dragon, and the Father of Lies and all manner of Wickedness. But whilst I was thus thoughtful, there came Trudging after us a little down-look'd Fellow, who it seems had the Keys of the Treasury of the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, and withal, order'd to Reward me with what he saw convenient; or as Dame Fortune, a light and incon∣ant Lass, who came Tripping be∣e him, in a Garment of Sleazy urple, should direct; and these soon out-stripping us, open'd a narrow Door with a Golden Key, over the which was Writen, THE ROOT OF ALL EVIL: Yet into this place, that was very dark, Voluptu∣ousness conducted me; here I took  prospect of all manner of Trea∣tres; as Gold, Silver, Pearls, Dia∣monds, Emeraulds, Saphirs, Jaspers, erryll, Topaze, Tqueis, and eve∣ry
precious stone; and with these Fortune, after she had given me  flattering Kiss, commanded Mamm (for so by this time I understood  that kept it was call'd) to furni me, that I might not be wanting t spend it upon my Lusts: When ha∣ving laden my self with as much as thought at that time convenient,  was all on a fire to advance further and thereupon I was conducted  the Chamber of Pomp, furnish'd o and neatly hung round with all man∣ner of gaudy Apparel, for either Se of Woolen, Stuffs, Silks, Linne Rich Embroyderies, and what else  that kind can enter into the Imag nation of Man; and here I had lea to furnish my self with what seem most precious in my Eyes, so th rejecting what I had forme esteem'd, I made my self Gay b yond expression; which suddain a reration infected me with a Diste er dall'd the pride of the Heart, an the Pride of Life; and no soon was I furnish'd in this place,  Lasciviousness, with whom I ha been formerly acquainted, ca from her Apartment to meet me, a∣usher
me thither; where at my Ar∣rival, I found Paints, Perfumes, Rib∣bons, and a hundred idle Toys and impertinent Fancies, which in my simplicity she Intruded on me, to render me effeminate, and unwilling at any time to forsake the Pallace: Being thus furnish'd, we turn'd down a large Entry, where at the mouth of a large Vault, Drunkenness stood ready to receive me, for every one in this case was order'd to their par∣ticular Stations, to give me the greater variety in my Visiting the Pallace of Worldly-Felicity: In this place, guarded by Dame Drunken∣ness, I found store of all manner of delicious Wines and other Liquors. But things, by reason of some unru∣ly Visitants, were all in confusion, every thing in a manner turn'd Tops-turvy; and this proceeded (she said) from the Unruliness of those that had continued till Night,Isa. 5.11. till Wine had Inflam'd them, &c. And here having largly quaffed ma∣ny vain and ridiculous Healths, till I had almost lost not only that of my Body, but likewise that of my Soul, I Reeld into the Apartment of Lux∣ury,
and vainly became one of the number of those that made their Bel∣ly their God,Phil. 3.19. giving my self up to Riot and Gluttony to that Excess, that I became in a manner nothing less then a Bruit, by indulging my Appetite to a degree of forgetting any thing beyond endeavouring to satisfie it, which in the end heigh∣tend'd me to a desire of Unlawful Love, and fir'd me with concupi∣scential Imaginations; which my Guide perceiving, lead me into the Chamber or Apartment of Venus, which was crouded with Gay and Wanton Beauties, who spar'd no Alurements or Charms to Intice me to Folly, but spread to the Air their Gaudy Plumes, Tun'd their Sy∣rens Voices, Roll'd their Sparklin Eyes, gave me the Amorous Leer, with half a Face, and a tempting Smile, whilst Cupid had spread his Nets in their Golden Tresses, that dangled on their snowey Breasts, to captivate my Eyes; nor thought he that enough, unless he made my Heart a Slave to Lust, who advanc' in the Front of this Amorous Train, and with a Thousand pretended En∣dearments
conquer'd my Affections, prone at that time to be subdued; and this was she whom Fables term'd a Goddess, by the Name of Venus, and to whom besotted Mankind pay'd Devotion, by Erecting Tem∣ples and Altars to a base Adultress; nor less they Fabled her Son, and gave him power to Wound fond Lo∣vers hearts, blindly shooting at a venture, Painted him Naked, with Wings, and screen'd his Eyes from the Light; all which Hieroglyphi∣cally may signifie no more, Then by his Nakedness his want of shame, which ever accompanies Lewd Lo∣vers; By his blindness, no doubt his Folly is descypher'd, and his rash∣ly shooting at a venture, whereby he knows not who he hits, or where his Arrow flys: And again, his Bow and Arrows signifie the Indiscretion of those that make themselves his Butt, by willfully thrusting them∣selves in his way; his Wings, the wavering of the Minds and incon∣stancy of Lovers; for what thing is more variable, light, or incon∣stant, then a Lawless Lover? With this sight I was at that time mightily
taken, and more especially with the Amorous Discourse of her who go∣vern'd this place; and the day be∣ing now far spent, and I in a man∣ner tir'd with Variety and Excess, was content to rest me there for that Night; whereupon breaking my mind to Voluptuousness and Folly, who all that while had Attended me, they highly approv'd of what I had Determined; and so promising to return the next Morning, in order to shew me the rest of the Pallace, the former departed; but the latter stay'd to Attend on me as my Hand-Maid, and after many Burning Glan∣ces and Lascivious Kisses, Lust lead me into the Closet of Wantonness, and there dally'd with me on the Bed of Ʋncleanness, insomuch, that she pt me Waking till the Day ap∣pear'd; and then according to her promise, Lady Voluptuousness re∣turn'd; when Knocking at the Door, she was presently let in by Folly, who (as I said) had continued with me.
CHAP IX. He discourses of other Recreati∣ons in the Pallace, and how he was carryed by Voluptuous∣ness and Folly to visit the se∣ven Towers, and describes the Wonders he saw there, with∣other things, as also a Prospect of its Situation, &c. VOluptuousness having at this time tempted me from the Arms of Lust, Lead me to a fair Banqueting House in the midst of a Spacious Garden, wonderfully wrought and incompassed with Roses, Hony-Suc∣kles, and Jesamine, twining in Amorous Ringlets; whilst Flora, who was Mistress of that Place, with all her Sweets Perfum'd the Air, and the Notes of the winged Choristers warbel'd from their swelling Throats a grateful Anthem to the smiling Spring: here I found not only store of Jovial and Sprightful Companions,
Revelling in the height of Merriment; but also Tables spread by the care of Voluptuousness, with all manner of Dainties; and here again we Laughed, Fed, Caroused, and told merry Tales in abundance; forgeting the Woe that is pronoun∣ced against those that here laugh in Sin and Security,Luke, 6.26. which Wo is because that shall Mourn hereafter. But having by this time my fill of this sort of Recreation; for indeed, the Pleasures of Sin, though they are but for a Season,Heb. 11.25. are even tiresom in the Fruition: I called to mind the Pro∣mise of Voluptuousness, which was to give me a sight of the rest of the Pal∣lace; and thereupon whispering her in the Ear, she consented to withdraw, and so we left the Company in the midst of their Revels, and height of Excess, and having passed through Galleries and Chambers, and taken a Superficial Prospect of things tending to Vice and Leudness, wee came to a large Court surrounded with seven Towers, in which. dwelt as Commander in Chief, Pride, En∣vy, Wrath, Gluttony, Lechery Cove∣tousness, and Sloath; and with these
my Conductress wou'd needs have me acquainted; against which (not∣withstanding Folly was in our Com∣pany) I made some objection, aledg∣ing that some of them, in the cir∣cumstances I was in, were not fit for my Conversation; but however, she wrought upon me to give each of them a visit in their order; and of these she Reckoned Pride (with whom I was familiarly acquainted) to be the first: for indeed, if rightly consider'd, he is the original Source and Fountain of many notorious Sins; nay by his very means so many mis∣chiefs have befallen Mankind, that it is imposible to number them; nor is there any Sin more hateful in the Sight of God, for this Sin had the Power to Translate or Metamorphose Angels of Light into Devils, and cast them from Bliss into Misery; for that God who giveth Grace to the Humble and Meek, ever resisteth the Proud and Haughty Minded.Iam. 4.6. Entring this Tower, I beheld Ar∣rogance and Presumption, who stood to enquire the Business of those that that came to visit their Master, who with exalted Looks withstood us,
till such time as they were better in∣form'd; but soon being given to understand I was a Favorite, wee gain'd Admittance, and there beheld Pride upon an exalted Seat, swelling like a Rising Tide, and by him stood (though with no less Lofty Deport∣ment) Disobedience, Vain-glory, Am∣bition, Contempt, Scorn, and Haught∣less of Mind, with many more of the same Breed; I expected indeed he wou'd have descended to Congra∣tulate my Arrival; but contrariwise he only took notice of me with a Nod; for it seems he was so stiff that he could not (or would not) leave his Seat: yet whilst I mark'd him well, he Infus'd a strange Infection into my Breast, that now I began more and more to despise thos whom I ought to have Honoured and Reverenced; though I saw engraven in black Capitals over the Gate of his Tower or Apartment, THE ORIGINAL OF SIN, AND CHIEF FAVOURITE OF THE PRINCE OF DARKNESS: for by the means of this Monster, who branches out into so many Mischiefs, is his Kingdom enlarged; nor was
there any thing that the Prince of Peace (our blessed Lord and Saviour) more inveighed against, and by the Example both of his Life and Do∣ctrine more Reproved; and that we might shun Pride,Mat. 11.29. in following his steps, he has left us this encourage∣ment, Learn (says he) of me, sor I am Meek and Humble, and ye shall find Rest for your Souls. For as Humility pleaseth God more then all other Vertues; (as being the original of all Vertues) so is Pride displeasing to him above other Sins, (as being the Original of all Sin) and is in its self (if rightly Consider'd) the height of Folly. For thus: If we are proud of our Bodies, Let us Consider how subject they are to Infirmities and Corruption, even to a Loathing; If of our Strength, many Beasts of the field are in that our Superiours; If in Beauty we put our Confidence, it is fading as the flower of the Field; nor did Solomon, in all his Glory, Exceed a short liv'd Lily of the Vally: If in Learning,Mat 6.29 that teaches us Humility; and to be Proud of it, implies the greatest Ig∣norance in the World: If of Riches, let us consider how much they are Inferi∣our
in that kind to a Golden Mine, or Rock of Diamonds, or any such like perishable things: And he that is proud of his Birth, is proud of the Blessings of others, and not of him∣self; and as for the Souls of Men, they Immediately proceed from one and the same Fountain of Life and Blessedness, Equal in their Original, and given by Him who as (I said) is a hater of Pride and Lover of Humili∣ty, and disposed of at his pleasure. Pride to Contempt and Folly chains us fast, Yet in its self is but an Airy blast; Though mischiefs numberless it does Create, And is the Sin that marks a Reprobate. Having made my Observation in this place as much as I thought convenient, I proceeded to the next, where Envy had her aboad; who though she is a Spawn of the first, yet to appearance (especially out∣wardly) she seems not so; for as the other feeds himself with Flattery and Vain Imaginations, Contempt and Scorn, &c. So this, with Ill-will, Spight,
Revenge, & sometimes with Despair, by which she becomes Lean and Ill-fa∣vour'd, especially at the prosperity of good Men, still vexing and tor∣menting her self to a degree of Mad∣ness, and is term'd the very FIRE∣BRAND OF HELL; and so is her Motto; for as Love and Charity are Badges of Salvation, so are Envy and Hatred of the contra∣ry; and consequently promote his Kingdom, who is their Author, by destroying those Souls they have power to Poyson and Overcome: For as an Envious Man grudges at anothers Prosperity and good Name, so he delights in his Infamy and Loss, ever Vexing and Tor∣menting himself, to promote mis∣chief in the World; and that per∣haps to no manner of purpose, more then to gratifie a causless An∣ger or Revenge, which redounds not to his own Advantage, but to his that sets him on work, and furnishes him with Infernal Venom to bring it about; nor can he create to himself any Pleasure thereby, because Envy becomes ever the Tormenter of those with whom she abides, and
still finds him out new Objects to Repine at; and is a Disease hard to be Cur'd, because it's Seat is altoge∣ther in the Heart: And indeed, sh look'd so gastly, that for my part I little affected her Company, an therefore left her Snarling by h self, and proceeded to the next though indeed whilst I stay'd in th Pallace of Worldly Felicity, I was no altogether Untainted with her V nom. For Envy's Poyson's by Contagi caught, Infecting not the Body, but th Thought: The Mind's the wretched Seat wher Envy dwells, And still is forming there a Th sand Hells; Whilst her Possesser does in Tormen live, And pines away to see his Neighbo Thrive. In the next Apartment, wh should I meet with but Wrath? whos Face was like the Face of a Lyo continually Belching and Breathing
Threatnings and Indignation; and by him stood Revenge, Rashness, and Implacableness, and round about him ung the Stories of Murthers, unna∣tural Attempts, and bloody Enter∣rizes; and over his Head Ingraven, THE VERY MURTHER∣ER OF HOLY LOVE; Nor can it be otherwise, for as Holy Love prepares the Mind for Hea∣venly things, so Wrath prepares it for the contrary, and sets it on Fire of Hell, banishing Reason, and expo∣sing the Possessor to innumerable Dangers and Hazards, rendering him the Emblem of a Raging Sea,Isa. 57.20. that casteth up nothing but Dirt and Mire; and as there is nothing on Earth comes so near to the Divine Goodness, as to be in perfect Love and Charity with all Men; so on the con∣trary, nothing Resembles more the Author of all Wickedness (who is term'd a Roaring Lyon,1 Pet. 5.8 going up and down to seek whom he may Devour) then a Man that gives up himself to Wrath and Implacableness; for if Love be the fulfilling of the Law,Rom. 13.10. then Wrath must be the breach of it. If God be Love, as doubtless he is,1 John 4.16. then
all things opposite to it, are oppo∣site to himself; and indeed it is that which the Devil troubleth and di∣sturbeth the Minds of Men withal that they may not be at leisure t perceive the Snares he lays for their Destruction, and causes them to run as it were, blindly on, into man Evils. Wrath is a flame that puts out Rea∣son's Eyes, For why, the Wrathful Man ca ne'er be Wise; Because he loses of himself the sway, And headlong follows, as it leads the way; Considers not, what danger he pur∣sues, What by't to get, or what he's like to lose: But Drunk with Fury, madly presses on, Till by his Rashness he's too oft un∣done. Next to these, Voluptuosness In∣form'd me, was the Apartment of Covetousness, who having been hi∣therto a stranger to me, I was the
more desirous to see him; nor that I o much car'd for his Conversation, ut for Novelties sake; for this Nig∣ardly Fellow (it seems) is ever a reat Enemy to the Lade Voluptuous∣ness: But however, not to break er promise with me, by giving imperfect Prospect, she was con∣ented I should give him a Visit; but s for her self, she said she would ay at the Door till I return'd; and o leaving Wrath in a raging Fit, up∣n what account I know not, nor am  yet inform'd, Folly and I enter'd his place, and there beheld the old Minos turning all things in a manner nto Gold, yet starving for want of ood; Adoring and Worshiping the Mammon of Ʋnrightcousness,Rom. 1.25. and rusting in Perishable things, Worshi∣ing the Creature instead of the Crea∣or; in setting his Heart upon his Riches, and placing his Strength in  broken Staff, upon which whom oever leaneth, it will utterly de∣eive him; for he flatters his retched Soul like the Worldling in the Gospel, viz. And he thought with himself, saying, What shall I do, ecause I have no Room to bestow my
Fruits? And he said, This I ill do, I will pull down my Barns and build greater, and there will I bestow my Goods; and I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou hast much Goods lay'd up for many years, take thine Ease, Eat, Drink and be Merry: And what insued A dreadful Disappointment,Luke 12.17, 18, 19. viz. But God said unto him, Thou Fool this Night shall thy Soul be Requiredo thee, Then whose shall the things b which thou hast provided? And in the following Verse,Luke 12.20. So is he that layet up Treasure for himself, and is no Rich towards God. That is, th Man who sets his Heart upon Riches, and sets them up as an Ido in his Heart. And indeed this is Sa∣tans Masterpiece, in Chaining the Affections of an immortal Soul (that should be content with nothing less then God himself) to a Lump o Earth, to things that in themselves are here deficient, and hereafter alto∣gether unavailable. It was a nota∣ble saying of St. Bernard's Brother, a Youth not exceeding Ten Years when his brethren Resolving to en∣ter into a Monastick Life, told him at parting, That they left him all their
Worldly Goods and Possessions: Ay but, says the Youth,In Vit. St. Bernard. This is very unequal∣y dealt, that you should take Heaven or your selves, and leave me only Earth, But the Covetous Man is of another ind, for he will not Relinquish Earth for Heaven, as is evident in he 18th of St. Luke; the Rich Man ade great boasts of his Righteous∣ness, but when our Blessed Saviour ame to offer him Eternal Life in Exchange for the distribution of his emporal Possessions to the Poor, e would not comply, but went away ery sorrowful; and the Reason was,Luke 18.23. ecause he was very Rich; that is, he ad great Possessions on Earth, but las no Treasure in Heaven; which is he only thing that can render a Man ruly Rich both here and hereafter; Rich here, by having a good Con∣cience, which is a continual Feast; nd hereafter, by finding that Trea∣ure Incorruptible and Permanent, when all other things shall make them∣lves Wings and fly away:Prov 23.5. And in∣deed, the Covetous Man may be said o be Miserable both here and here∣fter; for in this World he meets ith Weariness, Watchings, Tra∣vel,
and Disturbances, ever Eating the Bread of Carefulness; and in the next, Loss and Pain; for the Rust of his Riches, which Cankers his Sou and makes hin stop his Ears to the Cries of the Poor and Needy, and with a crushing Hand oppress the Widdow and Fatherless, will rise u against him in the day of his Rebuke and make him hang down his Hea in Shame and Confusion of Face. For he that hugs the Earth fast till h Dies, And Money dares more then h Maker Prize. Must ne're exect to mount abov the Skies; Or if he do, but to Receive th Doom, Of Angry Justice, in Reserve  come. By this time Voluptuousness fearing I might be Infected with the winte Breath of this Miser, began to be∣kon me off, who being of my sel little desirous of his Conversation  the Garb and seeming Grandure I was in, soon harkned to her Alure∣ments,
and made an orderly Retreat, promising to give him a serious visit when Time had Silver'd my Locks, nd led me into the December of my Dayes; yet I left him not without Company, for I perceiv'd Ʋsury, Extortion, Perjury, Fraud, Oppression, Sacriledge, and many of the same rood, peeping from behind the Curtain, and so I bid him adieu. When proceeding from his Apartment, I went to that of Luxu∣ry, by the advice of Voluptuousness, my conductress; and the reason was, or that after all these visits, I was not a little desirous of her Company, xpecting perhaps more at that time hen I found; for indeed there I had only the figure of what I had had he Practick or Experience before, or t least a Repetition, and so I passed t over, Referring the Reader to a erious consideration of my former ioting; only this by the way,Du. 32.15. that ike Jeshurun, in my Excess, I waxed at, and kicked against the Author nd Donor of Temporal and Eter∣al Felicity; which after a deep dis∣overy and true sence of my failings,  heartily desire all Good Christians
not only to Contemplate, but evert avoid: for this, though many hold  of little moment, and put it off wit divers familiar names, is the inlet t many notorious Vices, and has su dry Daughters; the chief of whic are greediness, Voracity, Excess, S∣pidity, foolish Mirth, Libidinous Co∣versation, &c. And indeed Glutto and Drunkenness, are equally d structive to Body and Soul, killi more in this World then the Swo or Pestilence, by inflaming t Blood, and Creating Evil Humo whose Attendants are Diseases a Death; causing likewise, in such e∣cess, the Will and Affections to m∣tiny and rebel against the Nobl Faculties of the Soul, leading bo the Reason and Judgement i Captivity, or confining them und the restraint of Stupidity, till su time as they have Executed the Evil Purposes. For when the Flesh grown stro usurps they Sway, Depraved Man too fondly does And rashly makes a Pilet of  Will,
Who Shipwracks Conscience on the Rocks of Ill, Stifles sound Judgment, and does Reason Kill. Thus leaving this place, I procee∣ed to the next, which was that of athery, or the Apartment of Lust, ith whom (as you have heard) I ad been very conversant, yet I spa∣ed not in this general veiw or obser∣ation to give her a visit; and found er accompanyed with Fornication, Adultry, Incest, Rape, and other Pe∣ilent Companions; nor is she the east of those many baits which the Tempter lays to catch Souls, nor less ilded over, then any of the rest;Prov. 5.3. or Solomon says, The Lips of a range Woman drop as an Honey comb, nd her mouth is Smoother then Oyl;Vers. 15,et consider the Deadly Bain, But er End is bitter as Worm-Wood, arp as a Two Edged Sword; her ee go down to Death, and her steps ake hold on Hell: and then again,Vers. 6.he better to deceive the Ignorant, ash, or Unadvised, Lest thou should∣st ponder the Path of Life, her ways e movable that thou canst not know
them. And indeed, he who give himself up to this Vice, runs man hazards, especially three; and tho are, The weakening his Body, t loss of Health, and the loss of  Soul, without a sincere and time Repentance: And what may be a ded to these, even his good Na which ought to be valued above Earthly things. For he who makes a Harlot his  light, Whose treacherous Smiles to  do invite, Insnares himself, and Hugs a  Bane, By which a Thousand Thousand h been slain; Lodging a deadly Viper in  Breast, Who wounds his Fame, his Heal his Peace and Rest. And now growing weary of th Prospect, and inclining to a fit Drousiness, Voluptuousness out  pure Kindness to my Infirmity  Frailty (as she said) which is a gre wonder to be expected from one
her quality, told me that Sloath dwelt in the next Tower, and that if I pleas'd to pay him a Visit, he would Entertain me with a Nap, or so forth: Of this I was not a little glad, though I thought to my self this Tower could not choose but be well Guarded and Maintain'd by such a Champion; for as Solomon has it,Prov. 19.15. Sloathfulness casteth into a deep Sleep, and an Idle Soul shall suffer Hunger. Entering this place, Laziness pre∣sently seiz'd upon me, and I became dull and heavy to any thing that was good, for this is both a Disease of the Body and Mind; for there is a sloathfulness of Heart, and a neglect, if not a hatred of Spiritual things, whereby Indifferency and Negli∣gence in Sacred things arise, and hinder a demonstration of our Love and Zeal towards God, either in good Words or Deeds, though both of them are requisite and necessary to Salvation: For, (as it is in the 16th Verse of the foregoing Chapter) He that keepeth the Commandment, keepeth his own Soul; but he that de∣spises his Ways, shall dye. Nor will
in this matter a Luke-warmness Ex∣cuse, but rather Aggravate the Of∣fence and Breach of the Command∣ments, as the Churches of Asia sad∣ly Experienced, by having their Can∣dle-sticks remov'd; that is, the Light of the Gospel and the Operation of the Divine assistance of the Spirit  Truth; by which means at this day they remain over-shaddowed with Atheisme, Mahumatisme, and Spiri∣tual Darkness; The five foolish Vir∣gins we see by their Sloathfulness in not providing Oyl were, barr'd from entering into the Bride-Chamber,Mat. 25.9, 0, 11. 12. an left to bewail their Folly in endless Woe;Mat. 22.11, 12, 13. and he who through neglect came unprepar'd of a Wedding Gar∣ment, was bound Hand and Feet, and cast into utter Darkness  wherefore, to prevent the like da∣ger, we are commanded to be up and doing, to Work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; to Work whilst it is Day, least the Night come, where∣in no Man can Work: Nor did our Blessed Saviour,Phil. 2.12. John 9.4. that miracle of Meekness and tender Compassion, spare to reprimand his Disciles for their Drousiness, commanding, us to
Watch and Pray, least we enter into mptation. Nor was this Sloath osted by himself,Mat. 26.41. but had many de∣ending on him, as Luke-warmness, rousiness, Carlesness, Neglect, De∣y, Cowardise, Doubting, Mistrust, eaviness of Heart, Ʋnconstancy, urmuring, Impatience, and many re; amongst which (Fool that I as) I vainly sorted my self; and hen I should have Run with Chear∣ulness the Race that was set before me,  put my Hand in my Bosom, and ry'd with Solomons Sluggard,Prov. 10.24. Yet a  little more Sleep, yet a little more lumber; and when I was urg'd by he good motions of the Holy Spirit proceed in my Duty, I pretended ere was a Lyon in the way. So Sluggards do, who ere supinly Live, Drowned in Sloath, neglecting still to strive To win the Prize, that at the Races end, Does for the Active Zealous Chri∣stian stand;
Forgetting in this Warfare there's Renown, They Sleep, and let another stea their Crown. And indeed, being in this place over-power'd with Drousiness, I  the end (in spight of Resistance) fe Asleep, and so continu'd with Sloa till the next Morning.
CHAP X. He is Entertained in a spacious Banqueting-House, and de∣clares what Entertainment he met with there; as also what further Promise Voluptuous∣ness made him, &c. MOrning being come, after many tumblings and tossings, many stretchings and yawnings, I reared my self on my Elbow, and began to consider where I was; but long I had not, e're Folly (who still was my Attendant) presented her self, and made me as sensible as she was capable; telling me moreover, that she had orders to give me a prospect of the Situation of the Pallace of Worldly Felicity; till such time as Voluptuousness, who had re∣tired her self for a while, found opportunity to return: And there∣upon taking me by the hand, she led me toan exceeding high Pinacle, or at least-ways my Sluggishness made
me imagine it so; and from thence  beheld it pleasantly situate on Ri∣sing Hills, Flowry Valleys, and Spreading Plains, (for it was exceed∣ing large) furnished with all the stores of Nature, whilst Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, refreshed and fe the thirsty Earth, and those stor with Fish and Fowl of every kind proper to that Element, as the Land was with Beasts and Birds suitable to it; no Parks nor pleasant Woods were wanting, nor Gardens and Orchards, furnished with Fruits a Flowers of pleasant scent, nor any thing that might serve for Food and Recreation; for Nature in that part had been prodigal, and with a giving hand strowed Bounties to serve such as should resort to this Pallace; for great indeed was the resort, as I well perceived by the many tracks and beaten ways, ac∣cess not being denyed Day nor Night; nor considering the Revels and Feasting there kept, could it be expected a less supply should serve. When I had gazed and beheld things beyond my Memory to re∣peat, I began to think how the
Glory and Fashion of this World pas∣seth away; and how all that I beheld was fading and perishing,1 Cor. 731 things of no duration; and that here we have no tarrying City, but ought to look for one above: That though we may re∣joyceHeb. 1314. here for a season, yet if wee rightly consider, we are but Pil∣grims and strangers. These Imagina∣tions, I say, upon serious considerati∣on got into my Head; but upon the approach of Voluptuousness, were soon expel'd, by reason she brought not only a banquet of the richest Fare, but divers Revellers to divert me from my melancholy and pensive thoughts, so easily is man (in a state of Sin) Induced to stifle the good mo∣tions of the Spirit, operating on and in the faculties of the Soul. So laying aside what I had well begun, after our repast was ended I enquired of my Conductress if any Curiosities remained yet to be seen? To which she replied, There were many; but that in the first place, for my better recreation, she had prepared Masks; Balls, and other such matters. And conducting me into the Hall where I had supped, I found all things pro∣vided
for my entertainment, and performed in the most modish and dexterous manner, the particulars whereof being too tedious, I submit them to the imagination of the Rea∣der; yet thus much by the way, let him understand, That neither Musick, Dances, variety of Apparel, Sprightly Ladies, and Jovial Youths, were wanting; nor indeed any thing sitting to furnish out such underta∣kings: but being tired out with close Recreations, I requested of Lady Voluptuousness, that she would shew me some pastimes at large, that I might have opportunity to refresh my self in taking the Air; which she promised me the ensuing morning, and so I retired to take my Repose; for yet I felt the powerful effects of Sloath, with the Pestilential contagi∣on of others that I had visited. And this was the third Night since my arrival, that at the importunity of Drowsiness, (a little Page that Sloath had sent to attend me) I had the opportunity of lying alone.
So powerful were the snares of Beauties Charms, That untill Sloth had forc'd me from their Arms, I counted it a Bliss too great to tell; When I was on the way to Death and Hell.
CHAP XI. A description of his fearful Dream, and how thereupon he became pensive; his excellent Reflections on the Estate of a Sinful and Voluptuous Life; yet continues his former Course, &c. BEing in bed, wearied with Plea∣sure, which in it self is even tiresom through Excess, I soon fell a sleep; and amongst other things Dreamed, and beheld in my Dream, the face of the Heavens (which was exceeding clear) all on a suddain contracted a melancholy Blackness, when anon it growing Dark as Mid∣night, there issued from the broken Clouds Thunder and Lightning, in a fearful manner, which struck me with horror, trembling and amaze∣ment; so methought I looked up, and saw the Clouds disperse at an unusual rate, and the troubled ir∣mament ready to fall in pieces; the
Moon I likewise beheld as a Globe of Blood, and as for the Sun it seemed altogether to be darkned: And whilst I was wondering what this might portend, methought I heard a great sound of a Trumpet, and saw a man sitting on a Cloud in Glory and Majestick Brightness, attended with the hosts of Heaven; at the sight of whom, the foundations of the Earth were shaken, and suddainly the Heavens became all on a flaming Fire, and I heard a voice saying, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. Whereupon the Rocks rent, the Graves opened, and the Earth and Sea gave up their Dead; some of which I perceived were exceeding glad, whilst others shook with Horror and Amazement, and would willing∣ly have fled from the face of him that sat on the Throne, seeking invain to hide themselves. Then methought I beheld the man open a Book, and the Dead were Judged out of those things that were written in the Book; upon which it was proclaimed, viz. Gather together the Chaff and the Stubble, and cast the  into the burning Lake. And with tht, I felt the ground give
under me, when immediately the bottomless Pitt open'd her mouth, casting forth Smoak, grisly Flames, and Coals of Fire in abundance, roaring like peales of Thunder, into which a great number sunk and were irreparably lost; when on the other hand, I heard a Voice saying, Gather my Wheat into the Garner; and thereupon many were caught into the Clouds, and ascended with Songs of Praises and Deliverance, whilst I found my self left behind, vainly seeking (as others had done) to hide my self from him that sat on the Throne; and the rather, be∣cause my Sins came into my mind, and my Conscience accused me of ingratitude and rebellion against my Maker, encompassing and filling me with horror and amazement; but as I was flying, if possible from my self, just as I was on the brink of the gaping Gulf, and ready to plung headlong into it, giving a great shriek, I started; and thereupon awaking from my slumber, I found it (to my no small Joy) to be at that time but a dream; yet this mae a strange impression on my mind,
and began to awaken me out of se∣cturity; especially when I considered the condition I was likely to be in, if the dreadful day of Judgment should overtake me at unawares, la∣en with my Sins and Transgressions; which made me a little reflect upon my former vain-spent Life, and like the prodigal Son, consider how  fled from my Fathers House, spen∣ding in Riot and all manner of wickedness not only my wordly goods, which wore given me to be improved to Gods Glory, but what was far more precious, my stock of Time, which was given (or rather lent) to work out my salvation in. How I had trifled with the good motions of the Spirit, and resisted it's striving; how I had refused Un∣derstanding, and the knowledg of Truth, shut the door of my heart against the approaches of saving Grace, and given my self up to the governance and conduct of my de∣stroyers, to the enemies of the King of Heaven, in the breach of all his Commandments, in grievously trans∣gressing and disobeying his Will and good Pleasure, by letting loose the
bridle of my headstrong Will and Affections, by giving up my self (as you have heard) to all manner of wickedness, not with standing I had been assuredly inform'd. that the wages of Sin is Death; and that by listning to the tempter, I should pr∣pare a snare for my own Soul; not∣withstanding this, I say, I indulgec my self in sensuality putting far a∣way the Evilday;Rom. 6.23 when on the con∣trary, I should have accounted my self as a Pilgrim, and have fixed m Affections on the other World, where are durable and lasting Joys, where True Felicity is only to be found; for he that seeks it in transi∣tory things, will find himself misera∣bly mistaken: I should have fixed my thoughts upon Life and Immor∣tality, upon the Kingdom where Christ Reigns in Glory, and counted my self in this World but as a way∣faring man travelling to my pro∣per Countrey, and design nothing more then to be at my Journeys end; and by entring at the strait Gate, as Wisdom directed, have passed on without fainting, to the Pallae of the Clestial King, where is fulness
of Joy and Pleasures for overmere.Psal. 16. Ult. True it is, This World may pro∣berly be said to yield many De∣ights and Refreshments, many Ho∣ours and Advancements, which are ot deny'd to the Sons of Men; But o what end does God bestow so ma∣y Liberalities? Why that we ould not abuse them, in making em serve our Lusts, and increase ur Affections to the World, but hat we should use them to his Glory, nd the good of our own Souls; use hem in such manner that we may be aid in no wise to Abuse them; that when at the last day we come to give pour Account, each of us may hear  comfortable Sentence sounding our Ears, of,Mat. 25.21. Well done, thou good nd faithfull Servant! thou hast been aithfull over a few things, I will make ee Ruler over many things; enter hou into the Joy of thy Lord. When n the other hand, those that have eglected and abused the opportuni∣ies and means of Grace and Salva∣ion, shall hear this amazing Sound, iz. And cast ye the unprofitable Ser∣ant into outer Darkness,Mat. 25.30. there shall be Weepig and Gnashing of Teeth.
These considerations one would have thought, might have made me break my chain of Bondage and Slavery wherewith I had rashly bound my self to serve the Tempter by giving up my strength to sollow the vain Pleasures and Vanities  the World, which rewarded  with little other then Toil and  bour, proving for the most part  ther Pain then Pleasure: But I foun by experience, that those wh have gotten a habit of Sinnin can't easily disencumber themselve or shake it off; the difficulty  which, the Prophet Jeremiah testi∣fies; Can (says he) the Aethiopia change his colour, or the Leopard h spots?Jer. 13.23. Then may you do Good, that  accustomed to do Evil. Nor is the ho of Grace at all times, nor is it  the power of man to repent when  pleases, unless with his will and af∣fections, moved with the gentl breathings of the holy Spirit, saving Grace put in,Prov. 1.28. and carry o the work of true Regeneration; f of some it is positively said, They sha call upon me, but I will not heart; They shall seek me early, but shall not  me,
Not that God faileth in his Promise  receiving a Sinner, at what time ever he shall turn away from his ickedness, & become a true convert; t because this is turning to God hen he is in an extraordinary di∣ress and calamity, or perhaps when  is just turning out of the World; hich may much be doubted, even y man, to be any true Conversion, t such as that whereof God spake y the Prophet Hosea,Hos. 7.14. They Howl and oar upon their Beds, and do not call pon me in their hearts. Todye well, is a long Art, in hich to learn it, there is but a short nd uncertain life, mostly spent in eep, Infancy, Childhood, Cares, nd other matters: The considera∣ion of which, made no doubt the ise man call upon us in this manner, iz. Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day, for suddainly shall his wrath break forth,Ecles. 3.7. and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed. These things, I say, at this time prevailed not with me to shake hands with my Leud Conpanions; for Sin (like a disease) having infected every
part, strugled with and prevaile against Reason, which notwith∣standing often rallyed, and at tim created a Civil War in my Soul; i somuch that by their violent e counters, swaying sometimes o way, and sometimes another, I oft stumbled at a block which  Tempter threw in my way, and  once within a stride of plunging int a dangerous Gulf called Despair, an had undoubtedly fallen into it, ha not the Invincible Hand of Divi Providence suddenlypulled mebac to reserve me for better Dayes. And this was done when Sickness had me seiz'd, When both my Soul and Body were Diseas'd; I ory'd alas! when Worldly helps were vain, Torttour'd with outward and with inward pai When nought but Clouds of darkness muff'd my E And Death stood snarling ready for his prize; When Hells of Horror, rouz'd by Conscious gu My wounded Mind, more then my Body felt; When the bold Tempter Aim'd his flaming Dart To Wound and Murther my defenceless Heart; I faw the danger, and in sad dismay, Trembling with Fear, Gasping for Life I lay, And wish'd that I had chosen Wisdom's way. O then what Vows, what Promises I made! How oft I Sigh'd! how of: I faintly Pray'd! Strugl'd like one in a Convulsion-fitt, To shake off Sin, but found the Load too great;
Whilst he that lay'd it on me, let me see How he (more then the World) had flatter'd me; And that the World does only bear the blame, Because by it he does Temptations frame: Suggesting to me that it was too late, That my black Crimes for Pardon were too great, That I was Damn'd and Lost beyond retreat. And nothing now had left me but Despair, And must with him to dismal shades repair. Cosider this, all you that wear his Chains; Think by his service what will be your gains, How he rewards his Servants for their pains. O! think betimes, and to your Father haste, Ye Prodigals that do your substance waste; Least the deceiving Citizen, the Fiend, Make you eat Husks, or worser Food inth' end: Make you despair, when in a forrain Land, Far from your home, when death and terrors band, Battering your weakned Faith, untill you fall In Everlasting Woes, beyond Recal. This had been my hard fate, though well deserv'd, And just the Doom, had not I (hunger starv'd, And almost Perishing) with tender Cryes, Mov'd the Compassion of my Fathers Eyes; And on my bended knees implor'd Relief, With Storms of Sighs, Rivers of flowing Grief; Who snatch'a me from the bold Destroyers Sword, From Death and Hell, and favour did afford, When worldly things could render me no Aid, But a Retreat, liketh' Ebbing Ocean made, His Saving Grace the mighty Ruine stay'd. He sent me Balm of Life to cure each Wound, As in the sequel will be plainly found:
For, as I was saying, notwith∣standing the many serious thoughts I had, in consideration of the Ama∣zing Vision I saw, yet being in the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, they were soon stifled, or at least much allayed, by crouding Vanities, which form'd and brought new seeming Pleasure to my Sences. But how I was con∣vinced of my Folly, and the wretched Error I was in, The following Pages will direct you.
CHAP. XII. How Riding to Recreate himself in the Forrest of Conscious∣guilt, he suddainly perceiv'd the Ruine of the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, sinking into the Gulf of Confusion, and finds himself in a wretched and miserable Estate; reflects upon his past Life, and becomes a true Penitent. HAving (as you heard) liv'd a considerable part of my days in all manner of Sensuality, in the Pallace of Worldly-Felicity, and re∣quiring a more Airey Recreation, it was agreed upon by all those my Companions, that I should be highly Attended into the Forrest of Consci∣ous-guilt, there to Course such Game as should be Started. So we Moun∣ted, and Rid together as in Tri∣umph, (I little dreaming of the dan∣ger
of the place) though it seems all that have been lull'd like me into a fond Security, in the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, are in the end brought hither, whether they re∣quest it or not; for this Forrest ad∣joyns to the Pallace, being exceeding Dark and full of Terror, by reason of the discouraging Shade that over∣shadowed it, and the many Pitsalls, Bogs, Ponds, Snares, and threat∣ning Wild-Beasts that are found therein, ready to Assault such as they find Defenceless; yet hither is my Simplicity I went, very Jocund and Gay; nor was it long e'er the Game was started, which we follow'd with full Cry; for now like Nimrod, we were Hunting after Blood and Op∣pression; and being in our full Car∣reir, had almost made the Game our Quarry: But it so happen'd, that being in the only open place of the Forrest, which is upon a little Rising Hill, the Sun shon hot upon me, and I began to faint; when being about to retire under the cooler Shades, my Horse fell down under me, and I found my self incapable of moving from thence: Then call'd I
to my Companions to come to my ssistance, but none either came or made reply; yet I supposing I heard  fearful Cry at a distance, Weak and Faint as I was, turn'd my Head o see what it might mean; when o my Horror and Amazment, I per∣ceiv'd the Pallace and all its fading Glories, sinking into the gaping Gulf of Confusion; all the pleasant places and pleasant Things where∣with I had Indulg'd my self, vanish from my sight, leaving in their oom the noisom Lake of Sad Re∣membrance: From the threatning anger of which, whilst I strove to y, I found my self Mir'd in the Ex∣ceeding large and deep Bog or Quagmire of an Evil Conscience; for he Hill of Prudence was sunk, so that the more I strugled to get out, the more I found my self sinking; and then the deluding Inchantment being remov'd, that held me as one in a golden Dream, I be held my Sins in their ugly and afrighting forms; and still as I strove to shake them off, they clung the faster to me; crying out, We are thy Creatures, and will Accompany thee: Thou hast taken Sil∣ver
and Garments of Naaman, a the Leprosie of Naaman cleaves un thee. Then too sadly I remember each Sin with whom I had been fam∣liar. Then I found my self surro∣ded with Blasphemy, Swearing, ∣ing, Covetousness, Lasciviousne Cruelty, Pride, Ambition, Riot, G∣tony, Drunkenness, Lightness, L∣ness, Lust, Envy, Hatred, Ang Ʋnquietness, Frowardness, Obstinat Rashness, Violence, Idleness, Sloa Hipocrisy, Flattery, Curiosity, D∣traction, Oppression, Slander,  with many more, who derided  and upbraided me for being so foo∣lish as to forsake the Council of Wis∣dom, ingeniously confessing, That  them was no Felicity; that GOD ne∣ver made them, but that they had the Enterance into the World by the  Malice and Subtilty of the Devil, an that he was the seeming Prince  whom I had pay'd my Homage, wh I Listed my self under his Banner,  the Pallace of Worldly Felicity: An now I call'd to mind what Mercy had abus'd, what offers of Grace had slighted, how I had griev'd th Holy Spirit, and by my Sins cruci∣fy'd
the Son of GOD afresh, and put m to an open Shame; that when Wis∣dom cry'd in the Streets, in the chief laces of the City, I either stop'd my ars, or turn'd my Back upon her. These considerations made me think y self unworthy, so much as to lift y Eyes up towards Heaven, to ex∣ect deliverance from thence, seeing  was so Notorious a Rebel against e Coelestial King; and if at any me I did, methought I heard the oice of the Prophet sounding in y Ears, viz. What have I to do with thee, O Joram!2 Kings 3. Get thee to the Prophets of thy Father, and of thy Mother; go to the Pleasures and Ad∣vantages that thou hast hitherto pur∣sued, and require them to help you. Then methought the Earth seem'd unwilling to bear me, and the angry Heavens flash'd Fire in my Face; all the Creatures whom I had abus'd try'd out for Justice upon me, whilst the Tempter play'd his stron∣gest Engins against me, waiting but the moment when Death shou'd Cut my Thread of Life in sunder, to de∣vour me.Psal. 116.3 Then the Pains of Hell ot hold upon me, the Sorrows of Death
compass'd me, and the Floods of Wic∣kedness made me afraid; the Sorrow of the Grave compass'd me, the Snar of Death overtook me. Then I found Trouble and Heaviness, and cry'd unto him that alone is able to deli∣ver, who lay'd help upon one that  Mighty; whilst the Tompter on  other hand strove with all his mig to push me headlong into the Gulf  Despair, by suggesting my Sins we greater then could be forgiven, a that I was Irreparably Lost: This confess filled me with horror a amazement, but still though throug my Infirmities my Faith was wea and imperfect, I cryed to my Delive∣rer, acknowledging my own vileness and confessing the multitude of m Transgressions, watering my Co with Tears, and with Remorse, cry∣ing often, Father, I have Sinne against Heaven and in thy sight,Luke. 15.18.29. an am no more worthy to be call'd thy Son make me as one of thy hired Servants O! let me approach Thee, though with shame and confusion of Face O! shut me not out of thy Heritage but take the lost sheep into thy Fold If thou wilt, O Lord, though I am
vile and wretched, thou canst, thou ayst cleanse me; though my sins be  Scarlet, yet thou canst make me as hite as Snow. O mercifull Lord!  not so look upon me, so that thou e not thy self; Regard not so my Wickedness, that thou behold not  own Goodness; Remember  so the Sins that I have done, that ou forget the substance thou hast ade. O mercifull Lord! what is e Sence of this saying,Ezek. 33.11. I will not be Death of a Sinner, but I desire that  be Converted and Live? O merci∣ll GOD! whose word is thy will, nd whose will is thy Power, to do whatsoever pleaseth thee, who dost promise nothing but what thou dost purpose, and then thou canst not romise any thing but what thou art le to perform, suffer me I pray thee  prostrate my self at the footstool  thy Mercy Seat. For great is thy oving-kindness towards the Sons of den. Lord, If thou wilt not the Death  a Sinner, what necessity if there at I should Perish? If thou desiresh t a Sinner should be converted and ive, what difficulty is there that I  not be Saved? Can the
Power and Malice of the Devil, can the number of my Transgressions either constrain thee, to that which thou wouldest not, or hinder that which thou desirest? Behold, O Lord! Thy Prodigal Return'd, who by sad experience has found thy Word the the Truth, behold him with the Ey of thy Fatherly Compassion, and let not thine Anger burn against him; for in thy wrath the Soul that thou hast made must fail before thee. Having in this manner pour'd o my Supplications, methought a Beam of heavenly Joy darted into my Soul, and the threatning Terron seemed to disappear: Then began  to reflect upon my past spent Life, and to detest against those that had seduced me; but above all my own Folly, which inticed and perverted me from the ways of Wisdom and Truth. And having made a repetition of my manifold Transgressions, & of those that had been my leud Associ∣ates, I burst out into Tears, and with St. Austin, said Behold, O Lord, with what Companions I walked the streets of Babylon, I wallowed my self in the
mire of it, as if I had reposed in a Bed of Spices and fragrant Perfumes, whilst my secret Enemy led me on to the center of Sin, so that I ran into all manner of dissoluteness, and practised what soever I affected: a Mist in the mean time, depriving me of Sight, de∣iving me, O my GOD, of the bright∣ness of thy Truth, whilst my Sins pro∣ceeded from me like the flowing of a Wine-Press. Here again I paused, and strugled with the Temptations that sallyed upon me; and then in the anguish of my Soul, cry'd out, How long, how long, O Lord wilt thou be angry? for ever? How long, how long, O Lord, wilt thou shut the gate of thy Mercy against me, and cover with indignati∣on, as with a Cloud, the brightness of thy Face? How long wilt thou turn away thine amiable Eys from beholding me, who without the assistance of thy saving Grace must ever be Miserable? O my Redeemer, let thy Mediation plead in thy sacred Merits, my wretch∣ed cause, with thy Fathers Justice! O Thou that wilt not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoaking Flax, have Pity, have Compassion on me! O
Thou that art the good Samaritan, pour Oylad Wine into my wounded Soul, and bind it up in the bundle of Life! Yet, wretch that I am, with what Face can I approach thy Presence, who have so often rejected thy offers of Life and Salvation, betray'd thy Cause, de∣serted thy Standard, and gon over thy mortal Enemy? And though with transcendent mildness thou hast call'd mov'd and invited me to return, yet have I obstinately and perversly refu∣sed it. Upon this, hanging down my Head with shame, a flood of Tears burst again from my Eys; which ended, methought I heard a voice, saying, I have heard thy Prayers, I have seen thy Tears! behold, I will heal thee. And now, by reason of the sudda calmness I found within, I had leisure to reflect upon my past Vanities, and the danger wherein I stood of hazar∣ding my Eternal welfare, which made me bitterly exclaim against Folly, who had been the occasion of my running into these dangerous ways, as in like kind she serves all those that listen to her, and shape their undertakings ac∣cording to her Dictates; and then,
to aggravate it the more, laughs at them when their Calamities come as desolation, they not being in the least able to deliver themselvs from shame or danger. Therefore let the Sons of Men consider how dangerous it is to refuse the call of Wisdom, whose Un∣erring Rules lead into the paths of Life, to follow a Deceiver who leads directly to the gates of Death; for, a holy David affirms,Psal. 36.1, 2. The Trans∣gressions of the Wicked saith within my Heart, that there is no fear of GOD before his Eyes, for he flattereth him∣self in his own Eyes, untill his Iniquity be found to be hateful. And this made me consider the wretched estate of many, who hardned in a course of sin, will fully shut their Eyes till some more then ordinary Judgment awake them; and this indeed was my case, as in part you have already under∣stood: for as it is written, viz.Isa. 26.9. When thy Judgments are abroad, the Nations will learn Righteousness; That is, the fear of an impendent punishment frequently awakens them out of that security, which when they put far away the Evil Day, they are apt to slumber in. And thus
declaring my Folly, and the dange∣rous Adventures I enter priz'd and was concern'd withall in the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, or Sensuality; my intent is to leave what has been said as a Seamark, to prevent others from running rashly or unadvisedly upon the same Shoal or dangerous Quick∣sand on which so many Thousands are lost, and from thence (without Vain∣glory) shew what followed in the better part of my Adventures. The End of the First Part.
The Conviction of Worldly-Vanity: OR, The WANDRING PRODIGAL RETURN'D. THE SECOND PART. CONTAINING An Account of his Escape from the Palace of Worldly Felicity; Of the glo∣rious Prospect he had of the Coelestial City; And of the Progress he made (under the Conduct of Divine Grace) to the Palace of Virtue and True Feli∣city; The manner of his Proceeding, the various Occurrences he met with by the way, and his Joyful Reception there at last: His Excellent Descri∣ption thereof, and of the Divine and Moral Virtues he found therein. With many Other Things, both Pleasant and Profitable. London, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the Poultrey. 1687.
The Wandring PRODIGAL Return'd. PART II. CHAP I. He is rescu'd from the miserable con∣dition he was in by Divine Grace; has a prospect and description of the CELESTIAL CITY, and of the, Joy he conceiv'd thereat, &c. HAving in the first part of my Travels declared how I was govern'd by, Folly, and how I con∣temn'd and despis'd Wisdom  Vertue; following a Voluptuous kind
of Life, which in the end I found to be at best but tiresom Vanity, as indeed all those must do that place their trust too much therein; and how, by being afflicted, the Eyes of my Understanding (that before were clouded and shut up in the dark mists of Sensuality) were open'd, insomuch that with Holy David, I may justly say, 11.9.71. It is good for me that I have been Afflicted. I shall now proceed to tell you, That continu∣ing in a sence of my own vileness, and still crying out for deliverance: As I was praying with a willing mind, 9.1. shedding Tears in abundance, and still wishing that my Head was Water, and my Eyes fountains of Tears, that therewith in some measure the stains and polutions of my wic∣ked Heart might be washed away, that so in Regeneration I might be∣come a new Creature; as I was thus Thoughtful and Penitent, I say, it so happen'd that fixing my mind on things above,Col. 3.1, 2. as I had at my first setting out been directed by the voice of Wisdom, though (wretch as I am) I refus'd it; methought I beheld, (at least with the Eyes of
my Soul) a Lady of incomparable beauty, clad in Vestments of purest white, shining with Transcendant Brightness and Glory; I saw her methought descending from Heaven, for there it seems she ever dwells with the Eternal Wisdom, till by his Compassion sent down to Relieve and Refresh poor Penitent Wretch∣es, and be a means to cause such Wandring Prodigals as my self to resolve upon returning to their Fathers House, and of making a true and sincere acknowledgment of their manifold Sins and Transgressi∣ons: And whist I lay groveling up∣on the ground in Sighs and Tears, she placed her self before me with the greatest mildness Imaginable. insomuch that although I was atfirst abashed, yet soon I took Courage,  after some abrupt stammering, occa∣sion'd by the confusion & bad state I was in, I open'd my mouth and be∣ganto implore her assistance, entreat∣ing her that she would vouchsafe to draw me out of the miry sink of my Sins, into which through Rashness and Folly I was fallen and there in
all likelihood must Perish, if not sud∣dainly reliev'd; for not withstand∣ing what had passed, I saw many Enemies preparing to assault me, against whose assaults I was but weakly provided, and little able to make any long defence. Thus having made my Supplicati∣on to this Heavenly Stranger, she mildly reprov'd me, and let me (with conviction of Conscience) behold how fondly I had given my self up to follow the Temptations & Alurements of the Enemies of my Soul,Prov. 3.17. and upon what slight terms I had rejected the Counsel of Wisdom, Whose ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all whose Paths are Peace. In doing which, she told me my Sins indeed were very great, and that they had been the more Aggravated by for∣saking the good way and treading in the forbidden Paths;Rev. 3.8. yet (conti∣nued she) to true Penitents There is a door set open which no man can shut; but beware that thou turn not aside again,Psal. 2. ult. Least thou perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, &c. These reproofs and words, spoken with a Majestick and con∣vincing
mildness, made such an Impression on my Heart, that I could not refrain bursting again into Tears, and in the midst of my Passion cry'd, O! the Insearchable height and depth of the Mercies and Love of GOD to. wards his miserable Creatures! even to those that were his Enemies, who have crucifi'd him to themselves Afresh, Rejected and Despis'd him for Tristes, for vain Delights, and Teem∣ing Pleasures; Him who is only Life, Light, Joy, and the Eternal Center of Happiness Then she proceeded to give me many words of Comfort and Consolation, saying, she had a Commission from Him That ever Liveth to make Intercession for Sinners, to draw me out of the Mire wherein I lay; from him that is able to save to the utmost; and thereupon touch∣ing me with her Golden Scepter, I presently receiv'd so much Strength and Vigor both of Body and Mind, that like the Lame Man that lay at the Gate of the Temple, I leaped from the danger wherein I was; lea∣ving Folly and my Horse Timerity to struggle by themselves, who with much striving sunk deeper and dee∣per,
till cover'd in the Quagmire, I beheld them no more. Being (as you have heard) deliver∣ed out of the great danger wherein I lay, and raised by the assistance of Divine Grace (for so by this time I understood the Lady was call'd) From the Death of Sin, to the Life of Righteousness, I began to bethink my self to whom I owed my deliverance; when with Holy David, I made my humble Acknowledgment. viz,Psal. 40.1.2.3.4.5. I waited patiently upon the Lord, and he enclined unto me and heard my Crye; he brought me up also out of a horrible Pit, out of the Miry Clay, and set my feet upon a Rock, and established my goings, and hath put a new Song into my mouth, even Praises to our GOD; many shall see it, and fear, and trust in the Lord. Blessed is the Man that maketh the Lord his trust, and Respecteth not the Proud, nor sush as turn aside to Lyes. Many, O Lord my God, are thy onder∣ful works which thou hast done, and thy thoughts which are to s-ward, they cannot be reckon'd up in order to thee; If I would declare & speak of them, they are more then can he number'd.Psal. 139., 18. Upon this, methought I heard a voice say∣ing,
Arise my Love, my fair One, and come away; for behold the Winter is past, the Rain is over, the Flowers have appear'd in our Land.Cant., 2.10 Now whist I was looking about me, I beheld afar off a very glorious Countrey, shining with Coelestial Brightness, to which I found my self all on a sudden desi∣rous to pass, and therefore took the boldness to inquire of Divine Grace what happy Land that was, which afforded so glorious a Prospect at so great a distance? To which she answer'd me, That it was the Heaven∣ly Canaan in which was the New Jeru∣salem, the City shining with the brightness of GOD: upon which I concluded this was the Countrey of which I had heard very glorious things spoken; and being more and more desirous to travel thither, I with much submission enquired of sundry things and matters relating thereto, and especially of the City which sent its beams of Light from far, and to which I well perceiv'd the Pallace of Worldly Felicity in all its seeming Glory, (if what appear∣ed sollid, had been really so) was nothing comparable.
To which she made this reply: As for the City (said she) it shineth with the glory of GOD as clear as Christal; and as for its Buildings, they are of fine Gold, glistering like Glass; the Walls and Foundations being of precious Stones, and the Gates so many intire Pearls; whose streets are pav'd with Gold; and that in this City there is no need of Sun or Moon, for the Lamb, who is the Coelestial King, is the Lamp and Light thereof, who gi∣veth it a large and glorious Light; from whose Seat streameth a Fountain or River of Water of Life as clear as Christal; and on the banks thereof, is Planted the Tree of Life, which continually yieldeth both Food and Phy∣sick; and in this City there is no Sick∣ness, Trouble, or Decay; no Curse, no Vnclean Thing, but the Throne of GOD and of the Lamb, and his Servants, who see his Face, and Reign with him for evermore, &c. When Divine Grace had shewed me these things, I concluded that to this place Wisdom intended to lead me, when she met me at the parting of the way; the thoughts of diso∣beying whose Voice, made me not a
little sad; and especially because I had triss'd away so much precious time in pursuing Vanity, putting off from Day to Day (as too many worldlings do) the time of Repen∣tance, which ought to be the early work of our Life; especially consi∣dering it may not be at all times in our power: For setting aside a thousand Accidents or chances that may befal us, either in suddainly depriving us of Life, Sences or Op∣portunity, doubtless our free-will, without the assistance of Gods Grace, and the good motions of the holy Spirit, must necessarily prove inef∣fectual; and so by a long obstinacy, a long resisting and grieving the holy Spirit, which should Seal us to the Day of Redemption, me may at last be left hardened in Impenitency, and either sink in the Gulf of Despair, or be Split upon the Rock of Pre∣sumption, which is altogether as dangerous, and has done more mis∣chief by far then the former. Notwithstanding these thoughts, I could not forget what Divine Grace had told me concerning the Coelestial City, but stedfastly
fixing my Eyes upon it, as place I greatly desired to be at, yet some∣what doubtfull by reason of my un∣worthiness, whether I should find admittance, I cryed out as in a Rap∣ture, O how Amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts!Psal. 84.2. My Soul longeth and panteth to enter into thy Courts! And now Divine Grace being fully satisfied that I intended to set for∣ward, she did not attempt to discou∣rage me; for although she dealt plainly with me, and let me un∣derstand the many difficulties I was like to meet with, she on the other hand supported me with many in∣dearing promises of Assistance, thereby to enable me not to faint, or turn aside from the way; and so abso∣lutely resolving to proceed in what I had determined, I implored her Assistance; which she promised as far as it was needful; and to shew me many things that as yet I was a stranger to. So happy is the Man whom Grace befriends, Him upon whom the Heavenly Guest descends;
That he a prospect soon may gain of Life, Immortal Joyes, and Glory free from strife. CHAP II. After a truc Sence of his Sin, he re∣solves to Travel towards the Coele∣stial City, and of the difficulty he met at his setting out, how he enter'd the Strait Gate where he met Evan∣gelist, and the Comfort he gave him. BEing yet in the same Garb I flatter'd my self in, in the Pal∣lace of Worldly Felicity, I found my self uneasey, as being sensible and ashamed of the miry condition I was in, I implored Divine Crace that she would help to change them; but she told me it might not be done, till such time I had repassed the broad way, and come to a certain place where I should find a Lady
that would strip me of them; at this, though I found them very Cum∣bersom, I was not a little pleas'd; for now having a true sight of the Condition I was in, I began to loath and detest what formely I had ap∣prov'd and delighted in: And so taking me by the Hand, she led me to the brink of a noisom Lake, full of fearful Monsters, Yelling Horri∣bly, and continually Roling in Li∣quid Fire; at the sight of which, I started as one in a Dream, when he fancies himself falling from the top of a Precipice; whilst my hair stood an end with Horror, and with an abrupt and broken speech, de∣manded, what this fearful Sight might mean? To which Divine Grace reply'd, This is the change of Sin from it's flattering and delusive shape, to that which is more properly and really its own natural deformity; This is the Place, and these the Com∣panions of your late imaginary Sollace and Repose; and here hadst thou been weltering, had I not been sent to your assistance by Him who is the Author of Grace and Truth; yet over this Lake you must pass, before you can arrive
at the stage where you are to be disro∣bed of your Poluted Garments. At the sight of this place, and the Thoughts of repassing it, I began exceedingly to Tremble, crying out,Rom. 7.24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death! from this danger and hazard I am now to undertake! but whilst I was trem∣bling and crying out, Divine Grace shewed me a Bridge that reach'd quite over the Lake, which was exceeding narrow, at the sight of which, being little recover'd from my amazement, I greatly rejoyced; and this Bridge is called by some Remorse of Conscience and Abborrence of Sin; but by reason of its slender∣ness, twas feeble & crazy, insomuch that as I passed it, it often crack'd and totter'd, so that I had once a mind to retreat, for fear of tum∣bling into the Lake; and the rather, for that the Monsters on either side reached at me to pull me in, and often with their horible bellow∣ing not only shook the Bridge, but put me into such an amazement, that sometimes I was regardless of my way; besides, the noisom vapors
created a dizziness and disorder: But by the assistance of Divine Grace I with much difficulty reach'd the other side. Yet Voluptuousness, who there lay wallowing in the Embraces of Sensuality, cryed after me with a horrible voice,Job. 20.11 saying, His Bones are are full of the Sins of his youth, and they shall lye down with him in the dust. But not willing to give further ear to her, I smote my Breast, and fetching a deep Sigh, said with a loud voice,Psal. 94.17 If the Lord had not hel∣ped me, my Soul should have been put to Silence. And now Reader, from this consider that none can be said to be Penitents, but such as through re∣morse of conscience, having a true Sight of their Sins, and a sence of their misdoings, with reluctancy, and an utter detestation and abhor∣rence, reflect upon them, resist them, and mortifie their corruptions; and this cannot be done truely as it ought, without great caution and difficulty, by reason of natural de∣pravities, and the fresh assaults of Temptations that frequently offer or cast themselves in our way; which though (as it too frequently
happens) they are sweet as honey in the mouth, which invites many greedily to take them in, yet in the Belly they are as bitter as Gaul. Having 'scaped this danger, and heard the lamentable Cryes of those that lay weltering in misery, we passed on till wee arrived at the end of the Green Lane, where it butted upon the Pallace that I had beheld sink down, and instead of which the noisom Lake arose, where wee met with a great Slough called the Slough of Discouragement, & in it many who had attempted to return without the assistance of Divine Grace, who relying upon their own strength had ventur'd so far that they could nei∣ther proceed, nor without some dif∣ficulty reach the side next to the Pallace; and the reason was, because it was guarded by one called Dis∣pondency of mind, who frequently (as they attempted to get out upon the firm ground) pushed them back again; so that being quite tired and spent, puzzled between Hope and Dispair, they lay fretting them∣selves in much Auxiety, and knew not what to do; so hard a matter
is it for those that rely upon their own strength, when they should rely upon the Merits and Gracious Pro∣mises of their Blessed Redeemer, to break the chain of their Sin, or get out of the Mire into which they have willfully or unadvisedly plun∣ged themselves: For Free-Will, without free Grace, is weak and insignificant. But it so happen'd, that whilst I made a little stand at the brink of this Slough, one called Promise, came and lay'd a strong Bridge of Assurance, which reached from one side to the other, and over this we passed; but had not gone far, before I espyed a pleasant Path that crossed a Meadow, which led a nearer way, over which I was desirous to go; but Divine Grace pulled me by the Sleeve, saying, Let thine heart be towards the high∣way;Jer. 31.1. the way that thou wentest turn again. Upon which, I immedi∣ately started back into the Road, and so wee kept on till wee came to the place where the ways parted. The which when I perceived, I called again to mind the Counsel of Wisdom, and was not a little griev'd
that I had rejected it, considering the many miseries I underwent since I took the Left-hand-way; yet I mingled my Grief with Joy, that it was once more in my choice; and so with a willing Mind, I enter'd in at the Strait Gate, crying, Wel∣com, Life; and fell to leaping for Joy; for now I felt my mind ligh∣ter then ever, though I was not dis∣robed, nor those difficulties that been suggested as yet appear'd; but far I had not gone, before I met a Man of mild aspect, who came up to me and desired to admonish me in a few things; and being glad of such an opportunity, I thanked him kindly, and promised attention: And he proceeded: I am (said he) Evangelist, whose care it is to direct those that enter in at this Gate, in their way to the Coe∣lestial City: And thereupon he demanded how it had fared with me? To which I briefly told him all that had befel me: after which, he made me sensible that I had seen him before, and that he had given me good advice, the which if I had ta∣ken, I might have escaped the
danger I had incurred; but seeing I had turn'd from the Evil of my ways, it might not be too late for me to reach the Pallace of True Felicity, seeing the Lord thereof has promi∣sed,Ezek. 33.11. That at what soever time a Sin∣ner Repenteth and Turneth from the Evil of his ways, his Soul shall Live, for that he wills not the Death of a inner, but desires that he be conver∣ &c. Nay invites all those that are weary and heavy Laden, to come unto him for Rest, declaring that he will in no wise cast them out, pro∣mising them freely, without price or Money,Is. 55.1. the water of Life; and makes himself our Advocate, to plead our Cause: you are one of those for whom he lay'd down his Life, one of those for whom he shed his most precious Blood; and for so great kindness what does he expect more then your obedience and faithful Service, your entire affections,Math. 11.30. and perseverance in well∣doing. Nor, as himself has declared, is his Service or Yoak uneasy; or should it be so, which indeed it is not, yet know you serve him not for nought; your Reward, if you perse∣vere
to the end, will be a crown of Life, an exceeding weight of Glory,2 Cor. 4.17 a Pearl of an inestimable value, a Kingdom without end, an Eternal Inheritance, &c. Wherefore look well to your Feet, that you with∣draw them not from the way of Peace, nor that you faint,Math. 20.16. for ma∣ny are called, but few are chosen; Wherefore so Run, that ye may obtain the Reward, the prize of Glory;1 Cor. 9.24 and be vigelent in holding fast the Faith, that in the end, when you have fought the good fight,2 Tim. 4.7. & 8. you may receive the Crown of Righteousness which the Righteous Judge will give you in that Day. Suffer nothing on this side the Mark of your high calling to trouble or affright you, no Temptations, Tribula∣tions, and Sorrow, to overcome you; but with a constant and stedfast Faith, Rely upon Him for Succor and Support, under whose Banner you are now to fight; nor fear his ability, for unto Him all Power in Heaven and Earth is given. This encour agement and cau∣tion I thought fit to give you, that you neither faint nor look back; and shall not be wanting, as further occasion offers, even as you can bear it.
Evangelist having given me this Heavenly Lecture, I found a tenfold Joy arise in my Heart, and after re∣turning him a Thousand thanks, passed on, accompyed with Divine Grace, till I came into a very low descent, which I understood to be the Valley of Humility, and here stood the School of Repentance, to which I must enter before I could pass any further. Of which take an account in the following Chapter. CHAP III. How having enter'd the Valley of Humility, he came to the House of Repentance, and how he was there Entertain'd; the Ingenious Con∣fession he made, with Admonitions and extolling the Divine Goodness, &c. APproaching the House of Re∣pentance, which stood in the middle of the way to the Coelestial City, I perceiv'd it hung with Sighs, and dropping with Tears, pav'd with
Groans, and ciel'd with Prayers and Ejaculations, appearing very Mournfull and Melancholy; but for all that, I was not in the least deje∣cted, but staid in the Porch till there came a grave Matron in a mourning Weed, plain and decent, with a Lovely yet Sorrowful Countenance; and after her followed two more, who appear'd to be her Daughters; and these, I understood by Divine Grace, were Repentance, Sorrow for Sin, and Confession of Sin: Then Divine Grace addressing her self to the first of these, told her to what end she had brought me thither, by what means, and to what degree she had wrought upon me; how I was become sensible of my own vileness, and therefore desir'd her to qualifie me further, according to her Rule and manner, that I might be fitting to pass towards the Coelestial City, whither I was bound The Ladies having well under∣stood the Cause of my coming, high∣ly approv'd it, and kindly welcom∣ed me, shewing me my Apartment, and what else was convenient for me. So that having no other busi∣ness
finess then to apply my self to the ways of Vertue, I lea'd a Lesson different from that which I had learn'd in the Pallace of Worldly Felicity; for now instead of Drink∣ing, Rioting, Gaming, Debauchery, and the like, I apply'd my self to Fasting, Prayer, and other such like Pious and Devout Exercises; and when I had so done for a few Days, I found a wonderful change wrought in me; yet all this while my Leud Apparel remained upon me, of which I was not a little ashamed, though how to get it off I could not tell; yet calling to mind what Divine Grace had told me, how that at a certain place I should be dis-en-cumber'd, I concluded this might be that place; wherefore taking the opportunity, I besought the Lady Repentance to do me that kind∣ness, who as readily consented; and thereupon taking me into the Re∣tirement of Sorrow for Sin, where was a deep Dungeon, she took off my Hat of Haughtiness, my Girdle of Intemperance, my Sword of Vio∣lence, my Coat of Vain-Glory, my Hose of Vain Delight, and conse∣quently
all my other Lustful and Vitious Attire, my Shirt of Lasci∣viousness excepted: which, that I might not be altogether naked, I intreated her to spare for a time; and these she cast into the dark Dun∣geon called Oblivion, to prevent their rising up in Judgment a∣gainst me when I came to the Coe∣lestial City: And so I being thus Lightned, continued in great con∣tent of Mind; so that true Repentance of all things in the World, makes the greatest change; it changes things in Heaven and Earth, for it changes the whole man from Sin to Grace, from vitious habits to holy Customs from unchaste Bodies to Angelick Souls, from Drunkenness to sober Counsels; and even GOD himself (in whom there is no variableness or shadow of change) is pleased by de∣scending to our weak understand∣ings, to say that he changes; that is, upon Mans Repentance he alters his determinate Decrees in case of Punishment, or the like; as in the case of Ninnive, and that of Hezi∣kiah, with more that I might men∣tion,
which for brevities sake I pass over. Repentance prevails with the Almighty to revoke his Sentence, cancels the Bills of Accusation, and throws the Records of Shame and Sorrow from the Court of Heaven, and even to lift the Sinner from the Grave to Life, from the Prison to a Throne, from Hell and guilt of Eternal Torture, to Heaven and a title of never-ceasing Felicities. Being now under the Jurisdiction of this good Matron, she would not suffer me to rest till she had made a further tryal of my Patience; and thereupon taking me by the Hand, she carry'd me into another Apart∣ment, and there shew'd me a very strait hole, which she said enter'd into the Chamber of Sincerity, through which I must pass, if I in∣tended to Arrive at the Coelestial City; upon which I began to cry out, That it was impossible that ever I should be able to pass through such a small hole; for to my seeming, my Hand would scarcely enter, and thereupon I ask'd Counsel of Divine Grace, who told me there was in∣deed no other way, and that although
it seem'd impossible with Man,Mat. 19.26. yet all things were possible with GOD; there∣fore I ought to Rely upon him, and not be discouraged; for that I must put off the Old Man, which according to the first Conversation, was corrup∣ted with many Evils,Col. 3.9.10. and put on the New Man, whose Conversation ought to be Justice, Truth and Holiness. The Old Man is the Affections of Sin, and the former Evil Life; and the New Man is the Godly Life, be∣gun in Holiness: And whilst she was thus discoursing, looking through the Window of my Understanding, I beheld an aged Eagle rough and dis∣order'd, who towring a while, in the end descended into a Christal Foun∣tain that stood hard by, and having dived therein, her Feathers moul∣ted, and she became young, spright∣ly and gay; and whilst I was wo dering what this might signifie, Di∣vine Grace enter'd the narrow hole, catch'd me by the Hands, and said,Hos. 11.4. I will draw thee in with the Cords of my Love; which she did, whilst Re∣pentance thrust behind; so that by reason of the straitness of the place, my Shirt of Lasciviousness was rent
to pieces, and I began to complain of the Rigor; but soon the hole grew wider, and I found much case, being now much lighter and at ease, especially in my Mind, then I was before; insomuch that concluding the worst was past, I began to Sing in this manner: How happy am I now I'm enter'd in! By which I am disburden'd of my Sin, Which like a heavy Weight so lately prest My sinking Soul, and robb'd it of it's Rest! Happy are they that Ruled are by them That lead the way to New Jerusa∣lem. And now being in, Repentance put m Garments suitable to my con∣dition o the great work I was to undertake, which were Spun by Hu∣mility Patience, Mkess, Charity, and many other Virtues; and so let me consider further to what end I came thither. And that I might have yet a deeper sense of my Sin, soon after Returning, she put me into an unusual Agony, though she
quickly gave me a Cordial, as in the sequel will appear. CHAP IV. He is Affrighted by the Terror of Con∣science, but is at the Earnest Inter∣cession of Sorrow for Sin, spared at the Command of Divine Grace; and crying out against Presumption, is humbled under a sense of Sin. CErtain it is that GOD has many and wonderful ways to bring Sinners home to himself, as some∣times by Threats, sometimes by Promises, and sometimes he draws them with the Cords of his Love, by degrees preparing them to be fit Ves∣sels for the Reception of his Grace, which has power to sofen and molli∣fy the Stony Heart, and baffle all Worldly Interest; as appears by the Conversion of St. Paul, the Call of St. Mathew, and others: But nearer to the purpose, When Repentance had Apparelled me, as I said, with Garments suiting
my Condition, she placed me in a Stony Chair, and having allow'd me a Breakfast of spare Diet, I scarce∣ly had ended it, when going out, she return'd again with divers in her Company, and of these she plac'd one on my Right Hand, one on my Left, and another directly before me; who with an angry and threat∣ning Look, star'd dreadfully in my Face, having moreover a Red Book in one Hand, and a Scorpion in the other; and whilst I was in a trem∣bling Fit, and wondering what i should mean, she had command to open the Book, which she immedi∣ately did; and in it I too plainly be∣held in Bloody Characters, the ma∣ny Crimes and Follies that since my coming into the World I had com∣mitted; which made me start, and forc'd all the Blood in my Body into ay Face, not being able to say one Word for my self; whereat she let loose her Scorpion upon me in a piti∣ous manner, insomuch that I cry'd out for mercy; whilst she, on the other hand, fell to upbraiding, say∣ing, Turn not away wretched Man, for it is not in thy power to fly from me:
Turn not away, I say, but behold thy wicked Actions Recorded in this Book, the smallest of which thou art not able to deny; see how in dreadful Letters stand Engraven thy Pride, Arrogance, Ambition, Spight, Hatred, Contempt of others, thy abused Prosperity, and slighting of offer'd Favous, and mis∣using of time, thy Wrathfulness, Inju∣ries done against thy Neighbour, thy Covetousness, Back-biting, Slande∣ring, Gluttony, Wantonness, Fornica∣tions, Adulteries, Drunkenness, Ly∣ing, Swearing, Prophane Speeches, Sloath, contempt and neglect of Sacred things, thy trusting in the Arm of Elesh, and relying upon Perishable things; the Follies of thy Youth, and the Sins of thy Riper Years; with many other Abomi∣nable and Notorious Crimes, hateful in the sight of GOD, and deserving to be punnish'd with no loss then Damna∣tion: Then how, Guilty Wretch, dar'st thou without shame and confusion of Face, look towards the Coelestial City, when you have been so Notorious a Re∣be against the King thereof, by taking part with the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? Upon this sharp Reproof, the Damsel call'd Sorrow for Sin,
being then present, fell bitterly to Weeping, and fetching many deep Sighs, as if her Heart would break, interceding with Conscience for me, who was all this while afflicting me, and threatning with fearful Judg∣ments of Wrath and Firy Indignation to come;Heb. 10.22. insomuch that I sat amaz'd and confounded within my self, looking every moment when the House would fall about my Ears, for me thought the Earth shook under me; and I, who a little before thought I was free from all danger, found my self now as bad (for the time) as when I lay bemir'd on the brink of the Gulf of Despair Where∣fore let none be over confident, least he be deceiv'd;1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that think∣eth he standeth, take heed least he fall. That is, let not Presumption whisper in his Ear, as in this case he did in mine,Luk. 18.11 lest like the Proud Pharisee, he be puff'd up with a conceit of his own Righteousness, or with the Young Man, pretend himself to be a strict observer of the Command∣ments, &c.Mark. 10.20. and boast of great things, when indeed he is nothing; for when we have done all we can we must
lay our Hands upon our Hearts, & say, We are unprofitable Servants, and that our own Righteousness is but as filthy Rags;Luk. 1710. flying from the terror of an acusing Conscience to the tender compassion and merciful Proes of a blessed Redeemer. Whilst I was in my Trembling fit, under the Sence of my Guilt, which Conscience presented to the Eyes of my Soul, in came Divine Grace, at whose Feet I fell prostrate, humbly beseeching her, that she would take Compassion upon a di∣stressed wretch, and deliver me from the Scorpion or Sting of Consci∣ence; who perceiving me truely humbled by a sence of my Sins, commanded Humility to raise me; which she kindly did, saying, He that abaseth himself shall be Exed;Note. and thus being enabled to stand on my feet, least Discouragement (a terrible Giant who had made the Slough I have mentioned, to hinder the return of those that pass the Bridge of Igno∣rance to the Pallace of Worldly Felici∣ty) Should meet and assault me on my way, she caused Remembrance to open her Golden Book, and read
me a Lecture from thence, and so she did, as in the following Chapter will appear. Where Golden Lines, in Golden Let∣ters writ, You will with comfort favourably meet. CHAP. V. Remembrance opens her Book and reads him a comfortable Lecture, mostly containing GOD's gracious Promises of Mercy and Forgiveness to true Penitents, and thereby allays his Fears. REmembrance (whoall this while had stood by) having receiv'd her orders, open'd the Book she had in her Hand, in which I beheld Lines of Gold in Pages of Azure, when touching the Seat of my Mind with a Silver Wand, she thus procceded: Hath Sin (said she) Abounded? Grace hath more abounded:Rom. 5.20 Wherefore he that mistrusteth the Mercies of GOD,
mistrusteth him to e Mrful, inju∣ub the Fountain of Mercy and Good∣ess, in denying him to be Love and Power; Love, to star him up to compas∣on, and tender Bowels of Mercy, nd Power, to do what seover seemeth ood in his own : and in these con∣st all the hope of poor Sinners, who had ey to do with any but a merciful GOD, must unavoidably Parish; for n the strictness of his Justice, the least Sin is Sufficient to Sink a Soul to he Depth of Msery. But that he is Love, Sacred Writ testies, and renders t in all ths one of the highest Attri∣utes of Omnipotency; nor is it in any small degree communicated to mankind, but rather in a most transcendant man∣er, viz. In this was manifested the Love of GOD towards us,1 Iohn. 4.9. because that GOD sent his only begotten Son into the World that we might Live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved GOD, but that he loved us,Iohn. 15.13. and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our Sins: Greater Love (says our blessed Saviour) then this has no Man, that a Man should ly down his Life for his friend: This is the Rock and Anchor hold both of Faith and Hope, for with∣out
out it we must have inevitably perishe and the Souls that he has made mus have failed before him; that is, of hi Mercy had not infinitely out weighe his Justice. Nay this blessed Saviou not only lay'd down his Lfe for lost an and undone Man, and took it up again gloriously ascending to the Right Han of his Father,1 Iohn. 2.1. but there likewise eve liveth to make Intercession for us: Fo if any Man Sin we have an Advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righ∣teous, and he is the Propitiation for th Remission of Sins. Again, Behold (says St. John) what manner of Love the Fa∣ther hath bestowed upon us,Iohn. 3  that  should be call'd the Sons of God! not that God has either occasion for us or our Service, for we can in no wise add any thing to his State or Felicity, who is  finitely happy from all Eternity, beyo Degree or Comparison; but that it i his Nature to do good to all his Crea∣tures, and to have Compassion on the Works of his Hands:Isa. 43.25. Wherefore speaking to this purpose by the Prophet Isaiah, h says, That it is he himself that bloteth out our iniquities for his own name sake, and that for the Love he bears us he will not have our Sins in Remem∣brance;
but then it is conditionally, hat we become sorrowful for our misdo∣gs, and repent us of the Evil of our ays. That he has power to Pardon d Forgive us,Mat. 28.18. is past all peradven∣ure, for all power in Heaven and Earth  in his hands; and as his Mercies are nfinite, so is his Power Vnlimited and comprehensible; nor is his Care and Regard less, for he that keepeth Israel, neither Sleepeth nor Slumbereth. There∣fore let the Wicked Man leave his ways, and the Ʋnjust Man the Evil of his d∣ings, and turn unto the LORD, and he will have mercy on him, and is ready to forgive him, and those that do trust in him shall not be Confounded;Psal. 91.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. for whoso dwelleth in the Secret of the most High, shall abide in the Shaddow of the Almighty; surely he will deliver thee from the Snare of the Hunter, and from the Noisom Pestilence; he will cover thee under his Wings, and thou shalt be safe under his Feathers, his Truth shall be thy Shield and thy Buckler; thou shalt not be afraid of the Arrow that flyeth by Day, nor of the Plague that destroyeth by Noon-day; a Thousand shall fall on thy side, and Ten-thousand at thy right-hand, but it shall not come
nigh  his  but  on  them out of  them in the  Peace  Father  out of  to  us to our endless Comfort, That GOD so lov the World, that he gave his only begot∣ten Son, to the end that whoser be∣lieveth in him might have  Life: for he came into the World not to condemn the World, but to the ena that he might sav Sanners. Having heard these comfortable Sayings, I greatly rejoyced; and be∣gan to Sing in this manner: O! what Return can Sinners make to thee For Mercies that are far beyond de∣gree! O Gracious Lord! What can poor Dust repay! Nothing but Sighs and Tears! Alas, can they
Hope for  Yes, if truly sent, From Hearts that Contrite are, and Pendent. CHAP. VI. He acknowledgeth his wonderful Change, is Assaulted by Discou∣ragement,  him, and puts him to slight;  from the School of Repen, is like to run into the , but is prevented by Understanding, and convey'd , with other matters of Note. HAving through the Assistance of  been thus long the School of , my Mind nd Affections were wonderfully ang'd from what they were in the rmer  of my Life, for I now egan to think of nothing but the ountrey whither I was going, and as continually Meditating on it, and
Contemplating of it's Beauty an Holiness; all that I had heard spo∣ken of it, returning continuall afresh into my Mind, insomuch that I cry'd out,Psal. 84.1.2. O! how Amiable are th Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! M Soul longeth and panteth to Enter in∣thy Courts! In thy presence is the f∣ness of Joy, and at thy Right Ha are Pleasures for evermore.Psa. 16.11. An when at any time Discouragemen assaulted me,Acts 14.22. Suggesting, Th through many Tribulations I must E∣ter into the Kingdom of Heaven, a that Bonds and Afflictions abided  in every City, I Answer'd him in th words of St.Acts 20.23. Paul, viz. I account that the Afflictions or Sufferings of th present Life, are not worthy of the Gl∣ry that shall be Revealed.Rom. 8.18. And whil I was thus considering with my sel Divine Grace came to me, and to me it was time to pass on, and pr∣forward toward the Mark or Prize my high Calling;Phil. 3.14. to which I willing∣ly submitted, all the Ladies prom∣sing in like manner to Accompa me; and so with Joy I proceeded For being disburthened of my Sin Apparel, I was much the lighte
and then (according as isdom had old me) the way see'd more plea∣sant, though not altogether free from danger. For the Prince of the Pallace of Worldly Felicity, to whom  had formerly been a Slave, was a∣broad with his Igions to prevent (if possible) my safe Arrival at the nd of my Journey; who often ry'd after me to Return, and made many hideous howlings to affright nd discompose me, that so they night shake or stagger my Resoluti∣on: But as much as in me lay, I stop'd my Eats and cry'd out, I will walk in the strength of the LORD;Psa. 7.16. and thereupon for a time they ceas'd to pursue me. So in the end, we came to a Crooked Lane, call'd the Path f Error; into which I had almost step'd before I was aware, but e'er my Foot reach'd the Ground, Vn∣derstanding, a good Hermit, whose Honse stood on the other hand, step'd forth and pull'd me back, and told me of the danger I was in; at which I began to tremble in such a manner, that I was scarcely able to return him Thanks, and especially because upon a second View, I beheld
Hymeneus and Philetus, with many other Erroneous Seducers and Bro∣thers of Error, who stood closely lurking to pluck in such as pass'd carelessly on their way; for here finding (or supposing at least) the Path easie, and that no other wa butted upon it, I had vain-gloriou out-strip'd my Company, in a man∣ner forgetting how I had been a lit∣tle before punish'd for hearkning t Presumption; and for this, Consci∣ence (as soon as she came up with the rest) began sharply to Rebu me; but seeing I only attempted, b had not enter'd the Lane, she upon the supplication of Repentance, gave over, and so we altogether enter'd the House of the Good Hermit Vnder∣standing, over whose Door was wri∣ten this Sentence,Psa. 49.20. viz. Man that is Born in Honour and Ʋnderstandeth not is like the Beast that Perisheth. Upon the Reading this, I began to con∣sider that a Man might understand and yet not understand aright; That he might be (if we may right∣ly term him so) a Man in understan∣ding as to Worldly Affairs, and in that boast great things, as the Sage.
and Philosophers of Old did: Nay, go somewhat surther, and yet be a Child in True Ʋnderstanding, as to Heavenly things, of which the Pro∣phet Jeremy speaks, viz.Jer. 9.29. Thus saith the LORD, let not the Wise-man glory in his Wisdom, neither let the Mighty∣man glory in his Might, nor let the Rich-man glory in his Riches; but le him that glories, glory in this, That he understandeth and knoweth Me that I am the Lord. Being come into the House of this Good Man, the first thing he shew'd me was a Man that lay bound with Chains of Security, in a dark Dungeon that was under the Floor of his House; yet in that Estate he seem'd very pleasant, not at all regarding the misery he seem'd to be in, nei∣ther was he able to get out of it, though he was incompass'd with Tombs and Coffins: Then I ask'd him whom this might be? And he put a Book into my Hand, and poin∣ting to a certain place, bid me read; when looking earnestly upon the place, I sound these Words, viz.Prov. 7.6.7. For at the Window of my House I lock'd through my Casement, and beheld a∣mongst
the Simple-ones, I discerned amongst the Youth, a Man void of Ʋn∣derstanding: Upon this I conside∣red it was the Emblem of my self, when forsaking Wisdom and follow∣ing the Advice of Folly, though I was then in the depth of Misery, yet by reason of my Simplicity, and for want of Understanding, I knew it not, but rested content even in that wretched Condition: Then I de∣manded why he was plac'd amongst Coffins and Tombs? Then he poin∣ted to another place, and bid me read; which I did, and found these words, viz. The Man that wande∣reth out of the way of Ʋnderstanding, shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead.Prov. 21.16. Then began he to reprove me, and upbraid me with my for∣mer Follies and Vanities, with my Disobedience to the call of Wisdom, and other things; but I freely con∣fessing and owning all these, bid Sor∣row for Sin speak a little on my be∣half: Whereupon she declar'd, though she must confess that I had been a grievous Sinner, and had in∣dulg'd my self with all manner of Vain-Peasures; yet by the means of
Divine Grace, having had a through sight of the miserable State I was then in, I had Renounc'd the World and all its Vanities; that I had been in the School of Repentance, and now was onward of my way, with a reso∣ution to persevere to the end, with hopes of Pardon and Eternal Life; ot upon my own account, or hrough any merits of mine, but up∣on the account, and by and through the meritorious Death and Passion of my Blessed Saviour, GOD manifested in the Flesh; hoping by him to be raised from the Death of Sin, to the Life of Righteousness;1 Cor. .22. for as by Adam came Death, so by Christ cometh the Resurrection of the Dead. There∣fore being truly sensible, sincerely and heartily sorry for what was past, she hop'd that he would not only pass by my former Frailties, but fur∣ther what I had well begun with sound Advice. This calm'd his Temper, and he upon the Motion of Divine-Grace, promis'd to furnish me with some of those Instructions which Wisdom had left for my Learning, who he said in that kind took Compassion on me,
even when I despis'd her ways, and that concerning Religion. So kind is Heaven to Prodigals Re∣turn'd, Who of their Sins Repented have, and Mourn'd, That they so kind so good a Father fled, To live with Worldlings, live a∣mongst the Dead. CHAP VII. Understanding gives him Cordial Ad∣vice, and prepares him to proceed to the House of Religion; and how after sound Counsel he went on his way, and what else befel him. UNderstanding having promis'd to give me some sound Advice, that might profit me in my further Progress, thus began: Now (said he) you are Enter'd up∣on this holy Warfare, you ought to quit your self like a Man, not to Faint,
but run with patience, and consider the danger of him that looks back; the Reward you are sensible is great, that will crown you, if you persevere to the end; and a great Reward cannot rea∣sonably be expected without Labour: Religion is not Nominal only, but Pra∣ctical, and must not be trifled with; for take it in its Latitude,  signisies the whole Duty of Man; and without performance of that Duty, Salvation cannot be reasonably expected: It com∣prehends Justice, Charity, Sobriety, Patience, Meekness, and many other Virtues; because these being comman∣ded by GOD, become a part of that Ho∣nour and Worship which we are bound to pay unto Him; in relation to which, St. James says, That Pure Religion,Jam. 1.27. and undefiled before GOD and the Father, is this, To visit the Father∣less and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted of the World: Nor must this be done superfi∣cially or hypocritically, for Praise or vain Applause, but seriously and heartily,Mat. 6.18. not as unto men, but as unto the Lord. Nor does this, which some term the External part of Religion, consisting in good Offices to our Neighbour, &c. excuse
us, but there follows that which is more peculiarly to be observed. The Internal part of Religion is cal∣led the Internal  which the Soul is only and more immediately em∣ployed and ministers to GOD in speci∣al Actions of Faith,Heb. 11.1. Hope and Charity; Faith believes the Revation of GOD, and is the Evidence of things not seen; Hope expects his Promises, and Chari∣ty loves his Exceencies and Mres; the last of these,1 Cor. 13.3. by reason of it's many singular Properties, being by the Apostle termed the greater of the Three: Again, Faith guides our Ʋnderstand∣ing to GOD, Hope gives us all the pas∣sions and Affections to Heaven and Heavenly things, Charity gives the will to the service of GOD; Faith op∣poses Infidelity, Hope does the like to Despair, and Charity to Enmity, Ha∣tred, and all other Passions of that kind; and these three Sanctifie the whole Man, and make your Duty to GOD, and your obedience to his Com∣mandments to be Reasonable and De∣lightful; and therefore to be Intie, Persevering and Ʋniversal. Ʋnderstanding having thus given me a further insight in Religion
then I had before, and humbly in∣treated, That the GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of Glory, would give unto me the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, which searcheth in all things, yea the deep things of GOD, to lighten the Eyes of my Ʋnderstanding,1 Cor. 2.10. that I might know what is the Hopes of his Calling, and the Riches of the Glory of his Inberitance in his Saints,Eph. 1.17.1. he suffered us to depart, yet promi∣sed to assisting when need should require it. CHAP VIII. How he caine to the House of Religion (being inticed in the way to turn a∣side by Hypocrisie and others) and of the  he sound these; the good Instructions he , with many other matters. HAving left this place, I passed on with great Joy, pondering in my mind what I had heard; and asking many questions of my Dear Companions, about the way, they
freely satisfied me in all things; tel∣ling me the next place I should come to would be the House which (how∣ever it might seem to my outward appearance) would prove very glo∣rious within to true Penitents, inso∣much that David,Psa. 84.10. tho a King, de∣sired rather to be a door keeper in the House of GOD, then to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness; That is, then to live wickedly in all worldly Plea∣e; and that it was far better known by the Inside then the outside, for that Hypocrisie had built her a House on that Road very nearly re∣sembling that of True Religion, and and for the outside was rather fai∣rer, by which many who travel'd that way, had mistaken the latter for the former, and were by the Lady Dissimulation (that keeps it) after they had along time flatter'd themselves, led to the top of a Mountain standing on the lest side the way, and by one Self-conceit re∣moved thence to a dark Land, where they wander to this day. This terrible Story made me very cautious and circumspect, whereup∣on I resolved to keep even with
those that accompanied me, & not to go before them, as I did when I had like to have turn'd down the crooked Lane of Error. And now being come within fight of a House on the Left Hand, I concluded it to be the same; whenas out came a grave Matron, with a Vail over her Head and shoul∣ders, seeming very Sorrowful, and her Face to appearance was much Furrow'd with Tears; yet for all that, I perceiv'd a couple of Fellows at her heels, called Desire of Vain-Glory and Praise of Men; This piece of seeming Gravity, with a very demure Countenance (as I came near her) said, Welcom, welcom, my Son; whilst those that attended her stept forward, and entreated me to turn in and take a Refreshment: But ha∣ving in mind what had been told me,Mat. 23.13. and remembring the dreadful Sen∣tence pronounced against Hypocrites and Vnbelievers, by the assistance of Divine Grace I stopped my Ears, and crying out, Life, Life, Eternal Life, I passed by, and escaped this carcass or shadow of Religion, by which too many are ensnared in embracing the shadow for the Sub∣stance;
by contenting themselves with the Apples of Sodom & Gomor∣rah, whose outsides are of a Gold and Crimson Colour, when the infide produces nothing but Cinders and Ashes.. 23. . Nor unsitly, but rather excel∣lent, is the saying of our Blessed Savi∣our, where he compares Hypocrites to painted Sepulchers: and indeed this is a Sin that walks the most lavisile to Men, because it is lodged in the se∣crets of the Heart, where GOD a∣lone is the Scearcher. Having escaped this danger, I lainly beheld the Ho of Religion, or true Devotion, at which I greatly rejoyced. This House stood in the middle of the way, and through it those that Travel to the Coeetial City must needs pss, or they will fail of their expectation. And up∣on our approach, Humity and Sin∣cerity came to usher s in, whilst Good Theology, who was Master of the place, stood to receive and welcom us with a gratulation of Peace; and so being enter'd, methought it was one of the most desirable pleces I had seen in my way; and here I learned of  Heed Mster, to be
Lowly and Meek, pouring out my Spirit in Supplication and Prayer,Mat. 11.29 intreating Sorrow for Sin and conessi∣m of Sins to assist me in as much as in them lay, to make an acknowledg∣ment of my own vileness, the better o suppress the strivings of the Fle, who in this transitory Life will at one time or other Rebel against the Spirit, though Watchfulness and So∣riety be never so constant in their Attendance: though (as  as∣sared me) in Religion is the greatest Cornfort and Encouragement Imagi∣nable, for though the Body  never so much Afflicted, yet i w keep close with GOD ou  will be at case, our good  be a continual Feast: We are, ays he,2. Cor. 4.2.9. Trobled on every  Di∣stressed; wee are  not in Despair; Persecut, but not fors∣ken; Cast down, but not Deryed; and again, Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is Good? But  for Rightcousness sake, happy are ye; and be not assraid of their , neither be Troubled.1 Pet. 3.1.14. Wherefore laying aside all Malice and Guile, and Hypocrisies, and ,
and all Evil speaking, as new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby, if ye have tasted that the Lord is Gracious; to whom coming,1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. as unto a living Stone, dis-al-lowed indeed of Men, but chosen of GOD and pretious, ye also, as living stones are built up a Spiritual House, &c. These sayings made Tears of Joy stand in my Eyes; and now to render my comfort the greater, having re∣peated many promises of perform∣ing (by the assistance of Divine Grace) not only what was, but what should be further commanded,  found my self strictly embraced; when looking to see by whom, I per∣ceiv'd a beautiful Lady, called Sted∣fast Faith, standing at my Right Hand, who had before I was aware put the Girdle of Firm Belief about me, and when she apprehended I was Sensible of what she had done, she with an earnest Speech delivered these words, viz. Be thou Faith∣ful unto Death,Rev. 2.10. and I will give thee a Crown of Life; & immediately I had a prospect of very glorious things; Then came Hope, and gave me an Anchor of Promise to secure me, if
at any time I should be tossed on the ough Sea of Distrust. Then Charity over'd me with a mantle of Compas∣ion, and having receiv'd the sacred Pledges of his Love (which he left as a remembrance of himself till his coming) with the most profound Reverence and Devotion, it was agreed by all the company, that I should be instantly conveyed to the Pallace of Wisdom and Vertue, both these being one and the same Per∣son; for True Vertue, is Godly Wis∣dom, and Godly Wisdom is True Ver∣tue. Now when I heard what was determined, I was somewhat abash∣ed, because Remembrance (who still attended me) loooking earnestly up∣me, it came into my mind how I had at the parting of the ways refu∣sed her Instructions; but however taking Counsel of Theology, I sound that through her Pallace, was the only way to the Coelestial City, and very near the Gate thereof; for indeed her conversation is mostly in Heaven, though by the will of the Coelestial King, she condescends to converse with Mortals, as well ap∣pears by the following account given
of her by the wisest of Men, viz. The Lord by  hath founded the Earth, by Vrsanding hath he eabhed the Heavens.Prov. 13.19. And there∣fore knowing that by going over to her, I should be nearer my Jouies end; I plucked up a good courage, and resolved upon it, saying (thou but softly) thus to my self: The ways of Wisdom , But need, , Who takes , She'd Heavenly , and  thi∣ther bent.
CHAP. IX. Being well Instructed, he passes on to the Pllace of True Felicity, de∣seres it, and is there ntertain'd with great Joy, and has from thence a full Prospect of the Coelestial City. BEing determined to pass on to the desired place of Rest, I perceiv'd at my setting out from the House of Religion (where I learn'd many things to surther me in my way) the powers of the Air and Darkness were mustering against me, to oppose my proceedings; but being furnish'd and supported as I was, the Terror  little or no effect upon me; notwithfranding they cast Shame, Disgrace, Contemps and Scorn in my w, for I set my Face like a Flint against their As∣saults; and with a steadfast Mind, opposed them with Patience, Constan∣cy, Perseverance, Meckness, Humi∣lity, and the like. And now the good Hermit Vn∣derstanding, who follow'd me to the
House of Religion, by the Appoint∣ment of Divine Grace, becoming my Tutor or Gaurdian, next her self I found my self doubly Blessed, and so the way growing even, we went smoothly on; True Content being the fore-runner of our Company, who still remov'd those Rubs that Adversity cast into the way, and made it easie to us; so that before the Sun declin'd, I had a Prospect of the Pallace, being in a manner at it, when methought it was the fairest that ever I beheld at such a nearness; though indeed the Coelestial City gave a more glorious Prospect; but how∣ever, this must be Enter'd before one can come to the other. The Structure of this Pallace of Virtue (for so henceforward I shall call it) stood upon a spacious Hill, green and pleasant to behold, and reach'd as high as Heaven; upon the Wall of which there were seven strong Towers, Guarded by Divine Virtues; and in chief, were under the Command (as I understood) of Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice, For∣titude, Temperance and Good-will; and over these Reign'd Wisdom as Queen
d Lady of them; and not only er these, but over many more; r all Virtues submit to her Conduct. nd thus far at present I had my In∣lligence from Vnderstanding, my utor. And now having in my Company ivine Grace, Vnderstanding, Me∣ory, Conscience, Repentance and eligion, or Theology (who would at ny Entreaty Accompany me) The Three Divine Virtues I mention'd in he House of Religion, being gone be∣fore to re-assume their stations, and the rest disinissed till further occasion might offer; we came up to the Gate, which was very Narrow, nei∣ther were the Paths much beaten, by reason of the small resort; and there we were met with Songs of Praise and Hosannahs to the Colestial King; and so we enter'd the Palace in Tri∣umph. And now I found by Experience, that Virtue, if there was no other Reward but enjoying it even in this World, in finitely exceeds Vice; but far be it from any to think it has it's Reward on this side Heaven; for Holy David, speaking of the Soul of
a Righteous Man,Ps 36.8. says, I shall be sa∣tisfied with the abundance of GOD's House, and he shall give it Drink of his Pleasure as out of a River. And i this may be term'd no more then a Heavenly Conversation, whilst o Earth, though some  yet hear what our Ble Saviou says, which is beyond all Contra∣diction meant of the future State, viz.Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they be with me where I am, that  may behold my Glory which thou hst given me. And now, as in the Pallace of Worldly Feli∣city were exceeding Stories of Perish∣able things; so in this Pallace of True or Spiritual Felicity, were things Incorruptible and Eternal, Treasures of every Virtue, durable and sting, as the Author of them. And here it will not be amiss to give a brief Description of the place, or rather of the Heavenly Guests I found there∣in, and that no further in Alegory, but by the help of Vnderstanding, as plain as may be, for the better Ad∣vantage of the Reader; and having in the former part given a Character of Wisdom, I shall proceed to give a Description of Virtue, as far as it is
warrantable, that not differing (in the main) from the former. CHAP. X. He gives a Description of Virtue, to∣gether with her Noble Qualities, the means whereby she Operates in the Soul of Man, and why to be de∣sir'd. VIRTVE is that Good which is wrought in the Minds of Men, by a Divine Insne; and and according to St. Austin (in his Second Book of Free-, Chap. 18.) is a good quality of the Soul Divinly direlled,  and  him to  to do what good he can to all, ; to resist evil and  that which is good. And so by the Soul of Man, up∣on which it Operes,  under∣stands the  of the Mind or Soul, as Reason Judgment and Will: The Inferiour part we call Sense, which is  to Beasts as Men; and there the Rational pat, which is a Ray of
Divinity, is properly taken for th Soul; and this it is that Virtue h the power over, to order or dispos and from hence we infer that Virt is a good quality of the Soul; that is to say, of Free-will; for Virt qualifieth Free-will, disposing it an preparing it to Do and Will well though neither of these can come t pass, without the Assistance of Di∣vine Grace. As for the Second part of the De∣finition, it is in consideration of Mans living Justly and Uprightly and he that doth otherwise is no tru Friend to Virtue; for as Vice is dia∣metrical to Virtue, so is any thing that borders or depends upon it And whoso liveth well, if he perse∣vere in so doing to the end, he need not fear of having the Reward du to Virtue, which is no less then Eter∣nal Life; it follows then that b Virtue, True Felicity is only attain∣able; for Virtue Redressing and Cor∣recting the Depravities and Exo∣bitances of Free-will, so that being as it were new moulded, it is di∣pos'd to do that which is Just an Upright; so that he that is trul
Virtuous, altogether shuns that which is Evil, and chooseth that which is Good; and this made Da∣vid wish,Psal. 27.4. That he might dwell in GOD's House all the Days of his Life: And for a further Encouragement to Vir∣tue, our Blessed Saviour tells us, that,Mat. 7.3. The Just shall Shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Much more might be said in this case to render Virtue Lovely and desirable in the Eyes of Men; but seeing she has not only been Recommended to them by our Blessed Saviour, the Fountain of Virtue and Goodness, but by the Prophets, Apostles, and Good Men of all Ages; those who refuse to Enter∣tain her upon such Recommendati∣ons, will hardly be induc'd to it by any endeavour of Mine. So to con∣clude this General, I shall only add, That Virtue is a Work of GOD in Man, and not of Man in himself; for as the Rain moisteneth the Ground, to ren∣der it Fruitful, and yet the Rain is not the Ground, nor the Ground the Fruit; Even so in the Ground of our Souls he Infuses his Grace, to render us Fruitful in Good Works.
CHAP XI. He gives a brief Account of Faith so far as is warrantable; to what end she serves, and the especial Marks of her Appearance, &c. as also of Hope and Charity. FAITH is,Heb. 11.1. as the Apostle says, the Evidence of things not seen, giving us Confidence and Asstance of things to come, which otherwise weighed in Humain Reason, might appear impossible; and this excel∣lent Virtue made Abraham and the Patriarchs and Prophets, &c. so fa∣mous and acceptable in the sight of GOD, by being confident through Faith, that none of GOD's Promi∣ses should fail, Abraham we hear be∣liev'd, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness;Rom. 4.3. Nay more, had the Honour to be stil'd the Father of the Faithful: Whilst those that have been dissident, have been ever Reprov'd and come to Nought; as the Obstinate Jews in the time of
our Saviour, who for their unbelief and hardness of Heart are call'd a Faithless Generation; for though Abraham by Faith had seen the Day of our LORD so many Years before, yet his faithless Off-spring, notwith∣standing such lively and apparent Demonstrations, hardened their Hearts. Faith in it's Offices con∣sists, First to believe with a steadfast Assurance, all those things that GOD has Reveal'd to us, when once we are Convinc'd he hath spo∣ken them; and that without too cu∣rious an Enquiry, or Attempt to search into his ways, we humbly submit, relying upon him for the ful∣filling of his promises, which cannot fail; for as well may he cease to be, as cease to be just; Heaven and Earth (says our blessed Saviour) Shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away till all be fulfilled;Mark. 13.31. and therefore may be as fully relyed upon, as if already seen fulfilled or possessed. Secondly, We ought to believe no∣thing concerning GOD, but what is Honourable & Excellent, as being as∣sured that that belief that is accom∣panied with dishonourable thoughts
or distrust, is little available; nor is Faith less the Parent of Charity, for it produces not only a stedfast Belief and Trust in GOD, but a love to∣wards him and relyance on him, with a true acknowledgment of his Good∣ness both in Word, Deed, and Thought. To let the contemplation of his Excellencies imploy our chief∣est care, and possess the very center of our Souls, is a great Sign of true Faith, especially if nothing of Vain-Glory be mixed therewith, but we are content to cast our selves entire∣ly upon him, estranging our Af∣fections from Worldly things, and placing them upon those that are lasting and Divine; and St. Paul says,Rom. 10.17. This Faith comes by Hearing; and indeed it may well do so, for that the Ear conveys the Promises to the Soul, and there the Vnderstan∣ding frames them in their divinest shapes, whilst Faith sets its signet of true belief upon them, which must be likewise confirm'd by Chari∣ty or Divine Love for although we had Faith even to remove Mountains, yet without Charity,1 Corn. 13.2. as Holy Writ testifies, it is nothing; for even the pow∣ers
of Darkness believe and Tremble; so that belief serves only to aggravate their punishment, because it is nei∣ther accompanyed with Love, nor Charity; and thus much briefly concerning a well-grounded Faith. Hope in the Pallace of Vertue takes the next place, and is highly to be approved, because it is the Mother of Patience, and the preventer of De∣spair, eacourages a Christian in perse∣verance, and expectation of the Re∣ward that is promised to those that do well, and confirmed by Faith; for where as Faith, is a firm and steadfast belief in general, of all the revealed will of GOD, so is Hope of what more immediately concerns the party with whom it resides, and is between the two Extremities of an infalible Assurance of Blessedness, and a Desparation of it; and the more a man recovers from the last Extremity, the more perfect is his Hope: And in this case it suffi∣ceth the Believer, that he believes and loves GOD, that he hath a firm Affiance and Confidence that GOD of his good Grace will have Mercy and Compassion on him, and will
give him whatsoever he hath promi∣fed to his Elect, hoping that he is of their number And not only to hope, for that would be too supine & neg∣ligent, but to strengthen that Hope with Prayer, Acts of Charity, and other Christian Duties; so that in the end, Hope may not fail of its ex∣pectations, but be satisfied with those blessings it so earnestly expect∣ed. As for Charity, the greatest of these Three,1 Pet. 4.8. it is no doubt a garment of Righteousness that covereth a mul∣titude of Sins; and without this, St. Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles accounted himself nothing. And to this I joyn Good Will, which is one and the same, for the truely Charitable Man willeth no Evil; and Love and Charity are inseparable Companions, being linked together in a Chain of Causes, and consist of Internal and External Acts, viz. Acts of Compassion, Love, Tender∣ness, Forbearance, Long Sufferance, Patience, and Brotherly kindness, as well as Liberality, relieving & succo∣ring those that are in Distress or Af∣fliction, by Alms, good Counsel, and
whatever else is necessary or conve∣nient, without any expectation of applause or retribution; for those that give any thing upon that ac∣count, are like them that when they gave Alms, caused a Trumpet to be sounded in the Market place, that they might have the praise of Men, so by that means it appears it was no true Charity, and consequently not register'd in Heaven; but on the contrary being attended with Pride and Vain Glory, things most hateful to the Almighty, instead of laying up treasure there, they treasured up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath: Nay the proud Pharisee's meerly boasting of what he had done in this kind, begat him rebuke and eternal infamy; for doubtless Chari∣ty is a spark of Divine Love, which inflameth the heart and prepares it for the reception of saving Grace; and there is no thing more that our blessed Saviour takes notice of in his distinguishing the Righteous from the Wicked, at the last Day, then by the Charity of the one, and the Hard-Heartedness of the other; as you may find it at large in Mat. 25
&c. Nay he has commanded us to do whatsoever in this kind is requisite, not only heartily, but with all the Privacy imaginable, to prevent Vain Glory or the applause of Men; and has promised us for so doing, that the Father who seeth in secret, will reward us openly; and this is the only opportunity GOD has gi∣ven the Sons of Men o make them∣selves friends of the Unrighteous Mammon,Luke. 16.19. that when ye fail, they may recieve you into Eternal Habi∣tations, and lay up treasure where neither Moths nor Rust can corrupt,Math. 16.19. nor Thieves break through and steal. Having gathered these things from good Vnderstanding, I was not a little glad, & thereupon put up my Petition to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose hands are the Hearts of the Sons of Men, that he would continue to me his Grace, and more and more enlighten my Un∣derstanding, that he would put a godly Fear into my heart, whereby I might ever apply my way to Wis∣dom. Which when I had done, I went to take a survey of the four Morral
Vertues who are of no small account to a good Christian, wherefore I shall not think it amiss to describe them, though for brevities sake I shall be as concise as will stand with conveniency. CHAP. XII. He gives a description of Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Tempe∣rance, Excellently representing them in their several Capacities, Motions and Opperation, &c. THe Moral Vertues are accoun∣ted both by Antient Philoso∣phers and Modern Divines, Four, viz. Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Tem∣perance, in which the Sages of old, by the light of nature placed their chief∣est happiness, squaring thereby their Actions, & regulating their Affairs; nor are they at all to be rejected or slightly accounted, though under a greater light then the Heathens could everpretend to, for St. Hie∣rom saith, By these the Christian liveth well, even in Morality. For Prudence
directeth him in his Affairs, Justice preserves his Integrity, Tempe∣rance preserves him in Health; and srequently in Prosperity, whilst Fortitude furnishes him with a con∣stant mind, to bear him out in all Hazards and Mischances; gives him courage and strength to defend himself against danger and malici∣ous attempts: And again, Prudence puts it in our power to contemplate the Creation, and admire the Crea∣tor in the beauty of his Creatures, to extol his Wisdom and Power, his Excellence and Order; and by degrees raise our Souls to a higher pitch of perfection. Temperance en∣ables us to subdue and mortify our Lusts, and to bring them under Sub∣jection, enables us to be vigilant and watchful against the enemy of our Souls; Prudence directs us to shun Temptations, Fortitude to resist them with a godly zeal, and Justice to live uprightly, doing to all as wee would be done by; so that these being used to a right end, bor∣der upon or are props and suppor∣ters to the former. But to come to somwhat more particular.
Justice may be said to be a Vertue of two kinds; as first, it is a general Vertue, and comprehends in it self all Vertue; as for instance, The man that lives uprightly and justly is called a just man; and is in the second place understood by the name of Distribu∣tive Justice, & so becomes National, and is the Defender of Innocence, the Scurge of the Guilty, and the Support of Kingdoms. Fortitude is a Virtue by which Ju∣stice in a manner is supported, though it may be divided into the Force of Arms and the Constancy of Mind, and so apply'd either Spiritu∣ally or Temporally; for by what but by Constancy and Courage, Pati∣ence and Assurance of an Eternal Re∣ward, did the Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors maintain the Truth of their Profession against Pagans, Infi∣dels, and even the Powers of Dark∣ness, against Persecutions, Temptati∣ons, Fiery Tryals, and a hundred kinds of Deaths; Rejoycing that they were accounted worthy to Seal the Testimony that they bore with their Blood. Temperance, says St. Austin, is a
power a Man gains over himself, pre∣vailing even against his craving Ap∣petite, and by degrees enables him to Rule his Passions, which is the noblest Conquest a Man can make; for when this Virtue is away, all o∣ther Virtues lose much of their force; for when a Man is overcome with Wine and Excess, he is prone to all manner of Vice, letting loose the Reins of Passion and Inordinate Affection. Prudence is the Queen, even of these, if rightly consider'd, because where∣ever she comes, she commonly Rules the rest; and by her Discretion di∣rects and orders the whole Frame of Man; prompting and disposing him to do that which is Just, Moderate, Sober and Discreet. And now ha∣ving taken a Survey of these, I ap∣ply'd my self to Holy Duty, observing all that in me lay, to keep the Com∣mandments, Pray and Sing Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, as I remember Wisdom told me, Those that were Conversant with her were wont to do; and least by any means I should grow flack or negligent here∣in, Vnderstanding brought Perseve∣rance
to me, who gave me the fol∣lowing Directions, by the Command of Divine Grace. CHAP XIII. He is brought to Perseverance, by whom and Understanding, he is fur∣ther Instructed; He is Recommen∣ded to her by Divine Grace; and leas a Prospect of the Coelestial City from the Tower of Faith, where he continues in Expectation. UNderstanding and the rest that Accompany'd me to the Pal∣lace of Virtue, being all this while with me, I was y my Tutor carry'd to the Apartment of Perseverance; For said he, unless you hold out to the End, it had been better for you that you had never set forward, if by a Re∣lapse you should lose at last what you have so long strugled for; the loss will be the more intolerable, and your fault the greater. When looking about me, I saw Divine Grace, to whom I made my Humble Obedience; where∣upon she comforted me, and bid Vn∣derstanding
bring out the Lady of that place, which she accordingly did; when considering I had not seen her before, I beheld her with a submissive Look, and she on the o∣ther hand beheld me with a grave, yet somewhat severe Look, and upon the Motion of Divine Grace, thus Accosted me: I understand (said she, you are lately come from the Pal∣lace of Voluptuousness to this place, therefore consider well your Ways, and set a Watch over your Heart; for though now, by reason of Divine Grace, you are not only Arrived at the Pallace of Virtue, but in favour with the Coele∣stial King, of whose City you have had a Prospect; yet know, without me you may yet fall short of your Expectation; both Faith and Hope,r. 17.9. I say, may fail you, if you slight my Counsel and Ad∣vice; for the Heart of Man is deceitful and desperately wicked, who can know it? Upon this saying, I fell upon my Knees in the presence of Divine Grace, and all the other Virtues that were present, and made a solem Pro∣testation, That I would take heed to my way, and do (by the Divine Assi∣stance)
what ever I was able to please he Lady Preseverance; and she on he other hand taking me up Lo∣ingly in her Arms, promis'd not to depart from me, unless I gave her cause, till I came to the Coeletial Ci∣ty. And so by the whole Assembly being Recommended to each other, we continue in Love and Friendship in the strictest Bonds of Amity to this day, continuing in great Felici∣ty in the Pallace of Virtue, and hour∣ly from the Tower of Faith taking a Prospect of the Holy and Heavenly Jerusalem, Replenish'd with Peace and Pleasures for evermore. In which, Great GOD, when this short Life is past, Let my poor Soul be by the Mercy plac'd, That I the Pleasures of True Life may Taste. FINIS.
