S723 11904446 50639
A Satyrick Poem AGAINST Those Mercenary WRETCHES, AND Troublers of Englands Tranquility, THE AUTHORS OF HERACLITUS AND OBSERVATOR. Infamous for their Scribling throughout England. By PHILOPATRIS. LONDON: Printed for H. Jones. 1682.
A SATYR ON HERACLITUS And the OBSERVATOR. I'LL Towzer sing, read it who list; A Blade as true as ever kist The sweet inchanting Lips of any English Jug, or Irish Jenny: Or did enjoy the sweet Embraces Of buxham Girls with pretty Faces; Or ere was blest with Venus sport; Or did all night with Doxie snort.
He so much loves the Female Sex, That yet his Soul did never vex For spending all his Small Estate On those leud Girls that Vertue hate. The Press it was his Drudge and Slave, Whereof, at will, he'd Money have. But all the Gain which it brought in, He leudly lavisht out in sin. At last he was a Jeast-ass made, Wherein he drove a Bedlam-trade. But since he had so little Grace, His Worship soon did lose his Place. Alas, quoth he, I'm quite undone, And have nought left but my old Gun! Therefore I'll employ my head To Write, and Print, and Rail for Bread; Whereby I'll both obtain my end, And serve the Pope, my dearest Friend: So I again shall be in Geers, When I have paid my Whores Arrears. The Pope, the D—and Broom I'll get Advanced by my pregnant Wit. I will endeavour, might and main, To sham the Plot yet once again; Or else I'll bring it to a Riddle, By playing well on my Bumfiddle. Against Dissenters, whom I hate, Great Jealousies I will create.
To Church of England-men I will Seem a Friend, yet I will still, As formerly, remain their Foe, Whereby I'll work their Overthrow. And now he hopes in Bloud to wade, By virtue of his Masquerade. But still there's some he stands in fear of, If they by chance should hap to hear of His Cit and Bumkin, and the others That in the world have made such pothers, They should think fit, in Term Hillary, To send him guarded to the Pillory. Therefore thought it best to appease 'em, With sweetest words that sure would please 'em. August Assembly he them call'd, Tho' loud before the Whelp had baul'd And bark'd against their just Proceeding, When they'd have lain the Plot a bleeding. But now he surely thought to coax These silly Heretical Folks: But Roger seeing 'twas not so, He thought it best for him to go, And fairly from them run away, To save his Neck or Ears, they say. At which he's mad, and in a fume Resolves to see the blessed Rome: Whither he's gone, you know the cause, And there's reserv'd with great applause,
By a great man, they call him Pope, As well as he deserves a Rope: To whom he tells a mournful Ditty, Which was, though sad, yet wise and witty, Of the great service he had wrought, Whereby himself's to mis'ry brought: But here he hopes for such relief As will allay his pain and grief. The good old man could not forbear The shedding Tear, as some do swear. Which having done, he gravely said, For all those things you shall be paid Both in this world and Heaven too, If one thing more for us you'll do. Then prethy, Son, return again To England; for I'll tell thee plain, I fain would have thee work Revenge; At Protestants have t'other Swinge. My Blessing too I will bestow, If that you now will go: and so I'll command the Fates attend ye, To England they shall safely send ye. With that he made with Cap in hand, Sir, Unto the Pope this modest Answer: Father, I'd have you know that I, If you command, with speed will flie. Than the swift Wings of Boreas blast I now will make more speed and hast.
Wherefore with speed he takes his way Direstly to Cathedral-bay; Where for his Voyage he Took Ship, A Man of War, not a small Skip. And as he sails, devoutly prays For Blessing on his murderous ways: O Fortune, now I pray be kind, And let me have a prosperous Wind. These Rogues I then will quite destroy, And neither leave nor Man nor Boy; But yet the Women I will spare, For them I greatly love, I'll swear. On Sea they sail as swift as Swallows, And plow the Waves as men do Fallows. And in less time than you can think, Or drinking down a draught of Drink, The Pope had ordered so the matter, That Towzer was blown o're the Water. In London, the first thing he sees Is Proteflants, like swarms of Bees. O ho, quoth he, I'll be among ye; I'll swear I soundly will bedung ye. But being worsted, stamps and stares, Like Pope or Cardinal he swears: And being mad, and fretting thus, Away runs to Heraclitus. This Heraclitus, men some tell, A Monster is, late made in Hell:
And fitted for to serve the Pope, And save his Children from a Rope. A Monster he is in each part, A Carcass foul, and a worse Heart. His Mouth doth laugh when's Eyes do weep; A Mystery 'tis profound and deep. He'll speak in Jeast and Earnest too, And both at once, as Papists do. And more than this, he's such a Fellow, Can backward blow, like a Smiths Bellow, A day, a week, a month together, And by his farting bring foul weather: Blow Parliaments and all things down, And them and all Dissenters drown. Now Towzer's sure enough that he Of Conquest sure enough shall be; And that the Scriblers wont be able To stand against a blast so stable: But Writing will be quite forborn By them, as men that are forlorn. And this he thinks agrees with Reason, Since now 'tis Heraclitus season: Who is become the mighty King Of all those Blades can huff, and ding, And whore, and drink, and curse, and swear, And blaspheme too, without all fear. He'll lie, I'll say't, with such a Grace, He's almost turn'd Truth out of place.
To this same King our Towzer goes, And thus in flattering terms wooes: Thou mighty King, whose potent sway, The lawless Scriblers do obey; Whose Nod the stobernest Whigs do dread, Although they be in Scotland bred: Thou whose imperious Empire reaches, And to all parts of England streatches, Hear poor Towzer's Request, and say, Thou'lt do't; for I must have no Nay. There are a few Tatter-de-malions, The surly Rogues wont be Italians: No, nor they wont accept of him That in their bloud would make 'em swim. And therefore if you'll undertake To ruine them, then I will make Your way to Honour and Renown, And Wealth and Plenty shall you crown. Nay, to encourage you the more, The Tories they will you adore For a great Wit, a man of Sence, Against the Whigs the best Defence. And more than this, I'll promise ye Shall be assisted too by me. And truly you must know, my Pen Doth guide inferiour Clergy-men. Brave generous Soul, be not afraid, All things shall be as I have said.
For you must know I am no Doger, But I am true and trusty Roger. Heraclitus hearken'd to this Story With no small Pride, no little Glory, To have a Jeast-ass, gay and trim, Come thus to beg a Bone of him. But much more was he pleas'd, that he Should promise him so large a Fee. He listning stood, with's mouth wide gaping, Like an old Hag when she is yaping. And you must know, with Cap in hand, Sir, He thus returns a ready Answer: Towzer, quoth he, my Thanks are real; I hope in this we shall agree all: For I do hate the Roughs as bad As you, or any, or Pope our Dad. Now therefore I the work will do, And please my self as well as you. Pray say no more, the thing is done; I'll ruine every Mothers Son: I'll make 'em to all men appear The worst of men that ever were. I Dirt enough on them will throw, Some cannot chuse but stick, you know. Among them such a stink I'll make, As bad as comes from Stygion-Lake: Whereby he hopes to save the Papish By-ways that truly are but apish;
By raising up a strange new Devil, That guilty is of far more Evil, As he will tell you, than the old, Which now is dead, laid out, and could. And that he may perform the work, He doth in ambuscado lurk. And sometimes fight and sometimes pray▪ And thus unto the Saints they say: O all you holy Martyrs dear, That lately died, without all fear, Upon the cursed Gallow-tree; From whence you did to Heaven flee. Cast down an Eye of pity now On those that do you service, vow; And let us all preserved be, Our full desires for to see: And that we may at last be able To plot the Plot into a Fable. Pray blind the Eyes of Hereticks, That they may not discern our Tricks; And that we may delude them all Into our fatal Snare to fall: Or that we may at last divide 'em, And then both ruine and deride 'em. Have you not seen the raging Wave, With hideous noises, roul and rave? Or have you seen the blust'ring Boreas Both huff and hector, rage and roar, as
He would make all before him bend, Or else he'd them in pieces rend: Or like when Rain, Lightning, and Thunder, Threatens to rend the world asunder. Just with such fury he doth fall On those he doth Dissenters call. Or have you seen how Bottle-ale That's put up new, but opened stale, When first the Cork and Bottle parts The Liquor from the Bottle starts; It bounces, foams, it froths, and flitters, As tho 'twere troubled with the Squitters. So when this Blade begins to vent His Malice which so long was pent, The Winds whirl'd out with such a rattle, As he had broke the Strings that twattle. They huff and ding, hector and rage, And threaten for to clear the Stage Of all who are not of their mind, And to the Papists wont be kind. Through England they do swiftly wander; One T—he is their chief Commander. Who that he might perform the deed, He undertook, with care and speed, Associates unto himself; A mercenary sneaking Elf, A huffing Jack, and a great Railer; Some say his name is Rend-all T—
Now Heraclitus, that he may Parliament destroy and slay, And rid the world of all Dissenters That will not quickly be Relenters, Gainst them makes a general Muster Of all he had, could blow or bluster. Damn'd lying Scandals, and such things, Which now in rank and file he brings; And draws them up in warlike manner Under the Ship which is their Banner. Whence they march with clamorous noise, Much like as when unruly boys On Holy-Thursday march about Their Parish-limits to search out; And fight too with the like discretion, Dealing their blows where's no transgression. The modest Parson goes before; The senseless Boys, like Lions, roar, With massie Clubs threatning to beat Down all that in their way they meet. So these accurst infernal Fiends, With hellish Malice tear and rends All that will not joyn Issue, and For Babylonish Interest stand; Endeavouring with might and main, To bring in Popery again. And since the Parliament would not By any means to this be brought,
But would endeavour by a Bill, The Romans Hope at once to kill; They are the first he will beat down Throughout both Country and Town: Affirming things nere heard before, That Parliaments should be no more But little Fingers of the State, And things that all men ought to hate: That their Addresses humble brought Unto the King's with Treason fraught; And that whatever else they do, Unless give Money,'s Treason too. And next he doth resolve to run, As to discharge from Towzer's Gun, With warlike force for to assault Those that are guilty of no fault; Unless it is a Crime to be Constant and firm to Loyaltie: And they forsooth must be made Traytors, Because of Popery they're haters; Adversaries to the Church and State, Because they do Popish Plotters hate. Thus Loyalty's transform'd to Treason By men of little brains or reason: Or rather men of small Religion, Which they do use but like a Widgeon. But yet of Loyalty much less, Unless't be Treason in that dress.
And now to make their Party stronger, And camp more wide by far and longer. They do perswade one Ashinton, Of England's Church a real Son, For to contrive a horrid thing, Wherewith some time the Town did ring; Which was their Creed and Pater-Noster, On Presbyter'ans for to foster▪ Nat. T—they sollicit to Something on their behalf to do: Who willingly, in hope of gain, Doth presently fall on amain, And doth, instead of Country News, Disperse false Stories to amuse. What matter is't, though false they swear, 'Twill make the cursed Whigs to stare. Well done, quoth Towzer, very well; I think there never came from Hell Any that were more kind and true Unto the Roman Cause, than you. You do deserve each man to be Advanc'd unto some Dignitie. Nay, I am sure that you shall have Whatever 'tis that you will crave, If once we can this Northern Evil Destroy, and send down to the Devil. Unto which end, I think there's need That I should write again with speed.
Methinks the work goes on apace, I'll swear we will not bate an ace: But them pursue, till Victory Doth crown our great industery. We must, like faithful Pioneers, Prepare the way by scatt'ring fears Amongst those silly sordid Sots, That so our well-contriv'd Sham-plots May follow and perfect the matter Design'd, and them to pieces batter. And thus this Blade again adventures To fall upon the poor Dissenters With fury, as when Boreas roars From off the North or Eastern shores; Or like when Bear berev'd of Whelp, Her threatning out with rage doth yealp; Or like a Lion hunger bitten, That hath no Meat in two days eaten. His Gun is once more furbished up; And being charged up to the top With Lyes and forged Narrations, Which he calls Observations, It is let flie with noise more loud Than that which comes from Thunder-Cloud. Thus Roger grows more fierce and surly, And makes a greater Hurly-burly, Than lately when he did appear In's Cit and Bumkin, and such Gear.
And that he may not want for Stories, Doth send unto his friends the Tories, Entreating them by all that's dear, That to his Cause they would adhere: And if the Government chance to be Spoken against by he or she, By Rogue or Raskal, Thief or Knave, Or those at doors that Alms do crave, By Lunatick, by Fools, or Idiots, That in their shallow brains have no guts, Or by the Worshippers of Baccas, When they as drunken are and mad as We sometimes, when meet at yonder Tavern by Ludgate, called Wonder; Pray be so kind as in a Letter Convey the News, or which is better, Bring it your self; and I'll be sure To lay't at the Fanaticks door. And if by chance their mouths, for fear, Are stopt, so that you cannot hear Any such thing; yet Guilt assures me You'll meet with some that will abuse me, And call me Rogue, Raskal, and Traytor, Because in truth I am a hater Of those that truly love the King, And fain would them to Tiburn bring:
Whereby our way would be laid ope For to bring in the banish'd Pope. Which if you chance to hear, my Friends, See that to me you quickly sends; And I as soon will have't in print, Whereby the Villains I'll torment. I'll say the Affront's not alone To me, but also to the Throne; And that the King is much abused, When I by them am thus mis-used. Nay, I'll direct my Worships Order Unto the new-made brisk Recorder. Whereby I will command his care In punishing of those that dare Be still so bold as to be Loyal, And Popish Plots will not deny all. I will perswade him they are ill men, And would make nothing for to kill men, If they can get a fit occasion Upon our lives to make Invasion. It's true, this is a horrid lie, Which he doth know as well as I; And therefore will dispise my Letter: Yet I thereby will be a getter. For in my next Half-sheet of Wit, I will be sure to insert it.
And so though the Original Do me no good, yet Copies shall; Being through the Nation scatter'd, 'Twill deleud men, whose Wits are shatter'd. A Whig shant speak or look awry, But I on him will have a Spy; Who will take care it shall be sent To me, to put it into Print. FINIS.
