T2539A 99830714 35168
A TRVE And Perfect Relation of a great and bloody Skirmish lately fought before the City of VVORCESTER Between ten Troops of our side consisting of about 500. Horse, and the Troops of the Cavaliers consisting of 1800. Horse. Decemb. 8. With the names of the Captaines, and other Offi∣cers and Troopers, that were slaine, wounded and taken prisoners on both sides. Decemb. 13. Printed for J. Horton, 1642.
A trve relation of a great Battell fought before the City of Worcester. TO give you some Testimony of my abilityes to do you Service, for your many favours conferred upon me, I cannot otherwise for the present, then by the relation of some exceeding true and re∣markable passages, which after a tedious march) happened between 10. Troops of our Horse, consisting of about 500. which went before to the Towne a day before the Army: And the Cava∣liers Troope consisting of about one thousand eight hundred Horse. The Skirmish began be∣tweene them, on Friday being the nine and twen∣tieth day of November, about foure of the Clocke in the afternoone; within a mile of the City of Worcester, and within a flight-shot of the River Severne: The reason that our tenne Troops (be∣ing but a handfull to the Cavaliers) fell on, was because that Cavaliers had very cunningly sent a report to those tenne Troops, pretending
that it came from the Lord Generall, the Earle of Essex, that his Excellencie was within a mile of the other side of the Towne, and would fall on presently, and wisht them to fall on likewise which was a plot and a meere invention of the Cavaleers, for those ten troops to fall on, where by they with all their Forces intended to cut of these ten troops: His Excellencies Army being at that time (which the Cevaleers knew very well) five myles distant from WORCESTER, and had marcht exceeding hard that day to come so nere, for had our army been then within a myle of the towne, we had taken all the Cavaleers. But to give a perfect and true relation of this Fight, and what Commanders we lost, I shall give you a perticualr of their names, which I had from some Officers that were then in the Skir∣mish, and are very much wounded, and there∣fore you may boldly take it for a true relation, Colonell Sunds troope fell on first, where the Co∣lenell himselfe was dangerously wounded in three places, his Cornet slaine, his Leivtenant danger∣ously wounded, Sergeant Major Duglas a brave Souldier was slaine, Captaine Bery slaine, his Cor∣net
wounded, Captaine Astons Leivtenant slaine, his Quarter master dangerously wounded, six of troopers slaine, his quartermaster dangerously wounded, his Corporall slaine, Two of Alderman Soames. men which were troopers, in this Skir∣mish, one where of viz. Master Low was slaine, and the other viz. master Tynne, taken prisoner, and carried away by Prince Roberts Forces. Cap∣taine Burrell, Captaine Heale, and Captaine Fynes were also in this Skirmish, but are come off well with the losse onely of some troopers. As for the number of our Common Horse or troopers, which were that Evening slaine, J cannot heare bnt of twenty three and for the Cavaleers, it is credibly reported, that they lost some Comman∣ders, for they wer seene to carry away foure dead Corps, and it is reported for certaine, that Prince Maurice brother to Prince Robert was dangerously hurt, and for all the odds of the Caveleers. who having encompassed our men. as it were in a halfe Moone, yet our Troops charged through their whole body, and forct their passage, onely with the losse of what is above mentioned, and so made their retreat good.
And then the Cavaliers marched into the Towne, and about twelve of the Clocke at night, ranne quite away, and are gone to LUDLOVV, not daring to stay the comming of our Army the next morning For upon report of this Skirmish to his Ex∣cellencie the Earle of Essex, the Army being quartered in the feilds for that night, having marcht that day about Foureteene myles, and for fiveteene dayes together Exceeding hard, gave Or∣der to the whole Army to march the next mor∣ning by the Breake of Day. Whereupon the whole Army gave a grat shout being overjoyed to heare that they should Encoun∣ter with the Cavaleers; Insomuch that the sound of the Drums, at that time could not be heard. The Commanders encouraging the Souldiers, And the Souldiers Vowing to follow their Com∣manders, Although a Report came into our Campe, that Prince Robert would give us Battell the next Morning, which was but a bravado of theirs, Yet our men were no whit danted, but rather
Encouraged and stronger in their former re∣solution. And then every regiment returning to their quarters, and passing on their Duty wishing eve∣ry minute the morning Starre to appeare. But before the time appointed for our Army to march, we were prevented of our long hoped wishes, by reason of a Petition which was sent from the Major, and Aldermen, of the City of VVORCESTER, (by one Master Ray, one of the Captaines of the Trained Bands of VVORCESTER) to our Generall the Earle of ESSEX, certifying him that the Ca∣valiers were all gone out of VVORCESTER, at twelve of that night, desiring also in their Peti∣tion that the Earle would not be offended with the Towne, for what they did was meerely through compulsion, and feare of the Cavaliers, who had done the Towne great injuries, as likewise most places wheresoever they came. Thereupon our Generall taking into conside∣ration their Petition, committed the bearer Ma∣ster Ray to the custody of one Capraine Mathews a Captaine of his owne Regiment, till his Excel∣lencie
might be further satisfied concerning the truth of this Petition, least it had, or might be some plot to ensnare the Army, but within an houre after we found Master Rayes Relation, and the Petition to be very true, and so we marched peaceably into Worcester, where as yet we remain untill we heare from his Majesty: His Excellence our Generall having sent a Post with some Let∣ters to desire his Majesty to returne to his Parlia∣ment, and to leave those Delinquents to the Ju∣stice of the Law. So for the present J can send you no other Relation, but when any further occasion happens J shall take the boldnesse to present my service. Jt is this day Ordered by the Lords and Com∣mons assemled in Parliament, that Richard Wright and Nathaniell Hall, shall be authorized by both Houses to search in London, and the Suburbs and Townes adjacent, for Armes lent by the City, and to seize the same, and to appoint De∣duties for that purpose. Joh. Browne, Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
