T3557A 11962787 51612
Tyburns Groans: OR, AN HUE & CRY AFTER A Polish Renegado. O Yes, O Yes: If any manner of Persons in City or County (the Ignoramus part of Leyden and Middleburg only excepted) have, or shall chance to find, pick up, or (Occasionally Cringing,) Reel against (in or out of his Way,) a stray'd Ignoramus-man, who has so long followed Will with the Wisp, alias Ignis fatuus, or, a New Light, till (being in fine) left in the Lurch (by Providence) he is forced to return a Non est Inventus of Himself: forasmuch as he finds the Vessel of a Noble Peer so far Tilted, that it will yield no more Refreshment, than Buli's Milk did Waltham's Calf. These are therefore in the Name of Popular Trismegistus, Tyrant-Elective of Pol-England, Commendador General of Good-Old-Cause-Land, Arch-Demagogue of the Principalities of Alsatia, Rebellonia, and Delusia; to Command and Require, all in general as well Bob-a-diddle, Treasurers, Chamberlains, Muggites, Creswellites, all the True-blew Mussleman-Race of Anakims, and Zam-zummims, that is to say, All Ignoramus-men, Flayle-men, Dagger-men, Occasional-men, as also all Carites, Vileites, Janewites, Goathamites, Black-Bull-ites, Hick-a-Colchites, together with all Anti-affidavit-men, Mock-God-Almighty, i. e. all Classical, Synodical or Congregational-men, to be Aiding and Assisting in the Surprizing, Tophamising, and personally detaining the True-Protestant-Corps (alias) Body of a Proto (per) Jury-man; Whig-Steward-man, Tap-sucking-man, Hemp-meriting, Gallows-defrauding, but at this time (Occcasionally) Latitat man, (alias) a Secret One: And the same John of Jewinstreet, to Apprehend, Seize, and in Safe-Custody detain, so as that no Trap-door, Tubb-house, &c. make any secret conveighance of the said Jack-Foreman elsewhere, till such time he be convened before Solm's Jury, which will be Empannell'd out of a num∣ber of honest Spartan Souls, being (all and one) Anti-Ignoramus's, Anti-Papal, Anti-Jesuitical, (having no Reserves for Conscience Sake) but Honest, Plain, Primitive Pro∣testants: There to Answer to such Interrogatories as shall be (not Arbitrarily but Le∣gally) proposed, in order to his Voyage to Anti-Carolina, Anglice, the Streights of Pad∣dington, of which fail not at your Peril. Given from Our Court at Poplar, nigh our Colony of Anti-Episcopia, in the Dominion of Whigland. Signed by Perkin. Succ. Adopt. And below, White-Acre.
