V657 12879948 94913
The Vision. 'TWas at an hour when busie Nature lay Dissolv'd in slumbers from the noisy Day, When gloomy Shades and dusky Atomes spread A darkness o're this Universal Bed, And all the gaudy beams of light were fled; My flutt'ring fancy 'midst this silent peace, Careless of sleep, and unconcern'd with ease, Drew to my wandring thoughts an object near, Strange in its form, and in appearance rare. Methought (yet sure it cou'd not be a Dream, So real all its Imperfections seem) With Princely Port a stately Monarch came, Airy was his mien, and Noble was his frame. A sullen sorrow brooded on his Brow; He seem'd beneath some weighty Fate to bow; Distrust and Grief upon his-Eyelids rest, And show the strugling troubles of his Breast. Upon his Head a nodding Crown he wore, And in his Hand a yielding Scepter bore; Forlorn and careless did his strokes appear, And every motion spoke a Wild Dispair. This mournful Scene did all my passions move, And challeng'd both my pity and my love, And yet I thought him by the ruins made Above my pity, and beyond my aid; Long did he in a pensive silence stand, For sure his thoughts cou'd not his words command: Too big for Speech— Till sullen murmurs from his bosom flew, And thus a draught of his disorders drew. Almighty Powers! By whose consent alone Ordain'd, I did ascend the Rega Throne, Led by your dark Decrees and Conduct there, I, as your great Vicegerent, did appear Beneath my Charge, whilst crowding Nations sate And bow'd and did admire my rising Fate, 'Twas then my Laurels fresh and blooming grew, And a loud fame of all my Glories flew; My willing Subjects bless and clap the day, The bravest and the best were all my friends, Whilst Faction in confusion sneak'd away; At distance grinn'd, but cou'd not reach their ends. Such Faith unto my promises were shown, My Word, the took for Oaths were useless grown; My very Word compos'd their hopes and fears, Sacred 'twas held, and all serene appears. Until my fate revers'd did backwards reel, Blurr'd all my Fame, and alter'd Fortunes Wheel; Ye Gods! Why did ye thus unconstant prove? Was I the Envy of th' Abodes above? Or was this stately Majesty but given To be the Cheat and Flatt'ry ev'n of Heaven? Can ne're a Saint implore Coelestial aid? Nor yet the Virgin Goddess Interceed? 'Twas for her her Cause engag'd I suff'ring lye; 'Twas to advance her just Divinity: Yes, I avow the Quarrel and the Cause, 'Twas for my Faith, and to out-cope the Laws. I'de rather be forsaken and alone, Than sit a craving Monarch on a Throne: Let all my cringing Slaves at distance stand, Fawn on th' Invading Foe, and kiss his Hand; Leave me, their Prince, farsaken and forlorn, Expos'd to all their slights and publick scorn: Let after Ages judge the mighty Test, Judge the Magnific Grandure of my breast. I saw my great forefather yet afore Seal all his Sacred Vows with Martyr'd gore; His Royal Issue blanded with disgrace, Saw all th' Efforts they us'd t' Exclude the Race; And yet these Terrours all I dare invade, Thus Conscience, thus Religion does perswade. I'll stand or fall by both those Tenets still, And be the second Martyr to my Will; And then he stop'd, his fiery Eye-Balls move, And thus with his resisting Fate he strove, And stood, like Capaneus Defying Jove. When strait a noise, from whence it came unknown, Was heard to answer in an angry tone; Dye then unpity'd Prince, for thus thy Fate Long since, by its Decrees, did antidate: To such perversness, what regard is shown, What Merit coud'st thou plead to mount a Throne? To thy repeated Wishes Heav'n was kind, And pleas'd the wild Ambition of thy mind; It put a Scepter in thy eager Hand, Yet not t'oppose the Genius of the Land; If Reason cou'd not sway thy Actions here, Heav'ns not oblig'd by Wonders to appear. See how thy Creatures at a distance stand, Skulk from thy troubles to a safer Land; Those who their Beings to thy bounty own, Forsake their fawning Cheats, and now are gone. Those who were Friends to thee and to thy Cause, Bold for their Rights, and for their Countries Cause, Thou, from thy darker Counsels, did'st remove. And want their aid now they refuse their love. Some more imperfect sounds did reach my Ear, But sense returned, and day light did appear. FINIS.
