W2435 18483296 107847
royal blazon or coat of arms W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the King, A PROCLAMATION. WILLIAM R. WHereas Our Royal Proclamation, bearing Date on the Twenty third Day of February last, Issued for the Apprehending several Persons therein Named, who, with divers other Wicked and Trai∣terous Persons, had Entred into a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, to Assassinate and Bur∣ter Our Royal Person; several of which Persons have been since Apprehended, and some of them have Suffered the Iust Punishment of the Law, for such their Horrid and Wicked Conspiracy, and others remain yet Vndiscovered (Viz.) Sir George Barclay, who is a Lieutenant of the late King James's Guards in France, a Tall thin Man, about the Age of Sixty Years, of a Ruddy Complexion, is Lame of his Right Hand; Major Lowick, a Tall Lean Straight Bodied Man, of a Sanguine Complexion, the upper part of his Cheek Bones pretty high, with a falling in just upon the Iaws. Dinant, Major George Holmes, Durant a Waloon, Cran∣burne, Bryerly, Rookwood, a Brigadier in the late King James's Guards in France; Chambers, who has a hurt in his Hand, and was formerly taken on Board a French Privateér, Davies: And whereas We have since the Issuing out Our said Proclama∣tion, Received further Information, of several other Persons herein after Named, who were concerned in the said Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy; for which Cause several Warrants of High Treason have Issued against them, but they have withdrawn themselves from their usual Places of Abode, and are fled from Iustice: We therefore (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) have thought fit to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby Commanding and Requiring all Our Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend the Persons above-named, and also Father Johnson alias Harrison, a Priest, who is a Short, Black, Full-bodied Man, his Eyes standing a little out of his Head, Aged about Forty Years, Bernardi, Hare, Harris, Counter alias Rumsey, Hungate alias Rogers, where∣ever they may be found, and to Carry them before the next Iustice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Requir'd to Commit them to the next Goal, there to Remain until they be thence Delivered by due Course of Law. And We do here∣by Require the said Iustice or other Magistrate, immediately to give Notice thereof to Vs or Our Privy Council. And for Prevention of the going of the said Persons, or of any other, into Ireland, or other Parts beyond the Seas, We do Require and Command all Our Officers of the Customs, and other Our Officers and Subjects of, and in the respective Ports and Maritime Towns, and Places within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That they, and every of them, in their respective Stations and Places, be Careful and Diligent in the Examination of all Persons who shall Pass, or endeavour to Pass, beyond the Seas; and that they do not permit any Person whatsoever to go into Ireland, or other Places beyond the Seas, without a Pass under Our Royal Sign Manual, until further Order. And if they shall Discover the said Persons above-named, or any of them, then to cause them to be Apprehended and Secured, and to give Notice, as aforesaid. And We do hereby Publish and Declare, That whosoever shall Conceal the Per∣sons above-named, or any of them, or be Aiding and Assisting in the Concealing of them, or Furthering their Escape, shall be, for such their Offence, Proceeded against with the utmost Severity according to Law. And for the Encourage∣ment of all Persons to be Diligent and Careful in endeavouring to Discover and Apprehend the said Persons, We do hereby further Declare, That Whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the Persons above-named, Who were mentioned in Our said former Proclamation, or any of them, and shall bring them before some Iustice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, as afore∣said shall Have and Receive, as a Reward, the Sum of One thousand Pounds promised by Our said Proclamation; which said Sum of One thousand Pounds, the Lords Commissioners of Our Treasury are hereby Required and Directed to Pay accordingly. And We do hereby also further Declare, That whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the Persons above-named who were not mentioned in Our said former Proclamation, or any of them, and shall bring them before some Iustice of Peace or Chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, shall Have and Receive as a Reward, the like Sum of One thousand Pounds, to be Paid in such manner, as aforesaid. And if any of the Persons abobe-named shall Discover and Apprehend the said Sir George Barclay, Johnson alias Harrison, Major Lowick and Major George Holmes, or any of them, so as they may be brought to Iustice, We do hereby Declare, That every Person making such Discovery, shall have Our Gracious Pardon for his Of∣fence, and shall Receive the Reward of One thousand Pounds, to be Paid in such manner as aforesaid. Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty second Day of March, 1695/6. In the Eighth Year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695/6.
