W2579 12494649 62467
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For a Publick THANKSGIVING. WILLIAM R. WHereas Their Majesties having a deep and serious Consideration of the War in which they (together with most of the Princes and States of Europe) were and still are ingaged against the French King, did by Their Royal Proclamation, bearing Date the Four and twentieth Day of March last, Appoint a general Monthly Fast to be kept throughout this Kingdom, for Imploring the Blessing and Protection of Almighty God in the Preservation of Their Majesties Persons, and in Prospering Their Arms both at Sea and Land, which has been observed accordingly. And for∣asmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of his Infinite Goodness in Answer to the Prayers humbly and devoutly Offered up to him, to pre∣serve Their Majesties and Their Government against the Designs and Attempts of Their Open and Secret Enemies; To give Their Maje∣sties a Great and Signal Victory at Sea against the French Fleet; To Protect His Majesties Person from the many and great Dangers of the War in His late Expe∣dition beyond the Seas; To Disappoint and Defeat the Barbarous and Horrid Conspiracy for taking away His Sacred Life by Assassination; And to bring Him back in Safety to this Kingdom: Their Majesties therefore Adoring the Divine Goodness and duly Considering that such Great and Publick Blessings do call for Publick and Solemn Acknowledgements, Have thought fit, and (with the Advice of Their Privy Council) do hereby Appoint and Command, That a Gene∣ral Thanksgiving to Almighty God for these his Mercies be observed throughout Our Cities of London and Westminster and elsewhere within the weekly Bills of Mortality, on Thursday the Twenty seventh day of this Instant October; and in all other Places throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, on Thursday the Tenth day of November next ensuing. And for the better and more orderly Solemnizing of the same, Their Majesties have given Directions to the Most Reverend Arch-Bishops, and Right Reverend Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occasion, to be Vsed in all Churches and Chappels, and other Places of Publick Worship, and to take Care for the timely dispersing of the same throughout their respective Diocesses, And Their Majesties do strictly Charge and Command, That the said Publick day of Thanksgiving be Re∣ligiously Observed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and up∣on Pain of Suffering such Punishments as Their Majesties can justly inflict for the Contempt or Neglect thereof. Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Two and twentieth Day of October, 1692. In the Fourth year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1692.
