W2513A 99830932 35394
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A DECLARATION Requiring all Officers and Soldiers to Observe strict Discipline, and for Payment of Quarters.10. Dec. 1691 WILLIAM R. Whereas after the Success wherewith it has pleased Almighty God to bless Our Arms in the Reduction of Our Kingdom of Ireland, It is necessary that many of Our Forces Employed therein be Transported into this Kingdom in Order to be otherwise disposed of, as Our Service shall Require; And to the end that the said Forces be kept in good Order and Discipline, and that Our Sub∣jects may not suffer by any Disorders or Misbehaviour of any Of∣ficers or Soldiers within Our Pay or Entertainment; We have thought fit hereby to Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That in what place soever any of Our Forces shall Pass or Remain, they shall duly pay their Quarters at the Rates and Allowances Limited and Directed by Act of Parliament in that behalf, beyond which no private Soldier or Officer of any Regiment, Troop or Company is to be trusted for any Provisions or Sum of Money on any Account or Pretence whatsoever in their Quarters. And We do likewise strictly forbid all Our Officers and Soldiers to use any Violence or Threat∣ning Words to any Person whatsoever, or to give any Offence, or Just Cause of Complaint. And in case any of Our said Officers, or Soldiers shall Presume to Commit any Spoil or Disor∣der, or use any Violence or Threatning Words, or otherwise Misbehave themselves, We do hereby further Declare that besides the Ordinary course of Justice for Redress, if the Persons Agrieved shall make known the same to the Superiour Officers, the said Officers shall and are hereby Re∣quired to cause Satisfaction immediately to be made, and that if such Officers to whom complaint is made, shall forbear or Delay the causing due Satisfaction to be given as aforesaid, the Persons to whom the Wrong is done, may then further present their Complaint to Us, that We may Order speedy Justice to be done them, by Reparation of the Injury, and by causing the Officers and Soldiers so Offending to be forthwith Cashiered, and such further Punish∣ments to be Inflicted on them as the Nature and Quality of their Offences shall Deserve. And We do further Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That no Officer or Soldier in their March or Quarters, shall be Lodged in any Private house whatsoever, without the Free and Volun∣tary Consent of the Owner, and that in case any Officers or Soldiers shall for any Reward or Consideration Leave or Change the Quarters Appointed them, or shall Demand or Exact Mo∣ney for Quarters, or to Exempt any Persons from the same, they shall be Punished by Cashier∣ing, and loss of their Pay. And We do likewise Strictly Prohibit and Forbid all Officers and Soldiers to Destroy or Disturb the Game in any manner whatsoever, without Leave from Us, the Lords of the respective Manors, or others to whom it may belong to Grant the same: It being Our Royal intention and Command, That all Officers and Soldiers in Out Service behave themselves Orderly in all things according to Law and Military Discipline, as becomes them, upon Pain of the Severest Consequences of Our high Displeasure. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Third Day of December, 1691. In the Third Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. M DC XCI.
