W2471 16273364 105233
WR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For Encouraging Mariners, Seamen and Landmen to Enter themselves on Board His Majesties Ships of War. WILLIAM R. WE being desirous to give all due Encouragement to all such able Sea∣men as have not been in Our Service the last year, or being in the Service have been regularly Discharged therefrom, and also to able∣bodied Landmen, who shall Voluntarily Enter themselves in Our Service, and Remain on Board Our Ships of War in Our Royal Navy, Have thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish this Our Royal Proclamation: And We do hereby Promise and Declare, That all Seamen and able-bodied Landmen, who shall after the Date of this Our Royal Proclama∣tion and before the Fifteenth Day of March next, Voluntarily En∣ter themselves Remain on Board any of Our Ships of War, or Fire Sips, or on any Press-Vessels or Tenders belonging to Our Fleet, shall Receive as Our Free Gift and Royal Bounty, the respective Allowances and Rewards following, (Viz.) Each able and ordinary Sea∣man Three Months Pay, and each able-bodied Landman One Months Pay, to be Paid to them before the Ships they are to Serve in shall go to Sea. And We do hereby Com∣mand and Require the said Seamen and Landmen to Repair on Board the respective Ships on which they shall so Enter themselves, and give their constant Attendance, for Fitting out to Sea such Ships as each of them do belong unto. And We are also Graciously Pleased to Declare, That Conduct-Money, according to the Practice of the Navy, shall likewise be Allowed to such Seamen and Landmen as shall Voluntarily Enter themselves and Remain on Board any of Our said Ships, according to the true Meaning of this Our Royal Proclamation. And for the Pre∣vention of any Deceit and Abuses that may happen by any Person or Persons leaving the Ships, to which they belong, and Entring him or themselves on Board any other or Our said Ships, as aforesaid, in order to the Obtaining of the Bounty-Money herein before Granted, We do hereby likewise Direct, Declare and Command, That such Seamen and Landmen belonging to any of Our Ships or Vessels whatsoever, as shall Leave any of the Ships or Vessels to which they belong, and Enter themselves on Board any of Our Ships in order to the Obtaining of the said Bounty-Money, shall not only lose the Wages Due to them in the Ship which they shall to Leave, but also be severely Punished according to their Demerits. Given at Our Court at Kensington the One twentieth Day of January, 1696/7: In the Eighth Year of Our Reign. God save the King. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd; Printers to the Kings mosst Excellent Majesty. 1696/7.
