W2629 16287999 105260
By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, Requiring the Discovery and Bringing in of Arms lately Imbezled. WILLIAM R. WHereas by the late Disbanding of the Army, and the Disorders that have lately happened amongst Soldiers deserting their Co∣lours, great quantities of Arms, Ammunition, Stores and V∣tensils of War belonging to Vs, have been by the Soldiers cast away, Panned, Sold, or otherwise Imbezled; And notwith∣standing Our late Proclamation to that Purpose, are not as yet Discovered or brought in for Our Vse, as they ought: We do hereby Require and Command all and every Person and Persons having any such Arms, Ammunition, Stores, or Vtensils of War in their Custody, to bring in the same unto the Mayor, Chief Officer of the Town, or to the next Iustice of the Peace of the County where they shall be found: And for the Encouraging and Rewarding such as shall do their Duty herein, We do hereby Order and Appoint the Sum of Five shillings for every Snaphance Musket, for every Match-lock Musket, Two shillings six pence, for every Carbine Five shillings, for every pair of Pistols five shillings, and for all other Ammunition, Stores, or Vtensils, the fourth part of the real Value. And in case any Person or Persons in whose Custody any such Arms are, or shall be, shall neglect the bringing them in, then the said Reward to be given and paid to such Person as shall Discover, and cause the same to be Seized to Our Vse; The said Values to be paid by the Mayor, Officer, or Iustice of the Peace respectively to whom the same shall be so brought; And that the Mayor, Officer, or Iustice of the Peace receiving the same, upon the Receipt thereof do give notice to the Principal Officers of Our Ordnance at Our Lower of London, of such their Receipt and Payment, who upon such Notice are hereby Required to Pay the Moneys Disbursed, and Receive the same for Our Vse. And We do hereby further Require Our respective Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and their Vnder Officers of Our Militia, Sheriffs, Iustices of the Peace, May∣ors and Chief Officers of, and in the respective Counties, Cities and Towns where any such Arms shall be, diligently to Enquire, and by all Lawful Ways and Means to Discover and Seize the same for Our Vse, and Arrest and secure, or otherwise according to Law Proceed a∣gainst the Persons in whose hands any such Arms shall be found, as against Persons Imbez∣ling Our Stores or Arms, so that they may be Tried and Punished for the said Offence, at the next Sessions or Assizes to be Holden for the County, or Place where such Offence shall be Committed. Given at Our Court at Hampton-Court the First day of April, 1689. In the First Year of Our Reign. God save the King and Queen. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesties. 1689.
