w794 12279546 58635
THE SPEECH Of the Right Honourable Sir PATIENCE VVARDE, LORD MAYOR Elect, At Guild-Hall, LONDON, September 29, 1680, being the Day of his Election. Together with the SPEECH Of the Right Honourable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight, the Present Lord Mayor of London. The SPEECH of the Lord Mayor Elect. GENTLEMEN, I Cannot but be sensible of the Honour you have bin pleased to confer upon me, in calling me by your free Choice to the place of Chief Magistrate of this populous and famous City, and therefore am obli∣ged to return you, as I do, my humble Acknowledgment. Although when I reflect on the meanness of my Abilities, for the discharge of so great and difficult a Service, especially under the present Circumstances of Affairs, when Fears and Cares press on us, I might heartily wish't to have bin excused: Yet, in confidence of (and imploring) the Divine Assistance, and hopes of your favourable Acceptance of my sincere Endeavours, I sub∣mit to the same.
I do not presume to think that I shall be able to come up to the Pattern my worthy Predecessor hath set before me, whose Excellent Conduct hath contributed much to our peaceable and safe meeting this Day, and well deserves our Praise and Thanks; but I shall labour to imitate it the best I can. I shall, according to the best of my Understanding, make the Laws of the Land, and the Constitutions, Usages and Customs of this Renowned City, my Rule; the Glory of God, the Ho∣nour of the King, the upholding the Protestant Religion, and maintaining the Peace, Liberties, and Prosperity of this City, my End in all my Administrations: And if at any time I shall seem to any of you to deviate from these, I entreat you to make a candid Construction, and forbear sudden and severe censuring my Actions, waiting for better Information. For if through humane Frailty, I may fail in a Circumstance, I assure you, in the main and substance I shall never swerve from this my pro∣posed end. Our Indefatigable Enemies the Church of Rome (who in for∣mer times did lay and carry on Designs for Subversion of the Protestant Religion, and Government established in these King∣doms) have of late been more active than ever. And to pass over the Burning the City, and frequent Attempts of that kind; and the many other Plots and Conspiracies at our remoter parts, came to those horrid Resolutions of Assassinating His Majesties Royal Person, and to menace even Justice it self in the Inquiries after them, by that barbarous Murder of (the never to be for∣gotten) Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, and Attempts on Others, in or∣der to an introducing their false Religion: All which carry their own Evidences so full and great, that such who will not shut their Eyes, have Demonstration; and calls aloud upon us to watch against such a People, whose Religion (according to their Casuists) allows, if not engageth them in such practices. But besides these, wherein God hath wonderfully disap∣pointed them (and I hope ever will) there is just cause to ap∣prehend they are more secretly undermining Us, and amongst other, ways, by being the occasion of, or at least taking occasion from the great Impiety, Prophaneness and Atheism of late crept in amongst Us; and the raising and fomenting Divisions and Animosities between our selves; and therefore, as much as in me lies, to obviate these their wicked purposes, I have propounded; First, To endeavour the Advancement of the Glory of God; and in order thereunto, I am resolved to be Impartial in the pu∣nishment
of Wickedness and Debauchery, and in countenan∣cing Piety and Vertue; And entreat by your good Admonitions and Examples to make my work the more easy in this particu∣lar. Secondly; To promote the Honour of the King, our Reli∣gion obligeth us to be good and loyal Subjects, and to give to Caesar the things that are Caesars; and therefore as I shall study to evidence my own unfeigned Loyalty to the King's Majesty, so I shall be careful, according to Law, to punish all Disloyalty in any whomsoever. Thirdly; To uphold the Protestant Religion, as to which nothing will more conduce than an Union in Affection of all those who profess the same Faith, and agree in the essential Do∣ctrine of it, however they may differ touching some Circum∣stantials, that we may, as honest Men, and good Christians, maintain Love and good-will, as those who mind the same thing, and intend the same Common-Good of all, and this to be the Only Measure of our Actions, all private and particular Apprehensions being made subject thereto. Fourthly; To the particular Concerns of this City, I shall make it my Business to preserve it in Peace, and advance its Prosperity in all things. And in order thereto, shall from time to time desire the Advice and Assistance of my worthy Bre∣thren the Aldermen, and as often of the Common-Council as occasion shall require. And if we are careful to discharge our duty to God, in a sober and pious Conversation; To the King, in a dutiful and loyal comportment; To the Religion we profess, by Union and Cha∣rity among our selves; To this City, in promoting its Peace and Welfare, We need not fear but God will dissipate and disappoint all the Designs of his and our Enemies, and continue his Bles∣sings to us. And so let us pray, that his Majesty may be blessed with a long and happy Reign, and this City and Kingdom with Peace and Prosperity. The Speech of the present Lord-Mayor. Gentlemen, I Rejoice to meet you here this day, where I can see the face of my Successor, and almost an end of my own troublesom Year, in which I can truly affirm I have used my hearty endea∣vours for the carrying on and promoting the common Business
and Advantage of the City, with the same Integrity and In∣dustry I ever did in my own private Concerns, as far as my Health and Strength of Body would permit; and I wish I could say, they had had the desired effects. And as for what concerns the Publick, tho I own my self subject to many hu∣mane Frailties, and pretend not, in that Hurry of Affairs that attend my Office, to be exempted from Surprize; yet I can with safety say, that in what I have done therein I have acted accord∣ing to the Dictates of my own Conscience, and the Rule of Law: And if whilst I have followed those Guides, any think I have bin misled, my satisfaction is, I have them to appeal to for my vindication. And now, Gentlemen, being almost out of Office, and not likely to have any other opportunity of speaking to you before I take my leave of it, I must say one thing more to you. 'Tis not to tell you how troublesom it hath bin to me, nor what hourly Cares for the Peace and Safety of this City I have laboured under, nor how I have impaired my Health and Estate in this Service; for all these every sober Man's own Thoughts will easily suggest to him. But it is to beg a favour of you, and that not for my self alone, but for you, for us all, and for this great City, (whose Members we all are); And it is, That all of us, who pro∣fess our selves to be Christians, would so far bear testimony to the Truth of that Profession, as heartily in meekness and for∣bearance to love one another. And tho there be Differences in Opinions, and the outward Modes and Forms of Divine Wor∣ship; yet let not these have that effect, as in the least to divide us, or divert us from that common Defence, which all good Protestants are engaged in to stand together. The due Regard of which, in my poor Opinion, next under God, is the only probable Way left for our Deliverance. I beg your Pardon for the Freedom I have used, and am well assured, all my Defects will be liberally supplied by my worthy Successor. And I shall pray, that God of his Goodness will disperse those Clouds, that seem so much to threaten this City and nation, and to defeat all Councils that tend thereto; to bless his Majesty with a long and happy Reign, and this City and Kingdom with Peace and Tranquillity. London, Printed for Thomas Collins, and Brabazon Aylmer, 1680.
