Y203 09456548 43168
YOVR SERVANT SIR, OR Ralpho to Hudibras Descanting on Wilds Poetry. LOe, now comes he, that came not yet, Who cares not though his Master fret; As Shoomaker so hath Translator, In stirrup Foot; so Imitator Of Hudibras is little Ralph, But servant hath more wit bit'h half. This Doughty Knight by Puny Squire Out done is, as a simple Syre Is by his wiser Son surpassed, So much doth Ralph exceed this rash head, As doth the Quiristers Sol fa-la-mi, Old Hopkins Rhimes when sung by Calamy. Brave Squire against proud Knight doth vant, And proves as stout a Combatant, With Oberon as was Pig-wiggin Whose head was arm'd with Achorn Piggin: Here may be seen, as in a Glass, The Mushrom wit of Hudibras, Who can't avoid in best of writing Such stinking stuffe as that of sh— The Squire hath got the quicker sight Mounted on back of Giant-Knight. HAh, are ye come? Welcome Sir Hudibras, For all you are my Master, y' are an Ass. Parturient Montes sith you make a blunder, Not in Wild Squibs, but Lightning joynd with Thunder, I question if you are as you pretend Unto the Bishops and the Church, a friend, For by those words a man that hath no eyes, May plainly see you do Hiperbolize: A Bishop's calmly urgent, makes no stir, Nor Thumps the Cushion like a Presbyter, He spits no fire, nor Wildly throws about Hell and Damnation amongst the rout; Flint breaks on Pillows: Tis not Pulpit Thunder But mild perswasion melts mens hearts asunder. Sugar and Hony excelleth gall or Verjuice, A Barnabas wins more then Boanerges: Such fiery Zealots by their Frantick fits Drive others (like themselves) besides their wits. You play with th' Organs, and their virtue show, As if you thought there were no Devil below: After which your more sordid stile is held on, (Sans Reverence to the name of Paules or Shldon) Gainst Calamy, by Metaphor descrying Your malice to a man that lies a dying, To kick a worm what glory may be found? That's dead in Law, and prostrate on the ground, Is he a bird of prey ? (buzzard or Kite) Mute had been better far then plainly sh— See how the Term with his condition sutes, Preachers when silenc't, what are they but Mutes? Thus do I (like your self) quibble at quicquid In Buccham venerit, or Mute or liquid: Not that I hate you, yet you must not think That Wits whole Mass is lodged in the chinck Of your own Scull, Sir, but that Ralph your man Hath somewhat likewise in the little pan Of's Peiim is not such an Ass As still to be outvi'd by Hudibras. To wake the Bishops you do make a Roare, And tell them nought but what they knew before. How they should be a sleep I much do wonder, Since you compare them unto fire and Thunder, Though what you say of Calamy be true, Yet tis not meet to lance old sores a new, To write a crime thats past on th'Actors Front, Whilst that Amnestia remains upon't. The King hath pardon'd such, then why should we Stir up again their stinking memory? But if they Act again those faults a new, Then Dun and Devil (a Gods name) take your due. Now leave we Calamy, and come to trace Thee Hudibras throughout thy Wild-goose Chase, In other manner then doth True de Case, Who least he should be thought for to transgress Ends (Poetaster-like) The King God bless — Whose sacred name should not be made a Sallad For Bread and Butter, such mean fare's a Ballad. And here I must confess that Wild hath hit On sev'ral pritty passages of wit; Although your Knight-ship's pleas'd at's lines to flout, Saying his Verses (like him) have the Gout: The difference twixt you both is not a pin, Squibbing and Squirting (Sir) are neer a kin. Tis true, his rhimes too much abusive bee, But thine's the more Profaner Ribaldry; In down right words he Jerks at Calamy, Thou at the Prelates by an Irony: Two Cocks well matcht, for his Invention sprung From Tap and Spigot, thine flows from the bung. His Verse is vain enough, since wanton lines Become Knights Errant, rather then Divines, Being shrewdly vext for that he cannot handle In Church a Text, he dies like snuff of Candle; Much discontented since that none will mind him And being dead, hath left a stinck behind him. But Hudibras tis strange what should thee move To take i'th Ashes of deceased Love; That son of Thunder by some men admir'd, Vollies whereof were heard when he expir'd. Thy Rav'nous Muse too, wanting better Cates Must feed on Peters Quarters ore the Gates. Such Darts gainst their dead Carcasses being hurld, May chance to vex 'em in the other world; And cause their Ghosts to haunt thee in the night, Enough to scare a poor Romantick Knight Out of his wits, if such a thing should be Thou wouldst be rob'd of all thy Poetry: And if thy rhiming faculty once fail Thou'lt shortly after die for want of Ale. Or if thou dost hold on to vex Wild thus, Thou'lt make him furious as Archilocus, Whose keen Iambicks may thy credit blast. And force thee through a Rope to breath thy last. FINIS.
