4317 99842818 7510
THE COPIE of a Letter, lately sent to an Honourable per∣son in England, from the Campe before Graue, dated the 23. day of August last past. Wherein is described the good successe both of her Maiesties forces and his Excellencies a∣gainst the Admirant, with his going away from the Graue. Also a Thanks-giuing for the vic∣tory God gaue his Princely Excellencie, in the ouercomming and taking the said Citie Graue, the 20. of September, stile noue. 1602. Truely translated out of the Dutch Copie. Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane neere Smith-field. 1602.
THE COPIE OF A LETTER, LATELY SENT to an Honourable person in England, from the Campe before Graue, dated the 23. day of August last past: Wherein is described the good suc∣cesse both of her Maiesties forces, and his Excellencies, against the Admirant: with his going away from the said Citie of Graue, before it was taken by his Excel∣lencie. RIght Honorable, my louing and dutifull seruice remembred vnto your good Honour, it hath beene thus with vs, that I could not send so often vnto your Honour, as I would, in that the enemie lay so neere vnto his Excellencies Quarter, that my Cap∣taine was commaunded to take foure more English companies, and to goe and lye with them three English miles from the Quarter neere vnto the Enemie, to gard on the North∣side the Riuer Maze, to defend the comming
of them ouer the Bridge to his Excellencies quarter, and for that they should not releeue the Towne on that side. Thus continuing foure dayes together in defending these pas∣sages, wee could neither haue paper, nor leysure to write, which maketh me write so much vnto your Honour at this time toge∣ther. The enemie in Graue fell out, at three seue∣rall times vpon the three Quarters. First, vp∣on his Excellencies: The second vpon Graue Williams: The third time vpon my Lords Honours, and were well beaten in, with losse of some men, where Captayne Kayes, and Cap∣taine Harcourt, and his Lieutenant Michell were then there slayne. The enemie and we lying so neere one to the other, keepeth great watch: many nights the enemie hath made signes to the Towne to come on and releeue it, but did not. His Excellencie hath made his approch on the East-side, close to the Towne mote: Count William on the South-side the like: and hath planted by them sixe peeces of ordinance, plan∣ting them seuerally by two and two in a place, some of them beating at the Rampiers and bullwarkes, the other playing into the Towne. My Lord with his approches, is close to the
Mote on the West-side the Towne, he hauing one Cannon there planted, that beates into the Towne: and my Lord is so neere, that he may enter it, assoone as his Excellencie or count William. The one & twentie day, at three of the clocke in the morning, the Admirant with his Field Fortes, came to enter the Trenches betweene his Excellencie and Count Williams his quar∣ter: our Scoutes and Spies diskenning their comming on (we being alwayes readie and watchfull) drue our men into diuision, and so into battell, Horse and Foote. Then we being readie for their comming on (the enemie being come vp to our Trenches, and being darke) we fired our Bracons from one of our Quar∣ters to the other: and they thereby seeing vs in such readines within our Trenches, pre∣sently fell off executing, running away, sea∣uing all such prouision they had brought thi∣ther for their passage to haue releeued the Graue: which were Ladders, Plankes, Mat∣tockes, Spades, Shouels and other Engins to haue entred the Trenches, and then the rest of the Armie should haue come on, when first way had been made, which (God be thanked) was not. So some sixe or seuen troopes of Horse fell out after them, put some to the sword, and
tooke two Italian Horse-men, whom they brought after to his Excellencie: And about three or foure dayes before their comming on, there would come ouer to his Excellencie twentie Italians and other the Admirants Souldiers at a time: The reason of their comming away was coniectured to be thus: That the ground was wet they lay in, want of money, scant of victuall and other things: For in truth, all things were very extreame deare to them, whereupon they grewe weake. My good Lord the two and twentieth day betimes in the morning went to his Trenches neere the Towne, and a small shot came from the enemie, and shot him in vnder the eye, be∣tweene the nose and the ball of the cheeke, which bullet resteth, as Surgeons & Phisiti∣ons take it, neere vnto the pallet of his mouth, and as yet not to be gotten out: yet by Gods helpe, no daunger, because it is cureable. Captaine Morgan hurt, being shot in the legge, and his horse kild vnder him at the Towne wall: Captaine Cooke hurt about the head and necke: Captaine Merekerk, Seriant Maior, shot thorow the shoulder, downe the backe, in the Trenches: and other Souldiers too long to name. The enemie the two & twentieth at night, set his cabbins on fire on both sides the Riuer,
and tooke vp his bridge, and marched away before day. Some foure or fiue thousand Horse and Foote of ours marched to his Quarter at day, finding him to be gone, and had taken all away. So our men firing the rest, returned. He is marched, as is thought, toward Venlo his friend Towne. Thus my humble dutie remembred, I humbly take my leaue. From Aradout, this 23. of August, stilo nouo. 1602. Your Honours euer to commaund to his power or seruice, W. C.
❧ A Thankes-giuing for the victorie God gaue his princely Excellen∣cie, in the ouercomming and taking the Citie Graue▪ the twentieth of September. 1602. THe time is come, wherein wee ought to prayse God, who bestoweth on vs from aboue his good blessings: he hath remooued the ene∣mies danger from vs, and dismayd them that were most haughtie. Behold the Nassawes bloud, which through Gods grace, at this time brings them downe powerfully, who offe∣reth vs his mightie helpe, and driueth a∣way sodaynely our prowde enemie, like Sisera. Our God hath disperst the enemies force, which they had relying vpon their Kings might, wealth, and treasure: but those
that trust in God, haue now by the Nassawes, ouerthrowne their courage. See their Kings power and pride, which he hath vsed thus long in these Netherlands, euen with robbings, burnings, and mur∣thers; but helpe thou vs, O God, from his oppression, who doeth these things to his owne shame. Obserue the Regent, a Lady full of wic∣kednesse, together with Duke Alvie, the great Commaunder, acknowledge Don Iohn, who came in shew of peace, but sought indeede, to carrie away the Netherlands treasure, and Parma, who through disdayne was much tor∣mented: Ernestus his fiery courage, and Al∣bertus his gift heere; but God hath almost dis∣couered his deceyt. Rise vp also, O you oppressed neighbours, Alas! the Netherlanders bloud hath proued sufficiently the Spanish trickes: how long yet shall their heauie crueltie indure, and be lamented? Abide not them, pray God in your miserie, that he will still helpe our Prince to warre, to make vs at peace together, and with speed to bring vs quite in safetie from the cruel Spaniards thraldome. What? bee not dismayde, trust vpon Al∣mightie God, whose powerfull goodnes he hath notably shewed at Turnout, and also re∣member
how proudly they came by Niew∣port, where they were slaine: There they had prepared for vs their Spanish poyson, and sworne, they would quite tread vnder foote that valiant couragious house of Nassaw; but euen then when they were about to do it, God did ouerthrow them. Thinke not, that victorie comes at any time, by the multitude and strength of an army, horse or foote, but onely of Gods bles∣sing: For we can shew, that God hath set himselfe with vs to hold vs vp, and hath giuen vnto them of Nassaw, pure wisedome and knowledge, for the comfort of Gods Church, and their countries defence, which they doe diligently put in practise: wherefore, let vs all with one accord praise our God. Marke now well, you rash inconstant sort, which thinke you winne; set vp your present power, as if you cride with speede, Mauris can attempt nothing, he flies; where are they? now wee shall surely get Ostend: But you haue turned and fled your selues, and with reprochfull shame haue forsaken the Citie Graue, which our Prince hath taken, and yet our valiant Souldiers keepe Ostend still. You came with great Armies, power and diligence, to relieue the strong towne of
Graue; but you came too late, for that one Princes Excellencie had before sufficiently entrencht himselfe: The like was also done before Berck. With grauing works, our Graue had shut the Graue, and so with shame are you retired. Now you goe to mutinie, and with speed cruelly to spoyle towne and countrey; for such are your Spanish exploites. See here, how soone the Spanish pride is, by Gods mercy, and the Nassawes valour, brought to shame, also how God hath destroy∣ed the rebellious Admirant, who greatly spoy∣led and hurt the Dutchie of Cleue. Keepe this well yeerely, monthly and dayly in minde, earnestly thanke God, and giue him the glorie, who giueth our valiant Prince victorie: keepe this, I say, still in memorie, and giue God the praise for euer. O Prince of rulers, preserue our Prince, and the aboue-named noble Nassawes bloud, defend the Citie Ostend from reproch, from flouds, tempests, stormes and winde, make all our neighbours our faithfull friends, deli∣uer vs, O Lord, from miserie, and giue not on∣ly peace in our dayes, but also heare our lamen∣tations; for surely it will, O Lord, great∣ly extoll thy name. FINIS.
TAke heede, gallant westerne Lords and Princes, Stay not benumb'd, take heart to your sences, Foresee where you their proiects may downe tread, Driue hence away, the foode of tyrants bread. Thinke vpon this euer.
