H205A P3737 99827619 32041
THE PROPOSALS FOR PROMOTING THE WOOLLEN-MANUFACTORY, PROMOTED. Further making it appear, that the Nation will thereby In∣crease in Wealth, at least 5000 l. per day, for every day in the year on which it is lawful to Labour. And that the Strength and Safety of the King and Kingdom, together with a most happy Reformation will be accom∣plished therein. All which is most plainly demonstrated, By several Well-wishers thereunto, Inhabitants and Citizens of London. Licensed, April 29. 1679. RO. L'ESTRANGE. LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis on Ludgate-Hill, MDCLXXIX.
The Proposals for Promoting the Woollen-Manufactory, promoted. NExt to being the Authors of profitable Inventions our selves, 'tis certainly most commendable to Incourage them in others, and endeavour, That what is happily found out, may be advantageously prosecuted. Men are grown to a wretched pass indeed, when, as Cicero complain∣ed, they leave off, Non solum laudanda facere, sed etiam laudare; Not only to do Praise-worthy Acts, but even to Commend them; Let us at least speak well of good Expedients, give the Labouring Promoters of Publick Weal our good word, and afford Industry a Tribute from our Tongues, though we are somewhat loth to allow her much from our Hands; To improve such effectual Expedients as will most reclaim Vice, and bring all Idle hands to Industry. To increase our richest Manufactories for Exportation, and especially to restore and advance that of Woollen, the Grand Staple Commodity of this Kingdom, which heretofore made the same to abound with Wealth, Power, and Honour, beyond any of its Neighbour Nations. These are things not to be Contemned or Neglected, but rather with the greater Diligence and Zeal to be Promoted and Encouraged to the utmost; For, since this golden Manufactory hath Decreased amongst us, several Offers and Essayes have been made for Re∣medy, and many who are concerned therein have been very Impatient; and not sufficiently considering the Cause of the Di∣stemper, some have moved the Parliament for the Exportation of Unwrought Wool, because little more than half what grows in the Nation is Converted. Others have Opposed them, and obtained an Act whereby to render the Exportation thereof Unwrought, a Capital Offence, and hang all those that should do it; yet are not able to Manufacture it themselves.
If Wool be Exported, the same will destroy our Markets a∣broad, and make People Beggars at home, saith the Clothier; But if it be kept at home, and not Converted, it will do us no good, saith Reason, with whom Experience and Poverty both joyn their Voices; the out-cries of the latter being heard, not only in every Street, but almost at every Door. The last Parliament hath almost every Session made it a great part of their Business to Hear and Encourage those who had any thing to offer for the Recovery of this Trade; and yet, till the late Breviat of Proposals published by one Mr. Richard Haines came out, it must be acknowledged, That neither the Exporter of Wool, nor Opposer of the same, or any others, have offered any certain Expedients for bringing all Idle hands to Industry, whereby the Wool may be Converted as fast as it grows and arises, on such terms, that the Cloth we have to spare may be Exported as fast as 'tis made. Wherefore, we cannot think it unseasonable, to joyn our Suffrages with him, and stir up all Active Publick Spirits, to promote and encourage that which will best accomplish this good Design: namely, Work-houses to be Erected, and Stock raised in every County, in which, poor People, Beggars, &c. shall be Employed in this Manufa∣ctory, with such Method of Government as may prevent all such Miscarriages, as have formerly rendred such Houses unsuccessful in our Nation; which he hath, in such his Breviat, declared to make good, and to Answer all Objections in that Case, in his Proposals at large, which undoubtedly may be done with little Difficulty, be∣cause 'tis done and practised in other Nations, and may here as well as there. The greatness of the Profits, namely, thirty or forty hundred thousand Pounds per Annum, we confess at first started us, but on deliberate Consideration we are satisfied with the Verity of it. And therefore judge it our parts to recommend it as afore∣said, with the Reasons and Grounds which have fully convin∣ced us why such vast Wealth cannot but necessarily arise there∣by to the Nation as thus.
In England we may reasonably conclude there are of Beggers petty Felons, Parish-Poor, and other idle People, which do little or nothing for their Living, 200 Thousand; whereof many who do nothing may earn six Pence per day, and those that earn six pence might earn twelve pence, when pla∣ced together in view of each other, where Correction and En∣couragement are duely administred. It may also be reasonably concluded, that each Person, one with another, may (with the help of some Clothiers) work as much Wool as will make fifteen pounds worth of Cloth in one Year, which, if so, then there will be thirty hundred thousand pounds worth to be Exported more than now is, as the Author of the Proposals does insert. But suppose the quantity fall short, yet we may reasonably conclude, that our Merchants in their course of Trade will near the matter double the Value in the returns of what they Export, so that still the Wealth of the Nation will be more, rather than less, increased, than what is proposed. But if we take no other measures than this, viz. that each Person, one with another, earns six pence per day, and that which is wrought by their Labour shall be Exported, 'tis a cer∣tain truth, the Nation will gain by their Labour 5000 l. for every day in the year that they work, as by Calculation doth appear; which, if doubled by the Merchants course of Trade, as aforesaid, it will then amount to no less than 10000 l. per day, clear gain to the Nation. And put case we allow 80 dayes in the year for Holy dayes, there remains 285 dayes to work in, which, by this modest Calculation, will bring in 2850000 l. in one year clear gain by their Labour, besides the Value of the Wool, and other things which add to the Value of all the Cloth they make. Nor is it to be doubted, but the Work of each Per∣son, one with another, may amount to 8 d. per day, after some time of practice, so that for the future, by the Expedients propo∣sed, all people, as aforesaid, being brought up to such habit of Industry, the Wealth of the Nation cannot but increase to the Value proposed. The Case is plain, and an ordinary Capacity, whose Judgment is not sway'd by corrupt Affection, may be well satisfied.
That we have Wool enough, Fullers Earth enough, poor People enough, Vagrants, petty Felons, Nurses of Debauche∣ry &c. sufficiently enough to make Cloth enough to revive the Glory, Wealth, Strength, and Safety of the whole Nation is most certain, and may as certainly be effected with good Suc∣cess; if instead of Houses of Debauchery, such Houses of Indu∣stry were erected. It being that which not only is practicable, but de facto hath been and now is practised on the same Consi∣deration, by the means whereof there is not a Begger in the Country where 'tis used, and by which that overgrown and in∣numerable Multitude of leud People may most profitably be re∣strained. All which considered, we can see no Reason why any People should oppose these Work-houses, unless it be those that do the greatest Mischief to the Persons, Estates, and Souls of Mankind, namely, the before mentioned Idle lewd Nurses of Debauchery, whom nothing can restrain so effectually as these houses, in which they would be held in Durance with great Advantage. There∣fore it concerns them and their Abettors to obstruct the Build∣ing; and look how much a man is an Enemy to the one so much he is the greater Friend to the other. 1. This we dare assert and maintatin against all Opposers that shall put Pen to Paper against it, that if such a Gold or Silver Mine should be found in England as might afford five thousand Pounds per day throughout the year, it would not do the Na∣tion near so much good, as these Expedients, if prosecuted. 2. That it is the greatest thing of such a kind, and easiest to be accomplisht that hath been offered to the King and Parliament, to promote the Wealth, Strength, and Safety of the Kingdom; since in it the Woollen Manufacture hath been encouraged. 3. That the said Expedients are feisible and practicable; which being so, it must needs be some extraordinary and inor∣dinate Affection that must force any man to oppose it. 4. That 'tis in vain to endeavour to suppress and destroy the Houses or Schooles of Debauchery, whilst the major part are Opposers and Enemies to the Houses of Industry, which may
afford a better Imployment and honester life to the Inhabitants, who ought to be removed from one to the other. And certain∣ly if such publick Labours and Endeavours as will thus pro∣mote the greatest Happiness of a Nation be contemned and dis∣couraged, it will be enough to dishearten all noble and publick Spirits, and render them Objects for the Scorn and Derision of the basest of Men. Wherefore, to prevent this destructive Evil, we shall with all hearty Affection and Zeal to the publick recommend the said Expedients to all good People in the Nation, of what Estate or Quality soever, viz. 1. To the poorest and most indigent, because thereby they and their Children, and their Childrens Children shall never want an honest Imployment, Food, Rayment, nor Habitation if uncharitable People do not hinder. 2. To the pious and religious, because thereby an happy Reformation in the Lives and Conversations of many Thou∣sands will be accomplished, if the Friends to Debauchery do not hinder. 3. To the Breeders of Wool, because thereby they will have quick Markets for their Wool as fast as it grows and arises, if the neglect of practical Expedients do not hinder. 4. To the Clothiers, because thereby all the Wool of Eng∣land, and what Scotland and Ireland have to spare will be secu∣red from being exported, and they may have it wrought upon cheaper Terms than before, as fast as they need it, having their Labourers partly maintained by a publick Stock, &c. 5. To the Drapers and Merchants, because they may have their Cloth, and afford it on cheaper terms than those that have supplanted us. 6. To the Farmers, &c. because they may save six pence in every twelve pence of what they now Contribute to the Live∣lyhood of the Poor, and may have better Markets for what they have to spare, since so many thousands will near the mat∣ter Earn, and Pay for all they Eat, and Drink, and Wear, which before had all for Begging, Lying, and Dissembling.
7. To the City of London in particular, whose Trade and Treasure will be near doubled, by reason of that double quan∣tity of Cloth that will be Exported, by means whereof, the Returns will be of double value in Commodity or Trea∣sure, &c. 8. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, whose Revenue by the Increase of Customes will be proportionably increased, if want of Encouragement do not hinder. 9. And to the whole Kingdom in general, because, besides the Increase of Seamen and Navies of Ships, for its Defence Strength, and Safety; Wealth and Treasure will Increase there∣in, at least thirty or forty hundred thousand pounds every year more than it did; if those that are regardless of the Na∣tions Weal, do not hinder, with a base intention to promote their own Private and Particular Lucre. Wherefore, with submission to better Judgments, we will conclude with the Words of St. Paul, upon the whole Matter; Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if there be any Vertue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things. FINIS.
