16724.5 99898923 151035
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE depiction of the English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown W. C. M. depiction of the blazon of the City of London with the initials (W. C.) of Lord Mayor William Craven above it and the initial of his office (M.) below it Commune Conciliū tentum in Camera Guildhald Ciuit. London, vicesimo primo die Ianuarij, Anno regni Dom. nostri la∣cobi, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, & Hib. Regis, fidei defensor. &c. octauo, & Scotiae xliiij. Corā Willielmo Cra∣uen Milite Maiore Ciuit. Lon. Leo∣nardo Hailiday Milite, Henrico Row Milite, Tho. Cambell Milite, Iacobo Pemberton Milite, Iohan. Swinarton Milite, Iohanne Iolles Milite, Iohan∣ne Leaman, Galfrido Elwes, Georgio Polles, wil∣lielmo Cockain, Aldermannis Ciuitat. praedictae, Ac Richardo Pyct, & Francisco Iones Alderman∣nis & Vicecommitib Ciuit. praedictae, Necnon Maiori parte cōmuniariorū dicte Ciuitat de Com. Concilio eiusdem Ciuit. existent. assemblat, &c. ❧ An Acte for Reformation of Apparell to be worne by Prentices, and Maid-seruants, within the Citty of London, and the Liberties thereof. Fhion or appa  by many Apprentices, within the Citty of London and Liberties of the same: and for satisfyeng such others who beeing well dispo∣sed are contented with such decent apparel as is fitting, and their Maisters well able to affoord them: as also for more conformity in this kind and for a∣uoiding many inconveniences that of late haue risen, by the neglect of Order in this behalfe. Be it enacted, ordeined, and established, by the Right Honou∣rable Sir William Crauen knight, Lord Mayor of the Citty of London, and his right Worship∣full Brethren the Aldermen of the same Citty, with the assent of the Commons in this present Common Councell assembled, and by authority of the same. That no Apprentice now being, or which hereafter shalbe, within the Cittye of London or Liberties of the same, shall at any time after the feast day of S. Michael Tharchangell next comming, during the tearme of his Apprentiship, weare any apparell, but of his Maisters cost, prouision or appointment, and not of his owne, nor of his friends, other, then by and according to his Maisters appointment for the stuffe, fashion, and goodnesse agreeable to the Orders, fashion and goodnesse, hereafter set downe and declared. Inprimis. That no Apprentice, shall at any time after the said Feast day of S. Michaell Tharchangell, weare any Hat lined, faced, or turfed with Veluet, silke or Taffata, but only the bredth of three Inches in the head: nor any Hat, other then such, as the Hat and band with the trimming, shall not exceed in all, the value or price of fiue shillings. Item. He shall not weare in his Ba, either Lawne or Cambricke, but Holland or other lin∣nen cloth, not exceeding the price or value of v. shillings the elne, no shal weare any lace, edge, or any other worke, in, or about the same Band, but only a plaine hem, and one stitch. And if any Apprentice shal weare any Ruffe-band, then the same not to exceed three yardes in length before it be gathered and set into the stock, nor two Inches in depth before the setting in of the same into the stocke. Also, that no Apprentice shal weare any Pickadilly or other support, in, with, or about the Coller of his Doublet, nor shall weare about his Coller, either Point, Ribbon, or Laces, but the Coller to be made close and comlie. Also, that no Apprentice, shall after the said feast day of S. Michael Tharchangell, during the terme of his Apprentiship, weare any Doublet or Breeches, of any kind of silke, or stuffe mingled with silke, but only of Cloth, Kersey, Fustian, Sackcloth, Canuas, English-leather, or English stuffe, which stuffe shall not exceed the price or value of two s. vi. pence the yeard. Also, that no Apprentice, after the said Feast of S. Michael Tharchangell, during the terme of his Apprentiship, shall weare in his Cloke, Coat, Ierkin, Doublet or Breeches, any Broad-cloth, exceeding the price or value of ten shillings the yard, nor any Kersey, exceeding the value or price of fiue shillings the yard. Also, that no Apprentice, after the said Feast of S. Michaell Tharchangell, during the term of his Apprentiship, shal weare in the garnishing, lining, facing, setting forth, or drawing out of his Apparell, eyther Veluet, or any silke or stuffe, sauing only silke Buttons, and silke in the button-holes, to his coat, Ierken, or Doublet. Nor after the said feast day of S. Michael the Archangel, during the terme of his Apprentiship, shal weare any Gloues, aboue the price or value of twelue pence the paire, and those without any fringe or garnishing of Golde or siluer Lace, Veluet, silke, or silke lace, or Ribbon. Also, that no Apprentice, after the said feast day of S. Michaell Tharchangel, during the terme of his Apprentiship, shal wear any Girdle, point, garters, or shoostringes of any kind of silk or ribbon, nor any Rose, or such like toyes at all, either on his Garters, or on his shooes. Also, that no Apprentice shal after the said feast day of S. Michaell Tharchangel, during the said terme of his Apprentiship, weare any silke, wosted or Iersey stockings, but shal weare stockings only of woollen yarne, or Kersey. Nor shal weare any Spanish-leather shooes: Nor any shooes made with Polonia heeles, nor any shooes made of any other Leather then Neates-leather, or Calues leather. Nor that any Apprentice shal after the saide Feast of S. Michaell Tharchangel, during the terme of his Apprentiship, weare his haire with any Tuft or Lock, but cut short in decent and comely manner.
Also, that no Apprentice, shall after the said feast day of S. Michael Tharchangell, during the terme of his Apprentiship, weare any Doublet or Breeches, of any kind of silke, or stuffe mingled with silke, but only of Cloth, Kersey, Fustian, Sackcloth, Canuas, English-leather, or English stuffe, which stuffe shall not exceed the price or value of two s. vi. pence the yeard. Also, that no Apprentice, after the said Feast of S. Michael Tharchangell, during the terme of his Apprentiship, shall weare in his Cloke, Coat, Ierkin, Doublet or Breeches, any Broad-cloth, exceeding the price or value of ten shillings the yard, nor any Kersey, exceeding the value or price of fiue shillings the yard. Also, that no Apprentice, after the said Feast of S. Michaell Tharchangell, during the term of his Apprentiship, shal weare in the garnishing, lining, facing, setting forth, or drawing out of his Apparell, eyther Veluet, or any silke or stuffe, sauing only silke Buttons, and silke in the button-holes, to his coat, Ierken, or Doublet. Nor after the said feast day of S. Michael the Archangel, during the terme of his Apprentiship, shal weare any Gloues, aboue the price or value of twelue pence the paire, and those without any fringe or garnishing of Golde or siluer Lace, Veluet, silke, or silke lace, or Ribbon. Also, that no Apprentice, after the said feast day of S. Michaell Tharchangel, during the terme of his Apprentiship, shal wear any Girdle, point, garters, or shoostringes of any kind of silk or ribbon, nor any Rose, or such like toyes at all, either on his Garters, or on his shooes. Also, that no Apprentice shal after the said feast day of S. Michaell Tharchangel, during the said terme of his Apprentiship, weare any silke, wosted or Iersey stockings, but shal weare stockings only of woollen yarne, or Kersey. Nor shal weare any Spanish-leather shooes: Nor any shooes made with Polonia heeles, nor any shooes made of any other Leather then Neates-leather, or Calues leather. Nor that any Apprentice shal after the saide Feast of S. Michaell Tharchangel, during the terme of his Apprentiship, weare his haire with any Tuft or Lock, but cut short in decent and comely manner. And if any of the said Apprentices shal offend, in wearing any apparell, or his haire, or other thing, contrary to the true meaning herof, with the allowance, appointment, or witting suffe∣rance of his Maister, and the maister of such Apprentice, doe not for the first offence, admonish and rebuke his Apprentice, and for the second offence, bring his Apprentice before the Cham∣berleyn of this Citty, for the time being, to be by him cōmitted to Little-ease, there to remain for the space of eighteen houres at the least, vnlesse in the meane time he shall submit and re∣forme himselfe, then the maister of such Apprentice, shall for euery day wherin he shal commit or doe, or wittingly suffer any the offences aforesaid, forfait iij. s. iiii. d. per diem, the one halfe to the vse of the Poore of the Parish where the offender shall then dwell, and the other halfe to such person as shall giue Information thereof. And for that Apprentices do in these dayes, liue more Riotously and at their pleasures, in spending their times in Dauncing-schooles, Dycing-houses, Tennis-Courts, Bowling-alyes, Brothel-houses, and other exercises vnfit for their degrees and calling, to the high displeasure of Almighty God, wasting of their masters substance, and vtter ouerthrowe of themselues. Be it enacted by the Authority aforesayd: That euery Apprentice which shalbe in any dancing Schoole, or schoole of Fence, or learne or vse Dauncing, or Masking, or shall vse dicing or any other play, or haunt any Tennis court, common Bowling alley, Cock-fighting or Brothell house, or which shall without his masters knowledge, haue any Chest, Presse, Trunk, Deske, or other place, to lay vp or keepe any apparell or goods, sauing only in his masters house, or by his masters licence and appointment, or shall keep any Horse, Gelding, or Mare, Dog or Bitch, or fighting Cock, shall vpon his owne confession, or proofe thereof made before the Chamber∣layn of this Citty (for the time being) or before any master or Warden of the Company where of his master is or shalbe free, be committed to Little-ease for eighteen houres, or to one of the Compters of this Citty, vpon the commandment of the Lorde Mayor of this Citty, there to remaine by the space of twenty foure houres. And the master of such Apprentise for allowing or witting sufferance of his Apprentise hanting or vsing any of the aforesaid forbidden schools, places, or exercises, shall forfeyt vi. s. viii. d. for euery time that he shal offend therein. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesayd, that all and euery such person and per∣sons dwellyng within this Citty or the Liberties thereof, in whose hands or custody any such chest, Presse, Trunke or Deske, Apparell, Money, Ware, or any other goods, Horse, Gelding, Mare, or Dog, or Bitch, or fighting-cock, shalbe found to be kept for any such Apprentise, shal forfayt and pay to the Chamberlayn of the Citty of London (for the time beeing) to the vse of the Mayor and cominalty and Cittizens of the said Citty, the summe of xl. s. of lawful money of England, or else to abide such punishment as shalbe inflicted vpon them by the Lord Mayor and court of Aldermen, agreeable to the Lawes of this Realme. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesayd, that all and euery the forfaitures, pe∣nalties, and summes of money aforesayd, shall be recouered by action of Debt, to be commen∣sed and prosecuted in the name of the Chamberlaine of this citty (for the time beeing) in the Kings Maiesties court, holden before the Mayor and Aldermen of the Citty of London, in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the same citty. ANd for the auoiding of many and great inconueniences and disorders which daily grow, by the inordinate pride of Maid-seruants, and Women-seruants, in their excesse of Apparell, and folly in variety of New fashions. Be it also enacted, ordained and established by the Au∣thority aforesaid, that from and after the said feast day of S. Michael Tharchangell next cō∣ming, no mayden seruant or Woman Seruant whatsoeuer, dwelling or which hereafter shall dwel within the citty of London or the Liberties thereof, which shall take any wages, or bee hired or agreed for wages, shal after the feast day of Saint Michael Tharchangel next ensuing, weare vpon her head, any Lawne, Cambrick, Tiffiny, cobweb-Lawne, or white silk-cipres, eyther in any Kerchefe, Koyfe, cros-cloth, or Shaddow, nor any Linnen cloth therein, sauing such Linnen cloth only, which shall not exceed the price or value of v. s. the eln, nor shall weare any Lace or Edging vpon the same, or any part thereof. Nor after the said Feast day of S. Michael Tharchangel shall weare any Band, Neckerchiefe, Gorget, Strippe, or Stomacher, but only plaine, nor any Ruffe exceeding foure yardes in length, before the gathering or setting in thereof, nor three Inches in deapth, with the setting in of the same. Nor shall weare any Lawne, Cambricke, Tiffiny, Cobweb-lawne, or white silke Cipres at all, either about their necke, or otherwise: Nor any other Linnen-cloth, exceeding the price of v. s. the elne: Nor any sort of Lace or Edging whatsoeuer, but plaine Hemme and one Stitch. Nor any Stomacher wrought with any gold, siluer, or silke, or with any kind of stuffe made of Silke, or mixt with silke. And it is also enacted, ordained and established, by the Authority aforesaid, that no Maide-seruant or woman-seruant, which shall be hired, or agree for or take wages, dwelling, or which hereafter shall dwell within the said Citty or Liberties, shall after the said feast day of S. Mi∣chael Tharchangel next comming▪ weare any Gowne, Kirtle, Wastcote, or Petticote, olde or New, of any kind of Silke stuffe, or stuffe mingled with silke, nor any other stuffe exceeding the price of two shillings sixe pence the yard, Nor any Kersey, exceeding the price of v. s. the yeard: Nor Broad-cloth exceeding the price of x. s. the yeard. Nor any silke Lace or Guard vppon her Gowne, Kirtle, Wastcote or Petticote, or any other garment, saue only a cape of Veluet. Nor any Fardingale at all, either little or great, nor any bodie or Sleeues, of Wyer Whale-bones
themselues. Be it enacted by the Authority aforesayd: That euery Apprentice which shalbe in any dancing Schoole, or schoole of Fence, or learne or vse Dauncing, or Masking, or shall vse dicing or any other play, or haunt any Tennis court, common Bowling alley, Cock-fighting or Brothell house, or which shall without his masters knowledge, haue any Chest, Presse, Trunk, Deske, or other place, to lay vp or keepe any apparell or goods, sauing only in his masters house, or by his masters licence and appointment, or shall keep any Horse, Gelding, or Mare, Dog or Bitch, or fighting Cock, shall vpon his owne confession, or proofe thereof made before the Chamber∣layn of this Citty (for the time being) or before any master or Warden of the Company where of his master is or shalbe free, be committed to Little-ease for eighteen houres, or to one of the Compters of this Citty, vpon the commandment of the Lorde Mayor of this Citty, there to remaine by the space of twenty foure houres. And the master of such Apprentise for allowing or witting sufferance of his Apprentise hanting or vsing any of the aforesaid forbidden schools, places, or exercises, shall forfeyt vi. s. viii. d. for euery time that he shall offend therein. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesayd, that all and euery such person and per∣sons dwellyng within this Citty or the Liberties thereof, in whose hands or custody any such chest, Presse, Trunke or Deske, Apparell, Money, Ware, or any other goods, Horse, Gelding, Mare, or Dog, or Bitch, or fighting-cock, shalbe found to be kept for any such Apprentise, shal forfayt and pay to the Chamberlayn of the Citty of London (for the time beeing) to the vse of the Mayor and cominalty and Cittizens of the said Citty, the summe of xl. s. of lawful money of England, or else to abide such punishment as shalbe inflicted vpon them by the Lord Mayor and court of Aldermen, agreeable to the Lawes of this Realme. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesayd, that all and euery the forfaitures, pe∣nalties, and summes of money aforesayd, shall be recouered by action of Debt, to be commen∣sed and prosecuted in the name of the Chamberlaine of this citty (for the time beeing) in the Kings Maiesties court, holden before the Mayor and Aldermen of the Citty of London, in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the same citty. ANd for the auoiding of many and great inconueniences and disorders which daily grow, by the inordinate pride of Maid-seruants, and Women-seruants, in their excesse of Apparell, and folly in variety of New fashions. Be it also enacted, ordained and established by the Au∣thority aforesaid, that from and after the said feast day of S. Michael Tharchangell next cō∣ming, no mayden seruant or Woman Seruant whatsoeuer, dwelling or which hereafter shall dwel within the citty of London or the Liberties thereof, which shall take any wages, or bee hired or agreed for wages, shal after the feast day of Saint Michael Tharchangel next ensuing, weare vpon her head, any Lawne, Cambrick, Tiffiny, cobweb-Lawne, or white silk-cipres, eyther in any Kerchefe, Koyfe, cros-cloth, or Shaddow, nor any Linnen cloth therein, sauing such Linnen cloth only, which shall not exceed the price or value of v. s. the eln, nor shall weare any Lace or Edging vpon the same, or any part thereof. Nor after the said Feast day of S. Michael Tharchangel shall weare any Band, Neckerchiefe, Gorget, Strippe, or Stomacher, but only plaine, nor any Ruffe exceeding foure yardes in length, before the gathering or setting in thereof, nor three Inches in deapth, with the setting in of the same. Nor shall weare any Lawne, Cambricke, Tiffiny, Cobweb-lawne, or white silke Cipres at all, either about their necke, or otherwise: Nor any other Linnen-cloth, exceeding the price of v. s. the elne: Nor any sort of Lace or Edging whatsoeuer, but plaine Hemme and one Stitch. Nor any Stomacher wrought with any gold, siluer, or silke, or with any kind of stuffe made of Silke, or mixt with silke. And it is also enacted, ordained and established, by the Authority aforesaid, that no Maide-seruant or woman-seruant, which shall be hired, or agree for or take wages, dwelling, or which hereafter shall dwell within the said Citty of Liberties, shall after the said feast day of S. Mi∣chael Tharchangel next comming▪ weare any Gowne, Kirtle, Wastcote, or Petticote, olde or New, of any kind of Silke stuffe, or stuffe mingled with silke, nor any other stuffe exceeding the price of two shillings sixe pence the yard, Nor any Kersey, exceeding the price of v. s. the yeard: Nor Broad-cloth exceeding the price of x. s. the yeard. Nor any silke Lace or Guard vppon her Gowne, Kirtle, Wastcote or Petticote, or any other garment, saue only a cape of Veluet. Nor any Fardingale at all, either little or great, nor any bodie or Sleeues, of Wyer, Whale-bones. or with any other stiffening, sauing Canuas, or Buckram onlie. Nor any Apron of any kinde of silke, Lawne, or Cambricke, or any other stuffe, exceeding the price of ij. s. vi. d. the yeard. Nor aboue one breadth in one Apron: Nor vpon, about, or with the same any Edging, Lace, or Fringe. Nor any Wosted, Iersey, or silk Stockings: Nor any Spanish-leather-shooes, nor shooes of any other Leather, vnlesse Neats-leather, or Calues leather: nor any shooes what∣soeuer, with Polonia heeles: Nor with the same any stitching, Rose, or silke Ribbon for Shooe stringes. And if any Woman-seruant or Maid-seruaunt whatsoeuer, which shall take, bee hired, or agree for wages, shall after the said feast day of S. Michael Tharchangell next comming, of∣fend, in wearing any Apparell or other thing heerein before forbidden, contrarie to the true meaning heereof, She shall for the first offence forfeit iij. s. iiij. d. And for the second offence, sixe shil, eight pence, or the Apparell worne contrary to the true meaning hereof. The same  o be employed, the one halfe to the vse of the Poore of the Parishe where such offence shalbe committed, and the other halfe to such person as shall  In∣formation thereof. All which Penalties shall be sued forth, in the name of the Chambern of this Citty (for the time being) by Action of Debt to bee commenced and prosecuted in the Court aforesaid, &c. God saue the King. Printed at London by VV. Iaggard, Printer to the Honorable Citty of London.
