21098 99900428 152017
THE HEAVENLY ADVOCATE: OR A short direction for the speedy vnderstanding of the New Testament, of the yeeres and dayes of Christs age heere on Earth, times and placés of his Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and Ascention: Together with a briefe Catechisme, for the instruction of Christian Families. And also a Spirituall Combate, betweene mans frailty and faith, in time of sicknesse. 1. IOHN 2. VERSE 1. If any man sinne, wee haue an aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righteous. LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop, neere Fleet Conduit. 1617.
TO THE RIGHT VVorshipfull Sir Iames Ful∣lerton Knight, Gentleman of His HIGHNES Bed-Chamber, &c. THE due regard which good men haue of you, for the spe∣ciall gifts with which it hath pleased God to grace you, the long experience of your Chri∣stian fauour; your willingnes to read, and wisedome to iudge and discerne of all that you read: hath made me bold to offer vnto your Worship, this testimony of my vn∣fained thankefulnesse, and to craue your fauourable patronage for the same. For I euer esteemed an vnprofitable life, to bee a kinde of vncomfortable death. For the matter and manner, I recommend it to the censure of the conscionable and iudicious
Readers; which will bee so much the more beneuolent, because it shelters it selfe vnder your name. And thus beseeching Almigh∣tie God, to blesse your faithfull indeuours in that high calling, and daily more and more to multiply his gracious mercies vp∣on your self, and your godly and vertuous Lady, I humbly take my leaue, Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded. Barthol Robertson, Minister of Gods Word.
THE HEAVENLY ADVOCATE. In a short direction, for the speedy vnderstanding of the New Testament, of the yeeres and daies of Christs age heere on earth, times, places of his Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and As∣cention: In Augustus Caesars raigne, 42. who raigned 57. and in Herod, 34. who raigned 37. Christ was borne. CHAP. 1. Of the natiuity of Iohn the Baptist, and Christs birth and actions, vntill he is about 30. yeeres. THE yeere of the World, 4183. when Eli∣zabeth, spouse to Zacherie, the father of Iohn the Baptist was with childe (six moneths gone) Gabriel was sent to Mary vnto Galile to Nazereth to intunate her conception, Luk. 1. 26 and an Angel to Ioseph, Matth. 1. 20. Marie with Christ in her wombe went into the hill Country in hast, vnto a Citie of Iuda to Zacha∣ries his house, Lu. 1. 39. Marie went vp againe
being great with child, from Galile out of the Citie of Nazareth vnto Iudea, with Ioseph vn∣to Bethleem, where Christ was borne, Luke 2. 4. 7. and laid in a Manger. The first day after his birth, the Shepheards came at the voyce of the Angel to Iosoph and Mary, Luk. 2. 11. and to the babe v. 16. who were the first publishers, v. 17. After this time, the Wise-men came from the East to worship him, Matth. 2. 1. The 8. day Christ was circumcised. Lu. 2. 21. The 33. day was the purification of Marie, and then Iesus was carried to the Temple of Ierusalem, to bee presented before the Lord, Luke 2. 22. Simion receiued him in his armes, Luke 2. 28. and Anna likewise (who had liued seuen yeeres with her husband from her virgi∣nity, and had beene widdow fourescore and foure yeeres) gaue thankes for him, Luke 2. 36. 37. 38. The 2. yeere Christ was carried into Egypt, and tarried there two yeeres, Matth. 2. 13. The 6. yeere Christ came out of Egypt, and fearing for Archelaus to goe to Iudea, turned aside into the parts of Galile, and dwelt in Na∣zareth, Matth. 2. 23. The 12. yere he to past Ierusalem with Ioseph and Mary, at the feast of the Passeouer, and dis∣puted with the doctors: frō thence he returned downe with them to Nazareth, and was sub∣iect
vnto them, and hee increased in wisedome and stature, and in fauour with God and man, Luk. 2. 42. 52. In the 15. yeere of Tiberius, Luke 2. 23. Pontius Pilate his 4. yeere being Lieutenant of Iudea, Herod Tetrach of Galile, his brother Philip Tetrach of Itrurea, & Trachonites, Liza∣nias Tetrach of Abilene, Christ came from Ga∣lile, Matth. 3. 13. and was baptized by Iohn in Iordan, Mar. 9. 1. being about 30 yeeres of age. CHAP. 11. Of Christs first yeres, publike functiō in preaching & working of miracles, being the 31. of his age. FRom Iordan he returned, and was immedi∣ately led into the wildernesse, where he was with the wilde beasts, Marke 1. 13. Iohn hauing disputed with the Pharisies at Be∣thabora, next the day pointed at Iesus cōming to him: saying, Behold the Lamb of God, Io. 1. 29. The next day Iohn stood againe, and two of his Disciples & said, Behold the Lamb. v. 35. 36. The same day, about the tenth houre, An∣drew and Peter followed him, Iohn 1. 39. Christ on the morrow going to Galile, found Philip, v. 43. The third day after, he came to Cana in Galile, and wrought the first miracle, Iohn 2. 2. 11. After that he went down to Capernamn, with his mother, brethren, and disciples; but they continued not many dayes there, Iohn 2, 12.
The Iewes Passeouer was at hand, and Iesus went vp to Ierusalem, and draue the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, Iohn 2. 13. At night Nicodemus came vnto him, Io. 3. 2. After he came vnto the land parts of Iudea, Iohn 3. 22. When Iohn was baptizing in Enon, beside Salim, v. 23. Iesus left Iudea, and depar∣ted againe into Galilie thorow Samaria to Sy∣char, and conuerted the Samaritan woman, at the Well, Iohn 4. 5. where he abode two daies, Iohn 4. 40. and two daies after hee departed thence and went into Galilie, v. 43. Againe, Iesus came to Cana in Galilie, v. 46. and wrought the second miracle, that same day, at the seuenth houre; healing the Rulers sonne, verse 52. When Iesus had manifested himselfe in Ga∣lilie, Luke 4. 14. hauing fled thither because of Iohns imprisonment, Matth. 4. 12. called An∣drew and Peter at the sea of Galilie, Mat. 4. 18. and Iames and Iohn, v. 21. passing round about Galilie, v. 23. his fame spread abroad thorow all Syria, v. 24. there followed him great mul∣titudes out of Galilie and Decapolis, and Ieru∣salem, and Iudea, and from beyond Iordan, verse 25. From Galilie he went to Nazareth, and lea∣uing Nazareth went and dwelt in Capernaum: which is neere the sea in the borders of Zabu∣lon and Nepthalim, verse 13. and there on the
Sabbath day went into the Synagogue and preached, Luke 4. 16. and cured one possessed, Marke 1. 21. In the same Citie also with the foure Disciples, he healed the same day Simons mother in law of a feuer, Mar. 1. 29. and when eeuen was come and the sunne downe, he hea∣led many, verse 32. And in the morning very early before day, he arose & went out into a solitary place to pray, verse 35. and when hee saw great multitudes about him, hee commanded them to depart to the other side of the water, Matth. 8. 18. there in the way to the sea, hee refused three which offered to follow him, v. 19. Luke 9. 57. Then he came ouer to the other side of the sea, to the Countrey of Gadarens, Marke 5. 1. who be∣cause their diuells possessed their swine, be∣sought him to depart: and hee gate him vp in∣to the ship and returned backe againe, Luke 8. 37. where the people were waiting for him v. 40. to whom hee taught out of the ship, Luke 5. 3. from thence hee entred into his owne Ci∣tie, Matthew 9. 1. then to Capernaum againe, Marke 2. 1. where hee cured the sicke of the palsie, and after he had called Matthew, hee di∣ned with him, Matth. 9. 9. where there was a great company of Publicans, and other that sate at table with them, Luke 5. 29. where hee disputed of Iohn & the Pharisies fasting, Mar. 2. 18. In the meane time while hee spake with
them, he arose and followed Iairus the Ruler of the Synagogue, to cure his daughter, Mat. 9. 18. And vpon the way, a woman of the bloudy issue was healed in the prease, Mat. 9. 20. when he came to the house he healed two blind men, Matt. 9. 28. and one possessed of a diuel, v. 32. After this, there was a feast of the Iewes, and Iesus went vp to Ierusalem: this is the se∣cond Passeouer mentioned, and there at Be∣thesda a Cripple is healed on the Sabbath day, Iohn 5. 9. And he went with his Disciples thorow the corne on the Sabbath, Marke 2. 23. vpon the second Sabbath after the first: they pluckt and and rubbed the corne, Luke 6. 1. The Pharisies were confounded in their quarrelling thereof, Mat. 12. 3. & on another Sabbath he entred into the Synagogue and taught, Luke 6. 6. where he healed the withered hand, for the which the Scribes were filled with madnesse. From Ierusalem hee went forth vnto the mountaine, and spent the whole night in pray∣er, Luke 6. 22. and when it was day hee chose his Disciples, verse 13. and taught that excel∣lent Sermon in the Mount, Matth. 5. 1. when he came downe from the mountaine he healed the Leper, Matth. 8. 2. then entred hee into Capernaum, and went with the Centurion to cure his seruant Luke 7. 2. 6. The day after hee went to Naim, and there
raised the widdowes sonne, Luke 7. 11. Iohn sent his Disciples to Christ, Matth. 11. 2. Then one of the Pharisies named Simion, Luke 7. 36. 40. desired Christ to eate with him, where Mary Magdalen is commended and one possessed with a diuel, blind, & dumbe, is cured, Mat. 12. 22. while he was refuting the Pharisies, . 25. his mother could not come to him for the reafe, Luke 8. 19. Christ preferred spiritual af∣finity, Marke 3. 35. The same day, when Iesus was gone out of Iairus house, Mat. 13. 1. he began to teach by the sea side, and entred into a ship and sate in the sea, and all the people was by the sea side, on the land, Marke 4. 1. The parable of the sower, and tares, Matth. 13. 24. The seed growing while men sleepe, Marke 4. 26. The graine of mustard-seed, ver. 31. The leauen, Matth. 13. 33. a treasure hid in the field, verse 44. a precious stone, vers. 45. a net, verse 47. CHAP. III. Of Christs more cleare and liuely manifestation, in walking thorow Iudea, and shewing him∣selfe to all sorts of people. AFter he had finished these Parables, he de∣parted thence, Matthew 13. 53. and came into his owne Countrey, Marke 6.  to Naza∣reth
where he was nursed, and (as his custom was) he went into the Synagogue on the Sab¦bath, and stood vp to reade, Luke 4. 16. and prayed, verse 27. But they thrust him out, and led him to the top of the hill, whereon the City was built, to cast him downe headlong, Luke 4. 29. There he did not many mighty workes Marke 6. 5. Because of their vncredulitie. Mat 13. 58. but went thorow all townes and villa∣ges, teaching, and iourneying towards Ieru∣salem, Luke 13. 22. Now began hee to send the twelue, two and two, Marke 6. 7. Iohn being beheaded, Matt▪ 14. 10. and Christ hearing of it, departed thence into a ship into a desart place, neere vnto Beth¦saida, Luke 9. 10. yet the people saw them when they departed, and ranne a foot thither out of all Cities, and came thither before them. Mar. 6. 33. and when the day was now farre spent, verse 35. and euening come, Matth. 14. 15. hee fed fiue thousand with fiue loaues, Iohn 6. 3. 4▪ Now the Passeouer, a feast of the Iewes was neere, Christ compelled his Disciples to goe ouer the sea towards Bethsaida, while hee sen away the people, Marke 6. 45. but when night was come, he was there in the mountaine pray∣ing, Matthew 14. 23. his disciples went ouer the sea towards Capernaum, and it was darke and a great winde, Ioh. 6. 17. 18. and contrary, Matt. 14. 24. at the fourth watch, Christ came
walking on the sea, Marke 6. 48. so they came o the land of Genazereth, and drew vp into he hauen, verse 53. The day following hee came to Capernaum, and there reasons of the true bread and Manna, Iohn 6. 22. and therefore the whole Countrey came thither, Mar. 6. 55. amongst others that came frō Ierusalem, were certain Scribes, Mar. 7. 1. whose traditions confounded, Matt. 15. 3. From thence he departed into the coasts of Ty∣rus and Sydon, where hee cured the Syrophinissi∣ans daughter, Marke 8. 24. and when hee came from the coasts of Sydon, hee went to the sea of Galilie thorow the midst of the coasts of De∣capolis: there cured a man deafe and dumbe, Marke 7. 31. where he went vp ro a mountain and fedde foure thousand, besides women and children, Matth. 15 29, and when hee had sent away the people, he tooke ship, and came into the parts of Magdala, or Dalmannutha, ver. 39. where Sadduces seeke a signe, and are reiected, Matt. 16. 4. VVhen hee had left them, hee entred into the ship againe, and departed ouer the water, and because they had but one loafe, reproued their dulnesse in not vnderstanding what the leauen was, Marke 8. Then hee came to Bethsaida, where he tooke a blinde man out of the towne and healed him, verse 23. from thence to the coasts of Cesaria, Philippi, and asked his Disci∣ples
who he was, Matth. 16. 13. six dayes afte was the transfiguration, Marke 9. 2. The nex day when they came downe from mount Ta¦bor, he cast out an vnclean spirit of a child, Luk 9. 37. and after they departed thence they took their iourney thorow Galile, and he would no that any should know, Marke 9. 30. They bid him go out of Galilie, for Herod sought to slay him, Luke 13. 21. There hee said, he was to bee deliuered into the hands of men, Matt. 17. 22. Now when the time was, that he should be re∣ceiued vp, hee stedfastly set his face to goe to Ierusalem, sent vnto a village of the Samaritans, which did not receiue him, Luk. 9. 52. but came to Capernaum and payed tribute, Matt. 17, 22. and hauing taught, and prepared his Disciples against ambition, and enuy, Matth. 8. Luke 9. Marke 9. departed from Galilie, and went into the coasts of Iudea, beyond Iordan, Mat. 19. 1. In the way answered to a question of adultery, and eternall life, Mar. 10. 17. And as they were going vp to Ierusalem, Ie∣sus warned them of his death, verse 32. and as he went thither, he passed thorow the midst of Samaria and Galile, hee clensed ten Lepers, Luke 17. 11. and while he went about in Gali∣lie, the Jewes feast of the Tabernacles was at hand, and he sent his Disciples to the feast, Ioh. 7. 8. and followed vp, although he told his bre∣thren he would not, ver. 10. In the midst of the
feast, he taught in the Temple, verse 14. In the last day and great day of the feast, hee stood and cryed, If any man thirst, &c. verse 37. Iesus went that night from Ierusalem, to Mount Oliuet, and early in the morning came backe to the Temple, Iohn 8. 1. 2. where hee caught; and after that he taught in the treasu∣ry, verse 20. and they would haue stoned him, verse, 59. but he went out and passed by, Iohn 9. 1. healed one borne blinde, on the Sabbath day, verse 14. Christ communed the second time with him, verse 35, and the Pharises that stood by, ver. 40. and of a good shepheard, Ioh. 10. 1. After these things▪ the Lord appointed other seuenty Disciples, Lu. 10. 1. and taught a Law∣yer charitie, by the Samaritan and wounded man, verse 25. 30, from Ierusalem hee past and entred into Maries & Marthaes village, v. 38. where he was entertained, he instructed his Disciples to pray, and the force thereof Luke 11. 1. a woman in the company called him bles∣sed, v. 27. then a Pharisie desired him to din∣ner, v. 37. where he went in, and sate downe at the Table, and pronounced many woes against the Pharisies, and at the answere of an expou∣der of the Law, said the like vnto him, ver. 46. but taught his Disciples many Christian ver∣tues, Luke 12, to the end. There were certaine present at the same season, whom he taught to
repent, Luke 13, 2, by a similitude of the fig∣tree, ver. 6. After he taught in one of the Syna∣gogues on the Sabbath day, vers. 10, where he healed a woman which had a spirit of infirmi∣tie, and bowed together, v. 13, he dined againe with the chiefe of the Pharisies on the Sabbath day, Luke 14 he cured the dropsie, he spake to the guests, v. 7. then to him that inuited him, v. 12. and to one that sate at table with him, v. 15, the Parable of the great Supper, v. 16. CHAP. IIII. Of Christs doctrine, the third yeere of his publike reuealing himselfe to the world, and disposing himselfe to death. ANd it was at Ierusalem the feast of the de∣dication, and it was winter, and Iesus wal∣ked in the Temple, in Salomons Porch, Ioh. 10. 23. The Iewes would haue stoned him, ver. 31. but he went away againe beyond Iordan, vnto the place where Iohn was first baptizing, and there he abode, ver. 40. preached the Parable of the lost sheep, The groat, and prodigall sonne Luke 15. of the vniust Steward, Luke 16. 1, of indissolubilitie of marriage, Mar. 10. 1. for be∣yond Iordan the people resorted vnto him a∣fresh, and as he was wont, he taught them, of Diues and Lazarue, Luk. 16. 19. To beware of scandall, Luke 17. 1. the force of faith, v. 6. o the Pharisie and Publican that went to pray▪
Luk. 18. 9. They bring infants to him, whom he blessed, Mar. 10. 13. taught a yong rich man how to becom perfect, Mat. 29. 21. The Parable of the work-men hired vnto the vineyard, Mat. 20. 1. from beyond Iordan he came to Iudea a∣gain, where they wold haue stoned him before. Iohn 11. 7 CHAP. V. While Christ is 33. yeeres of age, and 3. weekes, he is euer more and more earnest, to consumate his ministry and mans redemption. THE tenth of March, Christ came ouer Iordan to Bethabora, and hearing of the decease of Lazarus, the eleuenth day, he con∣tinued there two dayes, Ioh. 11. 6, the 13. day Lazarus dyed, and Iesus tooke his iourney to goe to raise him, v. 14. to them hee foretelleth his death, Marke 10. 33, when he had taken them out of the way, Matt. 20. 17. and denied the sute of Zebedeus two sonnes, Matt. 20. 20. as he drew neere to Iericho, hee cured a blinde man. The 14. day, Lu. 18. 35. In Iericho he is en∣tertained by Zacheus, Luk. 19. 5. and spake the Parable of ten pieces giuen to ten seruants, Lu. 9. 12. as he departed from Iericho hee healed  blind men, Mat. 20. 29. The 15. day is spent on the way. the 16. day Christ came to Bethania neere vnto Ierusalem, about 15. furlongs, Iohn 11. 18. where he raised Lazarus now 4. dayes dead. v. 17. The 17. day, he goeth to the desart, o Ephraim, & walked no more openly among
the Iewes, v. 54. The 18. day, he continued in the desart with his Disciples. The 19. day, be∣ing 6. daies before the Passeouer, hee came to Bethania and supped with Lazarus, whom he had raised from death, Ioh. 12. 2. The 20. day, which is Palme-Sunday, when they drew neere to Ierusalem, & were come to Bethphage, vnto the Mount of Oliues, Iesus sent two Disciples for an Asse, and came riding to Ierusalem, Mat. 21. 1. and past to the Temple and healed the blind and halt, v. 14. The Gentiles desired Phi∣lip to shew Iesus vnto them, Io. 12. 21. he casteth the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, Mat. 21. 12. The children cry Hosanna, v. 15. Christ left them and went out of Ierusalem in the eue∣ning, vnto Bethania, and lodged there, Mat. 21. 17. The 21. day (comming out of Bethania) in the morning he hungred, & cursed the fig-tree, Mar. 11. 12. the same day at euening Iesus went out of the Citie. The 22. day, he passed by the fig-tree, which was dried vp, Mat. 19. 20 so he came to Ierusalem, & as he walked in the Tem∣ple, auoucheth his authority, v. 27. foretelleth there their reprobation to their face by sundry Parables, the one of the two sonnes, Mat. 21. 28. the other of the vineyard let to husband∣men, Lu. 20. 9. the third of the king who made a marriage to his Son, Mat. 22. 1. They percei∣ued the similitude to bee spoken against them, therefore they would take hold of his words,
to deliuer him vnto the deputy, & sent spies which should faine themselues righteous men, to take him in his talke, Lu. 20. 20. First their disciples with the Herodians, Mat. 21. 16. concerning giuing of tribute. The 2. the Sadduces touching the resurrection, Mar. 12. 18. The 3. a Lawyer concerning the greatest cō∣mandement, Mat. 22. 36. The 4. the Pharisies ga∣thered together, are demanded how Christ should be Dauids sonne, Mat. 22. 41. whereupon he in∣ferred an exhortation to the multitude, and disci∣ples, that they shold obserue whatsoeuer they com∣manded, but not to do as they did, Mat. 23. 3. But to beware of them, Mar. 12. 38. Then Iesus sate downe ouer against the treasury, and preferred the widdowes mite, v. 41. Now Iesus went from the Temple, the disciples shew him the goodly building thereof, Mat. 24. 1. he foretelleth the destruction of it, and progresse of the Gospell, Mar. 13. 10. and of Antichrist, v. 14. 22. of the last day, Lu. 21. 27. For in the day time he was teaching in the Temple, and at night he went out, and abode n the mount that is called Oliuet, & all the people came to the Temple early in the morning to heare him, Lu. 21. 37. So he continued in Parables of the en Virgins, Mat. 25. 1 and ten talents, ver. 14. he pake also without Parables, v. 31. and that night Christ supped in Bethania, in the house of Simon the Leper, euen as he sate at meat, Mary brought a box of spikenard, and powred the ointment on his head, Mar. 14. 3. Now two dayes after was the feast of he Passeouer, the Iewes counsell held how to kill
him, Matth. 26. 5. The 23. day, Iudas went to the Iewes, and agreed with them, Mat. 26. 15. The 24. day, the first day of the vnleauened bread, when they kill the Passouer, Mar. 13. 12. for of necessitie the Passeouer must be killed, Luk. 22. 7. Peter and Iohn were sent to prepare it, v. 8. who went forth, & came into the Citie, and made it ready, and when it is now euentide, Christ came with the 12. Mark▪ 14. 16. 17. and as they sate at table, ver. 18. he fore∣telleth the treason of Iudas, Mat. 26. 25. declareth his desire he had to eat it, Luk. 22, 15, & when they were eating, he tooke bread, v. 19. Likewise after supper he tooke the cup, Luke 22. 20. he appeased the strife concerning superioritie, ver. 24. washed his disciples feet, Iohn 13. 4. Then went they out to the Mount of Oliues, Mar. 14. 26. But Iudas had receiued the sop, with which Satan entred into him Iohn 13. 27. and assoone as he had receiued the sop he went out immediately, and it was night, ver. 30 Then Iesus began to preach and pray, the Sermon is written from the 32. v. of the 13. Chapter, vnto the 31. v. of the 14. Chapter of Iohn. Then did he rise and went away, and continued the Sermon from Iohn 15. to the 10. Chapter, ver 33. and concluded with a prediction of their deniall, v. 32. Peter was also forewarned, Mar. 14. 30. Now his praier▪ firs in all their presence, Iohn 17. the whole Chapter. Then came Iesus to a place called Gethsemane, & tooke Peter and the two sonnes of Zebedeus, and prayed, Mat. 26. 36. Then he arose, v. 46. and went forth with his disciples, ouer the brooke Cedro
where was a garden into the which he entred, and his disciples, Iudas also knew the place, for Iesus often times resorted thither with his disciples, Ioh. 18. v. 1. 2. Iudas came, and the band with him, and led Christ to Annas, v. 12. 13. Peter had first smote Malchus eare, v. 10. which Christ healed euen then, Luk. 22, 51. all Christ Disciples forsooke him and ran away, Mar. 14. 50. yet 2. follow to Annas house, the one entred into the Palace of the high Priest, Peter stood at the doore without, then went out the other disciple which was known to the high Priest, and spake to her that kept the doore, and brought in Peter, & there at his entry he denied to be christs disciple, Ioh. 18. 15. 16. 17. Then after a little while another saw him and he denied, Luke 22. 58. and a∣bout the space of an houre after, the seruants and officers stood there, and his cosin (whose eare Pe∣ter had smote off,) who had made a fire of coales, for it was cold, and Peter warmed him, Ioh. 18. 18. and Peter denied, Luke 22. 60. Annas sent Iesus to Caiphas, his sonne in law, Ioh. 18. 24. Christ is accu∣sed before the Priests, and false witnesse brought, Mar. 14. 55. and smote with rods, v. 65. They led him rom Caiphas, to the udgement hal in the mor∣ning; but they went not into the hall, that they might eate the Passeouer, which is the 25. day of March: therefore Pilate came out to them, Ioh. 18. 28. and from thence entred into the common hall againe, v. 33. Then sent he Christ vnto Herod, Euke 23. 7. Herod dispised him, and sent him againe to Pilate, v. 11, who after long disputation with the
Priests, v. 13. & the 2. time, v. 20. and the 3. time, v. 22. and with the people requiring Barabas, Mat. 28. 25. and with Christ, Ioh. 18. 36. with his owne wife, Mat. 27. 19. and with Christ againe, v. 19, 10, (when Iudas had hanged himselfe, Mat. 28. 5.) then Pilate sate down in Gabbatha, about the sixt houre, which was the preparation of the Passeouer, Iohn 19. 13. gaue sentence it should be as they required, Luke 24. 24. Then the souldiers led him to the hall, called Protorium, and crowned him with thornes, Mark. 15, 16. & as they led him away, they caught, one Simon of Sirene, comming out of the field, and on him laid they the Crosse, that he might beare it after Iesus, Luk. 23. 26. vntil he came to Golgotha, Ioh. 19. 17. In the way he comforted the women, & the people that followed him, Lu. 23. 28. Then they crucified him betwixt 2. theeues, Mar. 15. 27. they that passed by railed on him, vers. 29. and one of the theeues also, which was hanged with him on the left hand, Lu. 23. 39. Christ recommended his mo∣ther to Iohn, Ioh. 19. 26. And it was about the sixt houre, and there was darkenesse ouer all the Land, vntill the ninth houre, Luke 23. 44. Then he gaue vp the ghost: and when he was dead, one thrust him thorow with a speare, Iob. 19. 34. when he was cru∣cified, they partod his garments, v. 23, and the Cen∣turion seeing the miracles of the son, earthquake, cleauing of the rockes, renting of the vaile of the Temple, Matth. 28. 51. confessed Iesus to be the Sonne of God, ver. 54. Now in the euening, because it was the day of
preparation that goeth before the Sabbath, Pilate gaue the body to Ioseph of Arimatha, and Nicode∣mus brought spices and buried him, Iohn 19. 38. 39. in a new sepulcher where neuer man was laid, in a garden, for that sepulcher was neere, v. 41. 42. The next day that followed, which was the 26. of March, the Priests desired Pilate that the sepul∣cher should bee made sure, vntill the third day, Matth. 27. 62. In the end of the Sabbath, when the first day of the weeke began to dawne, which is the twenty seuen of March, came Mary Magda∣len, and the other Mary, after a great earthquake, and the Angel of the Lord descended from heauen, and came and rolled backe the stone from the door, & sate vpon it, and made the keepers afraide, and in the 28. of Matthew v. 1. 2. 3. 4 hee said to her and Iohanna and to Mary, Iacobi, that Christ was risen, Luke. 24. 10. Christ shewed himselfe first to Mary Magdalen, Iohn 20. 16. and the same day to the other women also, Matth 28. 9. The same day, at night (which was the first of the Sabbath) when the doores were shut, came he to the eleuen, where he eat with them, Iohn 20 19. Luke 24. 41. Then he appeared to Peter, Luke 24. 34. Then to Cleophas and another disciple, going to Emaus, verse 18. That same day, when it drew towardes night, he vttered himselfe to them, verse 31. 10. and eight dayes after hee shewed himselfe to Tho∣mas, and the rest of the Disciples, Iohn 20, 26. which day is the third of April. Vpon the twentie eight day of March, he appeared at the sea of Ti∣berius,
in the morning to seauen of his Disciples, at fishing, Iohn 21. 2. which is the third time hee appeared to his Disciples after hee was risen from the dead, v. 14. After appeared to the eleuen Disciples, which went into Galile, to a mountaine, where Iesus had appointed them, Matth. 28. 16. And when hee had gathered them together, he commanded them that they should not depart from Ierusalem, Luke▪ 24. 49. Afterward hee led them out into Bethania, and lifted vp his hands and blessed them, and was carried vp into heauen, v. 50. 51. After that he had beene seene of them by the space of forty dayes, which maketh the fift day of May when he ascen∣ded, Acts 1. 2. CHAP. VI. After Christ Ascention, the gifts of the Spirit, are communicated to the twelue Apostles. ANd on the fifteenth day of May, which is the Pentecost, (according to his promise in Ieru∣salem) they were endued with power from on high, which is the Holy Ghost: To the which place of Ierusalem, immediately after the Ascention, the Discples returned from Bethania, or Mount of Oliues, for the election of one Matthias, to succeed in Iudas place, Acts 1. 12. 25. 26. & Act. 21. 1. FINIS.
A BREIFE CA∣TECHISME, FOR THE instruction of Christian FAMILIES. Together with a Spirituall Combate, betweene Mans Frailtie and Faith, in time of Sicknesse. LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop, neere Fleet Conduit. 1617.
A Briefe Catechisme, for the instruction of Christian Families. Question. DOe you desire to come to the Lords Mat. 5 6 Iohn 6. 27 Supper? Answ. Yes, I hunger and thirst after it. 1 Cor. 12. 27 Ephe. 5. 30 Col. 2. 19 Q. Wherefore do you so? A. To haue and to bee euer ioyned with the communion of Christ, and so with the Father, and the holy Ghost, and all Saints, which communion I lost in Adam. Gen. 1. 26 1 Cor. 5. 7 Q. How were you made in Adam? A. In the image and similitude of God, in knowledge, holinesse, righteousnesse and truth, euen to be the sonne of God. Ephe. 4. 14 Col. 3. 10 Eph.  1. 2. 3 Q. How fell you in Adam? A. By transgression I was made like vn∣to the beast that perisheth; euen a seruant of sinne, the world, and the Diuell. Rom. 6. 16 Gen: 15. 18 Q. How may you returne to this image of God and communion with him? A. By kéeping his couenants that he will
be my God, and I shall be his childe. Heb. 8 7. 8. 9. Q. How commeth God to make this co∣uenant with you? A. Onely by Iesus Christ eternall God, and heire of all things, made man to bring He. 1. 2 me among many children to glory. Q. What are the branches of this coue∣nant? A. Two: Gods promises in Christ to Gen. 7. 2▪ 22 me, and my duty againe to him. Q. Which are the promises of God in Christ? A. They are comprehended in the Arti∣cles of my Créed: I beleeue in God, &c. Ro. 8 32. 35 Which containe the promise of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, to giue vnto mes with all Saints eternall life. Q. What is your duty? A. To beléeue in him by that faith, that 1 Pet. 1. 6. 10 Phil. 1. 11. Ga. 5 6 worketh in me loue to kéepe his commande∣ments. Q. What is faith? A. Faith is a gift of God wherby I haue a substantiall euidence and assurance, by the faithfulnesse of him that promised, that the 1 Pet. 1. 8 riches of the glorious inheritance of Christ are mine. Q. Is faith in the promises so contained?
A. Farre more then the sight, or hearing, Mat. 1 26. 28 or féeling. Q. What are the commandements that faith teacheth you to worke? A. The same which God spake, Thou shalt E. 20 Ro. 13 9. 10 1 Iohn 3. 24 haue no other Gods before mee, &c. which commandements require to loue God aboue all, and my neighbour as my selfe. Q. Can you keepe this couenant by com∣ming to the Lords Supper? A. I am much holpen by ioyning the Sa∣crament, to the hearing of the Word and Marke 16. 15 Prayer. Q. What is a Sacrament? A. A seale of the righteousnesse of faith, whereby all my other senses perswade my Rom. 4. 11 heart of Gods fauour to mee in Christ, as mine eare doth by the Word of God. Q. How many Sacraments of this coue∣nant be there? A. Two: one of entrance which is bap∣tisme, Marke 1. 4. 5 1. Pet. 3. 21 in which by the washing of water through the Word, I am borne againe, made partaker of Christ to the washing away of my sinnes, and fulfilling of the Law by his righteousnesse, who is made to me righte∣ousnesse, 1 Cor. 1. 20 sanctification and redemption. Matt. 26. 26 Q. The other Sacrament is the Supper
of the Lord, what is the vse of that? A. It is the Sacrament of my continu∣ance 1 Cor. 11. 24 and growth in Christ, as eating and drinking causeth a new borne childe to grow Iohn 6. 56 to a perfect man. Q. Do you grow in Christ onely by eat∣ing and drinking the bread and wine in the Lords Supper? A. No: but by applying to my heart by faith, the graces signified in the Lords Sup∣per 1 co. 10 1. 3. 4 Ephe. 3. 17 while I eat and drinke. Q. Shew what graces you discerne in the Lords Supper? A. 1. By Gods minister, prouiding and disposing bread and wine; I discerne the Iohn 3. 16 Ro. 12 13. 20 eternall loue of the Father, that prouided his Sonne for my saluation. 2. In my selfe I discerne the bodie of the Elect, of which I am a member. 3. In bread, the chiefest food, I discerne Ioh. 6 47. 48. Christ the onely food of my soule. Q. You meane the body of Christ: for so are the words, This is my body? A. I doe so: but together with the body I vnderstand the whole person of Christ, Luk. 1 31. 32 Col. 2. 17 God and man, and all things which (as a Mediatour) he did for me. I say that sanctiffed humane nature which was conceiued borne, liued, suffered for me.
Q. Shew the rest of the graces? A. The taking of the bread by the mini∣ster, signifieth the separation of Christ, be∣gotten Gal. 4 4. 5 of the Father before al worlds, and in time borne of a Virgine for me. Gining of thankes, the ioy conceiued in Luke 2. 14 heauen and earth for Christs comming: To the glory of God, and peace on earth, and good will towards men. The breaking of the whole humilitie of Luk. 2. 24 Christ, from his incarnation, to his resur∣rection; his suffering in body & soule for me▪ The giuing of the bread, that Christ is Tit. 3 7 freely giuen of grace, not for our workes▪ Q. What is meant by giuing it to his Disciples? A. To shew that though Christ be suffi∣cient 2 Cor. 3. 5 for all, he is effectuall giuen onely to the Elect, that learne and practise Christ. Q. Proceed. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15. 16 Act. 5 A. In that it is saide, Take▪ eate, I dis∣cerne that the sum of the Gospel is to me the saupur of life, making mee bold to lay hold on the throne of grace, and possesse my selfe Matt. 1. 21 fully of my Lords ioy. Q. Why would he expresse those benefits by eating? A. To assure me that in Christ I am re∣stored Reuel. 2. 7
to the true tree of life, and bread that came downe from heauen, from which I Gen. 3 . 23 was once banished; but now may take and eate, and liue for euer. Q. Speake in like manner of the Cup? A. The taking of the cup, giuing thanks, Heb. . 1. and giuing it: signifieth this gift of Christs bloud, to pacifie both God & my conscience. Q. How commeth that? A. My saluation is not hy my merit, but by Gods Testament in Christ: this cup te∣stifieth vnto me that the Testator is dead, Heb. . 17 & I possesse the legacy of saluation, and re∣ceiue the spirit and life of Christ to bee the child of God. Q. What is your duty to doe in this co∣uenant? A. Before I come I must examine my selfe to know my estate, in faith and repen∣tance, to purifie my selfe from infidelitie and 1▪ Cor. 11. 2 sinne, and to approue myselfe in my general and particular calling to liue a christian life. In the receiuing I must by faith assure myself possessed of Gods promises, and ther∣fore  Cor. 1. 3. 4 praise him. After the receiuing, I must euer shew the Lords death, that is, professe my selfe a true 1 Cor. 11. 5 Christian, by shewing my faith, by the
workes of communion with the Saints: sanctification of my life, and loue of all men as much as is possible. Q. Are you sufficient of your selfe to make this vse of the Lords Supper? A. No, for all sufficiency is of God, of 2 Cor. 3. 5 whom I craue this grace in prayer; the forme whereof is the Lords prayer, Our fa∣ther which art, &c. Q. What is the summe of that, and so of all other lawfull prayers? A. That God would bee my God, and Iohn 20. 17 1 Cor. 15. 49 Ephe. 4. 23 Col. 3. 10 Father, and that I may bee his childe, and so bee receiued to that image of God, in which I was first made in Adam.
A Spirituall Conflict betwixt Mans frailty and faith, in time of Sicknesse. FRAILTIE. SWeet and comfortable is this life and I must leaue it. Faith. It is written (O frailty) and earnest∣ly thinke of it; Is there not (Iob 7. vers. 1.) an appointed time to man vpon earth, and are not his dayes as the dayes of an hireling, as a ser∣uant longeth for the Sabaoth, and an hireling looketh for an end of his worke: so haue I had as an inheritance, the moneths of vanity, and painefull nights haue been appointed vnto me: If I laid me downe, I said, when shall I arise? and measuring the euening, I am full with los∣sing to and fro vntill the dawning of the day againe. 2 Cor. 15. 19. In this life onely wee haue hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable, againe, Heb. 11. 13. & 13. 14. We are strangers and pilgrimes vpon earth, wee haue no continuing Citie héere, but wee seeke one to come, Iob 14. 1. A man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance and full of
trouble: he shoots forth as a flower and is cut downe, he vanisheth also as a shadow and con∣tinueth not. Frailty. Much wealth and a shining estate shall I forgoe and leaue behinde me? Faith. It is written, Eccles. 1. vers. 1. Va∣nitie of vanities, and all is but vanitie, I haue made me great workes, I haue built me houses, I haue planted me vineyards, I haue made me gardens and orchards, and planted in them trees of all fruits, I haue gathered vnto mee siluer and gold, and the choise treasure of kings and prouinces, I haue prouided me men-sing∣ers, and women-singers, and the delights of the sonnes of men: And I was great and in∣creased aboue all that were before me: whatso∣euer my eyes desired I withheld it not from them, I withdrew not my heart from any ioy: But then I looked of all my workes that my hands had wrought, and on the trauell that I had laboured to doe, and behold all is vanitie, and vexation of the spirit, and there is no pro∣fit vnder the sunne: Therefore I hated life for the worke that is wrought vnder the sunne is grieuous vnto me, for all is vanity and vexati∣on of spirit, I hated all my labour wherein I had trauelled, I went about to make my heart abhorre it, for what hath man of his trauell, griefe of his heart, wherein hee hath trauelled
vnder the sunne, all his dayes are sorrowes, and his trauels griefe: his heart taketh not rest in the night, which also is vanity. Frailty. O but wife and children, & friends, lye neere my heart and minister thoughts of heauy woe vnto me, when I thinke of leauing them. Faith. Remember (Frailty) what is writ∣ten, Hee that loueth father and mother more then me, is not worthy of mee, and he that lo∣ueth sonne or daughter more then mee, is not worthy of me: He is the Father of the father∣lesse, and the widdowes Iudge, euen God in his holy habitation. Frailty. O but God is angry with mee, and what shall I doe? Faith. I will beare the wrath of the Lord, because I haue sinned against him, vntill hee lead my cause and execute iudgement for me: Then will he bring me forth to the light; and I shall see his righteousnesse, I will looke vnto the Lord, I will waite for God my Sauiour, my God will heare me: Reioyce not against me (O my enemy) for though I fall I shall rise, when I shall sit in darkenesse, the Lord shall bee a ight vnto me. Frailty. Sicknes and sufferings are tokens of Gods anger towards man or woman. Faith. God forbid: cleane contrary doth the
Lord speaks for our comfort, as many as I loue, I rebuke and chasten: Be zealous there∣fore Reuel. 3. 19 and amend: Againe, haue you forgotten the consolation that speaketh vnto you as vnto childrē: My son despise not the chastning of the Prou. 3. 11 Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loueth he chasteneth, & he scourgeth euery sonnc that he receiueth: Heb. 12. 11 If yee indure chastning, God offereth himselfe vnto you, as vnto sonnes, for what sonne is there, whom the father chasteneth not: If ther∣fore ye be without correction (whereof all are partakers) then are ye bastards and not sons: The righteous cry and the Lord heareth them, and deliuereth them out of all their troubles: The Lord is neere vnto all them that are of a contrite heart, and will saue such as be afflicted in spirit. Great are the troubles of the righte∣ous, but the Lord deliuereth them out of all  He keepeth all his bones, so that none of them is broken. Frailty. But death is dreadfull, and what a misery of man is it to die? Faith. I shall not die but liue, and declare the workes of the Lord, I should vtterly haue fainted, but that I beleeue verily to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the liuing: Christ is to mce both in life and death aduan∣tage; I desire to bee loosed and to bee with
Christ, which is the best of all: Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: Euen so saith the spirit, for they rest from their labours and their workes follow them. Frailty. But I shall perish and be as though I neuer had beene? Faith. Vnto my sheepe that heere my voyce, I giue eternall life, and they shall neuer perish, neither shall any plucke them out of my hand: My Father which gaue them mee, is grea∣ter then all, and none is able to take them out of my fathers hands, I & my father are one. Frailty. Yet dust I am, and to dust I must returne? Faith. We shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpet, for the Trumpet shall blowe, and the dead shall bee raised vp incorruptible, and wee shall bee changed, for this corruptible, must put on in∣corruption, and this mortall must put on im∣mortalitie, &c. But we know this, if our earth∣y house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, wee aue a building giuen of God, that is, a house ot made with hands, but eternall in the hea∣ens: Therefore we sigh desiring to be clothed ith our house which is from heauen. Frailty. When I am gone, I am gone, and what hope is there after death? Faith. I know that my redeemer liueth, and
that hee shall stand the last vpon the earth, and though after my skinne wormes destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my selfe shall see, and my eyes shall behold, and no other for me. Frailty. Satan frighteth me with my sinnes, and layeth the greatnesse of them before me? Faith. But this is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be receiued: Iesus Christ came into the world to saue sinners, whereof I am chiefe? The blessed Apostle looked vpon him∣selfe, as the greatest finner in the world, and yet despaired not: But saith, for this cause hee was receiued to mercy, That Iesus Christ should first shew on him all long suffering vn∣to the ensample of them, which should in time to come beleeue on him vnto eternall life. Frailty. Sathan suggesteth that my repen∣tance is too late? Faith. It is neuer too late that is sincer and true: the theese vpon the Crosse came very late, yet to him was it graciously said, This day shalt thou bee with mee in Paradice. Not presuming therefore of mercy, and continuing in sinne; but truely lamenting what was past, and leauing any further to offend wilfully, I also will say in hope, Lord remember me when thou commest into thy kingdome. Frailty. Yet God is iust and must needes punish my sin?
Faith. That iustice is satisfied in the obedi∣ence of Christ, and each penitent sinner may in comfort say: If any man sinne, we haue an ad∣uocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righ∣teous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes, and not onely for our sinnes, but for the sinnes of the whole world; For two titles our Saui∣our Christ hath to the kingdome of heauen: the right of inheritance, and the merit of his Pas∣sion: The first belongeth to him, the second he vouchsafeth to vs in his merit: therefore our me∣rit is not to be trusted in. For as touching our merit, remember Dauid, Enter not into iudge∣ment with thy seruant (O Lord) for in thy sight no flesh liuing shall be iustified. When ye haue done all these things that are commanded, you shall say, we are vnprofitable seruants? Wee haue done that which was once our dues to doe: Behold he found no stedfastnesse in his scruants, and laid folly vpon his Angels; how much more in them that dwell in houses of clay? whose foundation is in the dust: yea the heauens are not cleare in his sight: how much more is man adhominable and filthy, which drinketh iniquity like water. How may a man be iustified before God, or how can he be cleane that is borne of a woman: Behold, he will giue no light to the Moone, and the starres are vn∣cleane in his sight: How much more man, a
worme, euen the sonne of man which is but a worme. The Apostle againe, When the boun∣tifulnesse & loue of God our Sauiour towards man appeared, not by the workes of righteous∣nesse which wee had done: but according to his mercy hee saued vs by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on vs abundantly through Iesus Christ our Sauiour, that wee being iustified by his grace, should be heires according to the hope of eternall life. Thus will faith euer finde comfort in the Word, to answere frailty in any point what∣soeuer of feare and fright, if it be sought out by carefull reading. A Protestation in Sicknesse. I Wrotched and woefull sinner, yet redeemed with the precions bloud of Iesus Christ, through his great loue, not my merit, protest before the all-séeing God, that I doe heartily desire to die in the faith, wherein it becommeth a true member of the true Church to end this life. I beleeue and confesse all and euery part of the Christian Faith, either expresly mentio∣ned, or truly comprised in the twelue Articles: and generally, I beleeue whatsoeuer a Christi∣an man or woman ought to beleeue. This immoueable and firme faith (God as∣sisting mee with his grace) I shall hold, as a
strong and inuincible hold, against all the sug∣gestions and assaults of Satan: Wherefore, if either by his oppugning tyranny, or my sicke∣nesse raging fury, I shall either speake, doe, or thinke any thing repugnant and contrary to this. Now in this my better strength both of body and minde, I disclaime it, renounce it, ab∣horre it, and pray that it may not bee imputed vnto mee, as any word, worke, or thought of mine, but of Sathans malice and my sicknesse strength. To my vttermost power I remit and forgiue vnto all persons, all iniuries whatsoe∣uer at any time, or in any sort done vnto mee: and earnestly intreating them the like againe from them to mee in any faults, or errours of mine vnto them: and I humbly acknowledge, with true woe of a grieued heart, that to my God I haue not carried my selfe as I should: my faults and offences, my faults and trans∣gressions are bitter vnto mee: yet doe I not despaire, but laying hold by the hand of my faith. vpon my all powerfull and sweet Saui∣our, I humbly craue mercy, with bowed knées of heart and soule before him: I acknowledge his infinite goodnesse to mee many and infinite wayes, and with heart and soule and all that is within me praise his holy Name: I commend into his hands my spirit, and though weake in body, yet strong in him, I say and cry, Lord
Iesus, Lord Iesus receiue mee to thee, Come Lord Iesus, come quickly, Amen, Amen. A Prayer in Sicknesse. O Lord, iust art thou, and iust and true are all thy iudgements, thy wayes are mercy and truth, and there neuer was or shall be any end of thy goodnesse: I humbly beséech thée to haue mercy vpon mee, and doe not reward mée according to mine iniquities: I haue sinned, I haue sinned, and woe is me for it; O thou pre∣seruer of men, thine I am, and in thee is my trust: in thy feare let mee liue, in thy fauour let me die; Sweete God of my comfort, Blessed for euer and euer, Amen. Another Prayer. MEercy Lord, mercy most holy and com∣fortable God, to all truely sorrowing sinners; looke vpon thy wretch that ioyeth to be thine, although most vnworthy to be respec∣ted of thée: vniust things haue I done and my heart bléedeth for them; iust things doe I suffer in regard of thée my gracious God. I humbly acknowledge, if I looke what I haue done what I suffer is not answerable: but less doe I suf∣fer then I haue deserued: Deare Father, I ac∣knowledge thy iustice so mixt with mercy, as neuer I can sufficiently thank thee for it. Com∣fortable
God, giue strength to my weakenesse, that more and more I may be able to doe that, which such great goodnesse of thine bindes mee vnto: where sinne aboundeth, thy mercy super-aboundeth, and shall not I feele it? Let not thy prayer depart out of my mouth whilest I liue and breath; if outwardly I must suffer, yet in∣wardly comfort and indue mee with patience according to the multitude of thy mercies. Thou knowest all, and thou canst doe all and euer blessed be thy name, Amen, Amen. Another Prayer. MOst gracious redéemer, which euer art mercifull, euer comfortable and kinde to them that trust in thée, euer a Sauiour whether thou sendest vnto vs well or woe: since it is thy will that through many tribulations wee must enter into the kingdome of God: grant mee strength euer to continue and stedfastly abide, in all Christian fortitude & perseuerance against hell, death, and Sathan, and all these terrours they can inflict either vpon my soule, consci∣ence, or body: that being assisted by thee, I may rest in thée, and receiue the crowne of life pro∣mised in thy goodnesse to all thine elect, for the which I shall sing prayses to thee in the heauens, with thée for euermore.
A Poeme to that effect. OH what strange sudden newes vnto the world is come: What haste the poste doth vse, To summon all and sum. A debt is to be paied, A certaine day is set: And euery man afraide How he should pay his debt. No surety will suffice, No hoping of delay: No clamors nor no cryes, But either die, or pay. The band is by the soule, The substance faith and troth, And who are in the world, Must looke vnto their oath. The Iudge is wise and iust, His Law is pure and cleere; And at his presence must, All flesh and bloud appeare. The place shall be so great, That none but shall haue roome▪ But none that shall intreat, To haue a partiall doome.
All flesh shall be indited, Of conscience accusation, Shall let none be acquited, That sinne sends to damnation. But such as mercy craues, That are for mercy crying: And such as mercie saues, From the eternall dying. Time shall yeeld vp his flowers, And faith subscribe to grace: Nature yeelds vp her power, Corruption hath no place. And in an instant all, A sudden change shall see, Then all the world shall fall, Where shall no being be. Rich, poore, both yong and old, Faire, full and strong and weake; Wise, fond, both hot and cold, The hearts of all shall breake. The spirits shall all assemble, And horrors hold the heart: The iustest soule shall tremble, For feare of their desert. All are in sinne contained, But who for sinnes are sorry: Shall be from death detain'd, of mercies glory.
The rich must leaue his wealth, And to the graue must hye: The youth must leaue his health, And learne the way . The faire must leaue to paint, And takd earthly hue: The poore must leaue to faint, And bid the world adue. The wise must leaue his wit, And make the wormes a feast: The foole must leaue his fit, and make the graue his rest. No bribe shall buy an houre, No gift procure a grace: To sweete the smallest sower, in the infernall place. Since then the newes are such, The Day of Doome so nye: And mercy doth so much, With highest maiesty. So none shall mercy craue, With humble faithfull loue: But shall in mercy haue, The ioyes in heauen aboue. And scape the paines of hell, That doth to sinne belong: And with the Angels dwel, To sing a heauenly song. Let vs to mercy flye, From sinne and death to saue vs: And vnto mercy cry, That hell may neuer haue vs, Amen.
