4236.8 S124755 99898624 173174
THE SPIRITVAL TOVCHSTONE: OR, THE SIGNES OF A GODLY MAN: Drawne in so plaine and profitable a maner, as all sorts of Christians may trie them∣selues thereby. Together with Directions, how the weake Christian, by the vse of these Signes may esta∣blish his assurance. By N. BIFIELD Preacher of Gods word at Isleworth in Middlesex. 2. COR. 13. 5. Examine your selues whether ye be in the faith: proue your owne selues. Know ye not your owne selues, how that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? LONDON, Printed by R. FIELD, for IONAS MAN. 1619.
TO THE MVCH HONO∣red Ladie, the Ladie RVTH SCYDAMORE increase of peace and ioy in belee∣uing. HOw great the benefite of assurance of Gods fa∣uour and of our owne saluation is, those onely know that are either scourged with the conflicts and
terrors of their own doub∣tings, or that are solaced and established with the sweet dewes of refreshing that arise from a rooted and well grounded faith. If men studie assurances so much for their outward possessions in this world, how much more earnest and diligent should men be to assure Gods loue and the inheritance of the glo∣rie to come? There is not a clearer signe of a pro∣fane heart, then to account these cares needlesse: nor do I know a iuster excep∣tion against any religion, then that it should teach,
that when a man hath done what he can to ob∣serue the directions of that religion, yet he can∣not be sure he shall go to heauen. But since I know that all that are possessed of the grace of Iesus Christ, do account assurance great riches, I therefore con∣ceiue hope that my paines about this subiect will not be altogether vnaccepta∣ble: and the rather be∣cause in this present trea∣tise I haue endeuoured to expresse the signes of trial in a much more easie way then before; and besides
haue added directions, that shew how a weake Christian may establish himselfe in his assu∣rance. I make bold to dedicate my new Essay herein vn∣to your Ladiship. You haue heard the substance hereof preached, and receiued it with much gladnesse; and in the priuate vse of these signes, you haue bene plea∣sed to professe (to the glo∣rie of God) that you haue found much contentment and establishment of your owne assurance. Your emi∣nencie in the sincere pro∣fession and practise of
true religion, and the shi∣ning of the graces here intreated of, long acknow∣ledged by many witnes∣ses, haue made you wor∣thy to be publikly obserued and praised in the Chur∣ches of Christ: and your great respect and fauour shewed to me, hath made this way of testifying my thankfulnesse, but as a small pledge and assu∣rance of my desire to do your Ladiship any seruice in the things of Iesus Christ. Thus beseeching God to enlarge the com∣forts of his Spirit in your heart, and to prosper you
in all things that con∣cerne the blessed hope of the appearing of Iesus Christ our mightie God and Sauiour, I end, and rest Your Ladiships to be com∣manded, N. Bifield.
CHAP. I. Describing the godly man by such signes as discouer him to the obseruation of other men. THe signes of the tru Christian that hath true grace in this world, and shall be saued in heauen whē he dies, may be cast into two Catalogues. TheTwo Cata∣logues of signes. one more briefe: the
other more large. The one Catalogue of signes describe him by such markes, as for the most part do outwardly di∣stinguish him amongst men. The large Cata∣logue I intend especially as a more infallible and effectuall way of triall, as cōtaining such signes as for the most part are not obserued by other men, or not fully, but are knowne to himselfe, and can be found in no reprobate. For the first Cata∣logue:The shor∣ter Cata∣logue han∣dled in this Chapter. The true Chri∣stian vsually discouers
himselfe by these marks. First, he will not haue1. He a∣uoids the companie of the wic∣ked. fellowship with the vn∣fruitful works of darknes; he will not walke in the counsell of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sin∣ners. He will not sort himselfe with workers of iniquitie. Psal. 1. 1. & 26. 2. Cor. 6. Secondly, he will af∣flict2. He is sor∣rowfull for his sinne. & humble his soule for his sinnes, mourning and weeping for them, till the Lord be pleased to shew mercie and for∣giue him. He doth ac∣count his sinnes to be his greatest burthen. He
cannot make a mocke of sinne, &c. Thirdly, he labours3. He is throughly reformed in conuer∣sation. to be holy in all parts of his conuersation, watch∣ing ouer his owne waies at all times, and in all companies. Psal. 50. 23. Esa. 56. 8. 2. Pet. 3. Fourthly, he makes4. He ma∣keth con∣science of lesser sins as well as greater. conscience of the least commandements as wel as the greatest, auoiding filthy speaking, and vain iesting, and lasciuious∣nesse, as well as whore∣dome: lesser oathes as well as the greater; re∣prochful speeches as wel as violent actions, &c.
Fiftly, he loues and5. He loues preaching. esteemes, and labours for the powerfull prea∣ching of the word, a∣boue all earthly trea∣sures. Sixtly, he honours6. He e∣steems the godly a∣boue all men. and highly accounts of the godly, and delights in the companie of such as truly feare God, a∣boue all others. Psal. 15. Seuenthly, he is care∣full7. He is carefull of the sancti∣fication of the Sab∣bath. of the sanctification of the Sabbath; neither daring to violate that holy rest by labour, nor to neglect the holy du∣ties belonging to Gods seruice publicke or pri∣uate.
Esa. 56. and 58. Eightly, he loues not8. He is not in loue with the world. the world, neither the things thereof, but is more heartily affected in things that concerne a better life, and so doth in some degree loue the appearing of Christ. Ninthly, He is easie9. He loues his ene∣mies. to be intreated, he can forgiue his enemies, de∣sires peace, and will do good euen to them, that persecute him, if it lye in his power: Math. 5. Tenthly, he goeth10. He is constant in good cour∣ses, though opposed. on in the profession of the sincerity of the Gos∣pell, and doth such du∣ties
as he knoweth God requires of him in busi∣nesses of his soule, not∣withstanding the oppo∣sitions of prophane per∣sons, or the dislike of carnall friends, &c. Eleuenthly, he setteth11. He serues God in his fa∣mily. vp a daily course of ser∣uing of God, and that with his family too, if he haue any; and exerciseth himselfe in the word of God, as the chiefe ioy of his heart, and the dai∣ly refuge of his life, cal∣ling vpon God continu∣ally, &c.
CHAP. II. Shewing the generall di∣uision of the Signes, and the ways how the signes were found out. THus of the shor∣ter Catalogue of signes: Now it fol∣lowes, that I proceed to those infallible marks of Election, and saluation. And whereas I haue di∣uers yeares since publi∣shed a Treatise which I called Essayes, or signes of God loue, and mans saluation: Hauing ob∣seruedThe occa∣sion of this Treatise. that diuers haue accounted the manner
of setting the signes downe somewhat ob∣scure in diuers parts of the booke, I will now by Gods assistance, for the helping of the weakest Christians in this Trea∣tise, endeuour to ex∣presse my selfe in this doctrine of the triall of a true Christians estate in a more plaine and ea∣sie course of examinati∣on; and leaue both the former treatise, and his new Catalogue vnto the blessing of God, and the free choice of the godly reader of vse, which he findeth most agreeable
to his owne taste, being both such as are war∣ranted & founded vpon the infallible euidence of Gods vnchangeable truth. In this proiect then I consider of the triall ofThe signes referred to sixe heads. a true Christian sixe wayes. First, in his humilia∣tion. Secondly, in his faith. Thirdly, in the gifts of his mind, with which he is qualified. Fourthly, in the workes of his obedi∣ence. Fiftly, in the entertain∣ment
he hath from God. Sixtly, in the manner of his receiuing of the Sacraments. In all which he differs from all the wicked men in the world, so as neuer any wicked man could find these things in his condition, which are true of the weakest Chri∣stian in each of these signes. And that the true Christian may not doubt of his estate, ha∣uing found these signesThe infalli∣bilitie of the signes. in himselfe, let him con∣sider the proofes an∣nexed
to each signe: & that nothing may be wanting to his aboun∣dant consolation, I will tell him, how I found out those signes, and by what grounds I procee∣ded. There are three sorts3. Wayes to find out the signes of a godly man in Scripture. of places in Scripture (as I cōceiue) which do point out the grounds of infallible assurance in those that can attaine vnto them: as first, such places as expresly do af∣firme, that such and such things are signes: As for example 1. Iohn 3. 14. Hereby we know, that we are
translated from death to life, because we loue the brethren. Here the holy Ghost shews vs expres∣ly, that the loue of the brethren is a signe, by which a Christian may know, that he is transla∣ted from death to life: & so the Apostle Paul giues signes to know, whether their sorrow were after God, or no. 2. Cor. 7. 11. So doth the Prophet Dauid, Psal. 15. giue diuers signes, by which the man that shal dwell in Gods holy hill, may be knowne. So the Apostle Iames tels vs,
how we may know the wisedome from aboue, by reckning the fruites and effects of it. Iam. 3. 17. So doth the Apostle Paul tell vs, how we may know, whether we haue the Spirit of Christ in vs or no, Rom. 8. 9. 15. &c. Gal. 5. 22. & 4. 6. 7. Secondly, I find out signes, by marking, what graces in man the pro∣mises of God are made vnto; for thus I reason: Whatsoeuer gifts of God in man brings him within the compasse of Gods promises of eter∣nall mercie: that gift
must be an infallible signe of saluation. But such are such and such gifts, as the instances in diuers Scriptures shew: And therefore the man that can find those gifts in himselfe, shall be cer∣tainly saued. As for ex∣ample: The kingdome of heauen is promised to such as are poore in spirit, Math. 5. 4. From thence then I gather, that pouertie of spirit is an infallible signe. The like I may say of the loue of the word, and of vprightnesse of heart, and of the loue of God, and
the loue of the appearing of Christ, &c. Thirdly, I find out other signes by obser∣uing what godly men in Scripture haue said for themselues, when they haue pleaded their owne euidence for their interest in Gods loue, or their hope of a better life. For look how godly men in Scripture haue proued that they were not hypocrites: euen so may any Christiā proue that he is not an hypo∣crite neither. As for ex∣ample, Iob being char∣ged to be an hypocrite,
and lying vnder the hea∣uy hand of God, pleades his cause, and proues that he was not an hy∣pocrite, by his constan∣cie in Gods wayes, and by his constant estima∣tion of Gods word, and desire after it, as after his appointed food, Iob 23. 10. 11. 12. More of this kind thou maist find in the proofes of particu∣lar signes. Now whereas some signes are generall, and thou mightst doubt of ye exposition, namely how that signe is infallible in such & such sences: For
thy establishment here∣in, thou mayst obserue, that I expoūd the signe as it is expounded in o∣ther seuerall Scriptures. As for example: The loue of the brethren, is a generall signe. Now how shall I know that I haue the right loue of the brethren? This I ex∣plane by flying to diuers other Scriptures, where∣in the particular expli∣cations of this signe are pleaded.
CHAP. III. The triall of a Christian by the signes of true humiliation. THe first way then, by which a Chri∣stian may trie him∣selfe, is to examine him∣selfe about his humilia∣tion for sinne, whether it be right or no. For vn∣der this head is compre∣hended the explication of the doctrine of po∣uertie of spirit, and god∣ly sorrow, and so in ge∣nerall of repentance for sinnes.
Now the true Chri∣stian in this matter of humiliation shews him∣selfe to haue attained26. Signes of true hu∣miliation. that, which no repro∣bate could euer attaine: and that in diuers parti∣culars, as, First, he hath a true1. He sees his sinnes. sight and sence of his sins. He discernes his sinful∣nesse of life both past and present, and is affe∣cted and pained vnder the burthen of his daily wants and corruptions, and sees his miserie in respect of his sinnes. Ie∣rem. 3. 12. Math. 11. 29. Math. 5. 4.
Secondly, he trem∣bles2. He feares Gods dis∣pleasure. at Gods word, and feares his displeasure, while it yet hangs in the threatnings. Esa. 66. 1. 2. Thirdly, he renoun∣ceth3. He trusts not vpon the merit of his own workes. his owne merits, and disclaimeth all opinion of true happinesse in himselfe, or in any thing vnder the Sunne; as be∣ing fully perswaded, that he cannot be saued by any works of his owne, or be happie in enioy∣ing any worldly things; and therefore is fully re∣solued to seeke for the chiefe good in Gods fa∣uour
in Iesus Christ onely. Fourthly, he mournes4. He mournes. heartily and secretly for his sins; and so he doth, 1. For all sorts of sins:For all sorts of sinne. for secret sinnes as well as knowne sinnes; for lesser sinnes as well as greater; for the present euils of his nature and life, as well as sinnes past: yea for the sins he hath loued, or haue bene gainfull and pleasing to him. Yea he grieues for the euill that cleaues to his best workes, as well as for euill workes, Esa. 6. 5. Rom. 7. Esa. 1. 16.
Math. 5. 6. 2. For sinne as it is sin,For sinne as it is sin. and not as it doth or might bring him shame, or punishments in this life, or in hell. 3. He is as much trou∣bledAs much as for crosses. for his sinnes, as he was wont, or now shold be for crosses in his estate. He mournes as heartily for the sorrowes that fell vpon Gods Sonne for his sinne, as if he had lost his owne and onely sonne, Zachar. 12. 10, 11. or at least this he stri∣ueth for, and iudgeth himselfe, if worldly af∣flictions do trouble him
more then his sins. Psal. 38. 5. Fiftly, he is truly grie∣ued5. And for the sins of others. and vexed in soule for the abhominations that are done by others, to the dishonor of God, or slander of true reli∣gion, or the ruine of the soules of men. Thus Lot, 2. Pet. 2. 6. and Dauid, Psalm. 119. 136. and the mourners marked for Gods owne people. E∣zech. 9. 4. Sixtly, he is heartily6. And for spirituall iudgments. affected, and troubled, and grieued for spirituall iudgements, that reach vnto the soules of men,
as well as wicked men are wont to be troubled for temporall crosses; & so he is grieued and per∣plexed for hardnesse of heart, (when he cannot mourne as he would,) and for the famine of the word, or for the absence of God, or for the blasphe∣mies of the wicked, or the like. Psal. 42. 2. 3. & 137. Nehem. 1. 3. 4. Esay 63. 17. Seuenthly, he is most7. And is moued thereunto by Gods mercie. stirred vp to abase him∣selfe and mourne for his sinnes, when he feeles God to be most mercifull. The goodnesse of God doth
make him feare God, and hate his sinnes ra∣ther, then his iustice, Hos. 3. 5. Eightly, his griefes8. And he is eased onely by spirituall meanes. are such as can be asswa∣ged onely by spirituall meanes. It is not sport or merrie companie that easeth him: his comfort is onely from the Lord in some of his ordinan∣ces. As it was the Lord that wounded him with the sight of his sinnes, so to the Lord onely be goeth to be healed of his wounds, Hos. 6. 1. 2. Psal. 119. 23. 24. 50. Ninthly, in his griefe
he is inquisitiue: he will9. And is carefull to learne how to be saued aske the way, and desires to know how he may be saued. He cannot smo∣ther and put off his doubts in so great a bu∣sinesse. He dares not now any longer be ig∣norant of the way to heauen. He is not care∣lesse, as he was wont to be, but is seriously bent to get directions from the word of God about his reconciliation, san∣ctification, & saluation, &c. Ierem. 50. 4. 5. Acts 2. 37. Tenthly, he is fearfull10. And is fearfull of being de∣ceiued. of being deceiued, and
therefore is not slight∣ly satisfied. He will not rest vpon a common hope, nor is he caried with probabilities; nor doth it content him that other men haue a good opinion of him; nor is he pleased that he hath mended some faults, or begun to repent: but repenting he repents still, that is, he takes a sound course to be sure his re∣pentance be effectually performed, Ierem. 31. 19. Eleuenthly, he is ve∣hemently11. And ear∣nestly de∣sires to leade an holy life. carried with the desires of the sound re∣formation
of his life. His sorrow is not water, but washing; nor is it euery washing, but such as maketh cleane. Worldly sorrow may haue much water, but it maketh no∣thing cleane; whereas godly sorrow alwayes tendeth to reformation and sound amendment. Twelfthly, in all his so∣rowes he is supported12. And trusts vpon Gods mer∣cie in his griefe. by a secret trust in the mercie and acceptation of God, so as no miserie can beate him from the con∣sideration and inward affiance and hope in the mercie of God. In the
very disquietnesse of his hart, the desire of his soule is to the Lord, and before his presence; though he be neuer so much cast downe, yet he waits vpon God for the helpe of his countenance, and in some measure condemnes the vnbeleefe of his owne heart, and trusts in the name of God, and his neuer failing compassi∣ons, Psalm. 38. 9. & 42. 5. 11. Lam. 3. 21. Zepha. 3. 12. 13. He is wonder∣fully13. And is in loue with God if he heare his prayers. inflamed with loue to God, if he at any time let him know that he
heareth his prayers. In the midst of his most despe∣rate sorrowes his heart is eased if he speed well in prayer, Psalme 116. 1. 3. 14. He daily keepes14. And daily iudg∣eth himself for his sin. an assise vpon his owne soule: he iudgeth himselfe for his sins before God, arresting, accusing, and condemning his sinnes. He confesseth his sinnes particularly to God, with∣out hiding any sin, that is, without forbearing to pray against any sin he knowes by himselfe, out of any desire he hath stil to continue in it; and by
this signe he may be sure he hath the Spirit of God, and that his sins are forgiuen him. Esay 4. 4. Psal. 35. 5. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. 1. Cor. 11. 32. 15. His requests are15. And prayes in the holy Ghost. daily powred vnto God. He cries vnto God with affection & confidence, though it be with much weaknesse and many de∣fects, as the little child doth vnto the father, and thereby he discouers the Spirit of adoption in him. Rom. 8. 15. Zach. 12. 10. Ephes. 3. 12. 16. He is vnfainedly16. Desiring to be rid of all sinne. desirous to be rid of all sins,
as well as one. There is no sin he knowes by himself, but he doth desire as hear∣tily that he might neuer commit it, as he doth thatNote this. God should neuer impute it. This is a neuer failing signe, a fundamentall one. 2. Tim. 2. 19. 17. He is content to17. And is willing to suffer af∣fliction. receiue euill at the hand of God, as well as good, without murmuring, or letting go his integritie; as being sensible of his owne deserts, and desi∣rous to approue himself to God, without respect of reward. This proued that Iob was an holy and
vpright man, Iob 1. 1. & 2. 3. 10. 18. He dislikes sinne18. He dis∣likes sinne in all. in all, euen in those that are neare and deare vn∣to him in other respects, 1. King. 15. 12. 13. 14. 19. He is innocent frō19. Sinne reignes not in him. the great transgression, and keepes himselfe from his owne iniquitie. He is not subiect to the domi∣nion of sinne. Sinne doth not reigne in him, Psal. 19. 13. 2. Sam. 22. 24. 20. He finds a desire20. He hū∣bles him∣selfe for sin euen in his prosperitie. to be rid of sinne, and to humble himselfe for it in prosperitie as well as aduersitie. He leaues sin
before sin would leaue him. He forsakes it then, when he could commit it without apparent dan∣ger, Iob 8. 5. 6. 21. Or if he be in ad∣uersitie,21. And in aduersitie his heart is vpright. his heart is vp∣right, without lying or dissimulation. He so see∣keth the pardon of his sinnes then, and so pro∣miseth amendment, as that he is also as carefull to practise it when he is deliuered. He is not like the Israelites mentioned Psal. 78. 36. 37. 22. He makes a su∣pernaturall22. He ac∣counts of spirituall things as the best things. valuation of spirituall things, accoun∣ting
them as pearles of the best price, not too deare bought, if he pur∣chased them with all the worldly things he hath; and contrariwise, accoū∣ting himselfe exceeding poore if he want them, or the meanes of them, Math. 13. 45. 46. Psal. 42. & 63. 1. 3. 23. He hath lost his23. He doth not sauour the things of the flesh and the world. wonted taste in earthly things: his heart is not transported with the ad∣miration of them, or the inordinate desires after worldly things. He loues not the world & this life as he was wont to do.
Though hee vse the world, yet he easily con∣fesseth himselfe to be a stranger and pilgrime here. He giues ouer the vnnecessary pleasures & profits of this life, Heb. 11. 13. 1. Ioh. 2. 14. 15. Rom. 8. 6. He is wearie of the world, and wil∣ling to forgo societie with the men of this world, the workers of iniquitie, Psalm. 6. 8. 9. and 39. 12. and 26. 1, 2, 3, 4. 24. If the Lord be si∣lent,24. He is much grie∣ued if God hide him∣selfe. and answer not his desires, but hides his face; his spirit faileth, and he is
as one that goeth downe into the pit: it troubles him as a sore crosse; and so contrariwise, Psal. 26. 1: and 88. 13, 14, 15: and 143. 7. Ioh. 16. 23. 28. 25. If he hath bene25. Of a liō he becoms a lambe. a man subiect to boiste∣rous, violent, and hurtful affections, he is now be∣come tame: of a Lion he is become a lambe, & a litle child may leade him, Esay 11. 9. 26. He hath a spirit26. His spi∣rit is with∣out guile. without guile, Psal. 32. 2. He is more desirous to be good, then to be thought to be so; and more seekes the power
of godlinesse, then the shew of it, Iob. 1. 1. Prou. 20. 6. 7. His praise is of God, and not of men: Rom. 2. 26. And thus much of the triall of his humilia∣tion. The signes of his faith follow. CHAP. IIII. The triall of a godly man by his Faith. FAith is the next thing to be tried in a childe of God. And in as much as there
are diuers kinds of faith,Why we should trie our faith. and experience shewes in many that giue no signes of repentance, that they wil not be bea∣ten frō a confident pre∣sumption that Christ died for them, euen for them in particular: it stands vs in hand to trie our perswasion by true rules of Scripture, that so if it will abide the trial of the touchstone, we may lay it vp as an hid treasure and a wonder∣full grace of God; and if otherwise, we may re∣pent vs of presumption, as a deceiueable sinne.
But before I open the signes of this signe, the Reader must be admo∣nished of three things. First, that I intend notThe drift is to shew how faith may be proued, not how it may be bred. by these signes to shew how faith may be bred or begotten in vs, but how faith may be proued and declared to be in vs. For it is the promises of God in the Scripture that breed faith: nor can humane reason beleeue such great things from God for any thing that is in vs, but onely be∣cause we see the word of God assuring such happinesse vnto such as
lay hold vpon them. So that, that which breeds faith, is the reuelation of Gods promises by his word and Spirit. Yet notwithstanding the as∣surance of faith is much increased and confirmed by the sight of those signes of the truth of our faith, and other gra∣ces of God in vs. Secondly, that I standA second caueat. not precisely vpon the order of these graces of God in vs, nor deter∣mine that question, which graces are first wrought in the heart of a man: but that which
I haue specially aimed at in the order of setting them downe, is to begin at those that either first appeare in a Christian, or are easiest (as I con∣ceiue) to be discerned in him. Thirdly, that I intendThe 3. note by way of preface. especially the triall of such Christians as agree in this, that they are per∣swaded that Christ died for them; that so the true Christian may see rea∣son to comfort himself, that his perswasion is no presumption, as is the perswasion of the most. It is true, that diuers of
the signes of faith here to be handled, will shew faith in the weakest Christian, though he will not yet be brought to acknowledge any per∣swasion. For this perswa∣sion may be secretly wrought vpon the hart: as it is when it relieth vpō the merits of Christ onely for saluation, though the iudgement of the Christian be not resolued against his doubts. The question then is, how a Christian may trie his perswasion of Gods mercie, and his
interest in Christs me∣rits, whether it be right or no. For answer thereun∣to, I say, that the true Christian doth proue his faith and perswasionThe true faith. to be right, by those signes following. First, his faithor per∣swasion1. Was wrought by the word prea∣ched. was wrought by the hearing of the word preached: & ther∣fore thou must first aske thy selfe, how thou com∣mest by thy perswasion. For if thou say, thou wast alwayes so perswa∣ded, or didst attain it by meere naturall meanes
or helpes, thou art de∣ceiued. For, faith is first wrought by the holy Ghost in the preaching of the Gospell, as it is most cleer by the words of the Apostle, How shall they beleeue in him of whō they haue not heard? and how shall they heare without a preacher? Rom. 10. 14. And whereas it may be, that many Chri∣stiās haue not obserued the workings of their faith; and haue forgot∣ten the time of their conuersion; and haue not iudgement to dis∣cerne how the Lord by
the ministerie of his ser∣uants did change their hearts, and leade them to Christ: Therefore when this first signe can∣not comfort, they must trie themselues by the rest that follow. Secondly, he hath an2. Esteems Christ a∣boue all things. high estimation of Iesus Christ. For the man that hath true faith, accounts all things most base in cōparison of the know∣ledge of Christ, and the loue of God in him. He had rather be sure of Christ, then to gaine the whole world. Christ is more precious then all
the world: yea is the only thing in request in the desires of the Chri∣stian. Now Christ is pre∣cious onely to them that beleeue, 1. Pet. 2. 6. and by this signe Paul knew that he was growne far beyond himselfe in his former life, and beyond all the Pharises in the world. Phil. 3. 9. Thirdly, he readily3. Receiues the testimo¦ny of Gods ministers before all the world. receiues the testimonie of Gods ministers spea∣king out of the word, & sticks to it against all the contradictions of the world. The Apostle Paul 2. Thessal. 1. 10. shewes,
that this signe will be pleaded and acknow∣ledged in the day of Christ: Christ, saith he, will be made admirable in them that beleeue. Now some may say, But how shall we know that we do beleeue? Why, saith he, you are true beleeuers, be∣cause ye receiued our te∣stimonie; and this shall be to your praise in that day. Fourthly, he cannot4. Casts out hypocrisie. abide counterfetting & hypocrisy. If it be a right perswasion, it is a faith vnfained; Vnfained I say,
as in other respects, so in affects, because it can∣not abide fainings, but with speciall hatred pur∣geth out hypocrisie; which the perswasion of hypocrites neuer doth. 2. Tim. 1. 5. Fiftly, this perswasion5. Will a∣bide triall. is permanent: it will en∣dure triall, it will hold out in the euill day; it inclines the heart to cleaue to Iesus Christ, euen in the fire of tribu∣lation, in the midst of manifold afflictions, and disgraces, and temptati∣ons. It is like the gold in the fornace that perish∣eth
not; nor will it barely hold out: but a Christiā by his faith comforts & supports himselfe in af∣fliction, so as his faith becomes to him both a breast-plate & an helmet: whereas the best faith, that is not the faith of Gods elect, will proue but drosse, if it be cast into the fornace of tem∣ptation, further then it is supported by carnall meanes and helps. 1. Pet. 1. 6, 7. 2. Tim. 1. 12. 1. Thess. 5. 8. Eph. 6. Luke 8. 13. Sixtly, he will beleeue6. It be∣leeues all things. all things: I say all things
that he apprehendeth to be required, threat∣ned, or promised in the word. To beleeue some things onely, may be in any other kind of faith, especially when they are such things as stand with their owne reasons, or wils, or affections, or the common opinion of other men: But this is the glorie of a liuely in∣stifying faith, it will giue glorie to God in all things. What God can speake, it can beleeue: so soone as it knowes it is spoken of God, though it be neuer so contrary
to the iudgment of flesh and bloud, Act. 14. 14. Seuenthly, he will not7. Will not make haste make haste. This was the signe giuen in the Pro∣phet Esays time: He that beleeueth will not make haste. He had prophe∣sied of hard times to fall vpō all the people: now this wold shew amongst them, who were true be∣leeuers. For those that trusted in God, would not make haste to vse ill meanes to helpe them∣selues; they would stay their hearts in rest and quietnes, and they would stay their feete too from
running to Aegypt, or to Asshur, which God had forbidden, Isai. 28. 16. If faith be right, and thy perswasion a sound perswasion, and well grounded, there are ioy∣ned with it these things following. Eightly, his perswasiō8. Is accō∣panied with a pure conscience. is ioyned with a good and pure conscience; a conscience, I say, that makes him carefull to a∣uoid sinne, and do good duties, and to serue God in sinceritie: whereas the perswasiō that is in wic∣ked men, is not accom∣panied with a good con∣science,
they do not make cōscience of their wayes. Now this is a cleare rule of difference, 1. Tim. 1. 5. 19. and 3. 9. Heb. 10. 22. Ninthly, he hath a spi∣rit9. And a spirit of discerning. of discerning. There is a great deale of light comes into the heart with faith. A man can∣not beleeue, and be ig∣norant still. The Chri∣stian that is endued with faith from aboue, is en∣dued with wisedome from aboue: so as he can con∣ceiue of the things of God that concerne sal∣uation, which the natu∣rall
man perceiueth not. Though he may want still in many knowled∣ges, yet he hath skill in some measure to learne how to be saued. The doctrine of saluation he can now vnderstand, which is taught in the ministerie of the word; and he now can make some good vse of rea∣ding the Scriptures, that before discerned litle or nothing in them. The veile that lieth vpon the hearts of all flesh; is now taken from his eyes; yea the very entrance into Gods word giueth light
to the simplest beleeuer. He that was stupid and vnteachable before, doth now heare as the learned, with a holy kind of insight and iudge∣ment: 2. Tim. 3. 15. Psal. 119. 130. Prou. 1. 4. 8. & 5. 9. Tenthly, he hath a10. And the witnesse of the Spirit of adoptiō. witnesse within himself. He that beleeueth hath a witnesse in himselfe, 1. Ioh. 5. 10. For he hath the Spirit of adoption to certifie him infallibly of Gods loue to him, & that he is the child of God, Rom. 8. 15. 16: and thus the beleeuers are
said to be sealed by the Spirit of promise, Ephes. 1. 13. 14. God leaues a pawne, a pledge with e∣uery Christian that shal be saued, to be as the earnest of his saluation, and this pledge and ear∣nest is Gods Spirit. And the Spirit testifies to the beleeuer, partly by re∣uealing to him the cer∣taintie & truth of Gods promises in his word; & partly by printing vpon his hart these sauing gra∣ces, which distinguish him from all others; and partly by powring vpon him the ioyes, which are
called the ioyes of the holy Ghost, in the vse of Gods ordinances, as the inward ratificatiō of the assurance of Gods loue and goodnes to the be∣leeuer. Of which after. Lastly, Faith may be11. Beareth those fruits following. discerned by many things it worketh, which are the fruits of it: and by the fruits of faith, we may know faith it selfe. Faith is like the roote of a tree, that lyeth vnder ground, and cannot be seen without much dig∣ging; but by the fruit the tree beareth, we may know what kind of root
it hath, and of what sort it is. Now the fruits of faith are these that fol∣low, and such like, as, 1. Loue to God and1. Loue. the godly: for Faith wor∣keth by loue, Gal. 5. 6. 2. Cleannesse of the2. Puritie of heart. thoughts and affections. For Faith purifieth the heart. It makes a man striue after inward puri∣tie, as well as outward: to get a cleane heart as well as cleane hands. It worketh humiliation for inward sinnes as well as outward, Act. 15. 9. and driues a man to seeke pardon in the name of
Christ, for all sorts of in∣ward perturbations and secret euils. 3. Victorie ouer the3. Victorie ouer the world. world. Faith ouercom∣meth the world, 1. Iob. 5. 4. 5: and so it doth, when it maketh a man so rest vpon God, and his truth and promise, as, if he be put to it, to deny the re∣spect of his owne credit, or profit, or pleasures, or the displeasure of carnal friends, or his hopes in matters of the world; re∣sting satisfied with the expectation of the trea∣sures and pleasures of a better world, yeelding
himselfe ouer to be gui∣ded by Christ, and his truth, vnto the death, Psal. 48. 14. He liues by his faith, Gal. 2. 20. 4. Humilitie. For a4. Humility true faith excludes boa∣sting of our owne la∣bors, gifts or praises; and makes vs able, out of the sence of our owne vile∣nesse, to acknowledge all the glory to Gods free grace and loue in Iesus Christ, Rom. 3. 17. Gal. 3. 22. 5. The confession5 Confessiō and profession of the truth. Faith will make a man speake in defence
of the truth: I haue belee∣ued, therefore haue I spo∣ken, saith Dauid, Psalme 116: which the Apostles pleade to proue their faith also: 2. Cor. 4. 13. 14. 6. The putting on of6. Applica∣tion of Christs righteous∣nesse. righteousnesse, which is not by the works of the Law done by vs. The application of, and re∣lying vpon the righte∣ousnesse of Iesus Christ, is the proper and onely worke of true faith. Rom. 10. 7. It opens a spring7. A verie spring of grace. of graces in the heart of a true Christian: he that
is a true beleeuer, is qualified with sun∣drie heauenly gifts, which were not in him by nature; which gifts do daily discouer them∣selues in his heart, flo∣wing from thence, as if there were a spring of liuing waters in his bel∣lie. Sanctification of the spirit, and faith of the truth be inseparable, Ioh. 7. 38. 2. Thessalo∣nians, 2. 13.
CHAP. V. The triall of a godly man by such heauenly gifts as serue him in his iour∣ney to heauen. THus of his triall in his humiliation, and in his faith. It followeth in the third place to trie him by his gifts, which are the fruits of faith. The true Chri∣stian differs from the wicked man in two sortsTwo sorts of graces in a Chri∣stian. of gifts: Some of them are such gifts as are be∣stowed vpon him from aboue, but serue him
onely for his spirituall vse, while he is on the way in his iourney to heauen, and so onely in this life; such as are the sacred thirst: The loue to the word, and meanes of his holinesse: The spirit of supplication: The loue of his enemies, and his de∣sire after the appearance of Iesus Christ. Other gifts he hath, which will accompanie him home into his heauenly country, and abide vpon him for euer, and are not aboli∣shed by death: such as are sauing knowledge, the loue of God, and the loue
of the godly. First there∣fore of those heauenly gifts which will passe a∣way: and so he is quali∣fied with fiue distinct holy gifts, which cannot be found in any repro∣bate. The first is his holyThe holy thirst that is in the god∣ly Chri∣stian tried by foure signes. thirst, which is a heauen∣ly kind of appetite, by which he is carried to the desire of things a∣boue nature; such as are the merits and righte∣ousnesse of Christ: the fa∣uour of God: the presence of God: the full deliue∣rance from all sinne: the remouing of spirituall
iudgements: the salua∣tion of other men, and the like; and this thirst is a signe the more infalli∣ble. 1. Because it is con∣stant and indelible in this life. There is no part of his life, but it conti∣nueth either in the sence of his affection, or in the iudgement of his vnder∣standing, so as he ac∣counts spirituall things to be the best things: and though at some times his affections may be the lesse moued after them, yet his appetite is daily renewed, as it is in
the hunger, or thirst, that is bodily. 2. Because it is indu∣strious. For this holy thirst will guide him to a carefull vse of all the meanes, by which good things may be attained; and doth not breathe it selfe out onely with sud∣den and vaine wishes, or flashes of desire, Psal. 27. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Psal. 63. 1. 2. Psalme 1. 2. Acts 2. 37. 3. Because it works a constant and secret me∣ditation of heauenly things desired, the heart frequently seekes after God day and night.
Isaiah 26. 9. Psalme 63. 1. 6. For what we desire feruently, we thinke on almost continually. 4. Because if the Lord quench his thirst, and sa∣tisfie his desire in spiri∣tuall things, the soule be∣comes as a watered gar∣den; and then followes in him an heauenly kind of satisfaction and con∣tentment with singular delight in the soule, and vowes and wishes of in∣finite and eternall thank∣fulnesse, Psalme 63. 4. 5. Iere. 31. 25. 26. And thus much of the first gift.
Secondly, the loueHis triall by his loue to the word. to the word is another signe that he is the child of God, and a cleare eui∣dence of his saluation. Now because all sorts of wicked men may resort to the exercises of the word, and those that haue but a temporarie faith may shew a great estimation of the word, and find ioy in the hea∣ring of it, & shew much zeale in things that con∣cerne the word, and may yeeld some obedience to the directions of the word also: it is profita∣ble to consider how the
true Christian may proue that his affection to the word is more sin∣cere then that affection which any wicked man can bring to the word. And thus he may find that his heart is sound in his loue to the word, by these marks. 1. By his manner of13. Signes to trie his affection to the word by. receiuing it, when he doth receiue the word, as the word of God, and not of men: setting his heart before Gods pre∣sence, and being affe∣cted as if the Lord him∣selfe should speake vnto him. This no wicked
man dares do: he dares not present himselfe with the whole intend∣ments of his heart be∣fore the Lord. For this signe the Apostle Paule acknowledged the Thes∣salonians to be true Christians, 1. Thessal. 2. 13. 2. By his Appetite to the word. For there is in a godly man as true an hunger after the word, as the food of his soule, as there is in his sto∣mach after the foode of his body; which shewes it selfe to be the more sincere, because it is con∣stant,
he desires the word at all times, and as his appointed foode daily; as it is in the bodily ap∣petite, though after fee∣ding the stomach may seeme to be full and sa∣tisfied, yet the hunger reuiues againe euery day, so it is with the heart of a child of God: whereas wicked men re∣gard the word but by fits, and in a passion, and then at length fall cleane away from the affection to it, Psal. 119. 20. Iob. 23. 12. 3. By his loue to them that loue the word.
4. By his sorrow, be∣cause other men keepe not the word, Psal. 119. 136. 5. By his vnfained e∣stimation of the word a∣boue all worldly things, accounting it to be an happy portion to enioy the word in the power and profit of it, Psal. 119. 14. 72. 111. 6. By his desire & de∣light to exercise himselfe in it day and night, that is, constantly, Psal. 1. 2. 7. By his griefe ei∣ther for the want of the meanes by which the word might be taught
vnto him with power, accounting such want of the meanes to be a sore famine; or for want of successe in ye vse of the meanes whē he doth en∣ioy it, Psa. 42. 3. Am. 8. 12. 8. By the extent of his loue to all the words of God, euen the Law, that with threatening shewes him his sin, and searcheth out his most secret corruptions; be∣ing most affected with that ministery that doth most sharply rebuke sin. 9. By his resolution to labour as hard for the food of his soule, as men
do, or he would do for the food of his bodie, Ioh. 6. 27. Amos 8. 12. 10. By the constant sweet taste he finds in it, especially when it is po∣werfully preached, Psal. 19. 10. 2. Cor. 2. 15. 11. By the end he pro∣pounds vnto himselfe in the vse of the word, which is, that he might not sinne; and that his wayes might be made pleasing to God, hiding the word in his heart to this purpose, Psal. 119. 11. 12. By his willingnes and resolution to denie his owne reason and af∣fections,
his credite, his carnall friends, his pro∣fits, or his pleasures in any thing, when God should so require it of him, and vpon any oc∣casion to shew his hear∣tie respect of the Gos∣pell, Mar. 10. 2. 9. 1. Cor. 1. 18. 13. By the effects of it: as, 1. When for the loue he beares to the word; he will separate himselfe from the wicked, that might any way with∣draw his heart, or endan∣ger his disobedience, Psal. 119. 115.
2. When he accounts the word to be his chiefe comfort in affliction, & finds it to be the maine stay, and solace of his heart, Psal. 119. 23. 24. 50. 51. 54. 143. 3. When it works in him effectually the re∣dresse of his wayes, and freedome from the do∣minion of sin, Ioh. 8. 33. Psal. 119. 45. 9. 59. 1. Thes. 2. 13. 4. When it works in him certaine and sensi∣ble assurance of heart before God. This assu∣rāce is an infallible signe of the right vse of the
word, 1. Thess. 1. 5. And thus of the se∣cond gift. The third gift is theHis triall by his gift of prayer. spirit of prayer or suppli∣cation, as the Prophet Zacharie cals it, Zach. 12. 10: and this gift he hath aboue all wicked men, which he shewes many13. Rules of triall. wayes: as, 1. He askes according to Gods will, 1. Ioh. 5. 14. 2. He prays with per∣swasion that God will heare him. He beleeueth in some measure that he shall haue what he prays for. He prayes in faith, Mark. 11. 14. Iam. 1. 6. 7.
Psal. 6. 9. 1. Ioh. 3. 19. 22. 3. He prayes in the name of Christ, and is af∣fected with the sence of his owne vilenesse, and relies vpon the merits and mediation of Iesus Christ, Ioh. 14. 13. Psal. 86. 1. 2. & 143. 4. 4. He will pray at all times, Iob 27. 9. Psalme 106. 2. 5. He is feruent in prayer: his heart prayeth: he hath the affections of prayer, Iam. 5. 16. Psal. 6. 8. 6. Prayer makes him exceeding weary of the world: it giues him such
a taste of his owne sin∣fulnesse, and of Gods goodnesse, and of the glorie of heauen, that he is vehemently carried with desire to be absent from the bodie, that he might be present with the Lord, Psal. 39. 12. 7. When he knowes not how to pray as he ought, the Spirit prepares his heart, excites in him ho∣ly desires, supplies him sometimes with words, sometimes with affecti∣ons, and somtimes wor∣keth inward vnexpressa∣ble groanes, which yet it presents to God, as effe∣ctuall
prayers, Ro. 8. 26. 27. 8. He findes an holy rest, and quietnesse in his conscience and heart, with spirituall boldnesse and confidence of trust in God, if he heare him gra∣ciously, and answer him in mercie, Psal. 3. 4. 5. 6. & 116. 1. 7. & 91. 15. 17. Ierem. 33. 3. 9. He loues the Lord exceedingly for hearing his prayer, and desires to keepe himselfe in the loue of God, Psal. 116. 1. Iude 20. 10. His prayers pro∣ceed from a heart that
loues no sin, but desires to depart from iniquitie, and to do that which is pleasing in Gods sight, 2. Tim. 2. 19. 1. Ioh. 3. 22. 11. He loues prayer in others, 2. Tim. 1. 22. 12. He striues against deadnesse of spirit and distractions, as an heauy burthen, Psal. 86. 3. 4. 13. He makes prayer his chiefe refuge; and he will pray, though prayer be in neuer so much dis∣grace, Psal. 69. 10. 13. & 142. 2. 5. And thus of the third gift. The fourth gift is the
loue of his enemies. AnyHis loue to his ene∣mies tried. Christiā may loue such as loue him; but to loue his enemies, is onely to be found in the true Christian, which he proues by these tokens of the sinceritie of his loue: 1. He can pray hear∣tily for them, yea in some cases he can mourne, & humble his soule before God for them in their distresses, Psal. 35. 13. 14. 2. He desires their con∣uersion so vnfainedly, that he is sure, if they were cōuerted, he could reioyce in them as hear∣tily,
as in those he now much delights in. 3. He can likewise for∣giue them their particu∣lar trespasses against him; being more grie∣ued for their sins against God, thē for the wrongs they do him, Mat. 6. 14. 4. He can freely ac∣knowledge their iust praises. 5. He can not onely patiently endure their reuilings, but can for∣beare, when he could be reuenged by bringing shame or misery vpon them, 1. Pet. 3. 9. Rom. 12. 14. 1. Sam. 24. 18. 19:
yea he doth, as he hath occasion, striue to ouer∣come their euil with good∣nesse, being willing to helpe them, or releeue them in their miserie, and do them any good for the soule or body. The last gift which is found in the true Chri∣stian,His triall by the loue to the appea∣ring of Christ. while he is in the way in this life, is, His loue of the appearing of Christ, which he shewes: 1. By the longing af∣ter the time of Christs coming, whether by death or iudgement. 2. By his gladnesse at the promises, or signes
of his particular or ge∣nerall coming. 3. By his often medi∣tations of that day, and his hearty prayers for the hastening of it, Reu. 22. 10. 4. By his daily care to dispatch all those godly duties which he desires to do before his death, and accordingly by his willing disposing of his estate, and ende∣uors to set his house in order: And this desire of Christs coming is appa∣rently the more sincere in him:
1. Because it ariseth out of his loue to God, and his hatred of his owne sins, and his weari∣nes vnder the obserua∣tion of other mens sins. 2. Because this desire is accompanied with the care of the meanes, by which he may be pre∣pared for saluation. 3. Because he is thus affected euen in his pros∣peritie when he thriues in the world, and is not in any notable distresse. Hitherto of his triall in such gifts as he is en∣dowed withall in this life onely: his triall in the
gifts that will abide in him for euer, follow. CHAP. VI. His triall in respect of such heauenly gifts as will not be abolished by death. THe gifts that will abide in him for e∣uerThe trial of his know∣ledge. are these three: Knowledge, the loue of God, and the loue of the brethren. These are per∣fected, and not aboli∣shed by death. And first, in his know∣ledgeAnd so he differs frō wicked men. he differs from all wicked men, and so in
diuers things: as, First in the things heIn the things he knowes. knowes: he knowes the nature of God in a right manner: he knowes God in Iesus Christ: he knowes the vilenesse of his owne sinnes: he knowes after an effectu∣all manner the mysteries that concerne the salua∣tion of his soule: he knowes his owne con∣uersion, and the forgiue∣nesse of his sinnes, and the things that are giuen him of God: Mat. 13. 13. Iohn 17. 3. Iere. 31. 34. 1. Cor. 2. 12. He knowes that Iesus Christ is in
him, 2. Cor. 13. 5. 2. Secondly, in the2. In the cause of his know∣ledge. cause of his knowledge. For flesh and bloud did not reueale those things vnto him, he came not by them by the vse of naturall meanes, but they are wrought in him by the word & Spi∣rit of God, Mat. 16. 17. 1. Iohn 2. 27. and 5. 10. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Thirdly, in the effects3. In the ef∣fects of his knowledg. of his knowledge, for 1. It breeds in him an vnspeakable refreshing and gladnesse of heart in Gods presence, Psal. 36. 8. 9. 10. Philip. 1. 9.
2. It inflames him to a wonderfull loue of the word of God aboue all earthly things, Psal. 119. 97. 98. 3. It works in him an effectuall sauouring and tasting of the goodnesse of spirituall things: Ro. 8. 5. 4. It enclines him to a constant obedience and practise of Gods will, Pro. 8. 9. 17. Iohn 7. 17. Deut. 4. 6. It redresseth his wayes, Psal. 119. 10. 1. Ioh. 2. 3. and 3. 24. 5. It beates downe pride and conceitednes, and frowardnesse, and
makes him humble and teachable, Pro. 3. 5. 6. and 8. 13. 14. Iames 3. 17. Fourthly, in the proper∣ties4. In the properties of his knowledge of his knowledge: for 1. It is infallible: his knowledge hath much assurance in many things with strong confidence, and resolution at some times especially, when he is before God, 1. Thes. 1. 5. 2. It is indelible, it can∣not be vtterly blotted out, it is fast grauen in his heart; contrary do∣ctrine, or persecution cannot raze it out, Iere. 31. 34. Eph. 4. 13. Prou.
4. 5. 6. 3. It is sincere, for first it inclineth him to giue glorie to God, and re∣ceiue all truth, as well as any truth. He receiues the doctrine of God, though it be aboue rea∣son, and against the cō∣mon opinion of men, or crosse his profit, or desires, or the like. Se∣condly, it leades him principally to vnder∣stand his owne way, and guides him to study the things chiefly that con∣cerne his owne refor∣mation and saluation, Pro. 14. 8. Colos. 3. 16.
And thus he differs from wicked men in his knowledge. Secondly, in his loueHis loue to God tried by 9. signes. to God he hath these things, which no wicked man can attaine to. 1. He hath a deli∣berate inward inflamed estimation of God a∣boue all things, accoun∣ting his louing kindnesse better then life, and the signes of his fauour his greatest ioy, Psal. 63. 2. 11. 2. He loues & longs for the Lord Iesus Christ with certaine & sincere affection, Ephes. 6. 24. 2. Tim. 4. 8.
3. He delights in Gods presence, and shewes it by his vnfained loue to Gods house, Psalme 26. 8: and by his heartie griefe for Gods absence, Cant. 3. 1: and by his carefulnesse to set the Lord daily before him, walking in his sight Psal. 16. 8. 4. He hates sin hearti∣ly because God hates it; and he dislikes sinners, because they hate God; accounting Gods ene∣mies as if they were his owne enemies, Psal. 139. 21. 22. and 97. 10. 5. He constantly de∣sires
to be like God in ho∣linesse, being carefull to approue his affection to God by his obedience to his commandements, so as it is not grieuous to him to receiue directions, but serues God with all his heart, being fearefull to displease God in any thing, Ioh. 14. 21. 1. Io. 5. 3. Deut. 10. 12. and 11. 22: & is more affected with Gods approbation then all the praise of men, Rom. 2. 26. 6. He is much affe∣cted with Gods mercie, & the blessings bestow∣ed vpon him, which he
thankfully remembers to the praise of Gods free grace, Esa. 63. 7. Psal. 63. 2. 3. 4. 6. 8. & 107. 22. Iob 36. 24. Deut. 6. 2. 7. He loues all the godly for this reason chiefly, because they are like vnto God in holi∣nesse, as being begotten by him, 1. Ioh. 5. 1. 8. He is as heartily vexed for any dishonor done to God, as for any disgrace offered to him∣selfe. 9. Finally he shewes it in diuers cases that befal him in his course in this life: as,
1. If he be put to suf∣fer any thing for Gods sake, he endures it with much ioy and patience, 1. Thess. 1. 6. Act. 5. Iohn 22. 15, to 19. 2. If at any time he offend God by his owne faultinesse, he is heartily grieued and cast downe, and doth constantly de∣sire to forsake any sinne, though neuer so plea∣sing or gainefull vnto him, rather then he would displease God, Deut. 30. 6. 3. In all streights and wants, he runs to God, relying vpon God as his
defence, rocke, and refuge in all times of troubles, making his moane vnto him, and powring out his prayers and com∣plaints before him, Psal. 18. 1. 2. Thus of his loue to God. Thirdly, his loue toHis loue to the godly tried by ten signes. the godly doth also di∣stinguish him from all the wicked men in the world, because here are diuers things to be no∣ted in his affection to them, which cannot be found in wicked men: 1. As first, he loues the godly aboue all other
sorts of mē in the world, he accounts them as the onely excellent people, Psal 16. 3. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. and af∣fects them as if they were his naturall kinred, Rom. 12. 9. 10. 2. He loues them not for carnall respects, but for the graces of God in them, for the truths sake, and because they are begotten of God, 1. Ioh. 5. 1. 2. Ioh. 1. 2. 3. Ioh. 1. 3. He delights in their fellowship and societie in the Gospell, as accoun∣ting them the happie companions of this life, Psal. 16. 3. 3. Ioh. 8. Phi∣lippians
1. 5. 4. He hath a fellow fee∣ling of their miseries: he is in some measure affe∣ctioned to weepe with them that weepe, and re∣ioyce with them that re∣ioyce; especially he is glad when their soules prosper: Rom. 12. 16. 3. Ioh. 3. 5. His desire is to walk inoffensiuely, as being loath any way to be an occasion of stumbling, or scandall to any Christi∣an, 1 Ioh. 2. 10. 6. He can beare their infirmities, take things in the best sence, suffer
long, & is not easily prouo∣ked: he hopeth all things, and boasts not himselfe, or enuies them, nor will receiue an euill report a∣gainst them, 1. Pet. 4. 8. 1. Cor. 13. 4. 5. 6. but ra∣ther makes Apologie for them. 7. He easily praiseth them in all places for their grace, or obedi∣ence, Rom. 16. 19. 3. Ioh. 6. Psal. 15. 5. 1. Thess. 1. 8. 8. His wel-doing ex∣tends it selfe to them to his power, he is bounti∣full, pitifull, and tender; he hath bowels of mercie, according to the occa∣sion
of mercy, either cor¦porall or spirituall. He gladly receiueth them, and with a ready mind communicates to their necessities, Philemon 7. 1. Pet. 3. 8. & 4. 8. 1. Iohn 3. 17. 3. Ioh. 5. 9. He loues all the bre∣thren. He hath not the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons, Iam. 2. 1. 2. Eph. 1. 5. Col. 1. 4. He can make himselfe equal to them of the lower sort, Rom. 12. 16. 10. Lastly he loues them at all times, euen when they are in aduer∣sitie, disgrace, sicknesse,
or any other misery. Hitherto of the godly mans triall by his gifts. CHAP. VII. The trial of the godly man by his works of obe∣dience. THe fourth way toHis works tried by 7. signes. try him, is by his workes, or by his obedience in his life and conuersation; and so his works excel all the workes of vnregenerate men many wayes: as, 1. Because what he doth, ariseth out of the
loue he heares to God and goodnesse; and therefore he doth good heartily, and not by constraint, or with repining, or delay: yea he is so stirred vp with the sence of Gods goodnesse to him, that he is much hūbled when he hath done his best, that hee cannot bring more glorie to God, Deut. 30. 20. Iosh. 22. 5. Mat. 4. 19. Rom. 6. 27. 2. In doing good he hath respect vnto all Gods commandements: there is no part of an holy life but he desires to practise it; and therefore he will
obey Gods will in some cases when it is against his profit, credit, ease, or the liking of carnall friends, preferring Gods cōmandements aboue all things, yea life it self, Ier. 35. Heb. 11. 8. Gen. 22. 12. Prou. 7. 2. Act. 5. 29. Mat. 16. 25. Exod. 15. 26. 1. Kin. 9. 4. Ier. 11. 4. Iohn 15. 14. 3. He will do good at all times, and not for a fit; making conscience of his wayes in all com∣panies as well as any; ab∣sent as wel as present; be∣fore meane Christians, as wel as before the best:
at home as well as a∣broad, Phil. 2. 12. Gal. 5. 7. 2. Kin. 18. 6. Psal. 106. 2. 4. He makes cōscience of the least cōmandement as well as of the greatest, Mat. 5. 19. Gal. 3. 7. 5. He comes to the light, that his deeds might be manifest, that they are wrought in God, Ioh. 3. 21. He is desirous in all things to be guided by the warrant of the word of God. 6. He exerciseth his faith in the very dis∣charge of the duties of his outward conuersati∣on. He liues by the faith
of the Sonne of God, and commits his way to God, and trusteth vpon the name of the Lord, Gal. 2. 20. 7. He knoweth that his obedience is right, because God heareth his prayers, and entertaines him graciously, when he calls vpon him in se∣cret; whereas God hea∣reth not sinners; and if wickednesse were in his heart, God would not regard his prayers, Ioh. 9. 31. Psal. 66. 18. And thus of his works.
CHAP. VIII. His triall by the enter∣tainment he hath from God. THe fifth way by which he may be tried, is by the en∣tertainment that God vouchsafeth him in this life, which he neuer vouchsafeth to wicked men. There are diuersSixe fauors God be∣stowes vp∣pon him which the wicked ne∣uer feele. 1. Election in time. specialities of fauour which God sheweth to him, and not to any vn∣regenerate man: As 1. His election in time is a manifest token of
Gods election of him before time: the Lord shews that he hath cho∣sen him frō euerlasting, when by the power of the Gospell he seizeth vpon him particularly, & effectually perswades him to leaue the world, and the sinfull societie he liued in, and to de∣uote himselfe as a liuing sacrifice vnto God. 2. He is baptized with2. The bap∣tisme by fire. the holy Ghost and fire: the baptisme by fire is onely proper to Gods Elect: the holy Ghost at some times falls vpon him, & sets him all on a fire, on
a fire I say, both of sud∣daine and violent indig∣nation at sinne, as it is sinne; as also the fire of holy affections, with which from God he fre∣quently and on a sudden is inflamed, while he stands before the Lord. For besides the affectiō which a godly man brin∣geth with him to Gods worship, he doth feele his heart oftentimes on a sudden surprised with strange impressions, sometimes of sorrow, sometimes of feare and awful dread of God; sometimes of feruent
desires after God: some∣times of strong resolu∣tions of holy duties to be done by him, and the like, Math. 3. 11. 3. He feeles at some∣times3. Much assurance. in the vse of Gods ordinances a maruel∣lous worke of the holy Ghost, in respect of much assurance & strange establishment of his heart, both in the cer∣taine perswasiō of Gods loue, and the infallible beleefe of the truth; so as at that time no dan∣ger or death could a∣maze him, but he could willingly witnesse his
confidence by vndergo∣ing any thing could be∣fall him, 1. Thess. 1. 5. 4. He feeles at some∣times4. Ioy vn∣speakable. the vnspeakable & glorious ioyes of the holy Ghost, which are differing from the carnal ioyes or illusions may be found in wicked men, because they are such ioyes, as he feeles onely in the vse of some ordinances of God, and such as by ef∣fect make him more humble, and vile in his owne eyes, and do en∣flame him to an high de¦gree of the loue of God and goodnesse; which
illusions can neuer do. 5. The sanctification of5. The san∣ctification of his affli∣ctions. his afflictions is another infallible signe of Gods loue to him. For God makes his crosses to be∣come blessings vnto him, & worke his good, so as he may plainly see, that it was good for him to be afflicted: & besides, God giues him many times the experience of his goodnesse both by vnexpected consolation in his distresses, & graci∣ous deliuerance out of them▪ Rom. 8. 28. Ps. 119. 6. Lastly, to this place6. The an∣swer of his prayers. I may referre Gods hea∣ring
& answering of his prayers; whereas God doth not heare sinners, as was shewed in the end of the former Chapter. CHAP. IX. His triall by the Sacra∣ments. THe sixt & last waySixe rules of his triall about the sacrament. of triall of the estate of a Christi∣an, is by the Sacraments, and in particular by the Sacrament of the Lords supper. For God hath ap∣pointed the two Sacra∣ments to be his broad
seales to assure his fauor vnto his people: and be∣cause none but worthy receiuers cā be partakers of so great a priuiledge as the couenāt of Gods grace, and the Gospel of Iesus Christ: therefore hereby doth the true Christian distinguish himselfe from all men. For in becoming a wor∣thy receiuer he doth di∣uers things not only re∣quired in cōmunicants, but such as none but godly men can attaine vnto: As, 1. He doth forgiue his enemies, as heartily as he
desires God to forgiue him his trespasses. 2. He examines him∣selfe, and vpon examina∣tion he both eates with sowre hearbes (that is, comes with some mea∣sure of griefe for his of∣fences) and withall finds as vnfained a desire, that he might neuer offend God in any thing as that God should there assure him of the forgiuenes of his sins, and that he will neuer punish him for any of them, 1. Cor. 11. 3. The couenant of his heart is to cleaue to God, and the care of
godlinesse all the dayes of his life, 1. Cor. 5. 8. 4. He is in some mea∣sure perswaded of Gods loue to him in Christs, & discernes the Lords body, so as he is secretly in some degree perswaded of the spirituall presence of Iesus Christ, & of the operation of God: so as he beleeueth, that Christ will as certainly nourish his soule, as the outward elements can any way be fit to nourish his bo∣dy, Mar. 16. 16. Col. 2. 12. 1. Cor. 11. 5. He sometimes feeles the holy Ghost inward∣ly,
setting to Gods priuy seale by sudden refresh∣ings falling like the dew vpon his heart, and esta∣blishing his soule before the Lord, Eph. 1. 13. 1. Cor. 1. 12. 6. His heart is knit vn∣to the godly more and more, and increaseth in his resolution to cleaue to them onely, and for∣sake all other professions of men in the world; lo∣uing them vnfainedly, and desiring for euer to be a partaker of their lot. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
CHAP. X. The directions that shew him how to get assurance by the helpe of these signes. HItherto of the signes of the god∣ly man. Now fol∣lowes the course that the weake Christian should take by the vse of the former signes of triall, to establish his heart in the assurance of Gods fauour, and his owne eternall saluation. My aduice is therfore, that the weak Christian that finds want of esta∣blishment and cleare as∣surance,
should take the former signes of trial, & go apart, and set himself in Gods presence, emp∣tying his heart of world∣ly distractions, and seri∣ously consider of euery rule of triall apart; and gather out into some li∣tle paper-book so much as in euery signe he can clearly find to be in himself, and that which he durst through Gods mercy resolutly auouch to be wrought in him by the grace of God. And this I would haue him to do with delibe∣ration, trying himselfe
by one or two of the chiefe heads at most in a day, spending no more time about it then he may well allow, without wearinesse or dulnesse. Now because he may be perhaps discouraged with the obseruation of diuers things, which he may find wāting in him∣selfe in euery signe; he must therfore take some sound notice of the di∣stinction of Christians made by the Apostle Iohn, 1. Ioh. 2, who casts all true Christians into three sorts. Some are In∣fants, and either new
borne, or but weakly qualified with the gra∣ces of Christ: yet are right, & haue true grace in some measure. Others are strong men, that is, such as haue the gifts of the Spirit liuely and in their power in them. O∣thers are Fathers, that is, such as haue had long experience in the pow∣erfull practise of godli∣nes, and haue bene long exercised in all kinds of weldoing. Now all these three sorts may be sup∣posed to come to these signes. The weake Chri∣stian only takes to a few
of the plainest marks in the explication of each signe. The strong Chri∣stiā he takes to the most of the marks. The Fa∣thers they in a manner discerne all the particu∣lars of Gods graces, and the seuerall workings of them. Each of these, euē the weak Christian may see so much as may stay his heart in assurance, & so settle his faith & ioy. When there are many signes of one & the self-same thing, it is suffici∣ent if it can be demon∣strated, though it be but a few ways, seeing euery
particular marke being warranted by Scripture, hath force to conclude for assurance, and to proue, that we differ frō all the wicked men in the world. Though at the first in reading but a signe or two, thou get but a few things may cōfort thee, yet hold out till thou come to the end of all the signes, & then thou shalt see a faire army (as it were of arguments) to proue thy election and saluation. For whereas the most and best of vs, if we be asked this que∣stion,
By what marks do we know that we are the true children of God, & not wicked men? If we answer on a sudden, and by present memory, we can scarce giue two soūd reasons to proue the in∣fallibilitie of our happy estate: which shews, that the most of vs liue at a great vncertaintie. Now he yt hath gone through the signes, shal find per∣haps 20, or 30, or 40 se∣uerall and distinct argu∣ments or markes, which when he hath collected them all together, may serue to answer all the
obiections of all the di∣uels in hell. The gates of hell cānot preuaile against his faith: which I declare thus: If the diuell say, thou art a wicked man, and an hypocrite; thou mayest readily answer, that by ye grace of God in Iesus Christ thou art none such; and mayest put the diuell to proue by the word of God, that euer any wicked mā did attain to all those signes thou hast collected. Which, because it cānot be done, thou mayest with much rest and full assurance cōmit thy self
to God, and bind thy self by couenāt, neuer more to dishonor him by such vnbeleefe, as to call his loue & thy saluatiō into question. If a threefold cord cannot be broken, how weake then should thy heart be, if thou shouldst feare thy estate, vnto which God hath so sealed, and so many wayes marked thee out for himselfe? And for thy further satisfaction: after thou hast collected thy signes together, thou mayest carry them to thy godly Pastor, and desire him
to peruse them, and ac∣cordingly to giue thee his ministeriall testimo∣ny concerning them in the name of Iesus Christ; and this may adde much satisfaction & rest to thy conscience. If in reading any of the signes, thou find any speciall doubts; at any hād suppresse them not, but seeke resolution frō doubt to doubt, and frō signe to signe. Thou mayst gain much profi∣table knowledg by pro∣pounding these cases of thy particular cōscience. The least gaine that
can be imagined by this course, is, that whereas before thou hadst few e∣uidēces or none for thy estate, thou shalt now haue many of all sorts: and it must needs be thy owne waiwardnes, if as∣surance follow not. For these signes wil ransacke thee, and try thy very heart and reines, and all thy secretest desires and practises. Yea this benefit thou maist reap by the signes, that they wil tell thee all the days of thy life, how it is with thee, whether thou go forward or back
ward. For if by exami∣nation now thou gather out all thou canst find by thy self, these wil not onely lie by thee to help thee against any temp∣tation at any time; but besides, if thou try thy self again, either against the next Sacrament, or the next yeare, thou mayest discerne what groūd thou hast gotten or lost. If thou prosper, thou wilt discerne it, by taking in diuers things in each signe, which be∣fore thou durst not ac∣knowledge; and besides it will excellently shew
thee what thou wantest in each grace of God, & so what thou shouldest set thy selfe about to get thy wants supplied. It will at all times make a true Anatomy of thy e∣state; which to the well-aduised Christian ought to be accounted a mat∣ter of great moment. The God of peace giue thee all peace and ioy in beleeuing. If thou receiue any good by this Treatise, praise God, and pray for me. FINIS.
