A3935 E418_4 R204598 99864066 161329
A LETTER WRITTEN BY John Ashburnham Esquire, from Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight, Novemb. 26. 1647. TO William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honourable House OF COMMONS. LONDON. Printed for Richard Royston. 1647.
A LETTER WRITTEN BY Mr. IOHN ASHBURNHAM Esq. At Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of VVight, Novemb. 26. 1647. TO M. VVILLIAM LENTHALL Esq. Speaker to the Honourable House of COMMONS. SIR, HAving heard what Colonel Whalley re∣lated to the Honourable House of Commons, concerning the Kings gi∣ving (and withdrawing) of his Word, for his not leaving the Army with∣out their consent, hath had doubtfull interpretations, I have thought it my duty to set down unto you plainly the matter of fact, to the end, that all the world may see how free His Maje∣sty
is from having done any thing against His promise, it being my particular duty so to do, because I was the occasion that drew on His Majesties engagement. Soon after I came to wait on His Majesty at Woo∣borne, Colonel Whalley came to me, as he said, by com∣mand from the Army, to desire that I would give my Word, that His Majesty would not depart from them, without their consent: To which I reply'd, that I was willing to give my Word accordingly, untill I should re∣tract the same. For at that time, and long after, the King was so civilly used by the Army, that I was confi∣dent the King would not disavow me in it. In which I found I was not deceived; For as soon as I had ac∣quainted His Majesty therewith, He was pleased imme∣diatly to send for Colonel Whalley, and having enqui∣red of him, what passed between him and me, His Ma∣jesty said to the Colonel, that He did willingly con∣firme the engagement which I had made. Of which there was never more question, untill many weeks after His Majesty came to Hampton-Court. When the differences of the Army grew great, and an active and powerfull Party thereof daily menacing vio∣lence to His Majesties person, His Majesty commanded me to retract the Engagement, which I had formerly given, alleaging that Colonel Whalley affirmed to him, that the Officers of the Army had so little power to pre∣serve Him, as that they were scarce able to keep them∣selves from affronts. Whereupon, having found Colonel Whalley walking by the River side neer Hampton-Court, I told him, That I came to withdraw that Word, which I had given him,
for His Majesties not leaving the Army, without their consent. The Colonel said, Why then the King doth so too: and I told him, you are to understand it so. He added it was very fairly done, and he would take notice of it accordingly. And lastly, asking the reasons why I did this; I re∣plied, I found there was now no other language spoken in Court, but Scotch; and that there was a Party in the Army that began to run to all extremities. That though I was confident, His Majesty would never stir from them willingly; yet He might be forced away, and I was not willing to hazard my Honour, nor my Life, neither for Scot, nor Adjutator. And to shew you that Colonel Whalley rightly appre∣hended what I meant, he soon after went to the Head∣quarter, where he declared unto them, (as I am credibly informed) That the King and my self, had withdrawn our Words, and therefore desired that stricter Guards might be put about His Majesty, which was done accor∣dingly. And further to shew you, That the Colonel himself, made no question that the King had retracted His Word, it will clearly appear by this, as His Majesty was pleased to assure me: When His Majesties Children came to Hampton-Court, the strict Guards which were newly set about His Majesties person, behaved themselves so rude∣ly, that they much troubled the Princesse. Of which she complaining to the King, He call'd Colonel Whalley unto Him, and bade him take order, that his Guards should no more perturb His Childrens rest. Whereup∣on,
he smilingly answered, That if His Majesty would re-ingage Himself, He should have no more Guards than formerly. But His Majesty told him, that He would not, untill the Army gave Him good reason so to do: For He held it a point of Honour, not to be engaged to those, who had used Him so harshly, as they had done of late. And therefore the King said, He did not speak to him to remove the Guards, but onely that His Children might take their rest, when they came to see Him. Whereupon, Colonel Whalley promised that he would give strict commands accordingly. Colonel Whalley likewise spake to Master Legg of His Majesties Bed-chamber, saying, That the King found fault with the disturbance which the Guards gave; and that if the King would re-ingage himself, the Guards should be taken off. To which Master Legg replied nothing at that time; but after told him, That he would be an humble suitor to His Majesty to re-ingage Himself, so that he could pro∣cure from the Army, the re-admittance of all His Maje∣sties Attendance lately forbidden the Court, and that there might be no more Guards upon Him than for∣merly. Which the Colonel declined, saying, That it was ne∣cessary that those Guards should remain, for the security of His Majesties person. Which passage I have received from Master Legg. Besides these I could give more instances, as Colo∣nel Whalley's desiring His Majesty to forbeare riding a∣broad, immediately upon the withdrawing of His
Word, &c. But I hope these may serve, to shew the clearnesse of His Majesties dis-ingagement. And truly had I not been fully satisfied that His Majesty was free from that engagement, such is my tendernesse of His Majesties honour, that I should not very willingly (though at all times ready, according to my duty, to use my best endevours for the preservation of His Majesties life) have waited on him at this time. Sir, I hope this will find no lesse credit with you, and all men, then there is truth in this Relation, which is of∣ferd to you by Sir, Your humble servant JOHN ASHBURNHAM. FINIS.
