A4279 E451_30 R205278 99864694 116926
JƲLY 8. 1648. A TRUE RELATION Sent to the Honorable Committee AT DERBY-HOƲSE OF THE GREAT VICTORY OF The Parliaments Forces against those of SURREY: Where was about Twenty slain, amongst whom the Lord Francis is one, and two or three eminent Persons, One hundred taken Prisoners, and Two hundred Horse, and their Carriages. Die Saturni, 8 Julii, 1648. At a Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-House. ORdered, That this Relation be forthwith Printed and Pub∣lished. GUALTHER FROST Secr' London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, July 8. 1648.
A true Relation of the great Vi∣ctory of the Parliaments Forces against those of Surrey. IT pleased the Right Hono∣rable Committee of Derby House to employ me in the busines concerning the pro∣ceedings of their Enemies in Surrey, and Sir Michael Levesey hath sent me to make this Relation. Upon Thursday last by one of the clock he sent Three Troops of his own Regiment with me from Hounsloe to Rigat, to possess my Lord Monsons Ca∣stle, and also to prevent the Enemies in∣tentions at their pretended Hors-race upon Banstead Downs; but notwith∣standing our haste, the Enemy got in be∣fore us, to the number of Six hundred, as we made them when they drew forth o'th Town; and we beat off their Guard
from Red-hill, and faced them upon the same: The Enemy was afraid of us, and we of them, doubting them too strong for us to handle: So that I sent to Sir Michael Levesey and Major Gibbons, to speed up with all the force which might be, who accordingly with much chear∣ful readiness performed it Major Gib∣bons the same night marcht to Rigat, thinking to meet with the former said Three Troops, but he found the Town neglected by us, and also quitted by the Enemy. Upon Friday morning the Enemy having Intelligence, That none of the Parliaments Forces had entred the town, very early marched from Darking with their whole Forces, thinking to possess Riga again, and had so done, had not Major Gibbons with his own Troop, and two of Col: Riches entred the place be∣tween the Intelligence and their march, but finding themselves deceived, they marcht the ready road for Kingston:
About Two hours after this, the whole Forces for the Parliament: (viz.) Five Troops of Horse and Three Foot com∣panies of sir Michael Leveseys regiments, two Troops of Col: Riches with Major Gibbons his own Troop, marcht from their Rendezvous at Red-hill within half a mile of Rigat, and made such haste that our Forlorn of Horse were ready to tread upon their heels before they got to Ewel, and had some small skirmish with the Enemy in the Town, took some six Horses, and as many prisoners, and so urged the Enemy upon the march, that they took many others near Nonsuch park. Sir Mich: Levesey seeing the Enemy make more haste then good speed, prose∣cuted them the more sharply with his Van Division of Horse: The Enemy drew up their Horse upon a Hill in the midway between Nonsuch and King∣ston, and faced us; our Van Division of Horse drew near them in good order, both Parties sending out single men,
who plaid valiantly, whilest the Bodies on either side seemed to stand in su∣spence; our Commander in chief had reason to suspend the Fight till his Foot and his Rear-division of Horse vvere come up, besides we were to clamber a pretty Hill: Yet at last Providence guiding us, our Forlorn advanced, con∣sisting of Fifty Horse, commanded by a Cornet in Colonel Riches Regiment, who charging the enemy with much re∣solution, was as gallantly received, Ma∣jor Gibbons seconded him with his own Troop, and by it spoiled the Enemies hopes, the rest of the Forces followed of that first division, and wholly rout∣ted the Enemy; it was as sharp a charge (whilest it endured) as ever I saw since these unhappy Wars in England; the pur∣suit was violently maintained, and had not the Enemy ordered their flight bet∣ter then their march, our Horse had fell into Kingston with them, but they sent their Foot beforehand into Kingston,
who at our entrance into the Town repulsed us at the Turnpike, and our Foot not being yet come up, Sir Michael Levesey drew up several Divisions of Horse in the lane before Kingston, think∣ing to fall upon them that night, but the Foot came not up seasonably: we supposed the Enemy had prepared too well for us, so that we drew off all, save one Guard of Horse into a Close within half a mile of the Market-place, think∣ing to make some further attempt this morning, but the Enemy answering not our Alarum, the Guard of Horse advan∣ced into the Town, and found it quit of the Enemy; they left near one hun∣dred Horse in the Town, with their Carriages, and placed a cart full of seage and other combustible matter upon the Bridge, for favoring their flight, over which they are march'd. There were about Twenty slain, amongst whom the Lord Francis
is one, and two or three other eminent persons. There was taken of prisoners about One hundred. Of Horse Two hundred. The Enemies strength left him I conceive Three or Four hun∣dred. This Account is witnessed by Lewes Awdeley Major. Sir Michael Levesey answered my desire, in leaving twenty Foot Soldiers for a guard at Rigat Castle, Mr. Fenneck a Countrey Gentleman hath the ordering them, until the Honorable Committee shall otherwise appoint. FINIS.
