B197 E466_9 99864655 162297
A Perfect Summary Of the most Remarkable PASSAGES BETWEEN The Kings Majesty and the Commissio∣ners of Parliament at the Treating-house in NEWPORT. From October the 2. to October the 9. Concerning, 1. The Kings Majesties last Propositions to the Commissioners and their Answer. 2. His Majesties possitive answer to the point of Religion. 3. A learned Speech spoken by his Majesty touching Episcopacy. With the Answer thereunto. 4. Divers Remarkable Passages between his Majesty and the Com∣missioners sent to the Army. 5. A Message sent to the Lord Generall touching the Treaty. 6. The Parliaments Answer touching His Majesties last Propo∣sitions. 7. His Majesties last Papers delivered at the Treaty. 8. Severall Letters from Newport, concerning the proceedings be∣tween his Majesty and the Commissioners since the last continuance of the Treaty. Beginning Octob. 2. THis day came letters from Newport one of which specifieth, That the Kings Majesty with his Bishops and Lawyers, have had a great conference concerning the affaires of the Treaty, and his Majesty declars his earnest desires to Treate personally with his houses of Parl. and made some progresse in the Bill for the setlement of Religion. Papers came from his Maj. viz.
His Majesty will consent that the calling and sitting of the Assembly of Divines at westminster, be confirmed for 3. years by Act of Parliament. And confirm for 3. years the Directory. And the form of Church Government, to be used for the Churches of Eng∣land and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales; provided, that his Majesty and those of his Judgment, or any others who cannot in Conscience submit thereunto be not in the mean time obliged to comply with the same. And that a free consultation and debate be had, with the Assembly of Divines at Westminster in the mean time (20. of His Majesties homination being added un∣to them) whereby it may be determined by His Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament, how the said Church Government and form of publick worship after the said time, And how Religion may be setled, and the Articles determined, and care taken for the ease of tender consciences. Concerning Bishops Lands and Revenues, His Maj. will consent to an Act or Acts of Parl. wherby Lives or for years, not exceeding 99 years, shall be made of those Lands towards the satisfaction of the purchasers, and others to whom they are engaged, wherby they may receive satisfaction, or His Maj. will some other way, for their further satisfaction. Provided that the propriety and inheritance of those Lands may still remaine to the Church: And the rest shall be reserved to be for their maintenance. His Maj. will give his Royall assent for the better observation of the Lords day; for suppressing of innovations in Churches & Chap∣pels, in and about the worship of God, and for the better advan∣cing of the preaching of Gods holy word in all parts of this King∣dom. And to an Act against injoying pluralities of Benefices by Spirituall persons, and Nonresidency, for regulating and reforming both Universities, and the Collidges of Westminster, Winchester and Eaton, for the better discovery & speedy conviction of Popish Re∣cusants, as is desired in your Propositions; for the education of the children of Papists by Protestants, in the Protestant Religion, for levying penalties against Papists, to an Act to prevent the practises of Papists against State, and for putting the Lawes in execution and for a stricter course to prevent hearing and saying of Masse. But as to the Covenant, his Majesty is not yet therein satisfied, that he can signe or sweare it or consent to impose it, doth conceive it
proper or usefull on the consciences of others. Nor at this time to be in∣sisted on. Touching the Militia, His Majesty will consent to an Act of Parliament. That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England now assembled, or hereafter to be assembled, or such as they shal ap∣point, during the space of 10 years shall Arme, Train and Disci∣pline, or cause to be Armed Disciplined, All the forces of the King∣doms of England and Jreland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Gernsey and Gersey and the Town of Barwick up to Tweed, already raised, both for Sea and Land service, And shall from time to time during the space of 10 years raise, levy, arme, traine, and Disci∣pline, or caused to be raised, levied, armed, trained and disciplined any other forces for land and Sea service in the Kingdoms, Domini∣ons, and places aforesaid as in their judgments they shall during the space of 10 years think fit to appoint. And that neither the King, his heirs or successors, or any other but such as shall Act by the authority or approbation of the said Lords and Commons shall during the said space of 10 years exercise any of the powers aforesaid. And all the said forces disposed by the Lords and Commons as they shall think fit and not otherwise. And have power to suppresse all forces raised without their authority. To suppresse any forraign Forces invading the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Gernsey and Iersey, and the Towne of Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them. And after the expiration of the said ten yeares, neither the King His Heires or Successours, or any person or persons by colour or pretence of any Commissions power, deputation, or authority to be derived from the King. His Heirs or Successors, or any of them, shall without the consent of the said Lords and Commons, raise arme, train, discipline, imploy, order, manage, disband, or dispose any the forces by sea or land, without the consent of the said Lords and Commons. And with the same provisoes, for saving the ordinary Legall power of Officers of Justice, not being Military Officers, as is set down in your propositions. And with a Declaration that if 30 persons be assembled in a war∣like manner, and not forthwith disperse themselves being required
by them, To be guilty of High-treason; to be uncapable of any par∣don from his Majesty, his heirs or Successors. And that the City of London shall have and enjoy all their Rights, Liberties, &c. in raising and imploying the forces of that City, in such sort as is mentioned in the propositions. 1. That none be compelled, but in case of comming in of strange enemies. And that the powers for maintenance of forts and Garri∣sons, and pay of this present Army, be exercised to no other purposes then to the suppressing of forces raised, or to be raised, without au∣thority and consent of the said Lords and Commons as aforesaid or for suppressing of any forraine forces invading. And that the, monies be raised by generall, and equall Taxations, saving that Tonnage and Poundage, and such imposts as have been applyed to the Navy, and be raised as hath been usuall. And that all Patents, Commissioners, and other Acts concerning the premises, be made and Acted in his Majesties name by Warrant, signed by the Lords and Commons, and such other as they shall think fit to authorise for that purpose. Touching Irelnd, after advice with his 2 houses, He will leave it to their determination, and give His consent accordingly, as is herein hereafter expressed. Touching publick debts, His Maj. will give his consent to such an Act, for raysing of monies by generall and equall taxations. His Majesty will consent to an Act, that during the said space of 10. years, the L. Chancelour, or the L. Keeper Com. of the great Seal, or treasury L. Warden of the Cinque-ports, Chancellour of the Exchequer, and Dutchy, Secretaries of State Master of the Rolls, Judges of both Benches, and Barons of the Exchequer of England, be nominated by both houses of the Parliament of England to con∣tinue quam Diu se bene gesserint: And in the intervaies of Parl, by such others as they shall authorise for that purpose. His Maj. will consent that the Militia of the City of London & Liberties thereof, during 10 years may be in the ordering and Government of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in the Common Councell Assem∣bled, or such as they from time to time appoint, to be imployed & directed from time to time during the space of 10 years in such man∣ner as shall be agreed upon, and appointed by both houses of Parl. And no Citizen of London, nor any Officers of the said City shall
be drawne forth, or compelled to go out of the said City or Liber∣ties thereof, for Millitary service, without their own free consent. That an Act be passed for granting & confirming the Charters, Customes, Liberties and Franchises of the City of London, notwith∣standing the Non user, Misuser, or Abuser. And that during the tenne yeares, the Tower of London may be in the Government of the City of London. And his Majesty doth only propose, that he may have liberty, to repaire forthwith to Westminster, and to be restored to a condition of freedom and safety, (a thing which he shall never deny to any of his Subjects) and to the possession of his Lands and Revenues; And that an Act of Oblivion, and Indempnity may passe, to extend to all persons, for all matters relating to the late unhappy differences, which being agreed by his 2. Houses of Parliament, his Majesty will be ready to make these his Concessions binding by giving them the force of Lawes by his Royall Assent. The Lords this day received this letter from the King, brought by Captain Titus. And both Houses had letters from the Commissio∣ners, sent by a Messenger of theirs, concerning the Treaty, Upon which both Houses voted that they do approve of what the Com∣missioners have done. And a letter of thanks to be sent them, desi∣ring them to go on according to their instructions. The Parliament Message to the Army touching the Treaty. Sir Thomas Withrington, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Nathaniell Fines, and Mr. Thomas Chaloner, were chosen Commissioners from the Parl. to congratulate the Lord Gen. and gives his Excellency thanks for all his good services, and communicate the particulers of what is done as to himself, and for his Army. And some votes concerning the easing of free quarter. October 3. This day came little Newes from Newport, only that his Maje∣sty is very desirous to have things brought to a conclusion, & seems not well satisfied about the point of Religion, but dayly expects an answer to his last concessions. Right Honourable, THe businesse here is of little consequence for matter of Newes, only that which I believe you have formerly had, which is as fol∣loweth, viz. That His Majesty (in the absence of the Commissio∣ners)
and those that have leave of the Parliament to attend him, were very close about the Bill of Church Govern∣ment. But at night after supper, his Majesty withdrew to pre∣pare a paper to be presented to the Parliaments Commissi∣oners the next day; But in regard that all things were not finished (as to satisfie) the Bishops and Doctors were ap∣pointed to meet him again the next morning. But besides the dispute about this businesse of Church-Government, The King had consultation with the Lords, and also with the Lawyers, and others about him, concer∣ning the rest of the propositions, some of them (as was said) having given his Najesty advice to send a letter to the Parl. to propound somthing to the Houses in a taking way, so as that his Maj. may come to London, and treat with the Parliament at Westminster about such things as are not con∣siderable. And besides that, by such Propositions he would find what the sence of the 2. Houses of Parliament is, and what his friends will do. And his Majesty was advised (as was said) first to offer this letter to the Commssioners, and they refusing it, he would send it up by one of his own Messengers, or atten∣dants. His Majesty presented to the Commissioners a letter to the Parliament with Propositions to the Parliament con∣cerning many things contained in the Proposition from the Parliament, and offering to treat for the rest, desiring that they would send it to the Parliament. But in regard that it is contrary to their Instructions, the Commissioners desired to be excused, and desired that His Majesty would please to give his answer to the Bill for Re∣ligion,
and so proceed by the way of Treaty, upon the rest in order, which was the thing which they received in com∣mand from the Parliament. The Commissioners that night dispatched a Messenger to the Parl. with Letters to acquaint the Houses that His Majesty hath as yet consented to nothing, but only the bill for recalling of the Declarations, &c. And that ever since they have proceeded upon the Bill for Religion, but no∣thing as yet concluded. And also to advertise the Parl. that his Maj. offered to them a paper to be sent to the Parl. of Propositions by him made, to grant such and such things, and then the King to come to London, and treat for the rest. These being the cheifest passages here for the present, I remain yours T. B. Octob. 5. Right Honourable, HIs Maj. thought to stay his possitive answer to the matter of Religi∣on (now in debate here) untill he heard answer of his Message sent by Capt. Titus; but upon a motion from Mr. Seamer, one of the Mini∣sters with the Commissioners to undertake to prove that Lay Presbyte∣rians are Jure Divino. His Majesty said that he had heard much of him (though a stranger) And that he did desire to discourse with him, A conference was had, and excellent Arguments laid down, And the King also discoursed very learnedly, but how farre his Majestie is satisfied therein, he hath not yet declared. The Treaty now goes on again, And you will hear somthing (considerable) from hence suddenly. Newport 4. Octob. 1648.
Octob. 6. Right Worshipfull, HAving so trusty a Messenger, I could not chuse but advise you somthing of the State of businesses with us in this Island, viz. The Kings Majesty is in all likelihood in a way to come to an Agreement with the Commissioners, so that here is great hopes of a Conclusion; the point of Religion was the last thing they were upon, some papers were delivered to the Commissioners, which have caused much scruple be∣twixt the King and Commissioners, but we hope all difficulties will be passed over with facity and a happy conclusion for the good of the King∣dom. So I remain From Newport this 2. of Octob. 1648. Your humble Servant T. B. Octob. 7 His Majesties papers delivered into the Commissioners in defence of Bishops, were 1. That his Maj. cannot consent to abolishing Epis∣copacy, because it is his judgment that they are nearest to Apostoli∣call institution. 2. That he is not satisfyed how he can in Conscience do it in regard of his Coronation Oath. To the former the Mini∣sters delivered in their Answers, and prooffs of Presbytery to be nearer. To the latter. The Lawyers gave his Majesty satis∣faction. SIR, ACcording to your desires in your last, I have sent you a Narra∣tive of the proceedings in these parts, viz. That the Kings Ma∣jesty as yet hath given no answer to to the Matter of Religion; but through some occasions given, hath had some small disputation with Mr. Seamer a Minister with the Com: and discoursed very learned∣ly about the Presbyterian Government; His Majesty delivered some papers touching the Bishops. His Majesty cannot consent to abo∣lishing Episcopacy, neither could he be satisfyed how he might in con¦cience do it, in regard of his coronation oht, both which the Ministers and Lawyers gave his Majesty satisfaction in, Sir I remain From Newport Octob. 6. 1648. Your humble devoted Servant L. S. FINIS.
