B2610A 99896306 153830
DAVEIDOS: OR A Specimen of some of David's Psalms IN English METRE. With Remarks upon the Late TRANSLATORS, By Mr. JOHN PHILLIPS LONDON; Printed for William Keblewhite, at the Swan in St.Paul's Church-Yard, 1798.
THE PREFACE IT was the Complaint of a Person no less eminent in the Church of England, then Dr. Don, Dean of St. Paul's, that the Psalms of King David, I mean as they were tran∣slated into English Metre in his time, and by that means being adapted to the Vulgar Tunes, were made a considerable Part of the Publick Worship, should be admitted into the Church in such an un∣decent and unmannerly Dress. That Great Person, who himself expressing his own Thoughts and Notions with so much Rapture and Sublimity, must certainly be deem'd a competent Judge, in his Po∣em upon the Translation of the Psalms by Sir Philip Sidney and his Sister the Countess of Pembrook, cannot for∣bear
condoling the Misfortune of these Celestial Hymns, so rudely handl'd by o∣ther Pens. Says he, The Songs are these, which Heav'ns High Holy Muse Whisper'd to David, David to the Jews: And David's Successors in Holy Zeal, In Forms of Joy and Art do re-reveal To us so sweetly, and sincerely too, That I must not rejoice as I would do, When I behold that these Psalms are become So well attir'd abroad, so ill at home; So well in Chambers, in thy Church so ill, As I can scarce call that reform'd, untIl This be reform'd — Since the Death of Dr. Donne, seve∣ral Persons have attempted to redress this Grievance with more Zeal then good Success; for Zeal and Poetry are two different Inspirations that do not al∣ways accompany one another. Men may be good Men, eloquent Divines, most ex∣cellent Preachers, yet but very bad Po∣ets. Sandys of later times, and Bu∣chanan
before him, both adventur'd to imp their Muses Wings with Cherubims Feathers, and suffer 'em to expatiate in the Tempes of Fancy and Exuberancy; yet Cowley in his Preface to his Pin∣daric Odes, ranges both those Great Men among those that have not hit the Mark. For, says He, All the Tran∣slators of the Psalms of David, even Mr. Sands Himself (for in despite of Popular Error, I will be bold not to Except him) are so far from doing Honour, or at least Justice to that Divine Poet, that, methinks, they revile him worse then Shimei. And Buchanan himself, who much the best of them all, and indeed a great Person, comes, in my Opinon, no less short of David, then his Country does of Judea. And the Reason of this he gives to be, because that none of these Peo∣ple have sought to supply the lost Ex∣cellencies of another Language, with new ones in their own. To this I cannot forbear adding, That all the Translati∣ons which I have hitherto seen since his time, are equally as guilty of their Pre∣decessors
Faults, and are so far from supplying us with the Excellencies of our Language, that where they are forc'd, for their conveniency, to gloss upon the Sense of the Text, they rather deform the Granduer of the Sacred Authors's Style with flat and insipid Notions of their own, and Expressions no less impro∣per, mean, and vulgar. They fetch in Rhimes by the Head and Shoulders like so many obstinate Delinquents, and bind 'em with the Chains of Impropriety ànd Incongruity to Words and Sentences al∣together forc'd and foreign from the true Signification: and all this, to patch up a Clink i'the Close. And while they pre∣tend to be Reformers of others, sin a∣gainst the very Idiom of the Language which they pretend to be Masters of. Unri∣vall'd, of which the Translators N. B. and N. T. seem to be proud off, is an Epithite by no means proper for God: And In∣carnate, ten times worse for the Mes∣siah. For Incarnate is a word more fre∣quently taken in an ill then a good Sense. We say of Women that are con∣tinually Brawling and Scolding, that they
are Devils Incarnate. And therefore Words that admit of a twofold and du∣bious Signification, are to be carefully avoided in a Sacred Translation. Their Cadences, which ought to fall with the greatest ease and softness imaginable, are harsh and violent, rather like the Shogs and Rubs of Carts and Coaches against the Posts i'the Street, then natural Closes. Of this number are The feather'd Throng, spoken of Birds. His rains from Heav'n parch'd Hills recruite; and Storms, the swift wing'd Steeds with which he flies. Really, not good Sense. And make the angry Sea comply— Let all the World, O Lord, combine, to praise, &c. Then shall the Teeming Ground a large Increase disclose— These Ex∣pressions will serve in a Ballad, but there is nothing of Flight, nothing of Curi∣osity in 'em. Of the same nature are, A thousand dewy Sweats distill'd— Thy word unseal'd the Springs — You who the Lord adore, your Vows before him lay— Thy ratling Thunders roard around— As Floods
through ancient Forrests roar, or Mountain Shrubs surprize— God for their Diet finds a way— When great they seem, like some large Cloak, let shame be round 'em rould— But enough of these Blunders in General, little superiour to Hopkins and Sternhold: for they do so Scaturire, that it would almost require a Transcription of the whole to re∣peat 'em all. In short, the Poetry, more es∣pecially N. B. and N. T's is very ordinary, and insipid, not to be call'd Poetry; the Con∣texture nothing better then Linsey Woolsey, and the Stuffing meer Thrums. To come to particulars, I would fain know how N. B. and N. T. could pick out of these words, Beterem javinou Sirothekem Atad, in the 58th. Psalm, Ante spinae Vestrae crescant in Rham∣num, this piece of ill sounding and spro∣positous Sense, E're Thorns can make the Fleshpots Boyl; 'twas certainly be∣fore Dinner; For I cannot see the least ground in the words for such a Pye Cor∣ner Expression. In the 95th. Psalm the Text runs thus, Ki El Gadol Jehova,
ou melek Gadol gnal Col Elohim. Quia Deus Magnus Jehova, & rex Magnus super omnes Deus. These words N. B. and N. T. thus Translate. For God the Lord, enthron'd in State, Is with unrival'd Glory great, A King Superiour far to all, Whom by his Title God we call. Here are no less then two Blunders to supply the conciseness of the Text; un∣rivall'd Glory, hardly warrantable; whom by his Title God we call, of which there is nothing at all in the Text; only it was a hard Shift which might have been supply'd with much better words. These occurr'd to the first Glances of my Eye, and I was unwilling to examin any farther for fear of meeting many more. I shall say nothing farther at present of their Translation, but that it is too full of He'ls and He's, deformities not to be endur'd in true and elegant Poe∣try.
As for the Psalms that have lately appear'd under the Name of Mr. Mil∣bourn, they may be truly said to be his: For the whole is an exuberant Para∣phrase, with little of David in it; in∣somuch that they may be rightly call'd David's Psalms in Disguise. For why should this Gentleman spend such an ex∣uberancy of words upon only Ahsre ha Isch, in the first Psalm, Beatus Vir, A thousand Blessings crown his Head— Or how it could come into his Mind to fancy the dreadful Sound of the last Trumpet in the word Mischphat, which signifies in that place no more then an Assembly, which is plain from its being coupled with the word Gnadath, which signifies Caetus. Or lastly, how could he extract such an effluvium from the first words of the second Psalm, Lummat Ragschou Goiim, ou leummim yehe∣gou Rik. God's wife Decrees are fix'd and strong As his Eternal Throne;
Why then should Heathen Fools so long His Sacred Power disown? Vain are their hopes, vain every thought, And all their words are vain, For what Gods mighty Hands have wrought, God's mighty Hands maintain. What is this to the Purpose? nothing I'm sure to the Text: And besides the Elegancy of the double expostulation is lost. Such Paraphrases as these rather mislead then Instruct. And therefore Benedicat Deus operi & Authori. Paraphrases are nothing to our Business. There is in the last place a small Speci∣men printed for the Company of Statio∣ners for the reforming of old Sternhold and Hopkins, but it begins so unfortu∣nately, that I dàre be bold to assert, that the Honour of reforming those Authors is not reserv'd for that Gentleman. For the first Psalm instead of being reform'd is render'd ten times worse then it was before. There is such a Hysteron Pro∣teron in the two first Lines, that stum∣sently
bles you at the very Threshold, and pre∣sently calls for a Candle to light you to the Sence. The Man is blest, by ill advice, To walk, who doth forbear. The rest is much of the same Form and Stile; from whence we may safely conclude, that the Expressions of Stern∣hold and Hopkins are too beggarly al∣ready to want any more Patching. It may be objected in defence of these Gentlemen, that they condescend to a mean and vulgar way of expressing them∣selves, for the better understanding of the Common People, and in complyance with their Capacities. But whose fault is that, the People are no better taught? At least I am sure it would be much more for the Honour of the Publick Worship that they should be better instructed, then to sing the Praises of God in un∣decent and incongruous Language. 'Tis the General Opinion, that the Psalms
of David, in their Original Beauty were the most exalted Productions of a divine and soaring Genius, and with∣al, the Perfection of the Hebrew Idiome, and that they were inrich'd with a Co∣pious and Eloquent Conciseness which our Modern Languages cannot reach, without the help of Paraphrase and Cir∣cumlocutions. However those two As∣sistances are very warily to be made use of; by no means too profusely; yet so as to supply the vacuums of our own Language with those Beauties of the En∣glish Idiom, which come the nearest to the Grandeur of Style and Meaning of the Author: And to this a due Con∣sideration of the Subject of the Psalm, and the Occasion of the Author's wri∣ting it, and the Connexion and Cohe∣rence of the Sentences will very much contribute. 'Tis true that there are some of these Psalms that are written with a plain∣ness befitting the Subjects of Penitence, Prayer and Confession.
On the other side, there are others so truly Poetical, and full of sublime Rapture, that if they be not follow'd with a Spirit and a Fancy in some measure adequate, they must of necessity loose their Luster. Seeing therefore that Specimens are come into the Mode, and that so many have so good an Opinion of themselves as to believe their Offerings worthy of the Publick View, I thought it now my time to be not Semper Auditor tan∣tum, especially having by me so many as I have of David's Psalms, some long since Translated, and others of  later Date. I know I shall not wait for Censure, having adventur'd to pass my Judgment so freely upon others. But for that, my Years and Education may in some measure bear me out. The Method which I took, that I might avoid the Rock which others had dash'd against, was in the first place to throw off the Shackles of Rhime, a weight
that lyes a little too heavy upon Fancy and Invention, but which I would ne∣ver be a Slave to. In the next place, I had the Assistance of the Original it self, the Latin, and Greek Versions, together with the Chaldee Paraphrase, all which I examin'd with the best Judgment I had. Nor was I without the two English Tran∣slations, not refusing to look upon Stern∣hold and Hopkins, sometimes, whether by accident or no, not far distant some∣times from the Point. As for my Talent in Poetry, I leave that with the rest for others to judge of: Only this I must add, that whoe∣ver he be, who has not that Talent in some measure above N. B. and N. T. whatever his other Properties or Perfe∣ctions are, shall never obtain much Cre∣dit by Translating David's Psalms. I will not insist upon the Ʋse and Be∣nefit of the Singing Psalms in Churches, which would savour too much of inclining to Self-interest. 'Tis sufficiedt for me, that the Church of England has approv'd
the Custome, and given 'em admission in∣to their Congregations. And truly, since the Voices of the People are so much re∣form'd to what they have been, by the many Organs set up in several Church∣es in this Ciry, 'tis but Reason that the Words they Sing should be reform'd as well. By whomsoever it be done, I shall not envy that Honour to the Per∣son who does it as it should be. Ne∣vertheless as I have shewd my self rea∣dy to serve the Publick, I should ac∣count it among the greatest Felicities of my Life if such a Work as this should Crown the end of my Days.
PSALM I. BLest is the Man who in the Paths Of Sinners never stray'd; Nor listen'd to the Scorners Charms, By wicked Counsel sway'd. But in the Law of God, the Lord, Doth place his whole Delight; And to observe his pure Commands Doth labour Day and Night. He, shall be like a goodly Tree That by the water grows, Whose timely fruit makes early hast To ease the tender Boughs. His verdant Leaf shall never fade, But Winter's rage withstand; For still desir'd Success shall crown Whate'er he takes in hand. But no such fixed Happiness Shall the ungodly find; They're like the Chaff blown from the Earth. By every gust of Wind, Nor shall the wicked dare to stand, Where  in Judicio aut loco judicii. God-like Justice pleads, Among the  in Coetu Justorum. Righteous, still afraid To shew their guilty Heads,
For the Omnipotent well knows The ways of righteous Men; But in their bold career destroys The Scoffers hateful Train. PSALM II. WHY do the Heathen, drunk with rage, Such frantick uproars make? Why do the People vain designs So vainly undertake? The Kings and Rulers of the Earth, In deep contrivance bold, Against the Lord and David's Throne A solemn League do hold. Proudly they cry, come let us cast Their servile bands away; Let us in sunder break their cords That bind us to obey. But he that dwells in Heav'n above, Shall laugh them all to scorn; And in derision of their Craft, Their Plots to folly turn. Then in his wrath he shall rebuke The blindness of their ways,
And in his hot Displeasure vex The remnant of their days. But he hath set his King on high, The King he always lov'd; And fix'd his Throne on Sion Hill That never shall be mov'd. Concerning him will I declare Heav'ns firm and high Decree, Thou art my Son, he said, this day Have I begotten thee. Ask but of me, the Heathen shall Be thy Inheritance; To every corner of the Earth Thy Empire shall advance. For they with rods of Iron bruis'd, Before thy feet shall fall; Like Potsherds into pieces broke, So shalt thou break them all. Now therefore, O ye Kings be wise, And to my Words give ear; And all ye Judges of the Earth My timely Precepts hear. With fear and trembling serve the Lord, Submissive to his Law; When ye rejoce, rejoice in Him With a Religious Awe. Lest he be angry, to the Son Obedient Homage pay; For fear ye perish, in the Paths Of Error led astray.
For ye must die, if once, his Wrath Be kindl'd in his Breast; But they that trust in him are safe, In his Protection blest. Osculamini filium, ne irascatur. Some of the Rabbins atttibute the ne irascatur to God the Father, and so turn it this way, Osculamini filium, ut sedet Iram putris. Simile est hoc Regi, qui ira percitus est in cives. Iuerunt igitur Cives & rogaverunt filium Regis ut seda∣ret iram patris. PSALM III. When David fled from his Son Absolon. O Lord, how numerous are they grown That trouble my repose, Many are they that still increase The Burthen of my Woes. Many there be that scoffing say To my disturbed Soul, His God no more shall be his Aid, Nor our Designs controul. But Thou art the secure Defence On which my hopes rely; Thou dost my Honour still maintain, And lift my head on high.
I call'd, I cry'd unto my God, When I was weak and faint; And from his Holy Hill he heard The voice of my complaint. I laid me down, and slept secure, And safely rose again; Regardless of my present fears, For God did me sustain. I will not their ten thousands fear, By thousands multiply'd, Tho' in the midst of all their Power Hemm'd in on every side. Arise, O God; the Lord appears: For on the shameless  Gena, Maxillas.  Dentes. Cheek They now are smitten with Reproach, That did my Ruin seek. And more to disappoint their Rage, Thy all-o'recoming Pow'r Has broke their Fangs envenom'd force, So eager to devour. Salvation thus belongs alone Unto the Lord above, Who for his People keeps in store The Blessings of his Love.
PSALM IV. THou Great Defender of my Cause Unto my cries gave ear; My God reliev'd me in Distress, And heard my humble Prayer. Proud Sons of Men, how long will you My Honour thus despise? That please your selves in vain Designs, And wander after Lyes? On Judah's Throne the Lord has plac'd Segregavit sibi Benignum seu potius sanctum; for the word signifies both. A righteous Soveraign; And he will surely hear my Voice, When ever I complain. With trembling then his Power confess, And strive to sin no more; Ponder at Night upon the Deeds Ye did the Day before. In your Retirements most remote, Your treacherous hearts upbraid; And every evil thought chastise, When on your Pillows laid. Let Justice be your Sacrifice With an unfeigned zeal; Then hope in God, and to his Throne For mercy still appeal. Men say, that our forsaken Cause No friends will now embrace, Therefore, O King of Heav'n, unvail The Brightness of thy face.
For greater joy my cheared heart Has in thy favour found, Then they had ever when their wheat And wine did most abound. Therefore will I lye down in Peace, And take my due Repose, For only from the Lord himself, My safe Protection flows. PSALM V. POnder my Words I thee implore, My mournful Words, O Lord, And also to my secret Sighs Thy gracious Ear afford; Hearken with speed unto the sound Of my continual Cries; For at thy Throne, my God and King, My sad Soul prostrate lies. Lord in the Morning hear my Voice, For at thy Heav'nly Gate, My early importuning Pray'rs Thy answer boldly wait. For thou art not a God that dost In wicked Works delight,
While every froward friend of Sin Is banish'd from thy sight. The wayward Fool shall not enjoy the splendor of thy Face; Those hidden Glories shine remote from their detested Race. The busie forgers of untruth shall perish undeplor'd; Such sons of Blood and deep Deceit Thou always hast abhor'd. But I will to thy House approach, Embolden'd by thy Grace, And pay the Tribute of my Vows Within thy Holy Place. Teach me to shun those crooked Paths Wheren my Foes are led; But in thy ways, from wandring safe, Direct me how to tread. For in their Mouths there is no truth Or care of Promise made, Corrupt within, like canker'd Flesh With rottenness decay'd. Their slanderous Throats are like the smells Of open Sepulchers; Whose flattering Tongue in vile defence Of falshood only swears. But let their own Designs, O Lord, Their own Confusion be; Subvert them in their heaps of Sin, Proud Rebels against Thee.
But they that trust in Thee, let them Triumph for evermore, Let them rejoyce in thy defence, Who thy great Name adore. In Showers of Plenty upon them Thy Blessings shall descend; Them shall thy Favour, like a Shield, In all distress defend. PSALM VI. OH! do not in thy Anger, Lord, My secret Shame detect; Nor while thy Fury yet remains, My guilty Soul correct: For I am weak, O therefore, Lord, In mercy me restore; And with thy heav'nly Balsom heal My Bones, with trembling Sore. My heavy Soul tormented lies Opprest, with inward Grief; My God, how long wilt Thou delay, E'er Thou afford Relief? Return, O Lord, and my sad Soul From horrid Death defend, Oh! for thy holy Mercy's sake, Some speedy succour send; For who within the Cells of Death, Can praise Thee under Ground?
Or who in the Infernal Pit, Thy Wonders can resound? Weary with groaning every Night, In Tears I bath my Bed; And all the Day my water'd Couch Supports my drooping Head. The luster of mine Eyes is fled, By sorrow chac't a way; Mine Eyes are sunk, to see my Foes, Now bear triumphant sway. Be gone, be gone, all ye that toil In Works of Wickedness; Heaven's King hath heard my weeping Voice With ptomise of Redress. Pleas'd with my Prayers, the Lord receiv'd My humble Sacrifice, And soon his reconciled Ear Was open to my Cries. Now shall he so my Foes perplex, So tame their growing Pride, That they shall run with speedy flight, Their sudden Shame to hide. PSALM VII. O Lord, my God, I have repos'd My Confidence in Thee, From them that persecute my Soul Now then deliver me: Lest greedy of my guiltless Blood, They do my Soul devour,
As the fierce Lyon rends the Prey Within his ravenous power. O Lord my God, if justly they Charge on me this Offence, If I have acted any Crime To stain my Innocence; If e'er the kindness of my Friend I willingly forgate, Or rather have not saved those That bare me causeless hate; Then let my Foes pursue my Soul, Not knowing whom to trust; Let them tread down my Life to Earth, My Honour to the Dust. Else Lord, arise, and in thy Wrath Against my Foes appear, That thy confirmed Promises My Innocence may clear. Then shall thy People worship Thee, To quiet Peace restor'd; Oh! therefore, for thy People's sake, Advance thy Strength, O Lord. Nor do I fear but thou wilt give Just Sentence on my side; When Thou my clear Integrity, And Righteousness hast try'd Second Part. Confound, O Lord, ungodly Men, That vent their Spleen in vain,
But guide the Just, and make thy ways Unto their Footsteps plain. For tho' the secret Bosom hides Our Thoughts from Mortal Eye; Yet like unfolded Leaves, all Hearts Before Thee open lie. Therefore will I in God alone For Aid and Succour trust, Who stil preserves the Righteous, And still protects the just. Jehovah is a righteous Judge, And patient in his Power, Suffering the Wicked to provoke His Anger every Hour. But if the Wicked will not turn From Sin's alluring Charms, He whets his Sword, and bends his Bow, His Sin-revenging Arms. Chas'd by such Instruments of Death, No place shall give them Rest, He makes his Arrows sharp to pierce The Persecutor's Breast. Behold, they travel all in vain Their Mischief to bring forth, For Mischief is the thing conceal'd, Tho' Folly be the Birth. Deep Pits they dig, in hopes to catch The Righteous there betray'd, But reel themselves into the Grave, For others Ruin made.
For on their own forsaken Heads Their plotted Mischiefs fall; And while they studie to revenge, Feel Vengeance first of all. Therefore with Thanks will I extol The pleader of my Right; And his protecting Truth in Songs Of Lasting Praise recite. PSALM VIII. O Lord our God, how ought the World Thy wondrous Name to prize, For thou thy Glory hast advanc'd Above the starry Skies. The tender Babes and Sucklings crie In witness of thy Fame, And to the Heav'n-contemning Crowd Thy Providence proclaim. While I the Heav'ns behold, the work of thy Almighty Hand, The Moon and Stars in order fix'd By thy divine Command: Then deeply reasoning with my Soul, I these discourses make, Oh! what is Man, that thou hast wrought Such wonders for his sake. For little lower in degree Then happy Angels plac'd, Thou hast his Rare Seraphic Form, With Heav'nly Beauty grac'd.
O're all the Works that Thou hast made He beareth lordly Sway, All Creatures with submissive Awe His ample Power obey. The profitable Sheep, and Ox, To hardy Toil decreed; And all the Beasts that in the Field, Or in the Desart feed. The winged Fowl and lesser Fish That in the Rivers keep, With all the larger Fry that haunt The secrets of the Deep. Therefore, O Thou, o'er all the World Chief Lord and Governour, How powerful is thy wondrous Name, How wonderful thy Power! PSALM IX. WITH my whole Heart will I sing praise Unto the Lord our God: The noble Acts which thou hast done, Will I declare abroad. I will be glad, I will rejoyce In Thee, O thou most High! And in my Hymns thy blessed Name, For ever magnifie. For thou hast put my Enemies To ignominious flight, That they with shame before Thee fall, And languish at thy sight.
Thou by thy Power hast still maintain'd my just and righteous Cause, Commanding from thy starry Throne, Obedience to thy Laws. Thou hast rebuk'd the Heathen's Rage, and wicked Men destroy'd; Their Name is perish'd from the Earth, Of all remembrance void. Insulting Enemies! no more Your desolations boast, For like the Cities ye laid waste, The Fame of you is lost. But he that dwells above the Stars, For evermore shall Reign; He hath prepar'd his Royal Throne True Judgment to maintain. To all the Nations of the Earth, Will he his Truth declare, His chosen People unto Him For Justice shall repair. The sure Protector of the Poor, Will he at length appear, In time will he the sad Complaint Of their Affliction hear. And therefore they that know thy Name, Shall on thy Help depend: For still on them thy Guarding Power Ne're faileth to attend.
Second Part. Sing praises therefore to the Lord That doth in Sion dwell, Unto the People all his Works In Songs of Wonder tell. He strictly searches for the Blood Of them that are opprest, And bears in mind the Poor's complaint, Until they be redrest. Have mercy on me, O my God, In pity of my grief; Behold how near the Gates of Death I beg thy swift Relief. That rescu'd so, on Sion Hill, Thy praise I may set forth; And thy Salvation loudly sing In Songs of sacred Mirth. Sunk are the Heathen in the Pit For others Ruin made, Their Feet are taken in the Net which they in secret laid. Oh! Justice still to be admir'd, By just Examples taught: For still the wicked dig the Snares In which themselves are caught. Headlong to the forgotten Grave, Ungodly Men descend; Untimely Death mows down the proud, That against Heav'n contend.
For always will he not forget The Poor when they complain, Nor shall the Humble in Distress, For ever wait in vain. Up Lord, and let not Man prevail 'Gainst thy Celestial might, But on the Heathen take revenge, So guilty in thy fight: Let them in dread of Thee despair, That in their deep distress They then may know themselves but Men, And Thee their Lord confess. PSALM X. WHy so far distant from us, Lord, Dost thou conceal thy Face? Now that our Troubles most require The Comfort of thy Grace. For wicked Men, the vexed Poor Of all their Peace deprive, But Lord, confound them in the Plots Which they themselves contrive. They boast of all their Hearts desire With Power and Riches stor'd; In friendship with the Covetous, They scom the living Lord. Such is their Pride, that after God Their Folly never sought,
And hold the knowledge of his Name Not worthy of a thought. They prosper in their wicked ways, And from their scornful Eyes So far remote thy judgments are, That they thy power despise. He faith in his deceived Heart, What cause have I of dread? For I shall never now be mov'd, Nor danger reach my Head. His Mouth is full of vile Untruth And cursed Blasphemy; Under his Tongue Deceit and Fraud, Like poys'nous Adders lye. In private Villages he waits, To slay the Innocent; In secret Holes his leering Eyes Against the poor are bent. He lurketh as a Lyon lurks, The humble to defeat, And merciless devours the Poor Entangl'd in his Net. With curteous Bow and lowly Cringe, He bends his treacherous Knee, Thus falls the Poor, in heaps betray'd By smooth Hypocrisie Then in his wicked Heart, saith he, God has forgot their Cries, He shall for ever vale and hide Their misery from his Eyes.
Second Part. Now then arise, O God, arise, Lift up thy Potent Hand; And succour thy afflicted Poor, That have so long complain'd. Wherefore should wicked Men blaspheme, And thus thy power despise, Their God is otherwise imploy'd Then to regard their Cries. For sure thy all surveying Eye, Their Tyrannies beheld ; Severely marking open Wrongs And Malice most conceal'd. Since therefore it remains in Thee, The Feeble to defend, To Thee the Poor commits their Cause, The Orphans only friend. Break thou the Strength of evil Men, O God, whom we adore; Pursue their bold Impieties Until they be ho more, Then shall thy rescu'd Poor confess Thy everlasting Reign, While deep Perdition swallows up The Ungodly and Prophane. But the Petitions of the Poor, Thou wilt in Mercy hear, With thankful Hearts by thee prepar'd, To reap the Fruits of Prayer.
Then shalt thou judge the Fatherless, And give the Poor his right, Nor shall the haughty Tyrant more Oppress him With his Might. PSALM XI. GOD is my Hope; then to my Soul Why speak ye bitter words? And say, fly to the desert Hills, Like the affrighted Birds. Behold, the Wicked bend their Bow; And ready is the Dart, With fatal Aim directed still To pierce the Righteous Heart. All the Foundations of his Hope Are quite cast down, they cry: Lord! what have good Men done, that they must thus forsak'n dye? But high in Heav'n, the Immrotal God Has fix'd his Azure Throne, And thence on poor afflicted Souls In pity will look down. Thence he beholds the Ways of Men, With a discerning Eye, Approving Right, detesting Works Of bold Impiety. On them will He rain all his Plagues Together summoned up;
Brimstone and Fire, in dismal Storms, The Portion of their Cup. For God, the God of holy Truth, Will Righteous Men embrace; And to the Just with Favour shew The brightness of his Face. PSALM XII. HElp Lord, Oh help, for godly Men Chac'd from the Earth, are fled; The Faitful seem to lye conceal'd 'Mong the forgotten dead. The common Talk of Neighbours now, Is all but Vanity, For what their double Hearts intend, Their flattering Tongues deny. But let Dissemblers perish, Lord, From the corrupted Earth; And the triumphing Boaster find The folly of his Mirth. Who say, that by such Tricks of State, We will our Names extoll; Are not our Lips and Tongues our own? Who shall our Pride controul? When moved with the loud Complaints And Sighings of the Poor, I will arise, saith God, and them To quiet Peace restore.
Nor are thy Promises, O God, Dispersed in the Wind, More pure then Silver are thy Words, Tho' many times refind. Now therefore keep thy Promise, Lord, Amd save thy chos'n Race; For now Impiety prevails, And potent Wrong takes place. And well thou know'st when violent Men Are lofty in command, The godly languish, ill prepar'd Their fury to withstand. PSALM XIII. HOW long wilt thou forget me, Lord, In this afflicted plight? How long wilt thou conceal from me Thy all-restoring Light? How long shall I in deep suspence, Consult my weary Soul? How long shall my insulting Foes Thus lawlessly controul? Consider, Lord, and hear the Cries Which my loud Sorrows make, And least I sleep the sleep of Death, Keep thou mine Eyes awake. Least in their Triumphs thus they sing, We have prevail'd at length:
Least their proud Trophies they advance, I hat have pull'd down my Strength. Yet are my Hopes in God, my King, His Fame will I advance; And tho' forsak'n, sing of Him, For past Deliverance. PSALM XIV. THE Fool has said, there is no God; For Men are all now grown Abominable in their Works; Not one upright, not one. The Lord look'd down from Heav'n, and view'd Man's all-corrupted Race; To see who would seek after Him, Or Holiness embrace. But Lord, they blindly all obey'd Blasphemous Ignorance, There was not one that gave his mind Thy Worship to advance. Vain workers of Iniquity! That will not understand, How they like Bread my People eat, And have my Laws prophan'd But Fear shall soon surprize 'em all, When dreaming least of fear, For in defence of the Upright, Th' Almighty will appear.
For they have proudly laught to scorn The Counsels of the Just; And in derision held the Poor, That make the Lord their trust. Oh that the Lord to Israel His promise would fulfill, And send Salvation to his Church, From Sion's holy Hill. Then when thy People shall return From heavy Thraldom free, Triumphant Jacob shall rejoyce, And glad shall Israel be. PSALM XV. WHO shall inhabit, Lord of Hosts, Thy Holy Place, s0 pure? Or whom shall Sion's sacred Towrs In fix'd repose secure? The Man whose Life is uncorrupt, And blameless in thy sight; Who from his Heart, the Friend of Truth, Continues still upright. Whose Tongue ne'r vented vile Reproach, His Neighbour to defame, Nor ever harbour'd false Reports To prejudice his Name. Who lowly in his own esteem Does wicked Men despise,
While they that truly fear the Lord Are pretious in his Eyes. Who always faithful to perform His Vow and Covenant both, Tho' to his harm he sometime Swears, yet changes not his Oath. He that tormenteth not the Poor With griping Usury; Nor to defeat the Innocent E'er took accursed Fee. The Man thus blameless in his Life, Of Heaven's great King belov'd, Shall prsoper in his holy Hill, And never be remov'd. PSALM XVI. THou great preserver of my Life, Continue my defence; For in thee only, Oh my God, I fix my Confidence. My quiet Soul to God has said, Thee only I adore, Not all my heaps of treasur'd Wealth, Can add unto thy Store. But my Relief I give to them That are on Earth upright, To them in Vertue that excel, Who are my chief Delight.
They shall heap sorrow on their heads Whose giddy Ignorance Thy Truth forsakes, of Idol Gods The Worship to advance. I will not of their Sacrifice In any sort partake, Nor yet so much as of their Names The smallest mention make. The Lord is my Inheritance, The Portion of my Rest; My sacred Lot shalt thou maintain, First by thy Aid possest. In places far for Pleasure fam'd, My Lot is measur'd forth; I have a goodly Heritage, The Garden of the Earth. Prais'd be thy Name, thy Grace inspir'd My Knowledge of thy Will; Teaching my Slumbers in the Night Thy Precepts to fulfill. The Lord I set before me still, On whom my Hopes rely'd: While he directs my wary Steps, My Feet shall never slide. My Soul rejoic'd from Tyrant Death To be for ever free, My Flesh, in hopes of future Life, Likewise depends on thee. For sure thou wilt not leave my Soul Within the Grave asleep;
Nor let thy Holy One abide Corruption in the Deep: Rather instruct me how to find That fair and goodly way, Which leads me to those blissful seats Of never-setting Day. There, in thy Presence to behold Th' Eternal Stores os Bliss, And all those Pleasures that surround The Throne of Paradise. PSALM XVII. COnsider well my case, O Lord, And to my Cause give ear, And with thy wonted Grace attend To my unfeigned Prayer. Yea, let thy own avenging Wrath The Sentence execute; And with an equal Eye regard The Right of my Dispute, For thou by Night didst prove my Heart, And saw st my Innocence; For I resolv'd my wary Lips Should utter no Offence. Whate'er the wicked did advise, Thy Precepts guided me; For led by them, I ever shun'd The Paths of Cruelty.
Preserve me in thy Holy Paths, O thou most faithful Guide, That while I walk the ways of Truth, My Feet may never slide. I call'd upon thee, for said I, My God will surely hear; Hear me, O God, and to my words Bow down thy Gracious Ear. Shew us thy wondrous Mercy, thou, The World's great Governour, And save thy People from the Proud That spurn against thy Power. Keep me, O Lord, as thou wouldst keep The Apple of thine Eye, Under the Shadow of thy Wings Let me in Safety lye, Protected from the Hate of men That would my Life confound; From those that greedy of my Soul Each Day beset me round. Second Part. In their own Fat and Plenty clos'd, They boast their high Success; And pamper'd with their cursed Wealth Their Scorn of thee express. Way-laying us on every side With restless toyl, they lye; Fixing their Eyes upon the ground Our private Steps to spie.
So hunts the Lyon all the Night His hunger to allay, So hunts the eager Lyon's Whelp For his unwary Prey. Up Lord, and disappoint their Rage, And my sad Soul set free; From thy consuming Sword, the Sword Of them that evil be. From Men, the fatal Instruments Of thy avenging Ire; From Men that in this World possess Their cruel Heart's Desire. For whose supply the secret Earth Her treasures opens wide; From whence their pamper'd Appetites Are duly satisfy'd. Whose Offspring greatly numerous Yet have their ample Shares, And their divided Substance leave In plenty to their Heirs. But as for me, in Righteousness Let me behold thy Face, And waking, of thy Glory full, Let me thy Love embrace.
PSALM XVIII. THee will I love, O Lord, my Strength, My Rock, and my Defence, My Soul's support, my God, my Might, My only Confidence. The Shield that doth preserve my Life From frequent Dangers free; My saving Health and Refuge still In all Adversity. The Pangs of Death environ'd me On every side distress'd; The wicked, like the rowling Waves, To my Destruction press'd. The Chains of Death about my Life Were like a Circle thrown; Entangl'd in the Snares of Death, My hopes were almost gone. Then did I cry unto my God, And call upon his Name, He heard my soon-admitted Voice That from his Altar came. Then trembl'd the amazed Earth, As with an Ague shook; Their deep Foundations the high Hills With suddain fear forsook. His kindled Wrath sent forth a Cloud, Whose substance brightly burn'd; And in his Fury Gnalab Gneschan be Affo, Ecsh Miffiou Tokel, Gechalim Baguacou mimmennou. Ascendit famus ah excandescentia tua, Ignis consumet ex ore ejus, pruinae arserunt abe. Coals of Fire The Hills to Ashes turn'd,
Then, the wide Arch of Heav'n he bow'd, And gloriously came down, While Darkness hover'd underneath, The Footstool of his Throne. High mounted on, the Cherubims, He pranc'd the lofty Air, While on their Wings th' obedient Winds Th' Illustrious Chariot bare. Second Part. Then in the Region of the Clouds He pitch'd his gloomy Tent, And as a Curtain round him drew The watry Firmament. But when he purpos'd that the World His Brightness should admire, Those Clouds to wondrous Meteors turn'd Of Hail and Coals of Fire. The ratling Thunder loudly then Brake through the vaulted Sky, And through the spacious Air was heard The Voice of the most High. He sent his Lightnings, and dispers'd His Foes of Succour void;
Nor ceas'd he to increase those Flames Till they were all destroy'd. Th' affrighted Sea, at his Rebuke, Her Channel then display'd; And where the World's Foundations were In vast Abysses laid. His Angels from their starry Seats Came down by his Command; And from the Surges of the Deep They drew me safe on Land. He sav'd me from my strongest Foes That bare me deadly Spight, Depriv'd of other Force to shun The Pressure of their Might. Prevented by their crafty Hate I saw my Ruin near; But my Upholder was the Lord Who led me out of fear. He brought me to a spacious Place, A place of Liberty; He brought me forth, to shew the World How much he favour'd me. According to my Righteousness The Lord did me reward, And to the pureness of my Hands His Mercy had regard. Third Part. Because I walked in the ways Most pleasing to the Lord,
Nor in contempt of his Commands Forsook his Holy Word. For every Day and every Hour His Laws before me lay; His Statutes did I not contemn, Nor vainly cast away. And in my Duty to my God I kept my self upright, Shuning those Pleasures, whose soft Charms My Frailty did invite. Therefore according to my Truth The Lord did me reward, And to the cleanness of my Hands His Favour had regard. To them that Holy are, will He As pure and Holy prove; And be upright to the Upright That labour for his Love. He will be likewise justly true Unto the pure in Mind; But to the Froward and Perverse As dangerously unkind. Thus to the Humble and the Poor His favour shall be shown, But as for proud and Haughty looks They shall be soon cast down. The Lord shall make my Taper yield, A clear and distant Light; My day redawning shall no more Give way to irksome Night.
For I, assisted by my God, Have mighty Hosts subdu'd; And mounting Walls of dreadful Height, Have slain a Multitude. The ways of God are Uncorrupt; His Faith is purely try'd; To Mortal Men a sure defence Who in his Faith abide. For who is God besides the Lord, Our King and Governour? And who is mighty, save our God, The Fountain of all Power? Fourth Part. 'Tis God that Girds me round with Strength, And lades me with renown; While all my dangerous Attempts Desir'd successes Crown. He made me, for the Race of War, Then is the Roe more Fleet, And on the Highest places set My soon Victorious Feet. My hands, he teaching how to fight, Gives courage to my skill: And He enabling, my strong Arm Can break a Bow of steel. The shield of thy All-saving Might Thou gav'st me from on high, And thy Right Hand preserves me still Among the Troops that dye.
When Thou in Battel for my steps Mad'st room among the slain, In Heat of all Incounters safe My feet thou didst sustain: Then I pursu'd my Enemies, And took'em in the Chace; Nor would retire, till they were all Consum'd before my face. The wounds I gave them, soar and deep, Disabl'd 'em to rife; Under my feet their sullen Pride Now in dishonour lyes, In Battel girded with thy strength I fought my daring Foes; And by thy Aid fubdu'd, they fell That did my power oppose. With Broaken Limbs they groveling lay, Submissive to my will, That all my stubborn Enemies I then might save or kill; For succour loudly then they cry'd, But there was none to save; Ev'n to God they made their Moans, But He no Answer gave. Fifth Part. Then did I pound'em small as dust That flies before the Wind; And trod 'em on the Ground like Clay, Despis'd of all Mankind.
Thou hast preserv'd me in despite Of my contending Foes; That still with eager Violence My Honour did oppose. And thou hast made the Heathen stoop To my subduing Sword; Strangers that knew me not before, Now serve me, as their Lord. When they but hear my Name, they yield, Not able to withstand; And distant Kings their proffer'd Realms Submit to my Command. Tho' far remote, in dread of Me, Their fainting hearts sink down; They tremble in their Lurking holes, In fear of my Renown. Jehovah lives: Blest be the Rock Of my Deliverance; And let the God of my defence His Glorious Name advance. Thou Great Preserver of my Life, Even Thou hast set me free, From those that prest my injur'd Soul; The Sons of Cruelty. Therefore, O Lord, o're all the World Will I extol thy Fame; And study still new Songs of Praise In Honour of thy Name;
Most tenderly dost Thou preserve Thy dear Anointed King: And wilt shew mercy to his Throne For ever flourishing. PSALM C. To the Proper Tune. Clangite Jehovae. OH all the Earth, sing loud to God, And every Region Praise his Name, Serve him with Gladness, and with Songs Extol his everlasting Fame. For know ye, that the Lord is God, He made us, and our days decreed; We are his People, and the sheep That in his goodly pastures feed. Oh enter then his Gates with joy, And fill his Holy Courts with Praise, Give thanks to him, and bless his Name, That Name which Heav'n and Earth obeys For the free Mercies of the Lord Endure to all Eternity; Nor does his Truth e're fail the Hopes, Of them that on his Truth relye.
Another way. VVIth shouts of Joy let all the Earth The Praises of the Lord Proclaim; With chearful Hymns and Odes resound The Adoration of his Name. For he, the Parent of the World, First made us, and our days decreed; We are his People, and the sheep That in his goodly pastures feed. Enter his Gates with praise, and fill His Holy Courts with chearful Songs; Extol, applaud and celebrate His Power, to whom all Power belongs. For still in an Eternal Stream, His Goodness and his mercy flow; His Truth endures from Age to Age, The same o're all things here below.  Laetitia.  Canticum laetum, sive cum clamore.  Clangite, voeifermini. These three Words denote a chearful Service of God, and nt that morose Devotion which some are pleas'd to affect.  Comprehends all those Words.
PSALM CI. Misericordiam & Judicium. MErcy and Judgment are the Theams I hat wake my tuneful strings; Of them I sing and sing to thee Great Soveraign of Kings. Wisdom and justice are the Props That my soft Rule sustain; Behold, since thou didst fix my Throne, The Method of my Reign. For in th' Uprightness of my heart, To Privacy restrain'd, A true Example there I walk't Of Soveraign Command. No wicked Deed my Regal Power Did meanly Countenance; Nor fawning Falshood in my Court Did her proud Head advance. They that with sullen Envy muse Disturbances of state, I still abhor'd their vile Converse, Chief Objects of my Hate. He that with baneful slander sought, His Neighbour to enthral; Like to the Proud, without Remorse, Did by my Justice fall. But to the Virtuous of the Land, My favour still was shewn;
Religious Officers did shine Like stars about my Throne. The fraudulent contrives of State My Councils never knew; Them that by lyes their Pomp upheld, My Anger did pursue, Betimes will I exterminate The Wickeds growing Race; No Harbour shall th' Ungodly find Within thy Holy Place. PSALM CXXXVII. WHen from our Country Captive led, Upon the Banks we sate, Of Babylons remoter streams, Bewailing our hard fate; Then lofty Sions ruin'd Walls Our thoughtful woes survey'd; Those Walls no more for us to see, All now in Ashes laid. Streight from our Eyes, grown big with tears; A Briny Deluge fell; Our Sobs and Sighs supprest the words That sought our Griefs to tell. Upon the pensive Willow Boughs Our Lutes untuned hung, And our neglected Harps lay by, As carelesly unstrung.
Come, Captives, leave your fruitless Moans, Our taunting Spoylers cry'd, And Sing us one of Sions Songs; But sadly we reply'd; Ah! who can now those Airs repeat With which our Temple rang? Who so distrest as we can sing As our blest Fathers sang? Shall Babylon our songs deride So charming to the Ear? Shall a Prophane and Forreign Land Our sacred Musick hear? No, dear Jerusalem, no, no, If ever I forget Thy vast Affliction, and thy share Of misery so great, First let my nimble joynts, benum'd, Forget their Active Skill; No more let tuneful Lute or Harp Their Artful Touches feel. First to my dry and Parched Roof My useless Tongue be glew'd, Unless thy joys, and Songs of Praise, Be once again renew'd. Lord, curse thou Edoms traiterous Race That in our ruin revell'd; Sack, burn, destroy and kill, they cry'd, Let all be lowly levell'd. And thou, Fierce Babel, when thy Tide Of Tryumph once shall turn,
Oh mayst thou then, a Victor now, Thy sadder ruin Mourn. Full happy He, who spoils thee then, As thou hast laid us wast; And makes the tast those bitter woes Which thou hast made us tast; Who from the wailing Mothers Breasts The tender Babes shall tear, Dissipabit allidendo; which can never be done, but that the Blood must sprinckle and scatter about. And with their Blood the rugged Stones. And Pavements all besmeare. PSALM CXLVIII. To the Common Tune and Measure. LET Highest Heav'n extol The Praises of the Lord, And all the seats of Bliss Melodiously accord. Let Angels Praise Him with sweet Hymns; And numerous Hosts of Seraphims.
Praise him both Sun and Moon That govern Day and Night, Praise him ye lesser Stars In number infinite. The Sphears above, And Sphears below, And waters that Beyond 'em flow. Praise ye the Lord all These, Praise ye his Holy Name, The supream Architect That rear'd the wondrous Frame, He said the Word, And all was made, From times decay, Securely laid. And as in Heaven above So Praise the Lord on Earth, All Monsters which the Land And which the Sea bring forth. All Dragons fierce, And Whales that sweep The Vast Abys∣ ses of the Deep. And all ye Meteors, The wonders of the Air; Fire, Snow, and ratling Hail Jehova's Name revere. Tempests and Storms, And Hurricans,
Performing still What He Ordains. Mountains and lesser Hills, Valleys, and Fertile Glades, Trees happy in their Fruit, Or yielding useful shades. Cedars that mount To pompous height; And variously The Hills delight. All Creatures, Flocks and Herds That People the wide Fields; And every creeping thing That copious Nature yields. The larger Fowl, And lesser Crouds, That Chirp and Sing Among the Woods. All Monarchs of the Earth, All Nations far and near; Princes and Rulers too, That swelling Titles wear; Beauty and Youth With all their Charms; Declining Age, And Babes in Arms. Praise ye the Lord all these, And magnifie his Name, For only He alone Can our just Praises claim.
So great his Fame, His Power no less, That Heav'n and Earth Do both confess. He has advanc'd in Fame The Strength of Israel, His chosen People They, Who in his Favour dwell. Therefore to Him Your Voices raise; To Him alone Sing Praise, sing Praise. Celi Celorum, which in∣cludes the whole structure of the Heavens. Aque quae sunt superne, vel super coelos. The Rabbins ob∣serve the Derivation of Shamaim from Shem, Illic, and Maim, Waters, because they say that Waters are there, and that the Heavens are Compos'd of Fire and Water.
PSALM CL. Hallelujah. PRaise ye the Lord, Praise him within His Holy Residence: Extol him for the Boundless fame Of his Omnipotence. Extol him for his mighty Deeds That fill the World with Wonder; And for the Triumphs of his Power That Numbers cannot Number. With lofty Trumpets Martial Sounds Extol his Puissance; While the Far-ecchoing Drum Unites The Chorus in a Dance; Praise him with Harps, and Harpsichords, With Flutes and Violins, While the Majestick Organ joyns To grace the Vocal Hymns. Praise him with Cimbals softly sweet; Praise him with Cimbals loud, Let every Creature that has Breath Extol the Living God. FINIS.
