B4712 E300_14 99861064 113192
THE DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE OF PAEDOBAPTISME, Asserted and Vindicated. By a large and full improovement of some principall Arguments for it, and a briefe Resolution of such materiall Objections as are made against it. Whereunto is annexed a briefe and plaine Enarration, both Doctrinall and Practicall, upon Mark 10. v. 13. 14. 15. 16. As it was some time since Preached in the Church of Great Yarmouth: Now published for an Antidote against those yet sprea∣ding Errours of the times, Anabaptisme and Catabaptisme. By JOH. BRINSLEY. Tanto magis proinfantibus loqui debemus, quanto minus ipsi pro se loqui possunt. August. ad Hil. Ep. 89. London, Printed for Charles Greene, and are to be sold at his shop in Ivie Lane at the signe of the Gun. 1645.
I Have perused this Vindication of The Doctrine and Practise of Paedo∣baptisme, in which the Reverend Au∣thour hath also handled some things not usally treated on by any, in our Language, which he submits to the judgement of the learned and judici∣ous; And I commend to be Im∣printed. Ja. Cranford. May 22. 1645.
To all the true Lovers of Truth and Peace in the Church of England, Specially those in the Towne of Great Yarmouth. TO You have I dedicated this part of my labours, to whom I have devoted all. What sad and dangerous distem∣pers have invaded the Ecclesiasti∣call body of this Kingdome in this spring-time of Reformation, I shall not need to tell you; there being scarce any part of it but feels of them, and la∣bours under them. Heereupon it hath beene, and is my highest ambition, to shew my selfe (what one of Col. 4. 14. Lucas de Me∣dico corporum factus jam e∣rat Medicus a∣nimarum. Hieron. in ep. ad Phil.the Pen-men of sacred Writ is said to have been, and what every Minister of the Gospel, (at this time specially) ought to be) both an Evangelist, and a Physician. To this end I have already ad∣ventured abroad some Counsels and Prescripts, The healing of Israels brea¦ches An. 1642 Church-Re∣formation. An. Church-Re∣medy. An. 1644, which being proper for the place where Providence hath laid out my Practice, may also (if rightly ap∣plied) proove not unusefull to others. And to the same end it is that I have now sent this Tractate after them; wherein you have a Topicall Reme∣dy
for that spreading Gangrene of Anabaptism, which, unlesse timely prevented, may prove faall to the whole body both of this Church and State. This evill beginning to shew it selfe as in some other parts adjacent, so) in this place, which God hath in part committed to my Cure, I was induced some∣time since to encounter with it in the Pulpit. My endeavours heerein (I blesse God) I found not alto∣gether unsuccessefull. And heereupon I am now the rather incouraged to present them to a more publick view. Wherein, if any shall conceive my service M. Marshals Sermon. M. Cooke. D. Featly &c. Gen. 38. 30. 31 needlesse, in regard of the divers learned Treatises of this kinde already published, I shall only desire them to believe, that (as, however those Pharez∣zes were first brought foorth, yet this Zarah put foorth the hand before most of them, the Pulpit be∣ing for most part delivered of the one, before the Presse was of the other s they shall meet with som∣what heere, which they may yet call New. Amongst other passages I shall humbly take leave to Apolo∣gize for one, which possibly may rise in the stomack of some, viz. the Holding forth of Confirmati∣on (as it is called) in the primitive simplicity of it, for an Apostolicall Ordinance. This (I con∣fesse)
I cooke the first hint of from learned and judi∣cious M. Calvin, as he himselfe, though he would Non infi∣cior, in co nonnihil hal∣lucinari Hie∣ronymum, quod Aposto∣licam esse ob∣servationem dicit, viz. Con∣fimationem. Calv instit. l. 4 c. 19. S. 4.not from St. Hieron contra Lucif.Ierome, yet after upon second thoughts, did from S Heb. 6. 2. Hic unus lo∣cus abundè te∣statur hujus Ceremoniae (sc. Impositio∣nis manuum in Confirma∣tione) origi∣nem fluxisse ab Apostolis. Cat. Com. in ep. ad Heb. ca. 6. v. 2.Paul. And finding it a point so usefull, not only in the present controversie o Paedobaptisme, but also for the healing of some of the chiefe differences of the times, viz▪ about mixt.Communion, and Church▪Covenant, I could not but hold forth that little light concerning it, which I have received from some others, such as were in their times magna Ecclesiae lumina, Rev. 1. 16. 20.stars of the first magnitude, Joh. 5. 35.burning and shining Lampes. If any shall not heereby see what others have done, and my selfe imagine to doe, I shall only crave of them, first to take off that filme of prejudice which possibly the grosse corruption of this supposed Ordinance in the former practise of it, both in the Church of Rome, and amongst our selves, may have drawen over their eyes, and then I shall freely leave them to beleeve and report what they see. For my selfe, let the World know, all that heerein I desire and aime at, to be onely this, That If there be any thing Apostolicall in this Or∣dinance, it may be revived and received: other∣wise
if meerely Prudentiall, (as an explicit Church-Covenant (so far forth as distinct from the Covenant of Grace) is supposed to be) then how farre to bee imbraced or rejected, I leave it to those who have Authority and Ability, to judge: With the submissive tender of which humble motion, I shall fit downe, and rest Yours in the service of Christ, Ioh. Brinsley. Yarmouth June 26. Anno 1645.
THE Doctrine and Practice OF PAEDOBAPTISME Asserted and Vindicated. HEB. 6. 2. The Doctrine of Baptismes. BAptisme, it is a Sacrament, a Sacrament of the New Testament, the first Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted by Christ, to be dispensed by his Ministers; upon these particulars I have already in∣sisted. It remaines now that we come The Subject of Baptisme.in the next place to the Subject of Baptisme, which be∣cause at the present it is made the subject of great de∣bate and controversie, I shall therefore take leave to dwell a little the longer upon it. Q. Who may and ought to be baptized. Q. The Question is, Who they are that may and ought to be baptized?
A. Such as are in Covenant with God. A. To this we may returne a generall answer; viz. Such as are in Covenant with God. Baptisme it is a seale of the Covenant, even as Circumcision was; which is there∣fore called by the name of the Covenant [My Covenant Gen. 17. 13. 14shall be in your flesh.] So is Baptisme a seale of the Co∣venant, viz. the Covenant of Grace, and of that Cove∣nant Baptisme a seale of the Covenant al∣ready made.already made. Marke that: A Covenant is first a∣greed upon, the writings drawne, before it be sealed. Thus men must first be in Covenant with God, before Gen. 17. 1. 2.they partake of this Seale. Thus it was in Circumcision, God first maketh a Covenant with Abraham and his Seed; then for the confirmation of it he commandeth Vers. 9. 10.him and his to be circumcised. And thus it is in Bap∣tisme, persons must first be in Covenant with God be∣fore they be baptized. They must be such as lye under Act. 2. 38.the promise. [Repent and be baptized (saith Peter to the Jewes) for the promise is to you and to your children.] Persons to be baptised must be [such as are in Cove∣nant] Such; understand it as we will, Inclusively, Exclu∣sively: All such, and onely such. Both true. All such as are in Covenant, may and ought o be baptized.1. All such, of what Nation, sex, age, condition so∣ever; Iew or Gentile, male or female, young or old, bond or free, &c. being in Covenant with God, they both may, and ought to partake of this Seal of the Covenant. When God instituted the Sacrament of Circumcision, Abraham and all his family were circumcised. [In the en. 17. 26. 27selfe same day was Abraham circumcised, and all the men of his house.] And the like we read of Baptisme: As it came in the rome of Circumcision, being the initiall seal of the Covenant as Circumcision was, so it was admi∣nistred after the same manner, to the whole family. Where the head of the family believed, presently we
read that they, and all theirs were baptized. Thus we read in that 16. of the Acts; first of Lydia, v. 15. God having opened her heart, she was baptized and her houshold.] Then of the Iaylour, v. 33. being wrought upon by the Apostles Ministery, [he came and was baptized, he and all his.] Thus, be they what they will, being once in Cove∣nant, they may and ought to be baptized. So runs the A∣postles Commission, [Go teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19.] R. And will you have the ground and reason of it, why the administration of this Ordinance should be so uni∣versall, consider but these two things; 1. The univer∣sality of mans sin and misery: and secondly, The univer∣sality of Gods offer of grace and mercy. 1. Mans sinne and misery u∣niversall. 1. Mans misery is universall. [All have sinned. Rom. 3. 23.] And sinning died. [Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Rom. 5. 12.] Such is the condition of all the sonnes of men by nature. They are all concluded, and shut up under sinne and death; so shut Gal. 3. 22.up, as without the free grace of God in Christ pardo∣ning their sinnes, and healing their natures, they can∣not possibly be saved. Even Infants that never sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, viz. by com∣mitting Rom. 5. 14.actuall sinne, yet being sinners by nature, by na∣ture Eph. 2. 3.children of wrath, they stand in need of Christ as well as any other. And consequently they stand in Tit. 3. 5.need of this laver of regeneration, this Sacrament of initia∣tion, whereby their spirituall washing from the guilt and spot of sinne, and their ingrafting into Christ may be sealed up unto them, and declared unto others. All sorts of persons stand in need of Christ, and conse∣quently of this Sacrament which sealeth up their interest in Christ.
2. The tender of Gods grace and mercy u∣niversall. 2. And secondly, as mans misery is universall, so is the tender of Gods grace and mercy, held forth to all men, [Goe teach all Nations, Mat. 28.] [Goe preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark 16. 15.] Thus Christ sent forth his Apostles; and thus he now sendeth forth his Ministers, with Commission to offer Christ and salvation by Christ, to all that will receive him, beleeve on him, sub∣mit to him. And reaching forth the thing signified, hee also reacheth forth the signe, even this Sacrament of Baptisme, which is therefore to be administred alike un∣to all, because Christ is offered alike unto all, (I meane Gal. 3. 28.all sorts of persons) and is alike to all. [There is neither Iew, nor Greeke, (i. e. Gentile) there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Iesus.] Being all alike in Christ, they ought alike to be 1▪ Cor. 12. 13.baptised into him. [By one spirit we are all baptised into one body, whether we be Iewes or Gentiles, &c.] Thus all that are in Covenant ought to be baptised. 2. Only such as are in Co∣venant may be baptised. 2. And (in the second place.) Onely they. This be∣ing a seale of the Covenant ought not to be administred unto any, but unto those which are, or in the judgement of charity may be thought to be within the Covenant. By this rule must the Church proceed in dispencing of this Ordinance, not by the judgement of Infallibility, The Churches rule, the rule of charity.and Certainty, but of Charity. To know infallibly who is within the Covenant, this none can doe but God, and a mans owne soule. The Churches rule is the rule of cha∣rity. Those who by the law of charity may bee thought, and are to be reputed within the Covenant of Grace, they, all they, and only they may, and ought to partake of this Ordinance.
Q Who may be thought to be within the Covenant. Q. Here then the great Question now falls in: Who they are that in the judgement of charity are to bee thought to be within the Covenant? A. All that professe the faith of Christ, and their chil∣dren. A. Hereunto we answer: All that professe the faith of Christ and their children. Both these the eye of chari∣ty looketh upon as Christians, and being such, it cannot deny them the badge of their Christianity, the seale of that Covenant wherein they are presumed to be. Professours of the faith bap∣tiseable. As for the former of these, we shall meet with no great difference about them. Persons professing the faith of Christ may, and ought to be baptised. For this Scripture is expresse: when the Eunuch put the question to Philip, Act. 8. 36.[See here is water▪ what doth hinder me to be baptised?] Philip returnes him this answer: If thou beleevest with all Vers. 37.thine heart, thou mayest. Those three thousand Converts Act. 2. 41. upon the receiving of Peters word, his doctrine, they were baptised. Thus Simon Magus, and the rest of Samaria, upon their beleeving, i. e. making Act. 12. 1.a profession of faith, they were baptised both men and wo∣men. Thus all that professe the faith of Christ (profes∣sing it with their mouthes, and not denying it in their lives) they have a right unto Baptisme. And why? Be∣cause in judgement of charity they are to be reputed Christians, and to be within the Covenant. Generall pro∣fession makes a Christian. True it is, if we speake of Christians in truth, in reali∣ty, then they only are Christians who have received Christ into their hearts by faith and love, in whose hearts Christ is formed. [He is not a Iew▪ (saith the A∣postle) which is one outwardly.] And so may we say, He Rom. 2. Gal. 4. 19.is not a Christian that is one outwardly, that hath only the name and profession of a Christian. Yet in a large sense, they which make so much as a generall profession Act. 11▪ 26.
of Christ, of faith in Christ, and subjection to Christ, they are to be accounted Christians. And by vertue ther∣of they may and ought to be baptised. Upon this profes∣sion Mat. 3.Iohn the Baptist baptized those that came unto him. And so did the Apostles those which came unto them, Act 5. and 8.however in some of them, that profession was hypocriti∣call and unsound, as in Simon Magus, Ananias & Saphira, &c. yet the Apostles looking upon them with an eye of charity, and judging of them according to their profes∣sion, they admitted them unto this Ordinance. Neither doe we read of any whom they refused, or yet brought to an exacter scrutiny and tryall, touching the inward worke of grace in their hearts, who did make such a pro∣fession and confession. Persons come to years of dis∣cretion how they ought to be admitted to Baptisme. And thus ought all those who are come to yeares of discretion before they are baptised, be admitted to it. As viz. Pagans and Infidels, such as are borne and brought up without the pale of the Church, not descen∣ded from Christian parents. Before they be admitted to this Sacrament, they ought first to be instructed in the faith of Christ, in the principles and rudiments of Christian Religion. Being thus instructed then they are to declare and testifie their voluntary imbracing of that faith, together with their repentance, by open Pro∣fession and Confession. Such was the manner of Iohns baptisme▪ having to deale with unbeleeving Jewes: He Mat. 3. 6. Act. 19. 4.baptised them confessing their sinnes, and professing their faith in the Messiah: Thus the Apostles having to deal with unbeleeving Gentiles, heathens, they first preached to them as Iohn the Baptist did, and then baptised them upon the confession of their sinnes, and profession of their faith. And such was the practice of the Priie
Church in like cases. Having to deale with Infidels, they first catechised them, instructed them in the principles of Christian Religion (whence they were called by the name of Catechumeni, persons that were to be catechised.) That being done, and they brought to some measure of knowledge, then they declared and testified their repen∣tance and faith by an open and publick confession in the congregation where they were to be baptised. And this they did (as it seemeth) by answering unto some questions which were propounded to them by the Minister. To which practise St. Peter seemeth to allude, 1 Pet. 3. 21. where speaking of Baptisme, he calleth it,  the answere of a good conscience towards The answer of a good con∣science in Bap∣tisme, what.God.] So our translation renders it; though (as Beza notes upon the place) not so fully expressing the force of the word  which properly signifieth an Interroga∣ting, a Questioning. So the vulgar Latine there renders it, Interrogatio bonae conscientiae, the Interrogation of a good conscience. Which though it be somewhat obscure, yet it will lead us to the right understanding of that phrase. Beza translates it, Stipulatio bon conscientiae, the stipula∣tion of a good conscience. Now stipulation properly it is an answer to an Interrogation; when one being deman∣ded concerning a thing, he returnes answer, and by his answer ingageth himselfe to doe somewhat that is de∣manded and required of him. Such a Stipulation there was in Baptisme, where the party to be baptised being demanded by the Minister concerning his repentance and faith, he made answer before the congregation, pro∣fessing both, and obliging himselfe to both. Such an  such a stipulation we finde betwixt Philip and the Eunuch, Act. 8. 37. 38. The Eunuch desiring
Baptisme, Philip interrogates him concerning his faith, [If thou beleevest, &c.] To this the Eunuch answereth, [I beleeve that Iesus is the Sonne of God.] And such was the practice of the Primitive times. Those which ten∣dered themselves to Baptisme, being Adulti, able to an∣swer for themselves, (of which sort then there were ma∣ny) they had certaine questions propounded to them, to which they made answer; as, Credis? Credo. Abre∣nuncias? Abrenuncio. Dost thou beleeve? (saith the Mi∣nister) I doe beleeve (saith the party) Dost thou renounce the Devill and his pompes? &c. I doe renounce them. Such was their manner then of Baptizing persons come Beza Annot. in 1 Pet. 3. 21.to yeares of discretion; which as Beza notes upon that place of Peter) after ages out of a , a perverse imitation, drew downe and applied to the Baptisme of Infants; but not so fitly, they being not able to answer for themselves. And this was the stipulation which St. Peter there speaketh of, and to which he attributes that saving property, [it saveth us,] which is the fruit and effect not of the outward Baptisme, the putting away the filth of the flesh, bodily washing: but the inward Bap∣tisme testified by the answer or stipulation of a good con∣science towards God. To which agreeth that of Tertullian cited there by Beza as an apt glosse upon that Text. Ani∣ma non lavatione, sed responsione sanatur. In Baptisme the soule is healed not by washing, but by answering; even by that answer of a good conscience. Thus were their Adulti, persons come to yeares of discretion baptised then. And after the same manner ought they to bee baptised now. But I will not dwell upon this, wherein wee are all agreed.
Baptisme of Infants. The maine businesse we have to deale with, and that which I chiefly aimed at, when I fell upon this Subject, is touching the Baptisme of Infants; whether they, or any of them may be baptized. Here the Anabaptists and we are at variance. We allow it to some, they de∣ny it to all. Whence it is they are called by the name both of Anabaptists and Catabaptists; because they op∣pose the Baptisme of all Infants, as a thing not onely in∣convenient, but unlawfull; and in case any of them bee baptized in their infancie, they looke upon that Bap∣tisme as a nullity, and so impose upon them a Rebaptiza∣tion when they come to yeares of discretion. Anabaptisme a dangerous errour. With this Errour of theirs I am now to encounter. An Errour not only opposing the constant and univer∣sall practice of all the Churches of God in the world, but dangerous and pernitious to them, tending directly not only to the unchurching, but unchristianing of them. Of such consequence is this doctrine of theirs, that if it be true, there are but a few Christians to be found this day in the world. To vindicate the truth of God, and the practice of the Churches; as also for the staying of unstable soules, who are subject in these unsetled times to be carried away in∣to this Errour amongst others: Come we as plainly as we can to joyne issue with them, putting it to the tryall, whether any Infants be baptizeable or no. Q. Whether In∣fants be bap∣tizeable, or no. So I shall state the controversie, and that to prevent impertinent disputes, and collaterall differences, which otherwise might fall in betwixt us, and the Semi-Anabaptist, or else some others of our Brethren, who deny baptisme unto some Infants, though borne of be∣leeving parents, upon other grounds, which now I for∣beare
to mention. My quarrell here is with the com∣pleat Anabaptist, who holdeth that Infants quâ Infants are not baptizeable, let their parents be never so holy, and the administration in all other respects never so pure, and regular. To meet with them, I propound the que∣stion in these tearmes. The Question stated. Q. Whether children of the holiest parents, and in the purest Churches, may and ought to be baptized in their in∣fancie? Of this Question we maintaine the Affirmative, that they may, and ought; they the Negative, that they neither ought, nor may. It remaines then that we come to see what can be said of either side. I shall beginne with the Affirmative, shewing you what grounds, what warrant we have for our doctrine and practise. Then come to the Negative, shewing what they can say by way of opposition against it. Infans of be∣leeving pa∣rents are sub∣jects capable of Baptisme. Begin with the former, pleading for our selves, and all the Churches of Christ; whose very practise in all ages, in all places of the world for so many hundred yeares together ought not to be despised by us. But letting that passe. Infants of beleeving parents are sub∣jects capable of baptisme. This we might prove by di∣vers Proved by ar∣guments.arguments. Take but two or three of the princi∣pall; and those no new ones. New arguments in this cause are not to bee expected, onely the improving of old ones, the driving home of those nayles which have beene heretofore fastened in the head of this Sisera by the Masters of the Assemblies. Children may be baptized, because with∣in the Cove∣nant. The first whereof is that which I have already laid downe in the description of baptisme, where I make the subject of baptisme to bee persons that are in covenant. From hence we argue, that if children of beleeving parents
be within the Covenant then they may be baptized: But they are within the Covenant; Therefore they may be baptized. The former of these is evident (and I thinke it will not be denyed.) To whomsoever the covenant it selfe belongeth, to them belongeth this seale of the Cove∣nant. Abrahams posterity being in Covenant, they were to receive the seale of the Covenant, viz. the signe of circumcision. Thus Christians the spirituall seed of faithfull Abraham, being in Covenant with God, they are capable of baptisme, this initiall seale, which sealeth up unto them, and testifieth unto others their entrance into Covenant. The maine difference here betwixt us and the Ana∣baptist will lye about the second of these; viz. Whether Infants of beleeving parents be in Covenant or no? This Infants of be∣leeving pa∣rents, are to be reputed in Covenant.they deny, alleadging that the Covenant, being a Co∣venant of Grace, it doth not runne along with the blood, it is not transmitted from the parent to the childe, neither is it intayled upon any family, any kindred. No, That which is borne of the flesh is flesh] (say they.) As for children, they are all alike borne children of wrath; nei∣ther are the children of beleeving parents herein privi∣ledged. [There is no difference (saith the Apostle) for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God.] No Rom. 3. 22. 23.difference here between the children of Christians, and Pagans; Beleevers, and Infidels; the one is no more in Covenant then the other by nature. Neither are men brought into Covenant by naturall generation, but by spirituall Regeneration. They must first be borne againe; otherwise they have nothing to doe with the Covenant. Thus they. But with what truth, it will appeare by these Proved by 3 Arguments.two or three arguments.
Arg. 1. Taken from Act. 2. 38. 39. Children of beleeving parents are within the covenant. What else (in the first place) meanes that of the Apostle St. Peter in that knowne place? Act. 2. where he tel∣leth those new Converts, that The promise was to them, and to their children, v. 39. and thereupon inviteth them to come and be baptized, as you have it in the verse foregoing. [The promise is unto you and to your children.] Explication. For the explicating of that Text, and for the vindi∣cating of it from the cavills and evasions of our Adver∣saries, I shall open and unfold unto you these two things: 1. What is there meant by the Promise; and secondly, what by their Children. Q 1. What meant by the Pro∣mise. 1. For the former of these, we finde the An abaptists nibling at it; some of them referring it to the words im∣mediately foregoing, viz. [The receiving of the Holy Vers. 38.Ghost.] This is the promise (say they) here spoken of, A.viz. of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. But against them the evidence is cleare. The Promise here spoken of is the great Promise of the Gospel, called here by way .of emphasis, [The Promise,] viz. the promise of Re∣mission of sinnes, which he willeth them to seeke, in, by, and thorough Christ. This promise he here holdeth forth unto them; and for the bearing up of their droo∣ping dejected spirits, he tells them that that Promise be∣longed to them, and their children. Not the promise of the Holy Ghost in those extraordinary gifts, which was peculiar to that age, and to some peculiar persons therein, not common to all that were baptized into the name of Iesus Christ. Q. 2. What by chil∣dren. But what is here meant by their Children? To this the Anabaptist answers, not Children in age, young Infants. Who then? Why either children by
regeneration, (So Calvin tels us some of them expound Calv. ad lo. Not children by Regenera∣tion, Or Succession.the word there in a metaphoricall sense, purposely to e∣vade and elude the force of it:) Or else (as the greatest part of them carry i) children by succession, their poste∣rity that should come after them being come to yeares of discretion. So they alleadge the word (Children) to be often used in Scripture. Act. 3. 25. Ye are the children of the Prophets. Act. 13. 26. Men and brethren, Children of the stock of Abraham.] Thus would they have the word here understood. [You and your Children] i. e. (say they) the lineally descended sons of Abraham, men and women of full age. But children in Age. A. But to this cavill of theirs we reply. The word (Children) there must be taken literally and properly, and be understood of Infants, Children in age. Vid. Robinson Bap. of Infants Arg. 5. For proofe of this, I finde the scope and drift of the place brought in by some, which seemeth (I confesse) to favour this construction. But in as much as I find that variously carried according to divers apprehensions of it, I shall passe it by, fastening upon that which I con∣ceive to be more demonstrative and convincing. I take it from the words themselves, Wherein we may take notice of three severall ranks or conditions of persons to The Promise said to belong to three sorts of persons.whom the Apostle here affirmes this promise to belong. 1. The Iewes themselves there present; 2. Their Chil∣dren; 3. Those which were a far off; But who were they? Q. Who were those a far off; Calvin; Piscator. A Lapide. Q. Who were those a far off? The opening of that clause will conduce much to the clearing of the former. [Them which are a far off.] This I know Expositors ge∣nerally, both Protestant and Papist, understand of the Gentiles, who were then afar off, at a great distance from
Not the Gen∣tiles, as it is u∣sually expoun∣ded. Ephes. 2 17. the Iew in point of Religion. For countenance of this ex∣position, they bring in that known place of the Apostle, Eph. 2. 17. where speaking of the Iews & Gentiles, he de∣scribeth each by a Periphrasis, the one a people a far off, the other neer. The Gentiles before the comming of vers. 13.Christ they were a far off. [Ye who somtimes were a far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ. 13. of that 2. Eph.] Thus they expound Peter by Paul, generally looking upon these texts in 2. Ephes. as a Comment upon that in the 2. of the Acts. Beza ad loc. But herein I find Mr. Beza dissenting from them, and that (as I conceive) not without good ground and war∣rant. By those a far off in that place (saith he) cannot be Proved by two reasons.understood the Gentiles. Why not? Take a double reason for it, each convincing. Peter was not yet fully in∣structed in this mystery touching the calling of the Gentiles. Act. 10. Vers 13. 28. 34. 1. The calling of the Gentiles was as yet in a great part a mysterie to Peter himself, A secret which was not yet clearly unfolded unto him. So much we may col∣lect from that vision presented to him, Act. 10. whereby taking away the difference betwixt the cleane beasts and uncleane, bidding him slay and eat, &c. The Lord taught him not to put a difference betwixt Iew and Gentile. So as it is evident, Peter was not so well instructed in this mysterie before, as that he should tell the Iewes so ex∣presly, that the promise belonged as well to the Gentiles, as to them. 2. Suppose Peter had understood this mysterie, yet No fit time to preach this do∣ctrine.was this no fit time to have preached and published this doctrine to these weak Iewes, being then but novices, be∣ginning to look towards Christ; to whom it might ra∣ther have been a stumbling-block to keep them back, then any incouragement to bring them to Christ. To heare
that the Gentiles were alike interested in the Promise with them, it could be no argument to perswade them to come in unto Christ. Vpon these grounds he con∣cludes (and I think very rationally) that by those a far off cannot be meant the Gentiles. But the poste∣rity of the Iewes, a far off in time. Who then? Why the posterity of these Iewes, who were to succeed them in the ages to come, who were then afar off in time. Mark it. Not Gentiles a far off in state and condition, but Iewes afar off in time, such as were to be born in afterages. That the phrase here must be so understood, Beza well evinceth it from the origi∣nall: where he takes notice of a remarkable difference betwixt Pauls words, and Peters: Paul speaking of the Gentiles in that 2 Ephes. he calleth them  but Peters words here are  the one importing a distance of state, the other of time. And so indeed the Greek phrase  properly signifieth; such as are a far off in time,  (as Piscator makes it out) longè post futuris (as Beza translates it) such as were to be born a long time after. What meant by Children. Now then (to winde up what I have ravelled) If by those a fr off, be meant not the Gentiles, but the Iewes afar off in time, then by their Children here must be un∣derstood, not their Posterity which was to come after; but their present issue, the children that already were, or should be born of their bodies, what ever they were, whether of riper, or younger yeares, even Infants. To them (saith the Apostle) as well as you, belongeth this promise, this great promise, the promise of the Messiah, of life and salvation by Christ. So ran the promise made to Abraham: It took in his seed, his children: and to you shall that promise be made good, in case you repent
and believe, and so approve your selves the children of faithfull Abraham, the promise will reach both you and your children. So then, (to close up this Argument) the promise belonging unto the children of believers, they are also in Covenant, and being in Covenant, the Seale of the Covenant is appliable unto them. Object. [As many as the Lord our God shall call] how to be un∣derstood. Here I am not ignorant of that beaten muse wch the Anabaptists generally think to creep out at, that evasion whereby they think to elude the force of this argument. They find it (as they conceive) in the last clause of the verse, which they make use of as the Sea-man of his Rudder in the Stern, whereby he turns about the whole Ship; so they think hereby to turn about the whole Ar∣gument. This promise (say they) it belonged to them, and their children, and to those a far off, but how? viz. up∣on their Calling, So run the words; [As many as the Lord our God shall call.] Now indeed (say they) be they who, or what they will, they may lay claim to the pro∣mise, being once called, out not else. A. To this we answer, That this Cavill of theirs, what force soever there may seem to be in it, yet it can∣not reach the Argument in hand, inasmuch as that clause stands in reference only to the clause next foregoing, viz. [Those which are afar off] not reaching to the for∣mer, [them and their children.] As for them, the words run roundly and absolutely, putting them and their chil∣dren together, without any note of distinction betwixt them, (as it is observable in all the originall copies that I can meet with) extending the promise alike unto both, and that without any limitation or restriction, [The promise is unto you and your children] Not to as many of them as the Lord shall call, (as they would restraine it)
but indefinitely to all of them; and [to those which are afar off, even as many as the Lord shall call,] as many of them that should succeed in after-generations, as the Lord should effectually call to repent and believe, they should partake in the same priviledge, The Promise should reach to them and to their children. So that let our adversary make what improvement he can of this allegation, unlesse he stretch it beyond the staple, and extend the words of the Apostle further then ever they were intended, and further then with any congruity they can reach, it cannot so much as touch, much lesse shake the Argument now laid down. I passe to a 2d, a second Argument to prove Infants of believing Parents to be within the Covenant. Arg. 2. Some Infants were in Cove∣nant under the Old Te∣stament. Infants of believing parents were in Covenant under the Old Testament, therefore they are so under the New. As for the Antecedent, the former part of this Enthy∣meme, viz. That some Children were in Covenant under the Old Testament, I think it will not be denyed. If it should, the evidence is clear▪ wherefore else were they circumcised? God did not put that this his Seale, to a Blank. [This is my Covenant] (saith the Lord) viz. a Gen. 17. 10, 11signe, a seale, a token of the Covenant, not to be admi∣nistred unto any but such as were presumed to be in Covenant with God. Now from hence we inferre, Therefore some are in covenant now. Proved by 3 Arguments.If they were in Covenant then, then they are in Cove∣nant now; If under the Old Testament, then under the New. This inference I shall evince and make good by three arguments. Otherwise In∣fants should be losers by the comming of Christ. Arg. 1. Otherwise, Children now under the New Testa∣ment  should be in a worse condition then they were under the Old; & so in stead of receiving benefit by the comming
of Christ, they should be indamaged by it; They should be losers by Christ, which is monstrous to conceive. Nisi fortè ar∣bitramur Chri∣stum in suo ad∣veu Patris gratiam immi∣nusse aut de∣curtasse, quod execrabli bla∣sphemâ non vacat. Calv. Instit, l 4. c. 16. S. 4.That the Fathers were gainers by the coming of Christ, brought into a better conditiō, Papists maintain: but that their Children should be losers by it, methinks Anabaptists should not dare to affirm. But so they must be, and great losers too, if whereas they were in Covenant before his comming, since his comming they should be excluded. Certainly, little cause had Iohn the Baptist to have sprung for joy in his mothers wombe at the presence of Christ in his conception, had his birth been so disadvantagious to him, and others in that condition. Far be it from us to give way to such a thought. The comming of Christ, it Luk. 2. 10.was joyous to all, to all nations, all sexes, all conditions, all ages; advantagious to all, even to Infants. Robinson, bap. of Infants. It is well observed, Christ did not only take the nature of man upon him, but the ages of man also, viz. Childhood, Youth, Manhood. He passed through all these estates, to shew that he was the Saviour, the Redeemer of all, and that some of all these estates should have benefit by him, and amongst others, Children; to whom he shew∣ed a peculiar affection when he was upon earth, (as God willing I shall shew you hereafter.) A plain evidence that he came not to disadvantage them in the great businesse of salvation, but to promote and further it. 2. Again (secondly) if Infants should be in Covenant The grace of God should be more large un∣der the Old Testament, hen the New.under the Old Testament, and not under the New, then the grace of God under the Old Testament should be more large then under the New; and under the New more straite then under the Old. Under the Old Testament, the Covenant was, [I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.] The grace of God then extended not to the Pa∣rent
only, but to the Childe. Now, if this grace should now be restrained only to the Parent, not reaching unto the Child, then the grace of the New Testament should be more straite then of the Old, which cannot be ima∣gined without great wrong and injury to Christ himself, and his Gospel. As for Christ, we know he brought grace Joh. 1. 17.along with him, (as the Sun doth his beames.) Grace and Truth came by (and with) Iesus Christ.] Grace, and that ample grace. Such is the grace of the New Testament, reaching and spreading further then that of the Old. [The grace of God which bringeth salvation, hath appeared Tit. 2. 12.to all men] (saith the Apostle) i. e. to all sorts, ages, and conditions of men. Therein is this grace more ample then it was under the Law. There the grace of God in an ordinary dispensation it was appropriated to the Iews. They were then the , Gods favourites, to whom his grace in Christ was manifested. But now that grace hath appeared to all men. The grace of the Gospel is more ample, and every wayes greater grace then that before, or under the Law [God having provided Heb. 11. 40.some better thing for us] (saith the Apostle.) The privi∣ledges of the Gospel are more, and greater, and better, then those under the Law. Surely therefore, Infants being in Covenant then, they are not excluded now. Which if they be, Infants no where cast out of the Covenant. 3. Let it be shewed (in the third place) by what act they  are excluded. If once they were in Covenant, let it be shewed when, and how they came to be ejected: how this Magna Charta, this Great Charter, granted first to Abraham, came to be forfeited, or when it was called in. How they who were once of Gods family, and wore his livery, came to be cashiered: How they, who were
once members of the mysticall Body, came to be cut off. If our adversaries can shew us a speciall warrant for the calling in of this act of grace towards them (as they must, before we can give way to it) a speciall and ex∣presse order to prohibit Infants from laying any further claime to that priviledge under the Gospel, which for so many ages they had beene peaceably possessed of un∣der the Law; then we will hearken to them. Otherwise we must hold Infants to be in statu quo, in the same, or in a better state and condition now, then they were in under the Old Testament. Being in Covenant with God then, they are in Covenant with him now. And being in Covenant, they have right to this initiall seale of the Covenant. I know what the Anabaptist will here reply to this Argument. Give me leave to meet with it, that I may cleare the way as I goe. Replic. These are two distinct Cove∣nants. That Infants should be in Covenant under the New Testament, because they were so under the old, it fol∣loweth not (say they;) why? In as much as these are two distinct Covenants, not the same. For this (say Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 6.they) Scripture is expresse; calling this Covenant which we have under the Gospel, a New Covenant, and a better Covenant, established upon better promises, &c. As The old Co∣venant aboli∣shed. Heb. 7. 18. for that old Covenant it is antiquated, and abrogated, being (as the Apostle tells us) disanulled by reason of the weaknesse and unprofitablenesse thereof.] That Covenant then is now determined, neither have we any thing to doe with it under the Gospel. This is a new Cove∣nant, nor like the former. A. The old Co∣venant, what. A. For answer to this, in as much as it will make much to the clearing of this doctrine, and tend greatly
to the satisfaction of those who desire it, give me leave briefly to shew you what the old Covenant was, which is there opposed to this new Covenant, and said to bee abrogated, and abolished, &c. Where, let God himselfe be his owne Interpreter In that 31. of Ieremy, v. 32. cited by the Apostle, Heb. 8. v. 9. the words are expresse. [Behold the dayes come (saith the Lord) that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, &c.] What Covenant? why marke what followes. Not according to the Covenant which I made with their fathers in the day that I tooke them by the hand to bring them out of Egypt, &c.] Marke it. This Not that made with A∣braham, but the Covenant at Mount Sina which werewas the old Covenant so much spoken of in that E∣pistle to the Hebrewes. Not that Covenant which God made with Abraham, Gen. 17. But that Covenant which he made with Israel at their comming out of Egypt, Exod. 19. These were two distinct Covenants: distinct, I say, whether in kinde, or only in manner of administra∣tion, Two distinct Covenants.I will not contend. A point worthy to be obser∣ved, as letting in much light to the controversie now in hand. Six differences betwixt them. Many remarkable differences there are betwixt them. To glean some of the handfulls that others have let fall. 1. (In the first place) they differ in time. The Cove∣nant Vid. Mr. Ro∣binson Bap. of Infants, p. 77.made with Abraham was long before that other Covenant, even foure hundred and thirty yeares. So the Apostle tells us expressely, Gal. 3. 17. The Covenant  In time.that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was foure hundred and thirty yeares after cannot disanull. So long was this Covenant after that Covenant made with Abraham. Place. 2. As they differ in time, so in place. The one made
at Mount Sina, Exod. 19. the other first made with Abraham in Vr of the Caldees, Gen. 12. after renewed, and confirmed in Canaan, Gen. 15. and 17. Manner of making and dispensing. Exod. 19.3. They differ in the manner both of their making, and dispensing. The Law was given after a terrible manner, to declare the Iustice of God against the viola∣ters and transgressours of that Covenant. But the Co∣venant made with Abraham, was made with all sweetnes of love and mercy, breathing forth nothing but free grace. And for the manner of their dispensation; that legall Co∣venant it was dispensed under types and figures, and ce∣remoniall observances. It had Ordinances of divine ser∣vice, and a wordly Sanctuary, &c. (as the Apostle spea∣keth, Heb. 9. 1.) But the Covenant made with Abraham was more plainely and simply dispensed, having no o∣ther Ceremony annexed to it, but only Circumcision, which was a seale of that Covenant. 4. Againe they differ in their Conditions. The con∣dition Conditions. Mr Robinson ibid.of that legall Covenant at Mount Sina, was even the same for substance with that which God made with Adam in Paradise. [Doe this and live.] A legall con∣dition; promising life, all earthly and heavenly bles∣sings, upon the condition of perfect obedience to all the Commandements. Whereupon this Covenant, through mans corruption, and inability to keep it, it is said to be weake. [It was weake through the flesh, Rom. 8. 3. and unprofitable, Heb. 7. 18. It was disanulled for the weaknesse and unprofitablenesse thereof.] But now the condition of that Covenant made with Abraham was Evangelicall, viz. Faith, and Evangelicall obedience. Rom. 4. 11.Faith; Circumcision the seale of that Covenant was to Abraham a seale of the righteousnesse of Faith; sealing up
unto him righteousnesse and life, not upon the conditi∣on of doing, working, but beleeving, which was accoun∣ted to him for Righteousnesse, (as the Apostle sets it Vers. 9. 22.forth, Rom. 4.) Obedience; not exactnesse, but upright∣nesse, Gen. 17. 1. Walke before me, and be upright, or sincere. End and use. 5. Againe (fifthly) they differ in the end, and use of  them. That legall Covenant, it was given chiefly be∣cause of transgressions. So the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 19. wherefore then serveth the Law, it was added because of transgressions. viz. to discover them, to bridle and re∣strain men from them, to denounce punishments for them (for that is a threefold use of the Law, 1. Detegit. 2. Fraenat. 3. Punit.) to convince men of sinne, and of their misery by reason of sinne, that so they might come to see the need they have of Christ, and be driven to him, according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 24. The Law was our School-master to bring us unto Christ. But that other Covenant made with Abraham, it was to assure him, and his seed of their interest in the Messiah, and the promise of life through him. Continuance. Sixtly, and lastly, They differ in their duration and  continuance. That legall Covenant it was but temporary, to continue but till Christ should come. So saith the A∣postle, Gal. 3. 19. The law was added because of trans∣gressions, untill the seed should come to whom the promise was made.] i. e. untill Christ should come. Then that legall Covenant as a Covenant with the Church, cea∣sed. But the Covenant made with Abraham it was an everlasting Covenant. So the Lord tells him, Gen. 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee for an everlasting Covenant, &c.
So then you see that these Covenants were two di∣stinet Covenants. That Covenant which God made with Israel at Mount Sina, it was not the same with that which he had made with Abraham before. And of that Covenant it is that the Apostle there speaketh in the 7. and 8. chap. of the Hebrewes. Not of the Covenant made with Abraham, which was an Evangelicall Covenant, and for substance the same with that which we are now under; But of the Covenant made at Mount Sina, that legall Covenant. That is the Covenant which the Apostle there compareth with the new Covenant, and of which he telleth us that it is now disanulled and abolished. Q. The Cove∣nant at Mount Sina, why cal∣led the old Covenant, and first Covenant A. 1. In opposition to the Cove∣nant of Grace under the New Testa∣ment. Q. Why but (saith our Adversary) how could that be called the old Covenant, and the first Covenant, when as it was 430. years after the Covenant made with Abra∣ham? This was rather the first Covenant, and old Co∣venant. A. To this it is answered: That legall Covenant is called the old Covenant, 1. In opposition to the Cove∣nant of the Gospell under the new Testament, which be∣cause it was revived and renewed, and confirmed by the comming of Christ, the promised seed, it is therefore peculiarly called the new Covenant, and that legall Heb 8. 13.Covenant in opposition to it, is called the old Cove∣nant. Waxing old.2. The old Covenant, because it waxed old, and through age decayed. So saith the Apostle of it in the place last named. Heb. 8. last. [In that he saith a new Covenant, he hath made the first old, new that which de∣cayeth, and waxeth old is ready to vanish awy.] The same for substance with the first Cove∣nant made with Adam in state of inno∣cency.3. The old Covenant, and the first Covenant, be∣cause
for substance it was partly the same with that first Covenant which God made with Adam in state of innocencie. The Law (the morall part of it) published upon Mount Sina, it was no other but the same Law that was given to Adam at the first. What was there written in Tables of stone was but a counterpane of 2 Cor. 3. 3.what was written in the fleshy Tables of the heart of man at the beginning. And being so, well might it be called the old Covenant, and the first Covenant, being before the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, I, or with Adam either. The old Co∣venant disa∣nulled. You see then what the old Covenant is, that legall Co∣venant whereof Moses was the Mediatour. And of this Covenant it is true, it is disanulled, abrogated, so as there is now no more use of the Law as a Covenant to the Church. Marke that, as a Covenant: Other uses there are of it many, which are still in force as much as ever: But it is no longer a Covenant. This Covenant is disanulled. But so is not that Evangelicall Covenant Not the Co∣venant with Abraham.made with Abraham, which is (as I told you) an Ever∣lasting Covenant, and for substance the very same with that which Beleevers are now under; viz. the Cove∣nant of Grace promising life and salvation upon the con∣dition of beleeving. So much the Apostle tells us ex∣pressely, Gal. 3. v. 8. The Scripture (i. e. the Spirit of God speaking in Scripture) foreseeing that God would ju∣stifie the heathen (the Gentiles) through faith, preached be∣fore the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Na∣tions be blessed.] Marke it. When God made this Co∣venant with Abraham, declaring and promising that in his seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed, he then preached the Gospel to him, making a Covenant
with him concerning Christ, and salvation by Christ. So much Zacharias in his song acknowledgeth, Luke 1. 72, 73. where speaking of the exhibiting and sending of Christ into the world, he calls it, An holy Covenant, the oath which God sware unto our father Abraham. The Covenant made with Abraham then was no other but the Covenant of Grace, even the same Covenant that we are now under. All the difference is, the Covenant now is new drawne, and so put into another forme, set forth and expressed more clearly and fully, then that with Abraham was, (even as our evidences and conveyances, now they are more large and full then they were wont to be in the dayes of our forefathers, though in effect the same) but for substance they are one and the same. And being so, (to close up this second Argument) that Covenant is an everlasting Covenant, (I will make Jer. 32. 40.an everlasting Covenant with them, saith the Lord, spea∣king of the renewing of the Covenant of Grace with them, Ier. 32. 40.) A Covenant that is not waxed old (as that legall Covenant did) that is not, nor ever shall be disanulled, but is in force still as much as ever. And consequently children of Beleevers being once in Co∣venant, they are still in Covenant. And being in Co∣venant, they have a right to this seale of the Covenant. Arg. 3. Proving some Infants to bee within the Co∣venant: Arg. 3. I passe now to a third Argument to prove children of Beleevers to be within the Covenant. I take it from that known place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. where he tells us expressely that the children of holy Because they are holy.and beleeving parents, (I, if but one of them be a be∣leever) are Holy. [Else were your children uncleane, but now they are holy, v. 14. A Text which neither Papist nor Anabaptist can look
upon, but it will make their eyes dazle. In this Text the Papist (unlesse he shut his eyes) cannot but see, that children of beleeving parents may be in a state of salva∣tion, though they dye without Baptisme. Why? be∣cause they are to be accounted holy by birth. And in this text the Anabaptist (if he will not (as he said) Quae∣rere festucam, seek strawes to put out his owne eyes withall, as indeed in this point they doe) cannot but see that In∣fants of beleeving parents are within the Covenant, and consequently have a right to the seale of the Covenant, and that because they are holy. Q. How Infants of beleeving parents are said to be ho∣ly. A. Not free frō originall sin. Q. Holy? but how holy? what are all the Infants of beleeving parents inwardly inherently holy, truly sanctified by the Grace and Spirit of Christ? and born such? A. Not so. Herein, what ever the Anabaptists hold about originall sinne, which most of them deny, (for that is their doctrine (I will not say of all, but of many, of most of them) that, no Infants are conceived and borne in originall sin, (point blank to that of David, Ps. 51. 5.) neither are children of wrath by nature, &c. we freely acknowledge it, that in this there is no difference. The childe of a beleever is as well conceived in sinne as any other, all being alike sinners by nature, and guilty of e∣ternall condemnation. In this sense children of belee∣ving parents are not said to be holy. Not but that God may and sometimes doth sanctifie children from, and in the wombe, as it is said of Ieremy and Iohn the Baptist. But that is not the holinesse which the Apostle there speaketh of. But visibly ho∣ly. What then? why an outward, visible holinesse. Here∣in the Anabaptists (most of them) and we agree. But
what outward Holinesse is it? whether a Civill or Reli∣gious holinesse. Here is the difference. The Anabaptist to evade the blow of this Text, taketh the former way, understanding the Apostle there to speake only of a Ci∣vill Evasion.holinesse, opposite to a Civill uncleannesse. [Now are  Not only with a Civill Holi∣nesse.your children holy.] i. e. (say they) they are legitimate, no bastards. Thus generally they construe that place. And for countenance of that interpretation they bring that Text of the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 2. 15. where the Prophet tells us, that at the first, God made but one man and one woman, joyning them together in marriage, viz. that he might seeke a godly seed (or holy seed) i. e. such as should be borne in lawfull marriage: And by that they interpret this Text of the Apostle, [Now are your chil∣dren holy,] i. e. legitimate, lawfully begotten, not spuri∣ous, no bastards. A. Vide P. Mart. & Parae. ad loc. To this we reply, that this interpretation (however it must be acknowledged to have some considerable ad∣vocates for it, both ancient and moderne) yet it cannot be the sense of the Apostle in that place. We shall not need to spend much time about it. The errour will soone appeare if we doe but oppose the parts of the A∣postles dis-junction there one against the other. [Else were your children uncleane, but now they are holy] That is, (say they) else were they bastards, but now they are legitimate. Now the former of these is not true, viz. that in case the unbeleeving wife were not sanctified by the beleeving husband, but both were unbeleevers, then their children should be uncleane, i. e. Bastards. This is not true. For the children of Pagans, where both pa∣rents are Infidels, yet being borne in lawfull wedlocke, they are no more bastards then the children of Christi∣ans
are, but are as legitimate, and as free from civill uncleannesse as any other. So that (whatever sense be put upon that place of the Prophet Malachy) yet this cannot be the sense of the Apostle in this place, where he speaketh of a holinesse that was peculiar to beleevers, not common to Infidels as well as them. The case is cleare to them who will not heere shut their eyes against the light. Evasion. 2. Others there are of them who would elude the force of that place another way. They will tell us that  Nor only san∣ctified to the use of the pa∣rents.Paul in telling them their children were holy, he meant no more, but that they were sanctified unto them. Even as the unbeleeving wife (say they) is sanctified to the belee∣ving husband, i. e. sanctified to his use, even so, and no otherwise, are their children said to be holy, i. e. sanctifi∣ed to the use of their parents in the duties of relation; so as the parents may both own them, and keep them, and use them as children, and that in a Christian and com∣fortable way. A. A. But to this it is as soone answered as to the for∣mer. (Besides that these children cannot be said to bee sanctified to both parents, the one being an unbeleever, to Tit. 1. 15.whom nothing is pure▪ nothing holy, besides that,) There is a broad difference between being sanctified to the use of one, and being holy. To a beleever all things are sanctified. [Every creature of God is go, for it is san∣ctified by the Word, and Prayer, 1 Tim. 4. 5.] [To the pure all things are pure, Tit. 2. 15.] , but not , Pure, but not Holy. This cannot be said of all creatures that they should be holy, holy in themselves, as here it is said of the children of beleeving parents, who are said to be not only , but , not onely sanctificati, but
sancti, not only sanctified to the use of the parent, but holy, holy in themselves. Q. But what holinesse then is it that that the Apostle here meanes? But holy in respect of fe∣derall holines. A. Why, briefly; It must be a Federall holinesse, the holinesse of the Covenant. So Calvin, Beza, P. Martyr, Paraeus, and almost the whole streame of Protestant Ex∣positors carry it. As for Papists indeed, they here Vid. A Lapid. ad loc.joyne hands with the Anabaptist. Not induring to hear of the holinesse of Children, holinesse by birth, because that being admitted, their absolute necessity of Baptisme, whereof they are rigid and cruell patrons, must fall to the ground. But amongst Protestant Interpreters it is generally received. And that not without good war∣rant from the word, which usually calleth them holy who are borne under a holy Covenant. The Covenant it self is holy; so called by Zacharias in that place preallead∣ged, 1. Luke 72. And so are they which are borne un∣der it. Thus were the Iewes holy. [Thou art a holy peo∣ple unto the Lord thy God.] Ye have it often repeated in Deut. 7. 6 c. 14▪ 2. 21.that book of Deuteronomy, i. e. under a holy Covenant, And in this respect they were all alike holy. It is that which Corah and his company tell Moses and Aaron. Num. 16. 3.[All the Congregation is holy every one of them.] A truth in it selfe, though not as they intended it. They were all holy in respect of a federall holinesse, though not so holy as Moses and Aaron whom God had sanctified and set apart to speciall and peculiar services. The Jewes being in Covenant they were said to be a holy people, and a holy seed. So you have it Ezra 9. 2. where it is said that the Holy seed had mingled themselves with the people of the land.] And in this sense the Apostle (spea∣king
in the knowne phrase, and language of the Scrip∣ture) calleth the children of beleeving parents holy, viz. so holy as the children of the Iewes formerly were. This was the priviledge of the Iewes; they were a holy seed, they and their children: In that differing from Gentiles that were out of Covenant. [We (saith the Apostle) Gal. 2. 15.who are Iewes by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.] the Gentiles being out of Covenant, their children were borne sinners, i. e. aliens and strangers to the Covenant. But it was otherwise with the Iewes, their children were holy, borne such, viz. in respect of a federall holinesse. In this priviledge doe beleeving Gentiles now partake with them, (the partition wall being now broken downe,) Eph. 2. 14.they being incorporated into the same body with them, being made Burgesses of the same heavenly Ierusalem with them, they are also infranchized and made parta∣kers of the same priviledges and prerogatives that they were. Amongst which this is one, that they and their seed are holy: that is, they are no longer Pagans and Heathens, but Christians, members of the Church, in Covenant with God, so to bee taken, so to bee re∣puted. The Anabap∣tist injurious to Infants. Where, before we passe any further, take notice how injurious the Anabaptist is unto the children of be∣leevers, whom they bereave of this spirituall priviledge, this excellent Prerogative, casting them out amongst the children of Heathens and Infidels: peremptorily af∣firming, That there is no difference betwixt the one and the other: The one as holy as the other, the one no more in Covenant then the other; and consequently the one hath no more right to the seal of the Covenant then the other.
Infants of Be∣leevers and Infidels differ. No difference? True, by nature we yeeld it, there is none. [There is no difference (saith the Apostle) for all have sinned, Rom. 3. 22.] I, and all have alike sinned; all alike guilty of Adams sinne by a just imputation; and all alike tainted and stained with Adams corruption by a reall communication. But hath Grace made no diffe∣rence? 1 Cor. 4. 7.[Who maketh thee to differ from another? (saith the Apostle.) Not nature, but grace. This made the Iew to differ from the Gentile, and the children of the one from the children of the other: And this is that makes as beleevers themselves, so their children to differ from Infidells: Of whom the Apostle saith that they are holy. And what? Is there yet no difference? Will our Adversaries say the same of the children of Infidels and Pagans, that they are Holy? But we shall not need to wonder at this, that they equa∣lize them with the children of Pagans and Infidels, when as they doe not sticke to compare them with Dogs and Cats, boldly affirming, (so some of that way have lately done) that the one hath as much right to Baptisme as the other. To which blasphemy of theirs, I shall returne no other reply but that of Michael to the Devill, when Jude 9.he strove with him, The Lord rebuke thee.] Thus you see this first and grand Argument for the Baptisme of Infants sufficiently supported. If Infants of beleeving parents be in Covenant, then they have right to this Seale of the Covenant: But they are in Covenant. This we have made good by three subordinate Argu∣ments. 1. The Promise belongeth unto them. 2. If they were in Covenant under the Old Testament, then also under the New. 3. They are holy. To these many other might yet be added. That of the
Apostle to his Romans seconds that to his Corinthians. If the roote be holy, so are the branches, Rom. 11. 16.] Ho∣ly parents, a holy seed. The one being in Covenant so is the other. 1 Thess. 4. 13. Againe, if they be not in Covenant they are without hope (as Paul saith of unbeleeving Gentiles) there be∣ing no way whereby salvation can be obtained but by the Covenant of free grace in Iesus Christ. But to exclude all Infants dying in their infancie from salvation, I think is greater cruelty then the Anabaptist will own. Nay cleane contrary to their doctrine, who by denying Ori∣ginall sinne, (as many of them doe) put all Infants dying in their infancie into a state of salvation, (larger charity then the Scripture will maintaine) and if saved, then they must first be in Covenant. Q. Whether  Infants of be∣lieving parents be in Cove∣nant. Q. But what then (it may be said) are all Infants of beleeving parents in Covenant? A. I answer in the outward visible Covenant they are. As for the Covenant it selfe, to speake properly, and strictly it depends upon Gods election. Neither doth it A. Visibly they are.belong to any but those who are elected. But this is to us a secret. Now the rule is, De ccultis non judicat Ec∣clesia. [Secret things belong unto the Lord, but things re∣vealed Deut. 29 29.to us and our children.] Amongst which this is one, [I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seede.] And this are we to hope and believe touching all the children of believers, that they are Gods children as well as theirs, untill the contrary be some wayes ma∣nifested. Q. How the Co∣venant is trans∣mitted. Q. But how commeth this Covenant to be transmitted from the parent to the childe? what doth it run along with the blood? Is it transmitted by the way of naturall gene∣ration?
A. Not by natu∣rall generati∣on. A. Not so. This (what ever our Adversaries in this particular would fasten upon us, both Anabaptists and Papists (for in this they are agreed) we renounce and disclaime. Foedus non transfunditr per carne, saith P. Mart. in 1. Cor. 7. 14.P. Martyr rightly. The Covenant is not propagated, and transmitted by the way of naturall generation. No. [That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh.] The parent commu∣nicates his nature and the corruption of it unto his child, But by vertue of the promise.but nothing of Grace. That is the free gift of God. And this it is that bringeth the childe of the believer into Covenant as well as the parent, even the free and graci∣ous promise of God made both to the parent, and to the childe: making over the heavenly inheritance unto both as joynt heires of the Kingdome of God. To draw to a conclusion of this first Argument. You see that Infants of believers are in Covenant, and how they come to be so. Now being in Covenant, they have right to this initiall seale of the Covenant. Repl. Infants have no right to the Lords Supper. Repl. But to this the Anabaptist will yet once more reply, that by the same reason they should have right to the other Sacrament as well as this, to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that being also a seale of the Cove∣nant. A. They have a right to it, though not in it. A. To this I answer briefly. A right they have to both the seales of the Covenant, both to Baptisme and the Lords Supper. Though for the present they be not capable of the latter, yet they have a right in it, or rather a right to it. Is adrem, though not Is in re. A right to it, though not in it. Even as a childe under age, an Infant lying in the cradle, being an heire, he hath right to such a house or land, which yet he cannot for the present take up, and make use of. Even such a right have the
children of beleevers in, or to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, a right to it, and a right to partake of it, when they are capable of it, which for the present they are not. Q. Infants, why not capable of both Sacra∣ments. Q. And why not as capable of the one Sacrament, as of the other? A. Because the one is a Pas∣sive, the other an active Or∣dinance. A. I answer, because the one is a passive, the other an active Ordinance in reference to the receivers. Bap∣tisme is a passive Ordinance, even as Circumcision was, which required nothing in the person to be actually done by him, but only to suffer the flesh of his foreskin to be cut: So in Baptisme now, the person baptized is a meere patient in the act of baptizing: But it is otherwise in the Lords supper. Even as in the Passeover there was somewhat more required then a bare suffering, viz. a taking, and eating, &c. Even so in the Lords supper, the Communicant is more then a meer patient, he must be active in that Ordinance. Take and eat, take and drinke, both in remembrance of Christ. This must the Com∣municant do in the act of receiving. Besides, in way of preparation to it he must examine himselfe, and that as for other things, so for his abilitie to discerne the Lords body. Which because Infants cannot do, therefore they are debarred from that Sacrament, though received to the other. Baptisme is a passive ordinance, wherein the person baptized is a meer patient. Such is a man in the begin∣ning of the new birth, the first act of conversion, a meere patient; As in Generation, so in Regeneration. Now Bap∣tisme, we know, is a Sacrament of our Regeneration, and consequently Infants are capable of this Sacrament, thoughnot of the other, even as Infants under the Old
Testament were capable of Circumcision at eight dayes old, when they were not capable of eating the Passeover, though they had a right to the one, as well as the other. But I shall dwell no longer upon it. I passe to a se∣cond generall Argument. Arg. 2. from Gen. 17. 12. [He that is eight dayes old shall be circumcised.] Arg. 2. Infants were circumcised, ergo, may be baptized. AN Argument which I question not but it would a∣lone bear the weight of this whole Controversie, if it were laid upon it. It is taken from the analogie and pro∣portion betwixt Baptisme and Circumcision: the one a Sacrament of the Old Testament, the other of the New. The Argument is framed thus: Infants under the Old Testament were circumcised; therefore Infants under the New Testament may be baptized. The Proposition or former part of this Enthymeme, the words which I have now read hold forth unto your, That Infants were cir∣cumcised▪ So runs the Order and Injunction here in the Text. [He that is eight dayes old, shall be circumcised &c.] Wherein for the opening of the words, we may take notice of the Ordinance it selfe, and the time assigned for the administration of it. The Ordinance, Circumcision; the time, the eight day. Briefly of each. Circumcision, what. 1. For the Ordinance it selfe, Circumcision, you know what it was. The first Sacrament of the Old Testament sig∣nifying and sealing up to the people of the Iewes their en∣trance into Covenant with God; Thence called by the name of the Covenant. [My Covenant shall be in your Gen. 17. 13.flesh, Gen. 17.]
For further opening of it, I might shew you both what was the signe, and what the thing signified by it. v. 11.The outward signe, the cutting away the foreskin of the flesh. The thing signified by it; Generally, their en∣trance into Covenant▪ More particularly, their Iustification nd Sanctification. Iustification, in the remission of all their sins, and gracious acceptation of their persons in and through the blessed seed, being now marked out for God. Sanctification, in the mortifying of their lusts. And hence it was, that that mark was set upon that part of the body, to represent both the pardoning and morti∣fying of all their sinfull lusts; both which were hereby not only signified, but sealed up unto them. Divers myste∣ries shadowed out by Circumcision. Many other uses there were of this Sacrament. Di∣vers mysteries were shadowed out and signified by it: As, 1. The Corruption of their natures, viz. That they  were by carnall generation unclean, and impure, out of Covenant with God, deserving to be cut off, and cast from the presence of God, as that foreskin was from the presence of men. Heb. 9. 22. 2. The meanes of their Redemption, viz. by the shed∣ding  of blood, without which there is no remission, no re∣demption. It is a generall observation: All blood shed in the Old Testament, was typicall; and so was this. The blood shed in Circumcision, a type of the blood of Christ shed in his Passion. 3. The nature of Mortification, which is a painfull  exercise making the heart bleed, and making it bleed by affliction of spirit; and a cutting off, and casting away of sin, as in Circumcision there was a cutting off, and ca∣sting away the foreskin of the flesh.
4. Their obligation and duty, viz. That they should be ready to shed their blood for God, who had taken them into Covenant with himselfe. Ends of the Institution. These and divers other mysticall significations it had; besides divers other ends of the Institution. As 1. It was to them the initiall seale of the Covenant, making them visible members of the Church. 2. It was a note of distinction, to difference and di∣stinguish them from all other nations and people. 3. It was an obligation upon them, binding them to the observation of the whole Law, not only Moral, but Ceremonial. 4. It was to them a pledge and assurance of their right to, and interest in the earthly Canaan, which was the type of a heavenly. These and many more ends and uses might be reckoned up, but I shall not dwell upon them. The time ap∣pointed for ad∣ministring of Circumcision, the eight day. Passe we to the second thing, (which is here princi∣pally aimed at) viz. the Circumstance of Time, when this Sacrament was to be administred, and that was up∣on the eight day. [He that is eight dayes old.] Filius ct dirum, the son of eight dayes, (so the Originall hath it) i. e. a Child of eight dayes old: That was the day ap∣pointed for the administring of this Sacrament, the eight day: which was precisely commanded▪ and as precise∣ly observed, upon what day soever it fell, I, though upon Joh. 7. 22, 23.the Sabbath day. [Moses gave you Circumcision (saith our Saviour to the Iewes) and ye on the Sabbath day cir∣cumcise a man;] viz. that the Law of Circumcision might not be broken. Thus it was. Q. Why the eight day? Q. But the question may be touching the reason of it; why God would have it so? why he chooseth out
that time, that day? why no sooner? why no later? A. For answer, Know we it is not good, nor safe to be too curious in our enquiries after God, in seeking a reason of all his Injunctions and Commands. He that is the Lord of time, may dispose of time as he pleaseth, neither is he bound to give an account of it. Yet in as much as there is a reason in all his actions, make we a sober and modest enquiry after it here. Q. Why no sooner A. Divers reasons alleadged. Some Physical Perer. ad loc. ex Plutarcho. Q. 1. Why no sooner? Why not before the 8th. day? A. Divers reasons I find given for it; some physicall or naturall, others spirituall and mysticall: In a physicall way, The Physitian will tell us, that the seventh day is a Cryticall day, and so a dangerous day, in speciall to Infants; so as till that day be past, no wound, no incision can safely be made in the body of a tender Infant. Other mysti∣call. In a mysticall way; Augustine will tell us, that this had reference to the resurrection of Christ, who rose again the eight day, by whom we have the true Circumcision. The Master of the Sentences, and others after him, will tell us, that this eight day shadowed out the last day. Octava dies eterna dies, (saith Luther.) The eight day an Luther ad loc.embleme of Eternity, which commeth not within the compasse of the seven dayes, which are the measurers of time. Then shall we have a full and perfect Circum∣cision, having put off this sinfull flesh. The Hebrew Doctours have yet another conceit. The eight day was assigned (say they) to the end that a Sab∣bath (which to the Jewes was a signe of their Sanctifica∣tion) Exod. 31. 13.might passe over the head of the Infant, before it was circumcised, which it doth ever in eight dayes. But I will not avouch any of these.
Two reasons insisted on. More plainly and simply, take a double reason for it. The one naturall, the other ceremoniall and mysticall. R. 1. The naturall Reason. 1. God puts off Circumcision to the eight day, be∣cause before that, the childe being tender could not without hazard or hardship indure so painfull a wound. From whence we might (by the way) take up a double observation, each usefull. Obs. 1. God proporti∣ons tryalls to strength. Obs. 1. See here the truth of that which St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 10. 13. That God will not suffer his people to be tempted, (tried above their strength, above what they are able to beare. He knoweth their frames and their tem∣pers, and he will deale with them accordingly. [Hee Psal. 103. 14.knoweth our frame (saith the Psalmist) and he remembreth that we are but dust. And therefore what ever sense and reason may dictate, God will deale tenderly with his people, the people that are in Covenant with him, not 1 Pet. 1. 6.afflicting them but when and where needis, and in such a measure as they shall be able to beare it. Giving them such breathings, such intervals, and intermissions as hee shall see fitting for them. Thus deales he here with these young Covenanters, the Hebrew Infants, he giveth them a breathing time betwixt their Birth and Circumcision, that so they might recover the soarnesse of the one, be∣fore he put them upon a new smart. Even so tenderly is God pleased to deale with his people: He will not suffer them to have sorrow upon sorrow but where need is. Paul writing to his Philippians tells them of Epa∣proditus his sicknesse, [He was sicke nigh unto death, but Phil. 2. 27.(saith he) God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. Herein God deleth with them, as the warie Physitian with his patient; who if he be driven to repeat his Phlebotomie, his
blood letting, yet he affordes his patient such intermis∣sion as the case will permit. Thus though God doe sometimes follow his people with a succession of tryalls, their need requiring it, yet he allows them such respites, and such breathings as he in his wisdome seeth fit fr them. True it is, flesh and blood sometimes thinkes o∣therwise. It is Iobs complaint as touching himselfe, that [God multiplied his wounds without cause, and that hee would not suffer him to take his breath, Iob 9. 17, 18] But this was Iobs infirmity, (as Asaph saith of himselfe in a Psal. 77. 10.like case) a fit of passion. Certainly God is no deligh∣ted in the miseries of his creatures, much lesse in the sufferings of his people, and therefore they shall have such intermissions as he seeth fit for them, that so they may not sinke under their burthens. Obs. 2. God will have mercy rather then sacrifice. Obs. 2. See here the truth of that which the Prophet Hosea tells us, Hos 6 6▪ The Lord desireth mercie, and not sacrifice, i. e. mercy rather then sacrifice. God requi∣reth that the Hebrew Infants should be circumcised, but he will not have them circumcised before the eight day; before that, they were not able to beare it. It might be a hazard, at least a hardship to them, and therefore hee requires it not. Nay, he requires the contrary. By no meanes upon what pretence soever, they might not ad∣minister it before that day. Applic. Applic. Which may serve both as a warrant, and di∣rection unto us about our baptizing of Infants. A warrant for baptizing by sprinkling. 1. As a warrant, viz. to beare out our manner of  baptizing Infants by sprinkling rather then dipping. Dip∣ping being a Ceremony which in these colder Cli∣mates cannot be used without eminent hazard and dan∣ger
unto children. Now the Rule is. Necessitie and charity dispnce with ceremoniall observances. Such is this rite, this manner of baptizing, a Ceremony. Now the duties of the Ceremoniall Law were ever to give way to the Morall, and so must they still. To preserve life is a duty of the Morall Law; no Ceremony but must give way to it. He that would not have Infants circumcised, will not have them baptized to the hazard of their lives. A direction a∣bout the time for baptizing Infants.2. Here is a direction to parents about the time for baptizing their children. Therein let them not be over hasty in thrusting their children upon this Ordinance so soone as ever they are borne, though not without some hazard and danger to their persons. But let them bee content to wait Gods time. Q. Gods time, I, but when is that? Gods time, the time con∣venient. A. When it is most convenient. That is Gods time. Therefore it was that God made choice of the eight day for Circumcision, because that day was most conveni∣ent. In Baptisme now there is no set day appointed, it may be administred sooner or later, before the eight day, or after. But the time convenient, that is the day. Q. Time convenient; when is that? A. Why when the childe may safely and conveniently receive it, and when the Ordinance may bee had according to Christs Institution. Now is the time convenient, which is Gods time; and this time Christians should wait for. Children dy∣ing without Baptisme, whether in∣dangered. Q. But what if the childe dye in the meane time? is it not hereby damniied or endangered? A. To this we answer by making the like Querie out of the Text. What if an Hebrew childe dyed before the eight day? The same case of danger might have beene objected, because the childe dyed without the
seale of the Covenant: yet were not the Jews upon that pretext of necessity to hasten the time, to baptise before the eight day. But in this case they must leave their chil∣dren unto that God who hath not tyed himself (though he hath done us) to Ordinances and means, but is able in∣wardly to supply what is outwardly wanting. And the like ought Christians to doe where Baptisme cannot bee conveniently had, with safety to the childe, and accor∣ding to the Ordinance of Christ, there are they to com∣mit and commend it unto that God, who both can and will make good his Covenant, though unsealed. Obj. Gen. 17. 14. The uncir∣cumcised man-childe was to bee cut off. Obj. Why but it is objected: The uncircumcised man∣childe was to be cut off: So you have it v. 14. [The uncir∣cumcised manchilde shall be cut off from his people.] i. e. separated from the fellowship of the Saints both here and hereafter. Now by proportion it may seeme there may be the like danger in a childe unbaptized. Arg. 1. It reached not to Infants un∣der eight daies old. A. To this we answer, that that Text, should it bee understood of children, yet is it not to be extended to Infants under eight dayes old. Such as dyed before they could receive this Ordinance according to the In∣stitution, they were not within the compasse of this commination and threatning. No more are children which are taken away before they can be made parta∣kers of Baptisme according to Christs Institution, this endangereth them not. Not yet to children, but to persons of age contem∣ning or negle∣cting that Or∣dinance. Jun. & Trem, ad loc. 2. But (secondly) that place is not properly to bee  understood of Infants, but of persons come to yeares of discretion. Not of Infants meerly wanting Circumci∣sion, but of persons neglecting and contemning that Or∣dinance. The words in the Originall import no more. Praeputiatus mas. The uncircumcised male, (so Iunius
conceives the word there to be taken, with reference onely to the sexe, not to the age;) Such a one shall be cu off; when? not in his Infancie, but afterwards, when hee commeth to yeares of discretion. If then hee shall neglect Circumcision, so approving of his parents neglect, then he shall be cut off. That this is the sense of the place, Iunius maketh it good by two arguments. Proved by two Arguments. 1. From the word in the Originall which (saith he)  is to be rendred not passively, (as our Translation rea∣deth it) [Whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised:] but actively; [Who shall not circumcise his foreskin▪] Not Circumcidetur, but Circumciderit. Not, shall not bee Circumcised, but shall not Circumcise, or cause to be cir∣cumcised the foreskin of his flesh, viz. when he is come to yeares of discretion, If then he shall contemne or neglect this Ordinance, &c. 2. From the Reason which God himself there giveth why the uncircumcised person should be cut off, viz. Be∣cause he hath broken my Covenant. Iritum fecit faedus meum. He hath made void my Covenant. Now this is not inci∣dent to children. And theeore the punishment should not be  where the offence▪could not be commit∣ted. If the Infant were not circumcised, it was the Parents fault in omitting it, not the Infants in wanting it. And in this case the Parent might be cut off, not the Child. The Exod. 4. 24.truth whereof we see in Moses; his child being uncircum∣cised, the Lord proceeds not against the childe, but him. Not the want, but contempt or neglect of time. And surely thus standeth the case in Baptisme: If per∣sons being come to yeares of discretion shall remaine unbaptized, either contemning or neglecting of this Or∣dinance of God; in this case God threatens them with a
Cutting off. But as for Infants, let their Parents look to it: If there be any default, any contempt, any neglect in them, let them see to it; God will have a controver∣sie with them they may smart for it. But as for Infants themselves, I have more charity then to feare their mis∣cariage for their Parents neglect. No: As the father shall not beare the iniquity of the son, so neither shall the son beare the iniquity of the father. The soule that sinneth Ezlthat shall dye. The uncircumcised male should be cut off: Non Infans, sed adultus: not being an Infant, but being come to yeares of understanding. It is not the want, but the neglect, the contempt of an Ordinance, that is dangerous and damnable. Not the want of Circumcision, nor yet the want of Baptisme, where it cannot be had according to the Institution of Christ. This is our rule, which we may not transgresse upon any pretence whatever. (Better no Ordinance, then to corrupt an Ordinance.) The Israelites might not upon any pretext or opinion of necessity hasten the circum∣cising of their Children before the time appointed, the eight day. This was the time convenient. There was the naturall reason of this Institution. R. 2. Besides this, I told you of a Ceremoniall Rea∣son: Infants were not to be circumcised before the eight day: Why? Because till then they were counted as in their blood polluted and uncleane. So was it with the rest of the Creatures, being new borne, they were ac∣counted unclean for seven dayes, the eight day they might be offered up unto the Lord, and not before. So you have it, Lev. 22. And as it was with other Creatures, so Lev. 22. 27.with mankind: For the first seven dayes the male-childe was accounted as unclean; the eight day it might be cir∣cumcised Lev. 12. 2▪ 3.
and so offered up unto the Lord. And what see we here? Obs. God will have no communion with impure creatures. Obs. God will have no communion with impure and unholy creatures. There is the substance of this shadow. God is in himself a pure and a holy God; being so, hewil have no communion with polluted & defiled creatures, Ezek. 16. 6.men that are in their blood, the blood of their nativity, in whom the corruption of nature rules and reigns. Thence Isa. 1. 16.is that of the Prophet; Wash ye, make ye clean &c. then come and reason with me. Infants under the Law were first to be washed and cleansed from the blood of their nativity, their Birth-uncleannesse before they came to receive the seale of Gods Covenant. Who ever would strike Covenant with God, or partake of the seales of his Covenant, they must be pure and holy. Appl. Psal. 50. 16. Let not such meddle with the seales of the Covenants Appl. O labour we all to be such, Otherwise ne∣ver take the Covenant of God in our mouths. Quid tibi? [What hast thou to doe to take my Covenant in thy mouth, &c. Ps. 50.] Never boast that we are in Covenant with God; dare not to meddle with the seales of the Cove∣nant, which so long as we continue in an unreformed, unsanctified state and condition, we have no right unto. The Infant during the time of the Ceremoniall unclean∣nesse of it, it had no right to this seale of the Covenant, Circumcision. No more have you, who ever you are, so long as you lye under a spirituall uncleannesse, not pur∣ged, and cleansed, and washed from your filthinesse, you have no right to this Ordinance of God, the Sacrament of the Lords supper. And therefore take you heed how you intrude upon what you have no right unto: But first get your soules washen; first with the blood, then with the spirit of Christ: with the blood of Christ washing
away the guilt of your fins unto Iustification; with the spirit of Christ washing away the pollution and power of sin unto Sanctification. Being thus washen, then, and not before, have you right to have communion with God, and so may comfortably partake in the meanes of your Communion, amongst which the Sacrament of the Lords supper is one, being a seale of the Covenant. And thus have I resolved unto you the first branch of this question: Why the Hebrew Infants were not to be circumcised before the eight day; Why no sooner? Q. 2. The latter branch yet remaines. Why no later? Q. 2. Why no later?They might not doe it before, neither might they de∣fer it beyond that day. The Text is expresse for the one as well as the other; [He that is eight dayes old shall be circumcised,] i. e. upon the eight day: So you have it ex∣plained, Lev. 12. Lev. 12. 3. Not but that in cases of necessity it might be defer∣red: So was it in the wildernesse for forty yeares toge∣ther. The reason whereof you have insinuated, Iosh. 5. Their children were uncircumcised, for (saith the Text) Josh. 5. 7.they had not circumcised them by the way.] Being in iti∣nere, every day marching and journeying from place to place, and subject to daily encounters with the Enemy, they could not conveniently be circumcised. In this case then, (the case of necessity) it might be deferred; otherwise it was to be administred precisely upon the eight day. And why not upon the 9. 10. 20.? why not the next moneth, the next yeare? A. Reasons al∣ledged. 1. Naturall. Peter. ad loc. A. For this I find divers reasons alledged: one phy∣sicall or natuall, the other morall or mysticall. 1. In a Physicall way (say some) this was a more
convenient time then afterwards; inasmuch as after∣wards the body of the Infant growing more firme and solid, his Circumcision would have been more painfull and grievous to him: Now God is not delighted in the smart and torment of his creatures, much lesse of the people that are in Covenant with him. Letting that passe: Morall and Mysticall Rea¦sons. Paraeus ad loc.  Parents . Other Reasons yielded are morall or mysticall. Of them I find Paraeus reckoning up three: 1. God would not have it any longer deferred, for the consolation of the parents; that they might have an early assurance of Gods grace and favour towards their Infants, viz. that he had received them into Covenant, and did look upon them as confederates with himselfe, and with his people. Appl. A speciall Priviledge, and so to be accounted by all that professe the name of Christ; who ought to use all means to have the Covenant sealed up, as to them∣selves, so to their Children, not omitting the first op∣portunity that God offereth them for that purpose. Were it a temporall estate, an inheritance that were to be setled upon posterity, and to be confirmed by some Decree in Chancery under Seale, in this case a carefull and provident parent would not let slip the first sealing day. No more should Christian parents willingly baulk the first opportunity for the sealing up of the Covenant of Grace, and therein of the heavenly inheritance, unto their children. The sooner it is done, the more comfor∣table to the parent. the  sake,  might fleigh▪ 2. As God did this for the Parents, so for the Ordi∣nances sake, viz. that that might not be sleighted, might not be neglected. Had there been a liberty left for pa∣rents
to have deferred and put off the circumcising of their children so long as they pleased, the Ordinance by this meanes would have been brought into contempt, and have been reputed as unnecessary, as needlesse. Now God cannot endure that any ordinance of his should fall into disrespect and disrepute among his people. Be it Word, be it Sacrament, be it Prayer. &c. God would have the due estimation of them all maintained. Take heed of slighting Or∣dinances. Applic. And take we heed how any of us have a hand in impairing it. How any of us be any occasion of lay∣ing any ordinance of God under disrepute and dis∣esteem. This is done to the Word, when men come to heare i, as if they cared not whether they came or no: Come sometimes (it may be) for fashions sake, if they Word.like the person of the Preacher; otherwise their own house, or their neighbours house, is as good to them as Gods house, the Publike Congregation. When they doe come, yet they care not how late they come, when the Sermon is begun, halfe done. Thus is it with some, who suffer every sleight occasion to detain them, As we see it too ordinary in divers cases, and particularly in that which I cannot but touch upon, your Baptizings; where civill ceremony, and outward solemnity stealeth away the time from Religious service: And what is this but to bring a disrepute, a disrespect upon this ordinance of God? as if it were not a thing of any such necessity as it is pretended to be. Baptisme. The like I may say of Baptisme, when children are detained from it week after week, moneth after moneth. What doth this imply, but that Baptisme surely either is not proper for Infants, or at least it is not of any such necessity, but that they may be well enough without it?
The Lords supper. And so for the Lords supper. When Christians upon sleight grounds shall absent themselves, laying aside that ordinance, not comming to the Sacrament yeare after yeare: What is this but to bring a disesteem upon that ordinance? as if it were not of any such worth, of any such necessity as it is pretended to be. In the feare of God every of us take we heed of every of these, or the like. Take heed how we be any occasi∣on of bringing an evill report upon any of the wayes of God: But by all meanes be carefull to uphold the reverence and estimation that is due to his ordinances. This was one end why God would not have Circum∣cision deferred beyond the eight day, that he might pre∣serve that ordinance from neglect and contempt. 3. A third Reason alledged by my Author, is: This To order the administrati∣on of Baptism afterwards.God did (saith he) not without a reference and respect unto Baptisme under the New Testament, which was to succeed in the room and place of Circumcision. Herein taking order also for the administration of the Sacrament, viz. that it should be administred unto Infants, though not precisely upon the eight day▪ (that was Ceremoniall, and being so, it is ceased as touching any obligation) yet in time stting and convenient. That was the substance and morality of that command, and that still abides; By vertue whereof Infants in their infancie both may, and ought to be baptized. And so I am fallen upon the later part of the Enthymeme. The Conse∣quence of the Argument proved. Infants under the Old Testament were circumcised: [Therefore under the New Testament they may and ought to be baptized.] Q. But how prove you this Consequence, (saith the Anabaptist.)
Baptisme suc∣ceeds Circum∣cision. A. Why, the ground of it is this: Because Baptisme succeeds and commeth in the room and place of Cir∣cumcision, answering to it. Q. How prove we that? Col. . 11. 12. explained. A. From the Apostle himself, Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised, &c. v. 11. Buried with him in Bap∣tisme, v. 12.] For the opening of which Text, know we briefly what the Apostles scope and drift there is, viz. to prove against the Jewes that Circumcision is not now necessary nor usefull unto Christians under the Go∣spel. The reason he giveth for it, is, because Christians have a more excellent Circumcision then that of Moses. That you have, v. 11. proved and made good by three Arguments. 1. From the Author of their Circumci∣sion; Not Moses, who was but a servant, nor any other man, but Christ himselfe. [In (or by) whom ye are circum∣cised: [By the circumcision of Christ.] 2. From the kind of it. It was not an outward, but an inward circum∣cision, ; a circumcision not made with hands, as that Mosaicall circumcision was; but made without hands, viz. the circumcision of the heart, of the inward man by the spirit of Christ. 3. From the fruit and effect of it, which is far different from that Legall circumcision. There was only the cutting off of one small part of the body, the foreskin of the flesh: but here is a cutting or putting off the whole body of sin: [In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ▪] Why but the Iewes here might object: This Reason is of no force; that because Christians were spiritually circumcised, therefore they should not need the outward
circumcision: For so was Abraham, and yet he received the outward circumcision; He had the inward grace, and yet he received the outward signe. And thus Chri∣stians, though they be made partakers of this great be∣nefit by Christ, yet they may stand in need of an out∣ward seale to assure them of their partaking herein. To this the Apostle answers, v. 12. shewing that Christ hath not left his people under the New Testa∣ment destitute of such an outward signe and seale: For hoever Circumcision be taken away, yet there is an∣other Sacrament substituted and appointed in the room and place of it, a more excellent and lively Sacrament then ever Circumcision was, a Sacrament resembling it, and answering to it, viz. Baptisme. [Buried with him in Baptisme] viz. Sacramentally, Baptisme being a Sacra∣ment of Regeneration, signifying and sealing up both our mortification, and vivification. [Being buried with him in (or by) Baptisme; wherein also ye are risen with him.] Thus then Baptisme succeeds Circumcision, and sup∣plies the place of it. Q. Whether Cir∣cumcision was a type of Bap∣tisme. Q. What then (saith the Anabaptist) was Circum∣cision a type of Baptisme? That cannot be (saith one of them) for then one Type might type out another, and so be a Type of a Type. A. Not so, yet Baptisme suc∣ceedeth it, and answereth to it A. To this we answer, that we doe not say that Cir∣cumcision properly was a type of Baptisme: Both Cir∣cumcision and Baptisme are types of one and the same thing, viz. the mystery of our Regeneration, which is the truth of those types. But this we say, that the one succeeded the other; Baptisme succeeded Circumcisi∣on, Baptisme an Antitype to Circumcision.came in the room and place of it, withall answering to it, and so may be called an antitype to it. This we say
with warrant from S. Peter, who saith the same of Bap∣tisme, 1 Pet. 3. 1.and the Ark wherein Noah was saved, 1 Pet. 3. [The like figure whereunto even Baptisme doth now save us.] The like figure, , the antitype, i. e. Typus correspondens, (as Beza explaineth it) a Type answering to a Type. That deliverance in and from the flood, and our Baptisme, they are two severall types, both typify∣ing and shadowing out one and the same thing, viz. our deliverance by Christ: but that being the former type, carried with it a resemblance of this; and this com∣ming after, answereth unto that. Even so may we say of Circumcision and Baptisme: Baptisme is to Circum∣cision , an antitype, though not properly typified by it, yet a type comming in the place of it, and answer∣ing to it. Obj. Answering to it? (saith the Anabaptist) True, in some things it doth, but not in all: Nay in many things there is a vast difference betwixt them. And therefore (say they) to reason from Circumcision to Baptisme, can be no convincing Argument. Baptisme and Circumcision compared. A. In way of reply to this, it will be both expedi∣ent and necessary to bring the Type and the Antitype, Baptisme and Circumcision, (as I may say) face to face, to compare the one with the other, that so we may see both wherein they differ, and wherein they agree. We will begin with the former. Wherein they differ. Wherein they differ. That there are differences be∣twixt  them, we yield it: But yet these differences we shall find for the most part circumstantiall; For substance we shall still find them one and the same. The differences are many. 1. In outward Ceremony. 1. They differ in the outward ceremony or signe;
which in the one, was a cutting off the foreskin of the flesh; in the other, the washing of the body with water. 2. In some cir∣cumstances a∣bout the sub¦ject. 2. In some circumstances about the subject, As 1. Circumcision was to be administred only to the males, Baptisme to male and female. 2. Circumcision was en∣joyned only to Abrahams posterity, to his seed accord∣ing to the flesh. As for others, however they might come in and joyn themselves with Abraham, and be confederates with him, yet were they not enjoyned to Gen. 17. 9.be circumcised: The command reached only to Abra∣ham and his seed. But Baptisme, that extendeth to all, both Iewes and Gentiles. [Goe teach all nations baptizing them.] i. e. not administring Baptisme to the Iewes only, as Circumcision was, but to all nations, Iewes and Gentiles. 3. Time of ad∣ministration. 3. In the circumstance of Time appointed for their administration. Circumcision was to be administred precisely upon the eight day, neither sooner, nor later, (as I have shewed you:) But in Baptisme there is a liberty left, no set day appointed. 4. Manner of signification. 4. In their manner of signification. Circumcision looked at Christ to come; Baptisme, at Christ already come: The one signifying and sealing the remission of sins by and through the blood of Christ to be shed; the other, through that blood already shed. 5. Matter sealed. 5. In the matter sealed. Circumcision sealed up un∣to Abraham and his seed a temporall promise, viz. touch∣ing the Land of Canaan: So you have it, v. 8. of this Gen. 17. 8.Chap. [I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan.] Not that this was the only thing which Circumcision sealed up, (as the Anabaptists would have it) or yet the
main thing; For in the verse foregoing, God promi∣seth Abraham to be his God, and the God of his seed. This ver. 7.was the grand promise, the main of the Covenant which Circumcision sealed up. As for that temporall inheri∣tance, it was but an accessary, an appendix, an additament. But Baptisme sealeth up only spirituall and heavenly be∣nefits, Grace and Glory. 6. Duration. 6. And lastly, (to name no more) they differ in their duration and continuance. Circumcision was but a tem∣porary ordinance, the temporary seale of an everlasting Co∣venant, Gen. 19. 7. 13.being to continue in force only till the com∣ming of Christ, in whom all the Ceremonies of the Old Testament determined. Paul speaking of the whole Pe∣dagogie of the Law, the Legall Covenant, tels us, It was Gal. 3. 19.added because of Transgressions, untill the seed should come to whom the Promise was made:] i. e. till Christ should Rom. 10. 4.come who was the end of the Law. But Baptisme, it is a perpetuall ordinance. Such is the Gospel it selfe, an ever∣lasting Gospel (as it is called Rev. 14. 6.) And such are all Gospel ordinances, everlasting ordinances, to continue in force till the second comming of Christ at the end of the world. All these differences we confesse and acknowledge: And we think our Adversaries cannot truly assigne any more, at least not materiall. Now for these differences, he that looketh upon them shall see them to be but cir∣cumstantiall, so as for substance these two may still re∣maine one and the same, and so we shall find them, the one in all materials answering the other. That will ap∣peare  Wherein they agree.by comparing of them in the things wherein they agree. 1. In ends and uses. And here we shall find them agreeing (first) in the
maine and principall ends and uses, for which they were instituted and ordained. As 1. Each of them a Seale of the Covenant. So was Each a seale of the same Co∣venant. Vers. 11. Circumcision. [It shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you.] And so is Baptisme a Token and Seale of the Covenant: And that of the same Covenant that Rom. 4. 11.Circumcision was, viz. the Covenant of Grace, sealing up to the beleever his interest in the grace and favour of God through Christ. Each a Seale of the Covenant, of the same Covenant. 2. Each an Initiall Seale, the first Seale of the Cove∣nant; Each an initi∣all Seale.each sealing up an entrance into Covenant. So did Circumcision, and so doth Baptisme. Each a note of distinction.3. Each a note of distinction, to difference and distin∣guish Gods people from all other people. So did Cir∣cumcision; it was the distinguishing marke, distinguishing Gal. 2. 15.betwixt Iewes by nature, and sinners of the Gentiles. And so doth Baptisme now to Christians, distinguishing them from Pagans, Turkes and Infidels. Each an obli∣gation to obe∣dience.4. Each of them an Obligation, binding to the same condition, the condition of Obedience, & that, Evangeli∣call obedience. Such was the condition of the Covenant Gen. 17. 1.which God made with Abraham. [Walke before me and be thou perfect,] i. e. upright, or sincere. Hereunto was he obliged by his Circumcision. And hereunto are Christians obliged by their Baptisme to the same con∣dition. Thus they agree in their maine ends and uses. In their signi∣fication, sha∣dowing out the same my∣steries.2. We shall finde them agreeing in their significati∣on. Each shadowing out the same mysteries. As 1. The corruption of nature. This was shadowed out in Circumcision, by cutting off the foreskin of the flesh.  The corrupti∣on of nature.And the same mysterie is shadowed out in Baptisme,
by the washing of the body with water. The mystery of Redempti∣on. 2. The mysterie of our Redemption through the shed∣ding  of the blood of Christ. That was shadowed out in Circumcision by the shedding of blood: And the same is shadowed out in Baptisme by the water; both repre∣senting and signifying the blood of Christ. The mystery of Regen e∣tion. 3. The mysterie of our spirituall regeneration. This  was shadowed out by Circumcision, wherein the cutting off the foreskin of the flesh signified the mortifying of sinfull lusts: And the same is signified in Baptisme, where by the washing of the body with water, is signi∣fied the washing of the soule from the staine and pollu∣tion of sin by the spirit of Christ. Whence it is called a Tit. 3. 5.Laver, , The laver of Regeneration, the washing of the new birth. Thus each of them holdeth forth the same mysteries. 3. Agreements in the Subject. 3. We shall find them agreeing in the Subject. Each of them being to be administred to all, and only Confe∣derates; such, all such, only such as are within the com∣passe of the Covenant. So was Circumcision to Abra∣ham and all his posteritie, to Infants as well as others, they being also confederates. And even so is it with Baptism: it is to be administred to all, and only such as may in the judgement of charity be reputed confederates; amongst which Infants also are to be reckoned (as I have alrea∣dy proved it at large.) Upon this ground were they cir∣cumcised, because within the Covenant; and upon this ground they may and ought to be baptized. Replic. Circumcision was grounded upon an ex∣presse com∣mand. Repl. But to this the Anabaptist replieth, that it was not the Covenant that made Infants capable of Circum∣cision. What then? Why, an expresse Command from God. Even that in the Text: [He that is eight dayes old
shall be circumcised.] Here is an expresse Mandamus (say they) an expresse order for the Circumcision of In∣fants; and by vertue hereof it was, that they were cir∣cumcised: not because they were in Covenant, but because God had given an expresse command concer∣ning it. Sol. That com∣mand was grounded up∣on the Cove∣nant. A. To this we answer. It is true, here is an expresse command for the Circumcision of Infants: but it is with reference to the Covenant, which was the ground of this Injunction, and the ground of Infants circumcision. This it was that made Infants capable of Circumcision; not meerly this Mandamus, this Command in the Text, (as abstracting Anabaptists would have it) without re∣ference to the Covenant, but their being in Covenant. They were confederates with God: God had taken them into Covenant, and therefore hee would have the seale of his Covenant set upon them. So much may be clearly collected (as from divers other passages in this Chapter, so) from the 10. 13. & 14. verses, where Cir∣cumcision is still called by the name of the Covenant: [My Covenant shall be in your flesh▪ &c.] Clearly import∣ing that this was the ground of their Circumcision, even the Covenant, not simply the Command. Note. As for the Command here in the Text, it is to be noted, that it only determines the time, assignes the day upon which Infants were to be circumcised, limiting it to the eight day. But as for their Circumcision it selfe, that was ordered before, being comprehended in the Covenant it selfe, which was the ground of their Cir∣cumcision. Repl. Here is a com∣mand for Cir∣cumcision, not the like for baptisme of Infants. Repl. Why but (saith the Anabaptist) however, here is an expresse mandamus, an expresse order and command
for the circumcision of Infants. Now (say they) could you shew us the like for the baptisme of Infants, then the controversie were at an end. But such command, such injunction, or direction there is none. Sol. No prohibiti∣on to forbid the seal of the Covenant to Infants under the New Te∣stament, more then under th Old. A. To this Allegation of theirs (Godwilling) I shall answer more fully hereafter. For the present I shall on∣ly retort it upon them, and demand of them to shew us a Prohibition, or Inhibition, where it is any wayes forbid∣den that children should partake of the seale of the Co∣venant under the New Testament, as well as under the Old; That they who were circumcised then, should be baptized now. That Baptisme succeeded, and came in the roome of Circumcision, we have sufficiently proved it already, and I thinke our adversaries being pressed upon it, they will not, they cannot deny it. Now if it came in the place of Circumcision, then it tyeth upon our Adversaries to shew what speciall proviso, what cae∣veat is put in to debar children from the one, who had so undoubted a right to, and so long a continued pos∣session of the other. How they come to be cut off from this priviledge which was once so firmly intailed upon them: Which if they cannot shew, then must we still conclude it to be their right. All materiall differences be∣twixt Circum∣cision and Baptisme held forth in the Word. As for other alterations wherein Baptisme differs from Circumcision, we can shew good warrant for them out of the Scriptures: As viz. 1. Why, whereas Circumcision was administred on∣ly to males, Baptisme should be administred to both sexes, both to male and female. For this, we have both  the practise of the Apostles to warrant it, (At Philips Baptizing of both sexes.preaching to the Samaritanes, they beleeving his do∣ctrine, were baptized both men and women, Act. 8. 11.)
and we have the Apostles reason for it, Gal. 3. 28. [As many of you as have beene baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; For in Christ Iesus there is neither male, nor female, &c.] Of all Nati∣ons.2. So secondly, for baptizing of all Nations. Where∣as Circumcision was restrained peculiarly to one Nation, Baptisme is to be tendred to all. For this we have our Mat. 28. 19.Saviours owne commission and warrant, [Ge teach all Nations baptizing them;] i. e. Not Iewes only, but Gen∣tiles also. And we have the Apostles reason for it also Gal. 3. 28. Act. 10. 35.in the place forenamed: [For in Christ Iesus there is neither Iew nor Greek, &c.] Upon any day.3. So againe for the circumstance of time. That we do not tye the administration of Baptisme to any cer∣taine day, as it was in Circumcision, but administer it be∣fore the eight day, or after: For this also we have the Apostles warrant, who tells us that it is not for Christi∣ans now to observe dayes as the Jewes did; reckoning up this amongst those weake and beggarly rudiments, as Gal. 4. 9. 10.he calls them. [Yee observe months and dayes, and times and years.] Herein Christians have a liberty, a liberty purchased for them by the blood of Christ; and that li∣berty Gal 5. 1.they must stand fast in. Thus in what ever other changes and alterations herein we meet with, we can still shew good warrant No warrant for this altera∣tion that In∣fants should not be bapti∣zed as well as Circumci∣sed.for it out of Scripture. Now if our Adversaries can doe the like for this great alteration, why Baptisme should not bee administred to Infants as well as Circumcision was, then indeed wee will hearken to them. In the meane time it is not for them to presse us for a speciall warrant, an expresse and particular order and command in this case. This we conceive to be altogether needlesse;
having such a standing order and direction touching Cir∣cumcision, shewing us to whom this seale of the Cove∣nant belongs, and to whom it is to be administred; viz. to all that are in Covenant, Infants as well as others, what needeth any new order in this particular? This order for the substance of it is perpetuall of force under the New Testament as well as under the Old. Further answer to this question I shall defer till hereafter, conceiving this sufficient for the present. One allegation is yet behinde which our Adversa∣ries by way of reply here cast in our way, I shall only touch briefly, and so dismisse this second Argument with it. Replic. By a like rea∣son children should now eat the Lords Supper because they eat the Passeover. Repl. If this bee a good Argument (say they) that Infants may be baptized, because they were Circumci∣sed, then by a like reason they should now be admitted to the Lords Table, because under the Old Testament they eat the Passeover. The reason (say they) is a like for both. So as if it hold in the one, why not in the other? Sol. Childrens ea∣ting of the Supper an an∣cient practice. Ans. To part of this I have in part answered alrea∣dy; give me leave now to doe it a little more fully. For childrens eating of the Lords Supper, whether lawfull or no, it hath beene, and yet is a Question. Anciently it is well knowne it was allowed and practised in the Roman Aug. l. de Eccl. Dogm. c. 52. & Eph. 23. Cyprian de Lapsis Serm. 5and African Churches. Those ancient Doctors Augu∣stine and Cyprian are Advocates in this cause, pleading not only for the lawfulnesse, but Expediencie of it. At this day the practice is (or at least lately was, as Peter P. Martyr Com. in 1 Cor. 11. 24.Martyr informes me) retained amongst the Grecian, Bohemian, Moravian Churches. How warrantable this hath been, or may be, is disputable. P. Martyr for his
In istâ causâ pro neutrâ par∣te vehementer contenderim. P. M. ibid. Non enim damnare au∣sim Ecclesiam veterem, &c. ibid. part professeth that he will not be zealous in siding with either part in this quarrell. As for the custome of those ancient Churches in admitting them, he will not, he dare not condemne it; and as for the practise of o∣ther Churches in debarring them, he cannot but allow it. The latter not so warrantable is amongst us, and most of the Churches at this day, and that upon good ground (as we conceive) concluded to be the more safe, the more warrantable. For their admission Scripture will not beare it out. As for that place cited and made use of by those Ancients as a ground for this practice, Joh. 6. 53. Except yee eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drinke his Blood ye have no life in you,] it maketh nothing for it; our Saviour there speaking not of a Sacramentall, but a Spiri∣tuall Communion, a Spirituall feeding upon him, which is done by faith, fetching refreshment & nourishment from Christ, by the application of his merits unto the soule. Much in Scripture that seemeth to make against it. Paul telleth us of divers Qualifications requisite in Communi∣cants; and divers actions to be performed by them in, and about the supper of the Lord, which Infants are not capable of, as viz. (besides the eating and drinking of the Elements which young Infants cannot doe) the exa∣mining 1 Cor. 11. v. 24 25, 26, 28, 29.of themselves, the discerning of the Lords body, the shewing forth the Lords death, the doing what they doe in remembrance of him &c. All these actions are actu∣ally to be performed by worthy Communicants. So as there is just reason why Infants though they be bap∣tized, yet they should not be admitted to the Supper of the Lord; this being as you see an active Ordinance, con∣sisting mostly in doing, [Doe this as oft as you eat it, &c.]
Q. But what say we then to the Argument? In∣fants eat the Passeover, why not then the Lords Supper, as well as be baptized, because they were circumcised? A. 1. To this we answer (i.) should it be granted that Infants did partake of the one, yet we see good reason why they should not be admitted to the other, being not subjects capable of the aforesaid Qualifi∣cations. Children did not eat the Passeover. 2. But (secondly) how can it be proved that Infants did eat the Passeover? I know it is an opinion that hath been received (swallowed downe I suppose without chewing, as many other of this nature have been) and that by some of note; but upon what ground, I know Aret. Censura contrà Paedo∣baptist.not: Scripture I am sure will not make it out. True, we finde an order that there should be a Lambe for a house, and in case that one family were too little to eat it up, Exod. 12. 3. 4.the next family was to be joyned to it; they must take it according to the number of the soules, (saith the Text) Joseph. de Bl∣lo Judai. l. 7. c. 17.reckoning (say the Hebrewes) ten to a Lambe: But that must be understood not universally of all the persons in a family, but only such as were meet to eat thereof. A∣mongst Aynsworth Annot. ad loc.which (say the Hebrews) sicke persons and young children were not to be reckoned, (no more then per∣sons uncircumcised and uncleane) being not fit to eat thereof. 1. Not fit to partake in the outward elements: This could not young Infants doe, eat the flesh and unleave∣ned bread, much lesse that unpleasing salade of sowre or Exod. 12. 8.bitter hearbes which was to be eaten with it. These were no fit food for Infants. 2. Much lesse (in the second place) could they un∣derstand the mystery and meaning thereof, which (as it
seemeth) they ought to doe, before they were admit∣ted Bucan. de Bap∣tism. sect 36.to communicate therein. So much (at least with great probability) is collected from the 26. v. of that  d. 12. 26.Chapter, where it is said, It shall come to passe when your children shall say unto you, What mean you by this service? Yee shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passeover, &c.] So it seemeth that none were to partake of this Sacra∣ment, but such as were of age and capacity to interro∣gate concerning the meaning of it: And that they were to be instructed concerning it, before such time as they were admitted to it. So much the Iewish Doctours will tell us concerning this Feast, viz. That such children as were able to goe up with their parents from the Gates of Ie∣rusalem Aynsworth ib.to the Temple, they were to appeare before the Lord, that being first catechized in the Commandements, they might celebrate the Feast. The Argu∣ment retorted. So that this Argument may now be retorted, and re∣turned with great advantage against the Adversarie, (as Bucan. de Bap∣tismo loc. 47. q. 36. Tilen. de Bap∣tismo Disp. 2 Thes. 24.I finde it by some of our moderne Divines.) Infants under the Law were circumcised the eight day, but not ad∣mitted to the eating of the Passeover, untill they were of ca∣pacity to understand the mystery and meaning of it. Even so nw under the Gospel, Infants of believing parents may and ought to be baptized, but not admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, untill they be able to understand the mystery and meaning of that Sacrament, to discerne the Lords Body. Which parallel being duly weighed, it maketh very much for the clearing of the warrantable∣nesse of the Churches practise in both these particulars, both in administring unto Infants the one Sacrament, and in with-holding from them the other. But I will no longer dwell upon it.
Objections Answered. MAny other Arguments might yet be produced for the vindicating of this cause, but I will not overload it, or tire your patience. Probably we shall yet meet with some more in returning Answer to the Objections of the Adversary. That is the second Act which I propounded to my selfe, and promised to you, when I first undertooke this Subject. Let me dis∣charge my selfe of it with as much brevity as conveni∣ently I may; not reckoning up all the shadowes of Ar∣guments that are made use of, of which there are divers not worth the naming much lesse the answering, but only some of the chiefe and principall which may seem to carry the greatest shew of strength and reason with them. Obj. 1. Paedobaptism a humane, An∣tichristian, o∣vell invention. Arg. 1. In the first place, against the Baptisme of In∣fants, it is alleadged, that it is but a humane, and that a novel invention, a meere device of Antichrist, and that of a very late impression, not practised in the Church till at least a thousand yeares after Christ; first brought in by Pope Innocentius 3. qui vivit An. 1215. A. R. In his vanity of chil∣dish baptisme. Sol. Grosse or wil∣full ignorance. Innocent. Thus it is confidently charged by some, who blush not to bring in M. Luther to vouch this their bold assertion. A. But herein how grossely (if not wilfully) ignorant they are, it is but too apparent. Certainly they who in
good earnest charge Paedobaptisme with novelty, shew Pag. 72. 73.themselves to be little seene in antiquity. I told you heretofore that in Augustines, nay in Cyprianus floruit Anno Dom. 250.Cyprians time (who lived in the third Centurie, within lesse then three hundred yeares after Christ) Children were ad∣mitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Surely then much more to Baptisme, without which they were not capable of the Eucharist, no more then an uncircum∣cised Antiquity pleading for Paedobaptism.person was of the Passeover. In this cause the te∣stimony of those Ancients are commonly cited. Au∣gustine speaking of Infants baptisme calleth it a Common Aug. Epl. 28. l. 3. de Pc. Me∣rit. & Remiss. e. 6. 7. 8. 9. ubi totam ferè Cy∣priani Episto∣lam recitat. & alibi passim: vide Pamel. Annot. in Cy∣prian. Ep. 69. Cyprian us Epist. 69. Orig. in Levi. Hom. 8. in Lu. in Epist. d Rom. c. 6.custome of the Church; shewing that it was universally received in his time. Cyprian in an Epistle sent from himselfe, and divers other Presbyters, his Collegues met together in a Councell to the number of sixty six, to his friend Fidus, pleads for it, averring and proving that it was not necessary that Baptisme should be deferred till the eight day as Circumcsion was. To the same purpose Origen before them (who lived in the beginning of the third Centurie, not much above two hundred yeares af∣ter Christ) mentioneth this as a received custome in the Church, approving of it, and giving a reason for it, viz. because even Infants are not free from spirituall pollution and uncleanenesse, no though they have lived but one day Cyill. Hieros. Catech. myst. Greg▪ Naz. Orat. 3. in San∣ctum lavacrum Ambros. in Luc. Concil. Mile. can. 2. citat per Pam. in Annot. super Epistol. Cypr. 69.upon earth. So that this cannot be justly charged with novelty that hath these, and many more of the Ancients speaking of it, and for it. Obj. Why but Tertullian, who was as ancient as any of them, the first Writer of note of the Latin Church, he was of another minde, disallowing and condemning this practice. A. To this it is answered by P. Martyr, that so hee
did some other things, which yet the word hath not Tertull lib. de Baptisme. P. Martyr. lo. Com. clas 4. lo. 8. sect. 5. condemned, as viz. second marriages, &c. so as his au∣thority in this case is not so much to be regarded, he be∣ing then (when hee wrote that booke) fallen from the Church, and from the orthodox faith (fallen into Mon∣tanisme) specially seeing he denyed Baptisme not only to Infants, but to all others untill they were well stricken in yeares, viz. to young men, nay to young widowes: But even from him (as the foresaid Authour observes) it may be collected that baptisme of Infants was then in use in the Church, otherwise he would never have repre∣hended the practice of it. So it was, and before his time. So much is testified by some of the Greek Fathers who Irenaeus con∣tra haeretic. l▪ 2. c. 39. Just. mar. quae. 56. cum allis citat. per Pamel. ub su∣suprà. Repl. Paedobaptisme an Ecclesiasti∣call constituti∣on. were before him, viz. Irenaeus and Iustine Martyr (who lived in the second Centurie, about an hundred and fifty yeares after Christ) both making mention of it. Repl. But it is replied that though it be acknowled∣ged to bee ancient, yet still is it a humane invention, no divine Apostolicall Ordinance, but a meer Ecclesiasti∣call constitution. So saith the Papist, and so saith the Anabaptist, in this not unlike Sampsons foxes, joyned to∣gether by the tayles, whilest their heads looke severall wayes; both asserting the same position though to diffe∣rent ends, the one to establish humane traditions, the o∣ther to undermine a divine Ordinance. But how prove they what they say? Why the Authours prealledged some of them say as much in expresse words. Origen calleth it a Ceremony, or Tradition of the Church. Augu∣stine, a custome of the Church. Sol. Paedobaptism how called a Ceremony. A. To grant all, what advantage can hence be ta∣ken? Baptisme of Infants is a Ceremony. Why, so in a large & yet proper acceptation of the word may all Re∣ligious
Rites be called, not only of humane but divine institution. Thus not only the Sacrifices, but the Sacra∣ments under the Old Testament were Ceremonies. And so may the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord be called, and that without any offence to those who understand the language of the Ancients, or the proper signification of the Ceremonia,  Cere Italiae oppido, ubi sacra Roma∣norum ēpore tumultus Gal∣lici summa cir∣câ reservata e∣rant, Liv. l. 5.word. Repl. But it is called a Tradition. A. So are some Apostolicall institutions, and doctrines and that by the Apostle himselfe. Repl. Why, but it is called a Ceremony and Tradition of the Church. A. True, but how? not of the Church as the Au∣thour, How a Tradi∣tion. 1 Cor. 11. 2. 2 Thes. 2. 15. How a Cere∣mony and tra∣dition of the Church. Origen in Ep ad Rom. l. 5. August. contrà Do. l. 4 c 24 & de Gen. ad lit. l. 10. c. 23. ftent Pame∣lio ubi suprà. but as the Subject of it. A Ceremony, a Rite reli∣giously observed by the Church, and a Tradition deli∣vered to the Church, viz▪ from the Apostles them∣selves. So much the forenamed Doctors doe expressely aver. So saith Origen▪ so saith Augustine. The Church received this Tradition of baptizing of Infants from the Apostles. And Augustines rule is a reason for it little lesse then demonstrative; Quod univers a tenet Ecclesia, &c.] That which is universally received and practised by the Church, and had not its first institution from some Councel, but hath beene ever retained, may well be be∣lieved to be an Apostolicall Tradition.] Repl. Pope Higinus the author of it. Repl. But say some the more learned Anabaptists (at least pretenders to it) though this be ancient, and a very ancient custome, yet the pedigree of it doth not a∣rise so high as to claime kindred of the Apostles. The first father of it was a Bishop of Rome, Pope Higinus by name. Sol. A. If so, then by their owne confession it commeth
somewhat near to the Apostles times; this Higinus being the eight Bishop of Rome, living in the dayes of the Em∣perour Euseb. l▪ 4. c. 9.Antoninus Pius, about a hundred and forty years after Christ. P. Mart. loc. com Clas. 4. lo 8. sect. 5. 2. But (in the second place) let P. Martyr in this re∣turne them answer, that upon search he findeth no such thing in the Decretals. Onely this he findes, that that Bishop was the first that made a law concerning God∣fathers and Godmothers (as we call them) in Baptisme. (An Ecclesiasticall constitution, though not necessary, yet Utile sane In∣stitutum. P. M. ibid. Vide Buan. de Bptismo, loc. 48. q. 47. in the judgement of that great Divine, and divers others, both lawfull and profitable.) Hereof that Bishop is sup∣posed to be the Author. What then? shall it be thence collected that he was the first author of Infants baptism. Nay rather (as P. Martyr observes) in as much as hee made such a provision for Infants that were to be bapti∣sed, appointing them some to be guardians unto them in their pupillage, who should by solemne promise be in∣gaged to take care of them, either instead of their pa∣rents, or together with them, for their religious educa∣cation in that Faith whereinto they were baptized, it is most probable that the baptizing of them was a thing in use before, and so no other but an Apostolicall Ordinance by them ordained, and from them transmitted to the Church, where the practice of it hath been uninterrup∣tedly continued ever since. Arg. 2. No precept or president for Paedobaptism in the New Testament. Arg▪ 2. But (saith the Anabaptist) this is strange, that this should be conceived to be Apostolicall, and of di∣vine authority, when as we have neither precept nor presi∣dent for it in all the New Testament. Here is their great and common argument, wherewith they shake and disquiet the mindes of many conscientious and simple
hearted Christians, who defire to see (what all Chri∣stians ought to doe) the pillar of fire, the light of the word going before them for their direction and warrant, in what ever they doe in or about any Ordinance of God. Give me leave therefore to joyne issue with them about it. Sol. Not necessary that there should be any expresse pre∣cept or presi∣dent in the New Testa∣ment. A. 1. Minding them (in the first place) that it is not necessary that there should be any expresse either precept or president for this practice in the New Testament. Let it be demanded of them, what expresse precept do they finde there for the observation of a Christian Sabbath? what either precept or president doe they meet with for womens receiving of the Lords Supper? yet both are a∣greed upon, that they may be done, ought to be done. And the like wee may say for the baptisme of Infants, should it be granted (as indeed it must) that there is no expresse syllabicall either command or example in the New Teftament for it, yet it is warrantable. How so? In as much as it findeth so cleare a ground, so firme a bottome in the Old Testament. Even as it is in those two other particulars. The observation of a Sabbath, though it hath no expresse command in the New Testa∣ment, yet it hath one in the Old, viz. in the fourth Com∣mandement, which for the substance of it is morall, and so unrepealeable, of perpetuall observation. For womens receiving of the Lords Supper, though we finde neither command nor example for it in the New Testament, yet we finde that in the Old which will bear it out, viz. their eating of the Passeover to which this Sacrament an∣swereth. Even so is it in the baptisme of Infants, though the New Testament be silent in it, yet the Old Testament holdeth it forth clearly enough, viz. in the Sacrament
of Circumcision, to which Baptisme answereth. There we have both precept and example, and those so clear and expresse, as that it is not necessary that we should have them renewed againe in the New Testament. A. . The New Te∣stament hath not left us wholly desti∣ture of either. A. 2. But (in the second place) come we to see what the New Testament will afford us as touching each of these; it for precept, then for president. In both wee shall finde that the Spirit of God hath not left us so naked, so destitute as they imagine. For precept. 1. For precept. Though we have not any expresse  itterall command, or particular direction concerning the baptizing of Infants, yet we have an impliite, & a gene∣rall one, which comprehendeth, & taketh them in. This you shall finde in that knowne place Mat. 28. 19. where our Blessed Saviour upon his last farewell to the world, renewing and inlarging his Disciples Commission, hee bids them, Goe teach all Nations, baptizing them, &c. For the cleare and right understanding of which Mt. 28. 19. explained.words, we must know that we have not in them the first institution of Baptisme, (which must be observed against our Adversaries, who looke upon those words under that notion.) No, Baptisme was instituted, and admi∣nistred long before both by Iohn the Baptist, and other of the Disciples. Only our Saviour here (as I said) re∣neweth and inlargeth to his Apostles their former Com∣mission, giving unto them one particular direction tou∣ching the subject, the persons, whom they were in the course of their Ministery to apply themselves unto, viz. Non ut hacte∣nù solos Ju∣daeos. H. Grot. Annot. in lo.to all Nations, i. e. not only to the Iewes as formerly they had done, but to the Gentiles also. Goe teach and baptize them, i. e. Goe and doe unto them, all of them, as heretofore hath been done to one of them. Go teach
them, instruct them, , Disciple them, make the Disciples; which being done, then baptize them, and theirs. Thus was it before done unto the Iewes, and to all that were proselites amongst them. The parents imbra∣cing the faith of Abraham, they were circumcised with their Children also. The like course our Savior here orders his Disciples now to take with all Nations: Goe teach and baptize them all. By your teaching and instru∣cting of them labour to bring them to the knowledge and faith of Christ, to bring them into Covenant, which being done, then administer the Seale of the Covenant to them and theirs. Not to the Parents only: If so, certain∣ly our Saviour would have put in a speciall caveat to in∣terdict and forbid them the baptizing of children, that they should not administer the Sale of the Covenant to them, as formerly had beene accustomed amongst the Jewes. Repl. Teach and baptize. Repl. Why but (say they) there should need no such caveat, when as the very words of the Commission are so expressely against this practice. Goe teach and baptize, i. e. first teach and then baptize. So as none are capable of the one, but such as are capable of the other; none ca∣pable of Baptisme, but such as are capable of Instruction; they must first be taught, then baptized. Sol. How to be un∣derstood. A. To this it is truly answered, that there can no such thing be collected out of these words. [Goe teach all Nations, baptizing them.] i. e. Teach all Nations, and baptize all Nations. As before was done to one Nation, so doe ye now to all. As the word was preached to the Iewes only, so doe ye now preach it to all Nations. As the Seale of the Covenant was administred only to that one Nation, so doe yee now administer it to all Nations.
More then this cannot be inferred from it. Not that all must necessarily be first istructed before they were baptized. That cannot be gathered from the words there, as will easily appear by the changing but of Note.one word in this Commission. Suppose the words to run thus, [Go teach all Nations circumcising them.] Suppose (I say) that our Saviour had given such a Commission to his Apostles, that whereas before circumcisio was pro∣per only to the Iew, now they should presse it upon all Nations, and should have delivered them their Commis∣sion in these words, [Goe teach all Nations circumcising them] would any thence inferre that therefore none should be circumcised, but only such as were first instru∣cted, and so consequently Infants should not be circum∣cised. This inference (I suppose) every one will dis∣claime. And why not the other? Goe teach all Nati∣ons, baptizing them, i. e. Teach all Nations, and bp∣tize all Nations; Teach those that are teachable, and baptize those that are baptizeable. More then this can∣not be made of it. Now that Infants are a part, and a considerable part of a Nation, none will deny; and that they are baptizeble, I have already proved. So as here we have, though not an expresse, yet an implicit arrant and command, which being rightly understood (what ever use the Adversary makes of it to the contrary) will be sufficient to beare ou this practice. Presidents in he New Te∣stament for Paedobaptism. In the second place enquire we what presidents, what examples the New Testament will hold forth unto us. And here againe, (as in the former) it must be acknow∣ledged that as for any particular persons who were bap∣tized in their Infancie, we have not any left upon record; yet have we that which is equivalent, some generall re∣cords,
holding forth unto us (at least with great proba∣bility) that this was the practice of the Church in the Infancie of it, even in the Apostles times. For this, see two evidences. The baptizing of whole fa∣milies.1. The former is that common one, not to be fleigh∣ted, viz. the baptizing of whole families, whereof wee finde frequent mention in Scripture. Paul telleth us of himselfe that hee baptized the houshold of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1. 16. Lydia being converted, she was baptized and her houshold, Act. 16. 15. The like we read of the Iailour in the same Chapter, being converted, he was baptized (saith the Text) and all his, v. 33. Thus was this Sacra∣ment then ordinarily administred to whole families, to whole housholds: Even as Circumcision was under the Old Testament. Abraham believing, and entering Co∣venant with God, hee and his whole family were circum∣cised, from the oldest to the youngest, as you have it, Gen. 17. 23. 27. And thus where the head of a family became a proselite, ordinarily he and his were circumcised. Even so under the New Testament, where the parent or head of the family imbraced the faith, the whole family was bap∣tized. Now in all these families, it cannot rationally be imagined but that there should be some Children. Repl. Repl. To this our Adversaries reply, that this phrase will not carry it, no more then that will prove that In∣fants eat the Passeover, because it is said that the whole family was to eat it, Exod. 12. 3. 4. Or that Infants have a∣ctuall faith, because it is said that Cisus beleeved with all his house, Act. 18. 8. Answ. But this muse is soone stopped: In as much as the phrase comprehends ll, and only such in the fa∣mily, as are capable of the thing spoken of. Now this
Infants are not of either of those Acts, whether of eating the Passeover, or of believing; and therefore the phrase there must be restrained to persons of riper age. But of Baptisme they are, as hath beene already sufficiently proved: In as much as this Sacrament being a Sacra∣ment of Initiation and Regeneration, a Seal of our Incision, and ingrafting into Christ, is only a passive Ordinance, as Circumcision was. And therefore, when it is said that those of Abrahams family were circumcised, and those of Stephana's and Lydiaes, and the Iailours families were baptized, we are to understand it of children, as well as any other. Note. No children of believing parents bapti∣zed afterwards To render this conjecture more probable, that Infants then were baptized in their Infancie, let it be observed and considered that wee no where finde any mention made of any children of believing parents who were baptized afterwards. An argument sufficient, if not to convince, yet to stop the mouth of the Adversaries. They presse us to shew where we read of any children that were baptized in their Infancie, and unlesse we can shew them some particular instances for it, they will not believe that any were. Now to retort this negative ar∣gument upon themselves; let it be demanded of them, where they finde any mention in Scripture of any chil∣dren of believing parents, who were baptized when they came to years of discretion, and not before? That they were baptized, I presume they will not deny; and if so, let them shew where, and when. For this let all the sacred Register be searched, from the time that Iohn the Baptist began his Ministery, to the time that Iohn the Evangelist ended his, (which was above sixty years, du∣ring which time millions of children of believing pa∣rents
were growne up to maturity) and if in all that time they can but shew any one instance of any childe borne of a believing parent, whose Baptisme was deferred till he came to yeares of discretion, and that then he was baptized, we will then acknowledge that there is some strength in their negative allegation. In the mean time, having such generall instances of the baptizing of whole families, sure we are we have more reason to believe that Infants were comprehended, and are to be recko∣ned in that number, then they have any for the con∣trary. The Apostoli∣call practice of confirmation. Heb. 6. 2.2. For a second evidence that this was the Aposto∣licall practise, I will not goe far from this word in the Text which I have now in hand. Possibly we may finde somewhat that maketh for this practice nearer hand then we were aware of: Even in the words immediatly following, [The doctrine of Baptismes, and [laying on of hands.] . Hic locus ad Paedbaptismi ap∣probationem Calvin Com. in loc.facit. (It is Calvins hint upon it.) This place maketh for the baptisme of Infants. How so? To shew you how, give me leave to touch upon that clause a little. Though it be a long, yet I hope it will be a usefull Parenthesis, serviceable not only to our present, but to some other purposes of great, and speciall concern∣ment. Laying on of hands. [The doctrine of Baptismes, and laying on of hands.] What is here meant by the latter of these? I confesse it is not agreed by Expositors. To boult out the truth as neare as wee may, [laying on of hands] in it selfe wee know it was, and is a Ceremony; a Ceremony of very ancient use in the Church of God, and that in divers ca∣ses. To let passe the former; In the New Testament we
meet with a twofold imposition of hands: The one mi∣raculous In the New Testament twofold.and extraordinary, the other ordinary. The former was practised by the Apostles, and other extra∣ordinary  persons in the Primitive times, and that in two Extraordinary and miracu∣lous.cases: 1. In conferring of extraordinary gifts of the Spi∣rit. Of this you may read Act. 8. 17. 18. and elsewhere. 2. In bestowing some temprall blessing, as viz. Healing of the sicke. Of this speaks St. Iames, Iam. 5. 14. [Is any sick among you let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him.] Not only pray [for] him, (as Beza, and the Geneva render it) but [over] him. , (saith the Originall) super eum, over or upon; i. e. holding their hands over, or laying them upon the sicke person. So was it frequently practised before, as by our Saviour himself, so by other of the Apostles, (as the Mat. 9. 18. Mar. 5. 23. Mar. 16. 18. Luk. 4. 40. Act. 28. 8.Evangelists informe us) in healing of the sicke; working some miraculous cures upon the bodies of men, they imposed their hands upon them. In both these cases was this Ceremony then used. You may see them both to∣gether in that act of Ananias, his, Act. 9. 17. where com∣ming unto Saul (or Paul) he put his hands on him, and said, Brother saul, the Lord hath sent me that thou mightest re∣ceive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.] But this was extraordinary, and consequently but temporary, to continue only so long as that miraculous power was con∣tinued to the Church; which ceasing, the Ceremony from thence forth in these cases is of no more use. Ordinary, used in two cases, In the second place, there is another imposition of  hands, which was, and is more ordinary. And that a∣gaine in two cases: In the case of Ordination, and Con∣firmation. In Ordination▪ 1. In case of Ordination, the ordaining of Ministers,
Church-officers, setting them apart to their Ministeriall office and function. This, for the greater solemnity of it, was performed with this significant Ceremony, the laying on of hands. Thus were the seven Deacons or∣dained, Act. 6. 6. [When the Apostles had prayed, they laid their hands on them, v. 6.] Thus were Paul and Bar∣nbas separated to the worke which God had called them (viz. to the exercise of their Ministery amongst Acts 13. 3.the Gentiles.) [When they had fasted and prayed, they (viz. the Prophets and Teachers in the Church of Anti∣och spoken of in the . v.) layd then hands on them, and sent them away.] Thus was Timothy himselfe ordained by Paul, 2 Tim. 1. 6. And thus did Timothy ordaine o∣thers. And thence is the whole action denominated from this Ceremony, and called a laying on of hands 1 Tim. 5. 22. [Lay hands suddenly on no man,] saith Paul to Timothy, speaking of the Ordination of Ministers. 2. Secondly, in case of Confirmation. So it is usually In confirmati∣on▪(how fitly I will not dispute) called. Let▪ not the name prejudice any against the thing: which (without que∣stion) is of very ancient use in the Church of God. That Hujus moris saeè mentio∣nem faiunt veteres, vid. Calv. Instet. l. 4. 4. c. 19. s 4. Confirmation whether an A∣postolicall or∣dinance. Hieron contra Lucfr. Non inficior▪ in eo noihil llucinari I presume will bee granted at all hands. Neither can it be denyed, there being so many of the Ancients making mention of it. But whether Apostolicall; o no▪ that is the Question. I know many have looked upon it meerly as an Eccle∣siasticall constitution. Of this opinion was Calvin in his former time, who in his booke of Institutions declares his dissallowance of Ieromes authority and judgement in this particular, in holding this forth for an Apostlicall Ordinance. But others I finde of another minde. I, Calvin himselfe in his latter time; who comming
to write upon the words of the Text, upon second Hieronimum, quod Apostoli∣cam esse obser∣vationem di∣cit. Calv▪ Inst. lib. 4. c. 19. s. 4.thoughts (which are the more to be regarded; secundae cogitationes) hee retracts what before he had dubiously averred; affirming and that positively, and confidently, that this Ordinance was no other but Apostolicall; grounding it upon these words, [the doctrine of Baptism, Hic uus lo∣cus abunde testatur hujus ceremoniae originem flux∣isse ab Apo∣stolis: quae ta∣men poseà in superstiti nem versa fuit: ut mundus sem∣per ferè b op∣timis Institutis ad orruptelas degenerat. Calv. Com. in Heb. 6. 2. Beza Annot. ad loc. Piscator observ. ad loc. Chemnitius Exam. Concil. Trid. de confir. Hemin. Com. ad loc. Ursin▪ Catech. Prog. 2. Dr. Fulk Ann. in Rhem. ad lo. Dr. Willet sy∣nops. Contr▪ 16and laying on of hands.] Hic unus locus abunde testator, &c.] This one place (saith he) doth abundantly testifie, that this Ceremony (viz. the Imposition of hands in confirmation) how ever in after times it was superstitiously perverted and abused (as the best Institutions are apt to degenerate in∣to foule corruptions,) yet it had its first originall from the Apostles themselves.] Of this minde are divers others (as of the Ancients, so) of our moderne Divines of note, viz. Beza, Piscator, Chemnitius, Hemingius, Vr∣sine, Dr. Fulk, Dr. Willet; and many others, men of sin∣gular both Learning and Piety, who all expound this Text in this sense. I know there are some few Mr. Cart∣wright Annot. in Rhem. ad loc. D. Ames Bell. Enerv. de confirm. cap. 1▪others (whose names and memories I honour) who are of a different judgement▪ who being distasted with the corruption of this Ordinance as practised in the Church of Rome, and amongst our selves, and so possibly preju∣diced against it, carry the Text another way, conceiving that by [laying on of hands] here, we are rather to un∣derstand the totum Ministerium, the whole Ministery of the Church, which was wont to be ordained by Impo∣sition of hands. A usuall trope or metonimie (say they) one Ceremony put for the whole Service. But to this supposition I must professe I cannot freely subscribe: In as much (1.) as I cannot looke upon this as one of the fundamentalls of Christian Religion, as these six heads here named, (and this amongst the
Metonymi ajuncti Cart. Ibid. Laying on of hands here cannot be un∣derstood of Ordination. R. 1. Ordination none of the first Rudi∣ments. Ista impositio manuum ad prima fidei fundamenta spectabat in primitiva Ec∣clesia. Cet ad loc. Fundamentū quartum fuit Impositio ma∣nuum: Paiaeus ad loc. rest) are by some conceived to be, and that not without some colour from the Apostles own words, [nt laying againe the foundation &c. v. 1.] Nor yet can I looke up∣on it as one of those  (as the Apostle hath it, v. 12. of the Chapter foregoing) those prima elementa, those first rudiments and principles of Christian Reli∣gion (as the Apostle calleth all these six in the 1. v. of this Chapter, [the principles of the doctrine of Christ; , the word of the beginning of Christ, the A, B, C, (as it were) of Christianity) one of those heads of Catechisme that children, novices, should bee first taught and instructed in; as part of that milk which the Apostle in the 12. v. of the Chapter foregoing tells us is fit for Babes. If this be milke, viz. the doctrine of Church-Discipline, Church Officers, Church-govern∣ment, &c. what shall we call or count strong meat? Cer∣tainly (were there no other argument) the sad differen∣ces of the times about this point, and that betwixt those who are no Babes, but strong men, judicious and consci∣entious, learned and holy men, shew this doctrine to be nothing lesse then milke. R 2. Laying on of hands here hath reference to baptisme. Manuum Im∣positionem ū Baptisma con∣jungit &c. Cal. ad loc. Gen. 7. 9. 10. 2. Besides (in the second place) the very putting of these two together [Baptisme, and laying on of hands] seemeth in Calvins judgement to import some refe∣rence and relation that the one should have to the other. A point that is observable how the Apostle here brin∣geth forth these doctrines (even as the creatures went into the Arke) by payres: Repentance and Faith; Baptismes and laying on of hands; Resurrection of the dead, and eternall judgement; each having a neare refe∣rence and relation to his mate. So it is in the two other payres: Repentance and Faith; Resurrection and Iudge∣ment,
the one relates to the other. And so it seemeth to be here, Doctrine of Baptisme, and laying on of hands; the latter seemeth to have a reference to the former; so as what shall we, or can we understand by it, but that ancient and universall practise of the Church, viz. Con∣firmation rightly administred and used? Confirmation what? Q. But what was, or is this Confirmation? A. Here not to regard what the Church of Rome holdeth forth unto us concerning it, as viz. that is a Sa∣crament; a Sacrament in some respect superiour to Bap∣tisme; that it is the consummation of Baptisme, so as with∣out it Baptisme is incompleat and imperfect; that in and by this Sacrament the Holy Ghost is conferred, and given for strength and corrboration against spirituall enemies; that it ought to be performed with such Ceremonies as Chrisma, Fa∣ci, Alapa, &c.are in use amongst them, most of which are very super∣stitious and ridiculous toyes, none of them (imposition of hands only excepted) finding any footing in Scripture. Thus have they dealt with this Ordinance, even as Mi∣cal sometime dealt with David, when having conveyed him away, she put an Image in his roome, with a pillow of goats haire for a boulster under the head of it, 1 Sa. 19. 12. 13. Even thus (I say) have they dealt with this Ordinance; taking away the Ordinance it selfe as it was first instituted, they have substituted an Image in the roome of it, which they have boulstred up with Ceremony▪ and inventions of their owne (no better then laa Caprina) all to deceive the vulgar. So as their confirma∣tion as by them used, is no more that which was first in∣stituted, and which the word holdeth forth unto us, then that Ship Argos was the same that it was first built, when as by often repairing it had scarce a piece of the first ma∣terialls,
Alexander Halensis & Bonaventura fatentur inge∣nuè Sacramen∣um confirma∣tionis, t est sacramentum, ne{que}  Domi∣no, ne{que} ab A∣postolis insti∣tutum & dis∣pensatum fu∣isse, quià in Scripturâ non legitur, sed po∣steà in concilio Meldensi in∣ventum esse scribunt. Whitak con∣trà Duaeu▪ . 8. sect. 61. left in it. And so much is ingously▪ confessed and acknowledged by some of their owne▪ as is obser∣ved against them by our learned Whitaker. And there∣fore▪to leave them▪ plow we with our owne Heifers; consult we with the Authors aforesaid. Calvin, Beza, Chemnit. Pis. Pareus, ubi su∣pà. The originall and primitive use of confir∣mation. Some of them will informe us, how that in the Primitie Church there were two sorts of Catchmeni (as they called them) persons that were catechized and instructed in the prin∣ciples of Christian Religion. The first sort were Extra∣nei, such as wer without; strangers to the Cvnant, Heathens, Infidells by birth, borne out of the Church. Now as for these, the manner was; they were first taught and instructed in the faith, so as in their owne persons they might make an open confession of it, which accor∣dingly they did before they were admitted unto Bap∣tisme. The other were the children of believing parents, who being borne in the Church, and looked upon as members of it, they were baptized in their Infancie. Now they▪ not being able to make such a confession in their owne persons before Baptisme, when they were growne up and come to yeares of discretion, they were then catechized and instructed in that faith whereinto they had beene baptized; which being done, they gave an account of that faith in the publicke congrega∣tion▪ ratifying that Covenant which they had entered in Baptisme; and so they were admitted and received in lesam adulorum, to further degre of communion with the Church; as viz. to partake of the Lords Supper &c. For the greater solemnity of which admission, and that Solennis pre∣candi rits: Calv. in Text. ex August.the action might be had in more respect and reverence, it was performed with this ceremony, the laying on of hands upon the person so received, who was dismissed
with a solemne benediction▪ Confirmation a usefull Ordi∣nance to the Church in di∣vers respects. This was (as it is conceived by them) the simpli∣city of this Ordinance in the first institution and primitive practise of it. An Ordinance (as Calvin and the forena∣med Authours conceive of it▪ of great and singular use unto the Church of God. And surely so it would bee, were it but restored to primitive purity. 1. By this meanes the exercise of catechizing would  be brought in use and credit, whereof the Church of Chemnit. Co. in Mark 10. 14God hath ever had singular need, and use. Calv. Instt. lib▪  19. s. 13 2. By this meanes the unity of the faith would bee  maintained, especially there being one and the same forme of catechizing generally observed. Calvin Ibid. 3. By this meanes parents would be quickned up to  looke to the religious education of their children, which otherwise many of them never regard. And 4. Children themselves would bee put on to  seeke after knowledge, that they may be able to give an account of that faith whereinto they were baptized, when they shall be called to doe it before the publicke congregation. 5. By this meanes persons ignorant or scandalous  might be kept out from communion with the Church in that sacred Ordinance of the Supper of the Lord. A soveraigne remedy against mixt commu∣nion. In which respect, of what consequence it might be for the healing of our present breaches, may bee easily apprehended. I shall not need to tell you, what a stum∣bling blocke in the way of many, our mixed communion (as they call it) hath beene, and is. At this stone many have tripped▪ and some have fallen, and others are daily in danger of it. Now, of all remedies for the healing and preventing hereof, I know none more promising,
then this Ordinance being duly practised according to the institution of it. By this means that sacred Ordinance might be freed and kept pure from that pollution, (so much (and that not without cause) complained of) through a promiscuous participation; and so this scan∣dall being removed, we might hope that many who are upon this ground departed from the unity of the Church, at least have broke off communion with it, might in a little time be reduced, and brought home againe; and others who are staggering might bee confirmed and establi∣shed. The difference about Church-Covenant re∣conciled.6. And lastly, by this meanes also that difference of the times about the formality of a Church-Covenant in receiving in of members▪ (as they call them) would soone be compremized, and taken up: There being here the Vtinam verò morem retine∣remus quem pud veteres fuisse admonui prisquam haec Sacramenti lava nascere∣tur. Calv. Inst. de Confirm. l. 4 c. 19. s. 13. Talem ergo▪ manuum im∣posionm, quae▪ simplici∣ty loco bene dictionis fiar, laude, & resti▪tuam hodiè in puum usum lim▪ Calv. Iust. l. 4. . 19▪ 3. 4.substance of what is there desired and contended for, and that better bottomed (as I conceive) then the former. In all which regards (besides many other) for my owne part I cannot but joyne with Calvin and Chemni∣tius, and divers other of our Divines, in desiring the re∣stitution and restoring of this Ordinance to the Church, which through the grosse corruption of it in the Church of Rome, and too apparent abuse of it amongst our selves (it being generally turned into a meer formality) hath growne into great dislike and distaste. Certainly, what ever any through prejudice may think of it, were this Ordinance stripped of those rags which superstition hath put upon it, and restored to naked purity and sim∣plicity, the Church of God should have no cause to bee ashamed to owne it▪ specially seeing the Apostle himselfe in the words of the Text semeth to give such countenance to it, laying it downe for one of those first
principles concerning the nature and use whereof chil∣dren Hodieretinen∣da pura insti∣tutio est: super∣stitio autem corrigenda. Calv. ad Tex▪ Nostri saepè ostenderunt, ritum confirmationis remotis inutilibus, superstitiosis, & cum Scripturâ pugnantibus aditionibus, pie & ad Ecclesiae aedificatioem, juxtà scripturae consenum usurpari polle, Chem. Exam. de Confirm▪ Ob nugas Ponificias in priâ Evangelii reformatione totu actus confirmationis est abrogatus, quae resssis isis  Pontificiis non male retineri potusset. Cheit. Harm. in Mark. 10. 16.should be instructed and taught. Confirmation presupposeth Paedobaptisme Q. But all this while, what is this to the purpose in hand? what maketh this for Pdbaptisme, the bap∣tisme of Infants? A. Surely yes, very much. This being granted that there was such an Ordinance in use in the Apostles times practised after the manner that you have heard, it may from thence be demonstratively inferred, that some chil∣dren were then baptized in their Infancy. To what purpose else should this subsequent act serve? where∣fore should there be such a publicke confession, and such a solemne restipulation, and ingagement after Baptisme, were it not that Baptisme was administred unto them in their Infancy, before they came to yeares of discretion. Otherwise, had they been able to anser for themselves, and to stipulate in their owne persons when they were baptized (as those that were adulti did) what need would there have beene of such a subsequent solemnity, to bring them actum agere, to doe that againe which they had once done before. But I will not dwell any longer upon it. You see now what Precept, and what Presidents the Spirit of God in the New Testament will afford us for the countenancing, and bearing out of this practice, the baptizing of Infants. True it is, expresse and particular
they are not; nor yet so demonstrative and convincing, but that the Adversary may take up some cavills against them. Yet are they such evidences as may give satis∣faction to those who are willing to receive it. However, sure we are, they make more for the warrant▪blenesse of this practice, then ought that the Adversary can pro∣duce, will against it. Object. Infants are not capable of repentance & faith, ergo not of Baptisme. Not so (say they) for as for Infants they are not sub∣jects capable of Baptisme. And why not? Why, because they are not capable of those qualifications which should dispose them to the receiving of this Sacrament. And what are they? why, Repentance and Faith. These are the conditions which the Spirit of God requireth in all persons that are to bee baptized; Repentance. [Repent Acts 2. 38.yee therefore and be baptized] (saith eter to the Iewes.) Faith [if thou beleevest with all thine heart thou mayest.] Acts 8. 3.(saith Philip to the Eunuch concerning his Baptisme.) Ans. In persons of yeares actuall repentance & faith is requi∣site before bap∣tisme, not so in Infants. A. To these Texts of Scripture it is soon answered, that here both Peter and Philip had to deale with persons of yeares, and those such as had no other title to the Co∣venant, but such as their owne actuall repentance and faith conferred upon them. Now had we to deale with such, we should runne the same course, not admitting them unto this Sacrament, but upon the testification of their Repentance and Faith. But in the meane time, this is ill applyed to Infants, the children of believing pa∣rents, who have a title to, and interest in the Covenant, and consequently a right to the seale of the Covenant, by vertue of their fathers charter. Repl. Repl. But it will be replyed; This is a generall, uni∣versall condition, required of all that are to be baptized; They must first believe▪ Our Saviours owne words (say
the) are expresse for it. [He that believeth and is bap∣tized shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. So that it seemeth Mark 16. 16. cleared.faith is a condition absolutely requisite in persons to be baptized, and must goe before Baptisme. Here is one of the great arguments, which the Adversarie putteth a great deale of confidence in. But what strength (or rather weaknesse) is in it, will soone appeare. Sol. P. Matt. loc. Com. Clas. 4. loc. 11. sect. 13. A. In the 1. place, it is truly answered by P. Martyr, and others, that Ordo verborum non necessario infert ordi∣nem rerum, The order of words doth not necessarily infer the same order in things. For instance, Mark 1. 4. it is said, [Iohn did baptize and preach the baptisme of Repentance.] Here is baptizing put before preaching, (which may serve to ballance that in the last of Matth. 19. Go teach all Nations baptizing them; where teaching is put before baptizing;) yet will it not thence follow, that Iohn bap∣tized before he preached. So here in those words of our Saviour▪ believing is put before baptizing in the order of the words. Yet it will not thence follow that faith must alwayes goe before baptisme in the reality of the thing. Should wee thus precisely stand upon the order of Siquis urgeat , (qui∣cunque credi∣derit & bapti∣zatus fuerit) reponemus ei, si placet sylla∣bas numerare, dictum Chri. Joh. 3. Nisi quis re∣natus fuerit ex Aqua & Spirit. Aret. Censura contra Anab.words, what should we say to that of our Saviour, Ioh. 3. 5. [Except a man be borne of water, and of the Spirit, &c. (a Text which is brought to ballance that other) where water is put before the spirit. A. 2. In the second place, wee grant it; Faith and actuall faith is requisite in persons capable of it, before they be admitted to Baptisme. And of such & only such▪ is that place to be understood; [He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.] Which cannot extend unto Infants, as the latter part of the verse will sufficiently evidence. [Hee that believeth not shall bee damned▪]
Which to apply to Infants, and so for want of actuall faith (which they are not capable of) to exclude them from all hopes of salvation, I presume it were greater cruelty then the Anabaptists will willingly owne. The place it selfe being consulted with maketh it cleare; shewing that this is spoken of all and only such as were capable of the Gospel preached to them, and consequently capable of faith; as the verse foregoing explaines it, v. 15. [Goe yee into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.] And what Gospel should they preach? Why, even this; [He that believeth, and is baptized shall be saved, &c.] Which must be restrained to those who were capable of hearing, and receiving that Gospell; not extended to Infants, who though they bee not ca∣pable of actuall faith, yet are they capable of salvation, and consequently of Baptisme. Bucan. loc. cō. loc. 48 q. 35. s 7 Tilen. syntag. de Baptismo Disput▪ 2. s. 30. This place I finde paralleld and compared with that of the Apostle to the Thessalonians, 2 Thes. 3. 10. where he giveth order that those which would not work should not bee relieved; [We commanded you that if any man would not worke, he should not eat.] What then shall be∣come of Infants, and sicke, and impotent persons? must they be starved? Not so. That place must be restrai∣ned to such as are able to worke, but will not. So here, [He that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved; but hee that believeth not shall be damned.] What then shall be∣come of Infants▪ may they not be baptized, and so must be damned? Not so. The place is to be restrained to such persons as are capable of faith, may believe, but will not. The parents faith how a∣vailable for Infants. A. 3. In the third place it is answered by some; that Infants though they have no faith of their owne,
yet the faith of their parents may be sufficient for them. Even as the sinne of another (their first parent) was e∣nough Sharp. Cusu Theolog. de Bap ismo Con∣tro. .to make them sinners, reputed such by a just im∣putation; so the faith of another (of their next parents) may be enough to make them beleevers, reputed such by a gracious acceptation. Of this opinion was Augustine Vid. P. Mart. loc. com. clas. 4and the ancient Church. And not without some truth; in as much as the faith of the parent is sufficient to bring the childe within the compasse of the Covenant, and so to make it baptizeable. However (as P. Martyr states it rightly) in point of salvation, every one (who is capable of it) must be saved by his owne faith. [The just shall Heb▪ 2. 4.live by his faith.] Not the faith of another. Infants n wholly unca∣pable of faith. A. 4. But (in the fourth place) it may be truly affir∣med concerning▪ Infants that they are not wholly unca∣pable of faith. True, of the outward profession, and inward exercise of it, they are. But not altogether of the grace it selfe. This, (at least the seed and root of it) may be in∣fused and implanted in the soule even in Infancie, by the secret worke of the Spirit regenerating and sanctifying of it. So as though Infants have not faith actually, by way of manifestation or exercise; yet vertually they may, by way of inchation and inclination. Thus may Infants have a gracious disposition which in time will come to be fides formata, formed in the habit and act of De fide Infan∣tum faedera∣toru, idem dicus quod de ipsorum ratione. Utra{que} ipsis inest acta primo, non secundo: in semente, non in messe: in radiè, non in fructu: interâ spiritus virtute, non externâ operis emonstrtione: Tilen. Syt. de Bapt. Disp. 2. sect. 27 Ifantes que madmodum dicuntur habere rationem ità hbe fim dici possunt. Imò firmiori quadam ratione, quum sit De occulta & secret elect. o. Aret. contr. Anabap.faith. A truth which is well illustrated by some by comparing faith and reason together, which Infants
may be conceived to bee both alike. Infants have not the use of reason, they cannot reason and discourse, &c. yet a principle of reason they have, being indued with a reasonable soule, which hath an inclination to discourse, and afterwards actually doth it. And from hence they are called reasonable creatures, though for present they have no more understanding then the bruit creatures, nay seemingly not so much as some of them of like age seeme to have. A young Lambe will sooner know the damme, then a childe the mother. Even so is it with faith. Infants have not the use and exercise of faith, yet may they have an inward principle of faith, the seed and be∣ginning of faith, wrought in the heart by the secret worke of the Spirit, an inclination to believe, and to shew forth their faith when they come to yeares of maturity. And from hence may they be called, Quâdā locu∣tione possunt dici parvuli sidelium fide∣les, quemad∣modum non∣nunquam In∣fantes ration∣ales appella∣mus; non quod reipsâ valeant ratioinari, ve∣rum quod ani∣mam habeant, quae, cum per aetatem fieri poterit ratioci∣nabitur, &c. P. Matt. loc. Com. Clas. 4. loc. 8▪ de Bap∣tismo, sect. 14▪ Infants of be∣lieving parents no Infidels. Infidelis ifa∣riam dicitur, negativè, & po∣sitivè, Til. disp. 2. de Baptism. sect. 28. Beleevers. A. 5. However, (in the fifth place) Infants of belie∣ving parents, though they have neither actuall nor yet habituall faith, yet are they not to be looked upon as In∣fidels, and unbeleevers. For the opening and clearing of which, we must know that there is a twofold infidelity, viz. positive and negative. positive or privative, the habit of Infidelity; when men being capable of faith, and having meanes of faith offered to them, yet will not believe, but continue in unbeliefe. Negative. Carentia fidei, a meere absence of faith, but without any contrary habit of infidelity. Now the former of these are properly called Infidels, and unbelievers. Not so the other. As for Infants, though they may be called nonbelievers, yet properly unbelievers they are not. Neither doth this simple ab∣sence of faith beeing in a subject as yet not capable of it▪ exclude them either from salvation, or from baptisme.
True, the former doth both. That positive or privitive Infidelity, the habit of unbeliefe, shutteth men out of the Kingdome, both of Grace and Glory. The Israelites Heb. 3. last.could not enter into Canaan (a type of both) because of their unbeliefe. Not so this negative unbeliefe. Infants of believing parents, though for the present they bee destitute of faith, yet are they not thereby shut out of the Kingdome of Glory, nor yet to be debarred from the priviledge of the Kingdome of Grace, which are agree∣able to their condition. Neither are they to be recko∣ned, or reputed as Infidels. Being born of believing pa∣rents, they are an holy seed, members of the Church with∣in the Covenant; which is all that is to be looked at in the dispencing of this Ordinance. Not the inward san∣ctification of the heart, whether present or future; but the outward state and condition of the person. This is that which the Ministers of the Gospell are to be regulated by in the administration of this Sacrament. The rule for dispensing Sa∣craments, not the inward, but outward state. Which (by the way) let it be taken notice of against some more moderate Anabaptists, who will not stick to indulge thus much unto us, that did they know what Infants doe belong to Gods election of grace, or were af∣ter that manner indued with the spirit, they would not be against the baptizing of them. For this, let them know, that this is not the rule which we are to walke by. Not the inward, but the outward state. Suppose a Mi∣nister had the spirit of discerning, and could discerne the inward state of men (as certainly our Saviour did Iudas his, and possibly the Apostles did some of those who were baptized of them) yet were he not to with-hold the outward priviledge from any for want of inward grace, they having right and title thereunto by vertue
of their visible state, their being under the Covenant outwardly. But I hasten to a conclusion of this point. One or two objections more, and I have done. Obj. Infants not capable of be∣nefit by Bap∣tisme. Obj. Infants are not subjects capable of any benefit by baptisme, and therefore why should they be baptized? Answ. To this I have in part answered heretofore. Let me now doe it a little more fully, yet briefly. A. 1. As much as by Circumcision. 1. Demanding of the Adversaries, what benefit In∣fants under the Old Testament had by Circumcision? Let them shew mee the one, I will shew them the o∣ther. A. 2. Baptisme be∣neficiall to the parents. 2. Though Baptisme at present should not bee bene∣ficiall unto Infants themselves, yet to their parents it may be; serving exceedingly for their consolation, when they shall see their children thus marked out for God, having Gods distinguishing marke, his Seale set upon them; which is to them an assurance that God is not only their God, but the God of their seed: That he doth acknowledge them in Covenant, and will make good the Covenant unto theirs, in case they doe not after∣wards by some act of their owne ponereobicem, put a bar in the way, so nullifying the Covenant, and frustrating Gods gracious intentions towards them. Thus it is usefull to the parent. A. 3. Baptisme be∣neficiall to children for the present. 3. Neither (in the third place) is it altogether unuse∣full to the childe, who by this means: 1. Is distingushed from Heathens, and Infidels, and marked out for Gods speciall service. Rom. 6. 4. 5. 2. Is hereby visibly ingrafted into Christ, and ac∣knowledged as a visible member of the Church: And consequently hereby commeth to have a share, and in∣terest in the communion of Saints; beeing now daily re∣membred
at the Throne of Grace by all those who pray for the wellfare of the Church. 3. Besides this (in the third place) who knoweth how, and in what way God may be pleased to concur, and worke together with his Ordinance? Certainly, heerein Gods wayes are (as the Apostle sayth of them) , past our finding out. And therefore stand not Rom. 11. 34.in this case to reason with flesh and blond, to consult with sense and reason about it. Had those women in the Gospel so done, surely they would never have brought their children unto Christ to be touched of him. But in this set faith on worke (as they did) and let that com∣mand obedience, obedience in submitting unto this Ordi∣nance of God. A. 4. Baptisme be∣neficiall in the future. 4. In the 4. and last place: Though this Ordinance have not any present effect upon Infants, yet afterwards it may have: viz. when they shall come to apprehend this stipulation, and ingagement betweene God and them: then this Sacrament will be usefull unto them, as in other respects, so specially as a strong obligation upon them, to binde them for ever to the service of that God, who was pleased to take them into his service, be∣fore ever they were able to doe him any service: To take and acknowledge them as his, before they knew them∣selves: To take and seale them for his children, before they were capable to know their father. A peculiar fa∣vour, and so a peculiar obligation. Obj. How shall In∣fants after∣wards know that they are baptized. Obj. But how shall children afterwards know that they are made partakers of this Ordinance? An objection which possibly may take much with some. Those who are thus baptized in their Infancy, how shall they know, and be assured that they are baptized?
Even as an Is∣raelite knew that he was circumcised: A. I answer; Even as the Israelites knew, were assu∣red that they were circumcised. Repl. Not so (saith the Adversary.) Circumcision was a permanent, Baptisme is a transient signe. The one left an impression behinde it, not so the other. The Is∣raelites carried a sensible marke in their flesh to minde them of their Circumcision. A. True: Such a sensible marke they had. But Viz. by the te∣stimony of o∣thers.how did they know, that that marke was given them for any such religious end, and purpose? That they re∣ceived it as a Sacrament, a seale of the Covenant betwixt The inhabi∣tants of Col∣chis, the Ethio∣pians, the Tro∣gloditae, and the Egyptians. Alex ab Alex. l. 2. c. 25 Her. l. 2. Diodor. Si∣cul. l. 2. c. 1. It. l. 4. c. 3. Witnesses in Circumcision. Vide Good∣wins Moses and Aaron. l. 6 c. 1. God and them. Other Nations there were (and that many) who used Circumcision (even as the Turkes doe at this day) but not to any such intent, not as a Sacra∣ment. How did the Israelites know that theirs was gi∣ven them with such an intent? Why, herein they were to give credit unto the testimony of others, viz. their parents, and other witnesses. Amongst whom (as it see∣meth) some were specially appointed for that purpose. So much the Iewish Doctours will informe us of; descri∣bing to us the manner of Circumcision, they will tell us, that when a childe was to be circumcised, one who sup∣plied the place of a witnesse (whom they called by the name of Baal. Berith, and Sandak, that is, the master of the Covenant) he held the childe in his armes whilest it was circumcised, that so he might beare witnesse both of the Circumcision, and of the name given the childe at that time. Such was the use of the latter Iewes. And it seemeth that the practice was ancient, as ancient as the Prophet Isaies time. So that learned payre of Exposi∣tours, Iunius and Tremellius interpret that place of that Prophet, Is. 8. 2. where the Prophet tells us, that hee
tooke unto him faithfull i. e. Virs no∣minatim ad∣vocatos ut e∣strentur no∣men illud filio meo imposiū in Ecclesia, qu∣um circumci∣dretur. Jun. & Tremel. ad loc Vers. 1. 3. The originall of wites in Baptism. Aq▪ ex hoc i∣tu profctum sse illum no∣strum constat, quo certi ho∣mine specia∣tim, maxiè veo i cala∣mitosis tem∣poribus (ut ista futura erant) adhibentur te∣stes accessus ad Christum, & ad Ecclesiam per Baptismum & nominis in Baptismo in∣dit. Hos vul∣gus compatres, et commates, Graeci olim , appellarunt. Jun. & Trib. Repl. A humane te∣stimony is no ground for faith. Sol. A humane te∣stimony suffi∣cient for a hu∣mane faith. witnesses: viz. Vzziah the Priest, and Zachariah.] Witnesses to what? Why to the Circumcision of his Sonne, of whom hee speaketh in the verse before and after. Such as might beare wit∣nesse that he gave him that name in his Circumcision, which the Lord had appointed him: viz. Maher∣shalal hash baz. Which, whether it was a thing really done, or only represented to the Prophet in a vision, is not materiall. It seemeth however, that this was a pra∣ctise then in use in those times. And from hence (as judicious Authours with good probability conjecture) came that custome so anciently and universally received amongst the Churches (till of very late times): viz. The having of Godfathers and Godmothers (as wee call them) in Baptisme. Some persons specially appointed to beare witnesse of the receiving of such a person into the Church of God by Baptisme, and of the Name then given unto him. But this by the way. From these did children amongst the Israelites re∣ceive the testimony of their Circumcision. Which they were induced the more to give credit to, because they saw the same practised upon others daily. And even such a testimony have children now concerning their Bap∣tisme, besides the testimony of the whole Congregation, which many have, and others ought to have. Repl. But this is but a humane testimony, and conse∣quently fallible. How shall I build my faith upon it? A. I answer. A Humane testimony is sufficient to build a Humane faith upon. True, a Divine faith must have a Divine testimony, But to a humane faith a hu∣mane testimony may suffice. Now such is this faith. To beleeve that I was Baptized; this is but a humane
faith, being concerning a matter of humane fact. Repl. What if a man should believe that he is bap∣tized when he is not? Sol. Such an error being invin∣cible shall not nder salvati∣on. Repl. But what if I should be deceived herein? as it is possible I may be? thinke and believe that I was bap∣tized, when as I was not. A. To this I answer, that such an errour being invin∣cible, shall not be prejudiciall in point of salvation. In this case the apprehension of the thing shall be in stead of the thing it selfe. As in the case of persons dying before they can have the Sacrament of Baptisme administred unto them: In this case it is determined that the desire of Baptisme (viz. by Parents for their children, by persons of age for themselves) shall supply the want of it. So said Ambrose concerning the Emperour Valentinian, who comming to him to be baptized, dyed by the way; Baptizatus vo∣to & voluntate licet non reip∣sâ per aquae lavacrum. Am. lib. de vitâ Va∣lent. 2 Co. 8. 12. He was baptized (saith he) in vow ad desire, though not by the wahing of water; which he concluded to bee as effectuall as if he had beene made partaker of the thing it selfe. And it is no more then what the Apostle will beare him out in, who tells us, That where there is a wil∣ling minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that which hee hath not. Desire of Bap∣tisme, (where it cannot be had) is baptisme in Gods ac∣cepation, Minime salva∣ri possunt qu nec re, nec vo∣to baptismi Sacramen um susciperint: qu verò saltem voto Sacra∣mentum bap∣tismi susepe∣rint, es non re slvari possnt Thom. pars. 3. q. 68. Act. 2. consupplying the want of this Sacrament. So much even Papists (however standing much upon the absolute necssity of Baptisme) will yeeld. Even so here. In the case of such an invincible errour and mistake, (which is only possible, not probable, much lesse ordinary) the very apprehension of the thing as done, with the applcation of the thing signified by it, shall be effectuall unto the person to all intents and purposes, as if he had been really made partaker of that Sacrament. And thus have I endeavoured as briefly, and yet as
fully as I could, to give satisfaction to all the chiefe Arguments or Objections which are brought against this Doctrine and Practise of Baptizing of Infants. An antidote a∣gainst Rebap∣tization. Onely let me yet speake one word or two, to the A∣nabaptist properly so called. For you must know, that of this Sect (as usually in all Sects it is) there are divers sorts. Amongst other, some Catabaptists, others Ana∣baptists. The former opposeth the Baptisme of Infants, as a thing not meet, not lawfull, at least not expedient to be done; yet being done, he alloweth it as valid and of force. The other looking upon this Baptisme as a meer nullity, holdeth an absolute necessity of Rebaptization. Now to these latter let me speake a word, and but a word. Minding them of that old Rule, which taketh place in many cases: Fieri quod non licet, factum valet: A thing which ought not to be done, yet being done, it may be of force and valid. For instance. David ought not to 2 Sam. 12. 9. 10.have taken the wife of Viah to his wife. The Lord by his Prophet chargeth it upon him, as a sinne, and a great sinne; yet being done, the Marriage was lawfull, and ought not to be dissolved. Amongst us, Clandestine marriages (as we call them) they are not allowable, but prohibited, yet being done, they are valid, and may not be undone. To come neerer the point in hand. In the case of Baptisme, Parents ought not to tender their chil∣dren to be baptized by any Romish Priest in a superstiti∣ous way; yet being done, Baptisme so administred ought not to be reiterated, but to be held as true, and valid. A case stated by many of the Ancients; in case any were baptized by Hereticks, so that the true matter and forme of Baptisme was observed, in this case the de∣termination of the Church (against the opinion of
Concil. Laod. can. 7. Arelat. can. 8. Leo Ep. 7. 7. citati per Chemnitium in Exam. de Confirmat. Cyprian) was that they were not to be rebaptized; only they were to be catechised, and interrogated concerning the faith whereinto they were baptized, and so by im∣position of hands in confirmation, they were to be recei∣ved into communion with the Church. Even so it is here. Suppose the baptisme of Infants not to be regular, that they ought not to be baptized untill they be able to understand the meaning of this Sacrament, and make a profession of the faith in their owne persons (an opinion which some moderate spirits are somewhat inclinable to) yet being baptized, their baptisme is valid, and ought not to be repeated. Even as it is with the bap∣tisme of a prophane or ignorant person; nay suppose a Iew, a Turke, an Infidel, a Pagan. In case such a one should out of some by and sinister respect, whether to save his life, or procure his liberty, or for lucre, or honour, or the like, should tender himself to Baptisme: In this case he ought not to be admitted. Divine ordinances are not to be prostituted to any such base or sinister designes. Yet put the case that by favour, or by some other indi∣rect way, he doe obtaine it. In this case his baptisme is not to be accounted a nullity. Neither ought he (in case afterwards he shall be inlightened, and come truly and seriously to imbrace the faith) to be rebaptized; only hee is then to make a right use of that baptisme, which was administred to him rightly for the substance of it, however by him obtained in an undue way and manner. Even so here. Supposing Infants to be baptized before they are meet to partake of that Ordinance, yet being for substance rightly baptized, they ought not now to bee rebaptized, but only labour to make a right and holy use of that baptisme, which was truly, though
conferred upon them. Which if rightly considered, and duly weighed, I presume it might be of use to some who are not fully satisfied in the point of Paedobaptisme, as touching the expediencie or lawfulnesse of it, viz. to stay them from running into that dangerous and destru∣ctive errour of Anabaptisme, properly so called, I mean of Rebaptization, the repeating of baptisme; which being once for substance rightly administred, ought not for some defect in the manner, or mistake in circumstance be reiterated. But thus much for this point; which I have dwelt the longer upon, if it might be, to settle wa∣vering and unstable mindes, and to keep them from be∣ing seduced, and drawne away to the imbracing of this spreading errour of the times, which hath also begunne to put up head in this place: However, liberare animam, to deliver my owne soule, by the discharge of my duty to∣wards God and you; withall, making it manifest, that if God shall permit this errour to spring and spread fur∣ther amongst us, yet it may never be said, that these Tares were sowne, and grew up whilest the Husbandmen Mat. 13. 25.slept.
MARK. 10. vers. 13. to 16. And they brought young Children unto him, that hee should touch them, &c. YOV know what Subject it is I have late∣ly fallen upon, viz. the Doctrine of Bap∣tisme; and therein of Paedobaptisme, the Baptisme of Infants. This doctrine and practice I have already in part endea∣voured to assert, and vindicate against the Anabaptists of the times. In further prosecution thereof I have now taken up this portion of Scrip∣ture, which is commonly made use of in this cause, as an argument to evince the warrantablenesse of Childrens baptisme. A portion of Scripture well knowne. No one passage in the Bible more frequently read in our pub∣lick Congregations (so it hath been,) but very sel∣dome explicated. So Chemnitius observed it in the Chemnit. Har. ad loc.Germane Churches in his time; and the observation holdeth as true in ours. Scarse a Lords day but this historie hath beene read (I meane in great Congrega∣tions,) but it may bee scarce once in an age opened. Give me leave now to doe it, and I will doe it with as much brevitie as conveniently I may; intending rather to glosse upon every thing in it, then to in∣sist upon any thing. A 3. fold Act in this Hist. The words are a historie, consisting of three parts,
three sensuall acts. The first of those devout persons who brought and presented these children unto Christ: v. 13. The second of the disciples repelling these Infants, and rebuking those which brought them; ibid. The third of our Saviours rebuking his Disciples, inviting, imbracing, and blessing these In∣fants; v. 14, 15, 16. wee shall looke upon them se∣verally. 1. Act. The act of those which brought these children to Christ: wher 4. particulars. Begin with the first, the act of those devout per∣sons which brought these children; wherein diverse particulars offer themselves to our consideration. As 1. who brought them: 2 whom they brought: 3. to whom they brought them: 4. to what end they brought them: A word of each. 1. Who were the bringers. I. Who brought them;  (saith the text.) They brought;] who they were, none of the Evange∣lists expressed. Most probably, the Parents, the Mo∣thers of these children. They brought them, which they did out of a tender and motherly affection which they bare unto their children; desiring their good, their welfare, [they brought them.] 2. Whom they brought: viz. Infants. II. And whom did they bring? Children. , (saith our Evangelist:) pueros, puerulos; children, young children. So our translation renders it; and such they were. Not children growen up, as some of the Anabaptists would willingly have it, but Infants. Cleared by 3▪ arguments. Luk. 18. 15. 1. So St Luke expresly calleth them; , Infants, sucking children. 2. So much also is implyed in the first word of the text; they brought, , adferebant, non adduce∣ant. They brought them, not led them; not led them by the hand, but brought them in their armes, Thus they brought them.
3. And after the same manner Christ received, and embraced them. [Hee tooke them in his armes.] , (saith our Evangelist) ulnis amplexus: even as mothers doe their children. All evidencing and clearing the condition of the persons that were brought. They were Children, Babes, Infants. 3. To whom they were brought. III. And to whom did they bring them? Vnto him, unto Christ. Thus others before had brought di∣verse aged persons unto him, who had received be∣nefit by him. And thereupon these tender mothers they doe as much for their children; [they bring them to Christ.] 4 To what end. IV. And to what end did they bring them. [That hee might touch them (saith our Evangelist:) that he might put his hands upon them and pray, (saith St. Math. 19. 13.Matthew:) that is, that by laying his hands upon them hee might blesse them. Such benedictions Parents were anciently wont to seek for their children, and children for themselves. Thus did Jacob and Esau, Gen. 27.each seek a blessing at the hands of their father Isack. And thus did Joseph seek a blessing for his two sons Gen. 28.Ephraim and Manasses; bringing them to his father Jacob, that he might lay his hands upon them, and blesse them; i. e. pray for them, and in the name of God pronounce a blessing upon them. Such a blessing (it seemeth) the people of God were frequently wont to seek for their children at the hands of those whom they apprehended to be indued with propheticall and extraordinarie spirits. And thus these mothers, looking upon Christ as a Prophet, a great Prophet, the great Prophet, they bring their Infants unto him, that they might receive a benediction from him.
The words being thus briefly opened, we may take up a double observation from them. 1. That Infants are subjects capable of benefit by Christ. 2. That it is the best office that Parents can performe unto their Children, to bring them unto Christ. Breifly of each. Obser. 1 Infants ca∣pable of be∣nefit by Christ. Infants are subjects capable of benefit by Christ: So much certainely these devout persons who here brought these children to him apprehended and be∣lieved. Wherefore else should they have brought them, had they not apprehended them to have been subjects capable of benefit by him. And surely such they are; capable, and that not onely of temporall, but of spirituall benefit: viz. of Remission of sinnes, of Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification, Glorification. Object. Infants doe not actually believe. But how can this be (saith the Anabaptist) see∣ing that Infants doe not actually believe? They can∣not lay hold upon Christ by faith; how then shall they receive any benefit by him? Answ. Christ can touch them, though not touched by them. To this I answer; Though they cannot lay hold up∣on Christ, yet Christ can lay hold upon them. Though they cannot touch him, yet hee can touch them. And this is sufficient. Marke the Text: [They brought chil∣dren unto Christ that hee should touch them.] Not that they should touch him, but that hee should touch them. Christ can, and often doth touch them by a veriuall contract, communicating spirituall benedicti∣ons and blessings unto them, who are not able to touch him, I meane actually to beleive on him. This is the case of Infants; they are not sensible of the need they have of Christ, neither can they seek a blessing for themselves, they cannot by an actuall
faith lay hold upon him: yet is this no impediment unto them. For all this, Christ may, and often doth communicate himselfe unto them; apprehending them, thongh not apprehended by them. In adultis, in persons come to yeares of discretion, and to the use of reason, both these meet together, even a mutuall apprehension, the one resulting from the other. Belie∣vers they apprehend Christ, and they are apprehen∣ded of Christ. This is that which Paul desireth for himselfe, Phil. 3. I follow after (saith he) if I may Phil. 3. 12.apprehend that for which I am also apprehended of Jesus Christ.] Paul was apprehended of Christ; viz. by his free grace accepting of him; and his desire is, that he might more and more apprehend Gods love and favour in Christ, viz. by faith and experience. Thus doe Christians when they are come to yeares of dis∣cretion, apprehend Christ; then they touch him, as that Woman in the Gospell did, who came and touched Mat. 9.the hemme of his Garment, drawing vertue from him by her faith. Thus indeed Infants cannot apprehend him; they cannot touch him. In the meane time it is enough that they are apprehended of Christ, touch∣ed by him. So were these Infants here in the Text. [They brought Children unto Christ that he should touch them.] Applica. Stand not to reason with flesh & bloud about this mystery. Appli: Stand no then to reason with flesh and bloud about the manner of Christs comming and communicating himselfe, and his grace unto Infants. This doth the Anabaptist, and because sense▪ and rea∣son cannot resolve his doubt, viz. How Baptisme should be made effectuall unto Infants, seeing they doe not actually believe; therefore he will not be∣lieve
lieve that it can bee any wayes beneficiall to them, what is this but to take up Thomas his Resolution? Iohn 20.Unlesse I shall see the print of the nayles, and put my fin∣gers into them, &c. I will not believe. These Women (or who ever they were that brought these Chil∣dren unto Christ) they were of another minde. They knew not which way vertue should go out from Jesus Christ unto their Infants; yet they bring them, render them unto him, only desiring that hee would touch them, which if hee would vouchsafe to doe, they doubt not but their Infants should bee the better for it. Surely what ever flesh and bloud, carnall sense and reason (which are no competent judges in divine and spirituall mysteries) may suggest. The Sacra∣ment of Baptisme is not un usefull, nor alwayes in∣effectuall unto Infants. God can, and (no question) often doth concurre with his Ordinance, communi∣cating the inward grace with the outward signe, work∣ing that grace of Regeneration in Infans, whereof Baptisme is a Signe and Seale. If for our parts wee cannot conceive how, or after what manner God should worke this worke in them, let not that stag∣ger our beliefe, Considering that there are many other things which are above our sense and reason, yet not above our faith. Wee believe that they are, though we know not in what way they are effected. Who is there that knoweth the way of his own na∣turall birth? how the body is framed and fashioned in the wombe? how, and when the soule commeth to be infused into it? Even such is the way of God in many of his works. So saith the Preacher, Eccles. 11.
[As thou knowest not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how Eccles. 11. 5the bones do grow in the wombe of her that is with childe, so thou knowest not the works of God.] Such are many of his works, many of his wayes, , untraceable Rom. 11. 33.wayes, wayes past finding out. And such in particular is the way of God in the worke of Regeneration; a mysterious way, the manner of it being above sense and reasons comprehension. So much our Saviour tells Nicodemnus. Ioh. 3. [The winde bloweth where it listeth▪ &c. So is every one that is borne of the Spirit.] The winde bloweth variously, sometimes in this quarter, sometimes in that, and who can give a rea∣son of it. Such is the worke of the Spirit. A myste∣rious worke. If we cannot give a reason of it, and set forth the manner of its working, let not this our ignorance prejudice our faith. What wee cannot com∣prehend, yet let us apprehend. What we cannot see, yet believe. So did these devout persons here in the Text. Having seene the power of Christ exercised upon others, they doubt not but their children also were capable of benefit by him; so as if he would but touch them, they should fare the better for it; and thereupon they bring them unto him. I have done with the former observation. As briefly of the latter. Obser. The best of∣fice Parents can doe for their Chil∣dren, to bring them to Christ. Reason . It is the best office that Parents can performe unto their children, to bring them unto Christ.] So these mo∣thers here thought of it. They knew not how to performe a better office unto these their Infants, then to present them unto Christ. And therein they were not deceived. 1. In as much as (Christ,) Iesus Christ is the storehouse
Christ a storehouse of blessings. 1 Ephes. 3. and Treasury of all blessings. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ (faith the Apostle) who hath blessed us with all spirituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ.] Spirituall blessings (which are the best bles∣sings) they are layd up in Christ, to be dispenced by him. God his Father hath made him (as I may say) his high-Almoner to distribute his bounty to the sons of men. Whetherthen can poore necessitous crea∣tures repaire better than unto Christ? And such are Infants naturally. Reason 2. Infants ne∣cessitous creatures. 2. Let that be a second Reason; viz the great necessity that Infants have of Iesus Christ. Without him they are lost creatures, for ever lost. Such they come in to the world, in a lost condition; being all sinners by nature. Sinners by Imputation, having the sinne of their first Parents charged upon them: Sin∣ners by reall communication, being heires of their fore∣fathers corruption. Now this being their condition, they stand in need of a Saviour, a susceptor, one that may undertake for them, and stand betwixt the wrath of God and them. And who can do this but the Saviour of the world, the Lord Christ? Now put these together, Christs Al-sufficiencie, and their necessitie; wee shall see ground and reason enough for this Assertion, that it is the best office that Pa∣rents can doe to their Children, to bring them unto Christ. Applica. Let it be applied briefly by way of Conviction, Instruction. Ʋse 1. The prepo∣sterous care of carnall Parents. By way of Conviction. Let carnall Parents here take notice of the preposterousnesse of their care and so∣licitude for their children in seeking all other things
for them, in the meane time neglecting this. Other things they will lay out, and lay up for them, neces∣saries and conveniencies for the outward man. They shall not want either food or rayment▪ It may be they will give them civill nurture and education, bringing them up in some honest trade or occupation, where∣by they may live like men in the world: And they will doe what they can to gather a portion for them, to leave them an Inheritance. But in the mean time, as for bringing them to Christ, and interesting them in him, this they never thinke of. And what is this but with Martha to bee solicitous about many things, but Luke 10. 41.whereas there is but one thing necessary, to over-looke that▪ Surely such is the interesting of children in Jesus Christ. Other things may bee for conveniency, this for necessity. Be convinced then of▪ your folly herein, you who are so indulgent towards, and provident for your children, that you thinke all the care you can take for them for their temporall welfare, to bee little enough; but in the meane time take no thought to bring them unto Christ, to have union and commu∣nion with him. Hereby you may expresse a naturall, but no Christian affection; that is true Christian affe∣ction, which putteth forth it selfe in bringing others unto Christ. The worst office to keep children from Christ. 2. But what shall we then thinke (in the second  place) of those who are so farre from bringing their children unto Christ, that they rather keepe them off from him. Prejudicing them against the waes of Christ, by their owne  examples▪ Cruell, un-naturall Parents! So wee account them, who
Levit. 20. . offered up their children into Moloc. What are they who (as much as in them lyeth) offer them up unto S? Vse 2. Instruction. To excite Parents to this duty.  Parents here take no∣tice of their  and be excited to discharge it: en∣deavouring (what in them lyeth) to bring their chil∣dren unto Christ. The best office, the truest act of charity you can performe to them. So we looke Matt. 9. 2. act of those who brought that poore Para∣liticke, the man icke of the Palsie unto Christ▪ Hee could not come himselfe, they bring him. The greatest piece of charity they could possibly have shwed  Suppose it, that they had otherwise contributed largely and liberally to his necessities, giving him meat and drinke, and apparell, and mo∣ney; all this had beene nothing in comparison of  they now did for him. What ever , what  naturall affection the most tender hearted Pa∣rents in the world can shew to their children, should they provide never so well for them in all other  yet this is more than all, to bring them to Christ▪ The truest and highest preferment that a Pa∣rent can preferre his childe unto, to preferre him un∣to Christ. Old Barzillai could not doe more for his 2 Sam. 19. 37.sonne  than to preferre him unto David, to be his follower, his attendant. Hee well knew that David could do more for him than himselfe could. Upon the same ground preferre we our children un∣to Christ▪ They cannot serve a better Master, none so able to doe for them as hee▪ Little it is that wee  Much we have done  and transmitting our
corrupted nature to them, thereby laying them under guilt, and making them children of wrath. This have we done against them to make them miserable. Now all that wee can doe for them, cannot free them from that condition. O labour to bring and present them unto him that can, even unto Iesus Christ. Quest. How shall Parents bring their children to Christ, and what they are to doe to that end. Answ. A threefold direction. But which way shall this be done? How shall Pa∣rents bring their children unto Christ? or what shall they doe to this end? Take some directions briefly. I shall reduce them to three heads. Something is to be done for them be∣fore they are borne▪ Something when they are borne, in their Infancy▪ Something when they come to yeares of understanding. Before they are borne. 1. Before they are born, whilest they are yet in the  wombe, Parents should have a care to sanctifie their children. Sanctifie them? How? Why (as all other  Sanctifie them in the wombe by prayer. Psal. 127▪ 3. things are to be sanctified) by prayer, and thanksgi∣ving. Children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the wombe is his reward (saith the Psal∣mist.) Being so, they should be blessed in the wombe▪ First, by blessing God for them, for the hopes of them Secondly, by commending them unto his blessing. This doing Then (in the second place) let Parents make sure  (as much as in them lyeth) that they may bee borne Make sure they may bee borne under the Cove∣nant.under the promise, under the Covenant. As for the Planet it matters not: if they be but borne under the Promise, wee may looke upon them as a hopefull seede▪ Q. But what shall or what can the Parent do to bring the Childe under the Promise?
A. Make sure he be under it himself; make sure his owne interest in the Covenant, that God is his God in Christ▪ Being so, then may hee haue a com∣fortable hope that God will bee the God of his seed also. So  the Covenant. [I will bee thy God, and the God of thy eed.] This are Parents to doe for their children whilest they are yet in the wombe be∣fore they are borne. When they are borne.Secondly, when they are born; then first give them up unto God. Even as these mothers here in the Text,  Give them to God againthey bring their children unto Christ, putting them into his Hands, his Armes. Thus should Parents deale with their children, having received them from God, they should give them unto God againe; putting them into his hands, casting them upon his arms; put∣ting them into the hands of his Fatherly providence, to be ordered and disposed of by him, according to his good pleasure. Casting them upon the Armes of his everlasting mercie in Iesus Christ, begging for them a gracious acceptation. For the assurance  whereof. Bring them to Baptisme. Secondly, their next care must bee to tender them to the Ordinance, the Sacrament of Baptisme, to get the Seal of the Covenant set upon them; to get them Whether mothers are bound to pre∣sent their children with their owne hands.marked out for salvation; a care which lyeth most properly upon the Parents. Not that they are ab∣solutely bound to present them with their owne hands. True it is, these mothers here they bring their children unto Christ in their owne Armes (as is most probable,) and so Christ taketh them into his. But as for the lter of thse, I know you will readily yeeldit, that it is not binding, that because Christ
tooke these children into his Armes to blesse them; therefore Ministers should necessarily take chil∣dren into their Armes to Baptize them. No more doe I conceive, the former to bee; that because these Mothers brought their owne children unto Christ, therefore all Mothers ought to bring their children to the Sacrament of Baptisme, and there present them to the Ordinance in their owne Armes. Sure I am, in Circumcision it was other∣wise. But herein, if any seeme to bee contentious, I will not contest with them; onely I will say with 1 Cor. 11. 16.the Apostle in anothercase; we have no such custome, or (for ought I know) the Churches of God. The chiefe care lyeth upon the Pa∣rents, speci∣ally upon the father. Exod. 4. 24▪ But in the meane time, the chiefe care lyeth upon the Parents; and that specially and chiefly upon the Father. So did the care of Circumcision. Thence was it, that God was ready to slay Moses for neglecting of it, suffering his sonne to bee un∣circumcised. Quest. What if the mother bee unwilling? Q. But what if the other Parent, the Mother be unwilling withall, not willing the childe should bee Baptized? It is a case which possibly may fall out in these dividing times. Now in this case what should the husband doe? Should he please his wife, and neglect this Ordinance. Answ. The case of Moses and Zippora. A. It was the very case (as Junius, and divers other good Expositers conceive it) betwixt Moses and Zipporah. Zipporah not being as yet fully instru∣cted in the Religion of God, or not fully brought off to it▪ and withall an indulgent mother, was un∣willing that her child should be Circumcised. Here∣upon Moses her husband in gratiam uxoris, to please
and content his wife, defers the Circumcising of him. But what the issue was the story tells you, and your selves may easily make the application. Let not Pa∣rents deferre this Ordi∣nance upon carnall reaso∣nings. Let not Parents then either neglect, or deferre this Ordinance beyond what is meet, where it may be had according to Christs Institution. Herein let them not stand to reason with flesh and bloud about it (as the Anabaptist doth; what good, what benefit a poore Infant shall receive) from, or by this Sacra∣ment, seeing it apprehends nothing, understandeth not what is done to it. A. No more did the Circum∣cised Infant, it onely felt the smart of Circumcision, (as Infants now doe the coldnesse of the water) but the mystery and meaning it apprehended not, yet was not Circumcision thereupon to be deferred, till it came to years of understanding. No more ought this Sacrament, which cometh in the roome of Cir∣cumcision. What though sense and reason cannot tell us how this ordinance should be beneficiall, yet sub∣mit to it, resting upon God in the use of it. Know∣ing and remembring that in sacred actions of this na∣ture, we are to captivate our owne understandings, bring∣ing them into obedience unto Christ, dealing with him not by reason, but by faith. So much our Saviour intimates unto us in the 15. of this Chapter, where he tels us, that, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdome of God, as a little childe, hee shall not enter therein.] Children, we see how they yeeld up themselves un∣to their Parents pleasures, believing, submitting, and obeying, without disputing and reasoning. Thus should christians yeeld up themselves to the pleasure of their Lord and Master Christ, believing his words,
submitting to his commandements, though to reason never so unreasonable. Thus did Abraham when he was 99. yeares old submit to Circumcision, though to Gen. 17. 24.reason, a ridiculous uncomely ceremonie. What e∣ver reason dictates, yet neglect not this ordinance of God, the bringing of our children, and consecrating them unto God by the Sacrament of Baptisme: which if it should not be for the present beneficiall unto the childe, yet to the Parents it may be, being to them a signe and seale for the confirmation of their faith in believing the promise made to them, and to their seed. Object. The Promise is sufficient, though un∣sealed. Chemnit. Har. ad loc. But what needeth this? Is not the promise it selfe sufficient? And cannot God as well make it good unto our children without this Sacrament? So Chemitius brings in some reasoning against this act of these women in the Text, as if it savoured more of superstition, then of devoution, viz. that they could not be contented with Christs praying for their children, but they would needs have him to touch them. The Centurion (say they) was of another minde. He doth not bring his servants unto Christ, or desire Christ to goe unto him. Onely speak the word (saith hee) and Math. 8. 8.my servaant shall be whole.] And this act of his (say they) it was farre more commendable then this of the women here, who brought their children unto Christ that hee should touch them. From whence they argue, that Parents having the word, the word of promise, they shall not need this Sacrament for their children. Ans. Meanes afforded for the helpe of our infirmity and strength∣ning our faith are not to be neglected. To this wee reply, it is true, God can make good the promise unto them, saving them without this
Sacrament, as our Saviour could and sometimes did heale those which were diseased without touching of them, or coming neere to them. But seeing God is pleased so farre to condescend unto our weaknesse, as to give us a signe for the confirmation of our faith, in this case to sleight it, to neglect it, to refuse it, what is it but to tempt God? It was Ahaz his case yee know. The Lord bids him aske a signe for the con∣firmation of his faith in the promise. He refuseth Isaiah. 7. 12.it as a thing needlesse. [I will not aske a signe, neither will I tempt the Lord.] Nay Ahaz, in not asking it at Gods command, therein thou didst tempt the Lord, not to believe Gods word without his seale; not to believe the promise without a signe, this is in∣deed to tempt God. But where God affordeth a signe for the help of our infirmitie, there to refuse it, to ne∣glect it, is both presumption and rebellion. 3. When chil∣dren come to yeares of dis∣cretion. The 3. head is yet behinde, what parents are to doe for their children when they come to yeares of understanding, in way of bringing them to Christ. Here again two things. 1. Instruct them in the knowledge of Christ. 2 Tim. 3. 15. 1. Instruct them in the knowledge of Christ. Instil∣ling into them, so soone as they are capable of them, the principles of Christian Religion▪ Thus was Timo∣thie brought up; From a childe hee knew the holy scrip∣tures, &c. And thus should Christian parents bring Ephes. 6. 4.up their children; bring them up in the nurture and ad∣monition of the Lord, (as Paul exhorts his Ephesians:) teaching them to know God and Iesus Christ; com∣manding them to walke in the wayes of God. This Gen. 18. 19.will Abraham doe: [I know (saith the Lord) that he will command his children, &c. and they shall keep the way of the Lord.]
Leading them to Christ by ex∣ample. In the second place, goe with them, goe before them,  leading them unto Christ by their own examples. It is that which taketh place with children more then all pre∣cepts and instructions whatsoever: And without this the other will doe little good. Would we then have our children brought home unto Christ, be we our selves followers of him. Not dealing by our chil∣dren as old Barzillai did by his son Chimham, whom 2 Sam. 19. 39▪he leaves to follow David, when himselfe departed from him. Even thus doe some parents. They could be content their children should follow Christ, and be religious, whilest in the meane time themselves turne their backs upon him, and his Religion; wal∣king loosely, making no conscience either of sins, or duties. Now what is this but to prejudice their children against that way, wherein they would have them to walke? Would we have our children come unto Christ, goe with them, as these mothers here did, leade them, and shew them the way by our own ex∣ample. And thus I have done with the first branch of the text; the first act; viz. of these mothers, or who ever they were that brought these children unto Christ. And his disciples rebuked those that brought them:] Act. 2. The act of the dis∣ciples double.Come we now to the second act in this Historie, viz. the act of the Disciples, prohibiting these Infants, not without a check a rebuke to those that came, and ten∣dred them. So all the three Evangelists have it. , increpebant eos, saith Matthew and Luke, [they rebuked them.] Not the Infants themselves, but the bringers of them. So our Evangelist explaines it ; They rebuked those which 1. Repelling the Infan▪brought them.] Thus these Infants were repulsed, and
these devout persons rebuked. Each will yeeld us something worth the observation. Obser. Satans pecu∣liar-ill will to children. 1. In the former take we notice of a peculiar ill∣will Satan beareth to children; he hath an evill eye up∣on them, endeavouring by all meanes to keep them from coming to Christ, and so to hinder their salva∣tion. How Satan hinders chil∣dren from coming to Christ.This Satan doth many wayes. 1. Through the indulgencie of Parents suffering them to have their owne wills. 2. Through evill education, poisoning their tender yeares, giving them such a ang then, as they shall retaine all their life after. 3. Sometimes 2 King 23. 12.under a pretext of Religion. Thus of old he instigated not only the heathen, but even Gods owne people to offer up their children in sacrifice to Molock, unto devils. And even thus doth he instigate those of the Church of Rome at this day, to sacrifice their chil∣dren, to put them into monasteries before they know what they doe, which is little lesse than to offer them up unto Satan. 4. By keeping them from the ordi∣nances. Thus he instigated the disciples here to repell thse Infants from coming neere to Christ. And▪ he it is that hath of late times instigated the Anabaptists to take up this quarrell, to prohibite the Baptisme of Infants, which is as much as in them lyeth to keep them from coming unto Christ. Reason 1. And wherefore should Satan have such an evill eye at them? Why he looketh upon them as the se∣minarie, the urrie of the Church, out of which God taketh those plantes wherewith he plants his  and therefore Satan hath an ill-will to them, that so he might hinder the encrease of the Church. . Let Parents take notice of it, and be so much the
more carefull and vigilant in watching over their chil∣dren, Parents should be the more vigilantnot neglecting any meanes for their spirituall good; which if they shall doe, what doe they but leave them as a prey unto Satan, who will be ready enough to prey upon them. My purpose is onely to touch things as I goe.  These Infants are repelled, and those which brought Rebuking those which brought them. Obser. 2. Good under∣takings sub∣ject to dis∣courage∣ments, cast in sometimes Reason. 1. By God for the tryall of his people, & exercise of their graces. Matth. 15. them are checked, rebuked. Thus good intentions and pious undertakings some∣times, oft-times meet with impediments and discourage∣ments; which sometimes God casts in the way of his people, sometimes Satan. 1. God, for their probation and tryall, the tryall of their faith; as also for the exercise of that and other graces in them, which by the exercise of them come to be strengthned and increased. To this end it was that our blessed Saviour gave such harsh in∣tertainment to that poore Cananitish woman that came to him in the behalfe of her daughter; First, bidding his disciples dismisse her, [send her away.] v. 23.Then himselfe shaking her off, telling her hee had nothing to doe with her, or for her. [I am not sent v. 24.but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.] Then giving her tam, and course language, calling her a dog. [It is not meete to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto v. 26.dogs.] All this he did for her probation and tryall, to try and exercise her faith. These ends God hath in it. Reason 2. By Satan to dishearten them. 2. Satan hath other ends, viz. to discourage, dis∣hearten the people of God, to beate them off, and make them desist, and leave off their undertakings▪ and therefore he endeavoureth to crush them in the Nnmb. 32▪
shell, and nip them in the bud. Applica. Fore-arme against dis∣courage∣ments. Take we notice of it, and make use of it, that be∣ing fore-warned, we may also be fore-armed, against what ever discouragements wee shall meet with. Not disheartned by them. Alas, these are no new or wonted things, but such as Gods people have fre∣quent experience of. Let them not dull or rebate the edge of our endeavours, but rather whet, and set them. Sowre sauces in the beginning of a meale, they whet the appetite. Even such use make wee of what ever impediments and discouragements shall en∣counter us in the entrance upon any pious, relgi∣ous undertaking. Let them be rather as whets, to sett an edge upon our resolutions. Let not new∣commers to Christ bee discouraged. And in particular, let it be usefull to new beginners, new commers to Christ, young Christians. At first conversion, when they doe but begin to looke to∣wards God and Christ, they oftentimes meet with such entertainment, as these Infants here did. They finde course usage from the world; Course language (it may bee,) or an overly carriage from friends and ac∣quaintance; mocks and checks from others: And happily God himselfe (or Satan by his permission) may strow some Murices, some Caltraps, some cros∣ses in their way. But let not all discourage, still hold on. In the end, what ever the world doth, bee you assured, Christ will smile upon you, and embrace you, as here he doth these Infants. To passe on. These Infants were repulsed, and those which brought them checked. But by whom? By the Disciples of Christ. [His Disciples rebuked those which brought them.] What see we here?
Observ. Holy men may stand in the way of▪ religious un∣dertakings. Even good men, holy and gracious men, may sometimes be impedements to pious and Religious undertakings.] It was Peter that assayed to perswade his Master not to goe up to Jerusalem. [Master favour thy selfe.] Here was an assay to hinder the best worke that ever was done, (the worke of our Redemption,) and that by Matt. 16. 22.an eminent Saint, an eminent Apostle. Here in the Text the Apostles, whose office it was to winne and bring all sorts o persons unto Christ, yet they prohibite these children, and rebuke those which brought them. Thus good men sometimes may bee back-friends to good causes. This God permits; this Satan incites to; this holy men yeeld to. See a Reason for each. Reason 1. God permits it. First, God permits it to the end that our faith (as the Apostle speaketh) should not stand in the wisdome of men; nor yet in the holines of men. That we may learn not to make either the Iudgement, or Practise of man our Rule; our Rule to believe by, our Rule to walke by. Secondly, Satan incites to it, the rather making use  Satan incites to it; making use of such instruments because least suspected.of these Instruments, because least suspected, and con∣sequently most prevalent. Thus at the first he made use of the Woman in tempting the Man. Adam could not naturally suspect his owne flesh; hee could not suspect that poyson should bee reached forth to him by such a hand. None so likely to perswade with him, as his wife was. Vpon a like ground it is, that Satan maketh use of pious and godly persons, in cros∣sing and hindering some pious undertakings. Thus hee made use of Peter, to take off his Master. So much our Saviour there expresseth, [Get thee behind Matt. 16. 23.me Satan▪] It was Satan that spoke in, and by Peter; making use of him as his Instrument in suggesting
and conveying that temptation. And wherfore of him? Why, he thought if any could prevaile with Christ, Peter might assoone, or sooner than any. Holy men yeeld to it. because they know but in part. 1 Cor. 13. 9. 3. As God permits, and Satan incites, so▪ holy men sometimes yeeld, and become instruments to God, and Satan in these services (or rather dis-services) in hindering of good: and that because they know but in part. It was so with the Disciples here. In prohi∣biting these children, they act according to their knowledge. They did not know their Masters mind concerning them; and thereupon they did what they did. Thus is it with good and holy men, they are sometimes Remoraes, back-stayes to a worke, that tends to the glory of Christ, and good of his Church. Whence is it? not from any ill-will they beare to ei∣ther; but because they are not fully informed touching the minde of Christ▪ they are not per∣fectly Acts 19. 25.instructed in the way of the Lord; wherein they walke according to their light. Applica. Make not the judgement or practise of o∣thers, a rule to believe, or walke by. Make use of it briefly, even that which I have al∣ready given you a hint of. Learne we hence, not to pin our faith or obedience upon other mens sleeves, not to make the Iudgement or practise of others (whatever they be) a Rule, a Standard for us to believe, or walk by. A very common errour in these un-setled times. How many well-meaning soules are there every where, that bottome their faith upon the wisedome, or upon the piety and holinesse of men? Take wee heed of it; Knowing that if we shall sayle by this Compasse, we may bee on ground before we are aware. Rom. 3.You know who spake it. Let God bee true, and every man a lyar. God onely is infallible, and his Word an
infallible Rule. As for men, the wisest, the learnedest, the holiest, they are all lyars, and that both actively, and passively, subject to deceive, and bee deceived. Take wee heed therefore of trying truth by this touchstone, of weighing truth in this ballance, by these weights; To the Word, to the Word. That will not, that cannot deceive. Humane judgement, humane practise may, though in persons never so eminent. Take heed then how wee bee prejudiced against truth, because such or such assent not to it. Take heed how we let in errour, because such or such em∣brace, and entertaine it. Surely, it is one of the pre∣vailing Arguments of the times, that hath misled and seduced many, to the receiving and embracing of divers dangerous errors; even the good opinion and high esteeme which they have had of some who have gone in those wayes. Anabaptists misled with an opinion of the piety of their lea∣ders▪ I will instance but in one, that which the Text leadeth me to, viz. The errour of the Anabaptists in denying Baptisme unto children: An errour which spreadeth farre and nigh in the Kingdome, to the pre∣sent disquietment, to the future danger of the Church. Many in all places carried away with it. And what is it that so prevailes with them for the sucking in of this errour? why, surely nothing more than the high opinion which they have of those who stand up in this cause; an opinion of their singular piety, zeale, knowledge. They are knowing Christians▪ forward and Zealous Christians, close walking Christians, such as desire to come to the Rule, and to follow Christ close. Such they apprehend them to bee. (And I
will not deny, but some such may be found amongst them.) And hereupon they make their judgements, and practise a standard, a patterne to themselves. Surely (say they) it cannot bee but that they should bee in the right; A knowing people, a praying people, &c. Ans. To meet with this Errour, doe but looke up∣on this instance in the Text, and see who they were that prohibited these children from comming unto Christ, and rebuked those which brought them. They were not Scribes and Pharisees. They were not su∣perstitious, or blinde, ignorant, or yet wicked and prophane persons. No, they were Disciples, follow∣ers of Christ, those who by reason of their constant attendance upon Christ, and familiar acquaintance with him, one would have thought should have un∣derstood his minde sooner than any, yet they fall into this very errour; they would not have children brought unto Christ, for which they are reproved of their Lord and Master. I doubt not, but even amongst that Sect which I am now speaking against, there may be some pious, de∣vout, humble Christians, (though I feare not many, for in most of them you shall see a spirit of pride and disdaine, and bitternesse against all that doe not walke by their light, but some such I hope there are) some Disciples of Christ, who do follow Christ accord∣ing to their light, in the simplicity and uprightnesse of their hearts. Now what though they debarre chil∣dren from comming unto Christ, and rebuke thse which bring them, finding fault with the received practise of all the Churches in Baptizing of Infants? What
then? Shall we presently hearken unto them? Nay rather hearken unto Christ; so doe these women here in the text. The disciples prohibite, rebuke them, bid them be gone with their children. But Christ hee incou∣rageth them, hee invits them. And to him they har∣ken not to his disciples. Suppose the adversaries to childrens Baptisme be some of them disciples of Christ, never so pious, never so zealous, never so eminent for grace, for holinesse, yet hearken we rather to their master, then to them; to him inviting, rather then to them prohibiting. [The disciples rebuked those which brought them.] Object. The ground of this act of the disciples, not malice, or enuie, but 1 Cor. 13. 4. But upon what ground did the disciples this. What did they it out of malice? Out of envie? Were they unwilling that these Infants should receive any bene∣fit from Christ? Surely not so. Charitie envies not: Grace is communicative, willing and desirous that others should have a share in the same Christ, and in the same benefits by Christ; whence was it then? Surely out of Ignorance, & out of blind-zeale. 1 Out of ignorance, ignorance of these two things.  Ignorance, of two things. 1. Of the need that these Infants had of Christ. 1. They did not apprehend what need these In∣fants had of Christ. Not being troubled (as is most probably) with any bodily infirmitie, they did not see what should occasion this their addresse. [The whole need not the physician but the sicke.] Had they been sick Matth. 9. 12.and diseased, questionlesse the disciples would have admitted them as readily as they had done others; but being sound and hayle, they put them back, as apprehending them to have no need of Christ. 2. As they apprehended that they had no need of Christ, so (probably) they did not conceive how
2. How they were capable of receiving benefit by him. they were capable of any benefit by him▪ Those which came unto Christ, ordinarily they came for one of these ends, to be benefited by him either in their bo∣dies, or in their soules. In their bodies by his miracles; in their oules by his doctrine. Now as for the for∣mer of these, these Infants had no need of it; and for the latter they were not capable of it; and con∣sequently the disciples could not see what they should be the better for coming to Christ, and there∣upon Applica. The Anabap∣tists grounds in denying Baptisme un∣to Infants, the same with these of the disciples. 1. Because In∣fants have no need of it. repell them, keep them back▪ And are not these the very grounds, the chiefe grounds that the Anabaptists goe upon at this day, in debatting children from the Sacrament of Baptisme? 1. They have no need of Baptisme (say they.) And 2. They are not capable of benefit by it. 1. They have no need of Baptisme. How so? In as much as they are free from originall sinne, (that is the doctrine of the compleat Anabaptist.) Infants (say they) doe not stand charged with Adams sinne. And as for any sinne of their owne, whether origi∣nall, Dig Anab▪ integ Ereunen  Odgo▪or actuall, they are not guiltie of it. Originall sin in Infants (faith one of their books) it was but a Ro∣mish invention,  and set a foot by those Antichristi∣an factors, that so they might have an occasion to extoll, and dee their queen of heaven, the virgin Mary, whom alone amongst all the posterity of Adam, they exempt from that common condition. Now being free from sin (say they) from the guilt of sinne, and from the staine of sinne, what need have they of this laver, which is ordained for the washing away of sins? Act 22. 16.[Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sinnes,] (saith Ananias to Paul.) The poole of ethsda that mira∣culous
hath, it was proper for lepers, and cripples, and such other diseased bodies; as for others they re∣ceived no benefit by it. And so is it with this spiri∣tuall, this heavenly bath, it is appointed for leprous, sin∣sick-soules, not for Infants who are not troubled with any such maladies. 2. They are not capable of benefit by Baptisme. Againe secondly, as they have no need of Bap∣tisme, so what benefit can they receive by it, or from it, being void, and destitute of understanding, of reason, and consequently of faith, upon which depends the efficacie of this, and all other the ordinances of God. Heb. 4. 2.This it is that qualifieth a person for the Sacrament Act. 8. 37.of Baptisme, his faith in Christ. If thou believest, thou maiest] (saith Phillip to the Eunuch.) And this it is that draweth vertue, and benefit from the ordinance, which without this is rendred wholy ineffectually. These are their reasonings; and are they not (for substance) the very same with the supposed reason∣ings of the disciples here in the text? They would not have the Infants brought unto Christ, Why? They had no need of him, being in perfect health, free from sicknesse; and they could receive no benefit by him, being void of understanding. Even thus saith the Anabaptist, what should children be brought to Baptisme? They have no need of it, being free from sinne▪ neither can they have any benefit by it, being voide of faith. Both erre, not knowing the scriptures. Now to both these we may say, as our blessed Saviour once did to the Sadduces in an other case, when they represented to him their mis-apprehensi∣ons touching the Doctrine of the Resurrection. [Yee erre (saith he) not knowing the scriptures, nor the power Matth. 22. 29▪
Matth. 22. 29 So did the disciples. of God.] Surely so did the disciples here in repulsing these Infants, they erred not knowing the scriptures. Psal. 8. 2.The scriptures would have told them, that out of the mouthes of babes and sucklings God hath ordained himselfe prayses, Psal. 8. The scripture would have told them, Psal. 22. 9,that God maketh Infants to hope whilest they hang upon their mothers breasts, and that hee is their God from their mothers  Psal 22. The scripture could have told them what their Lord and master had said; All that Ioh. 6. 7.the Father giveth me, shall come unto me, and him that cometh unto me I will in no wife cast out, Joh. 6. As also what he had done, and that but a little before this act Matth. 18. 2.of theirs. How he had expressed his affection to In∣fants, by taking one, and setting it in the midst a∣mongst them, propounding him as a patterne for their imitation. This they either knew not, or remembred not, or considered not. Thus they erred not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of Jesus Christ, how he was able to communicate his vertue to Infants, as well as any others. So doe the Anabaptists Psal. 51. Ephes. 2. Even so doe the Anabaptists at this day. They erre, not knowing the scriptures, which will informe them, that children are conceived in sinne, and brought forth in iniquity; and are by nature children of wrath, and conse∣quently, have need of Christ, and of this ordinance of Christ: Nor yet knowing the power of God, how he is able to make this ordinance effectuall unto them, though for the present destitute of actuall faith. Here is the first ground of this errour in the disciples; ig∣norance, misapprehension. 2. Blind zeale for their ma∣sters The second is not much unlike, viz. their blinde-Zeale; zeale for their master; 1. For his honour; 2.
For his ease, both which probably they had an eye at. Honour. First, his Honour. They thought it dishonourable to their Lord and Master, that he should be troubled with such Clients. Non vacat exiguis.—Had they beene Kings and Princes, or persons of quality, such as those three Wisemen of the East were, that brought Matt. 2.Presents to him in his Cradle. Had they beene per∣sons that came to doe him homage, to put any tem∣porall honour upon him; had they brought a Crown to put upon his head, to make him a King. Now Calvin. Harm. ad lc.(saith Calvin) in all likely-hood they should have beene welcome, none more. For, his it was that had dazeled the Disciples eyes; even a mis apprehension of a temporall kingdome, which they expected, and Matt. 20. 21. Acts 1. 6.hoped their Master would take upon him. Where∣upon, what ever made and tended that way, they were ready to embrace it. In the meane time, not understanding that the Kingdome of Christ was not Iohn 18. 36.of this world; which if they had, in likely-hood they would not have repulsed these Infants as they did, as if it would have beene a disparagement to their Lord and Master, to have any thing to doe with them. Ease. 2. They had an eye herein to his ease; they saw that their master wanted no worke, no employment already, so many of all sorts flocking unto him, as that he had scarce leisure to take his repast for them. Now if Infants also should be admitted, they feared he would be over-charged, over-burdened. These were their thoughts (as Expositers most ra∣tionally, and probably conjecture.) Certainly how∣ever,
Observ. Two dange¦rous counsel∣lours and guides. some carnall reasoning it was, seconded with a blind-Zeale, that made them do what they did. [Two dangerous things to consult with, and to bee led by in the matters of Christ] 1. A dangerous thing to consult with carnall reason; Carnall rea∣son.To make sense and reason sit as Judges upon Christ, and upon the mysteries of the Kingdome of God. Surely, this it is that hath brought a world of errours in∣to the world. Men will not submit to the judgment of the Word, but they will call in carnall reason to ad∣vise with. Hence are most of the errours in the Church of Rome at this day. Their Bread-worship, wherein they thinke they doe a speciall honour unto Christ, in falling down before the consecrated Hoast, being Transubstantiated, turned into the Body of Christ (as they conceive.) Their Saint-worship, wherein a∣gaine they thinke they do great honour unto Christ, in not comming unto him immediately, but making use of Court-favourites, Saints or Angels as their me∣diatours to make their way, and present their Peti∣ons for them. This doe they by this meanes fancie a new Christ unto themselves, taking from him that which properly belongeth to him, and attributing to him that which is heterogeneall, not agreeable, but di∣shonourable to his nature. From the same fountain spring many of the errors of the times. Socinian and Arminian errors generally all of them. Anabaptisticall errours many of them. They judge of divine mysteries, decrees, ordinances, not by faith submitting to the Word, but by sense and reason. A dangerous Counsellor in these matters, not to be hearkned to without, much lesse against the Word.
2. And as reason is a dangerous Counsellour, so  blinde-zeale is a dangerous guide. This was that Ignis∣fatuus Blind-zeale.that led Pauls Countrymen (the Jewes) wilde, that led them into those bogs and quick-sands of le∣gal Ceremonies, and ran them on ground upon the main of their owne legall righteousnesse. They had a Zeale of Rom. 10. 20▪God, (or for God) but not according to knowledge,] (as the Apostle tells them.) And this it is that mis-leadeth many poore devout soules in the Church of Rome, (whose case is to be pittied,) putting them upon all their superstitious will-worship, wherein they take a great deale of paines to go to heaven, more than the most of us doe. They have a Zeale of God, of Christ, but not according to knowledge. And surely, this is the grand-seducer amongst us at this day, that which mis∣leadeth a multitude of well-meaning soules in this Kingdome, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Seperatists. They stand for Christ, whom they desire to have ex∣alted, and (as they thinke) for the ordinances of Christ, which they desire to have set up with the greatest pu∣ritie and simplicitie. And herein they shew themselves Zealous, I,  (as Paul said of himselfe Gal. 1▪ 1▪before his conversion) more exceedingly Zealous; but alas, their zeale is not according to knowledge. Even as the Disciples here, they have a Zeale for their Ma∣ster, as for his ease, so for his honour; and thereupon they keepe backe these Infants from comming to him. But it was not according to knowledge, a blinde-Zeale. By this meanes (contrary to their in∣tentions) they came to dishonour him whom they in∣tended to honour. For wherein lyeth the honour of a Prince more than in the multitude of Subjects? [In the Prov. 14. 28.
multitude of people, is the Kings honour.] No one thing more honourable unto Christ, than to have multi∣tudes of all sorts of persons, both old and young, repayring and resorting to him, and receiving bene∣fit by him. To keepe backe any of these from com∣ming to him, is an act not more injurious to the per∣sons so repulsed, than dishonourable unto him. Like issues and fruits of blinde-Zeale are but too observable amongst some of the Sectaries of the times, who in pretending to advance and exalt Christ, doe in truth debase and dishonour him. In pretending to set up his Ordinances, they rather pull them downe▪ destroying what they pretend, and intend to build. Of such dangerous consequence is it to bee led by such a guide. A fiery hot mettalled horse wanting his eyes is but dangerous to the Rider, specially if the reynes be cast upon his necke. And such is blind-Zeale to a well-meaning, but ignorant soule, being given way to, it will run a man upon precipices, and downfalls, which shall neither be honourable unto God, nor safe to himselfe. All of us take heed of this Guide. Be Zealous, but let it be 1. in a good matter. And 2ly. in a right man∣ner. To that end regulating our zeale by the Word. Psal. 119. 133. vers. 105.It is Davids prayer, [Lord order my steps in thy Word.] And it was his practise, to make the Word a light unto his feet, and a lanthorne unto his pathes.] Herein let him be our patterne; knowing that they are not good in∣tentions that will beare out unwarrantable practises. The Disciples intention here (no question) it was good, but yet their act reprovable. They rebuke others, and Christ rebuketh them. So it followeth.
Vers. 14. But when Iesus saw it, he was displeased, and said unto them, suffer little children to come unto mee, &c. Acts 3. Our Saviours Arbitration; wherein 3. particulars. COme we now to the third and last Act in this History. In the two former, we have the con∣troversie betwixt the Disciples, and those which brought these Infants. In this, we have our Saviours arbitration, and decision of that controversie. Where∣in we may take notice of three particulars; Our Sa∣viours Affection, Speech, Action. What he thought of this act of his Disciples; what he sayd to it; what he did upon it. 1. His Affection. [He was displeased.] 2. His Speech to his Disciples; wherein we have a Charge, and a Reason for it. His Charge, [Suffer little children to come unto me, &c.] The Reason of that Charge, first propounded; [for of such is the Kingdome of God;] then confirmed and illustrated by an argu∣ment a majori, from the greater to the lesse; [Veriby, I say unto you, whosoever doth not receive the Kingdome of God as a little childe, &c.] 3ly, His Act, which is three-fold, all towards these Infants. 1. His suscep∣tion, [he tooke them in his armes.] 2ly, His Imposition of hands, [he layd his hands upon them. 3ly, His Be∣nediction, [he blessed them.] Of these in their order.  His affecti∣on, what hee thought of this act of his Disciples. Begin with the first, wherein the History expres∣seth our Saviours affection, what he thought of this act of his Disciples.  [when he saw it, he
was displeased; (much displeased) (saith our new Tran∣slation.) Indigne tulit, saith the vulgar, he tooke it ill at their hands. Indignatus est (saith Beza) hee looked upon it with indignation. What see we here? Obser. Good inten∣tions will not beare out un∣warrantable actions. 2 Sam. 6. 6. Mat. 16. 23. Good intentions will not beare out un-warrant able acti∣ons.] Uzzah had no ill thought in putting his hand to the Arke, yet you know how it was taken. Peter had no evill meaning in advising his Master to favour himselfe▪ yet you know what a tart rebuke he recei∣ved, [Get thee behinde me Satan.] The Disciples here, in keeping backe these Infants, they had an eye at their Masters both ease, and honour; yet they have no thanks for their labour. Their Master is so far from accepting of that their officious service, that he distastes it, he was much displeased with it. Applica. Let not Wil∣worship look for acceptati∣on with God. Let Will-worship never looke for better acceptance at the hands of God. Voluntary services which men perform unto God without the rule, what ever the intentions of the performers may be; or what ever shew of wise∣dome or holinesse in the things themselves, God will never owne them, never accept them. I doubt not, but it was a deuout and Religious intention that first hatched and bredmost of that Will-worship, which is to be found in the Church of Rome at this day. Their Bread-worship, their Saint-worship, their Image-worship, they intended the honour of Christ in all. All their pompious and costly Ceremonies, they were introdu∣ced upon this ground, to put honour upon Religion. The intention good, but the services unwarrantable, being without, or against the rule, and consequently shall finde no better entertainment at the hand of Christ, than this act of the Disciples did.
Would we be sure our services shall finde accep∣tation, bee first sure of a warrant (Gods warrant) for what we do. Otherwise, what ever shew of love, or wisedome there may seeme to be in them, wee shall but lose our labour. Instead of pleasing God, dis∣pleasing him. So saith the Text of this act of the Disciples here; [When Jesus saw it, hee was displeased.] And wherefore displeased? what was it that hee The ground of Christs displeasure.tooke so ill at their hands? A. For answer; See a three-fold ground of this displeasure, even a three-fold injury involved in this one act of the Disciples. viz. A three-fold injury offered by his Disciples.An injury 1. to the Children; 2ly, to those which brought them. 3ly, to Christ himselfe. Touch upon each. To the In∣fants, in kee∣ping them from Christ. Observ. The greatest injury. Ʋse 1 This injury charged upon Anabaptists. First, Here was an injury offered to these poore In∣fants,  whom the Disciples in keeping them from Christ, prejudiced, and (as much as in them lay) hin∣dered in the matter of their salvation. A greater injury they could not have done them. Appl. Let Anabaptists looke to it, who debar chil∣dren from Baptisme. Herein what doe they but as much as in them lyeth, debar them from comming un∣to Christ? debar them from union and communion with him? The greatest cruelty that can be exercised upon these innocent Lambes. Non est hoc Christianum (saith Ferus in Mat▪ c. 19. v. 13.one writing upon this History) sed planè Herodianum, vel▪ si mavi Aegyptiacum. This is so farre from Chri∣stian charity, that it is rather Herodian, or (if you will) Aegyptian cruelty. Cruelty exercised not onely upon the bodies, but upon the soules also of poore Infants. Certainly, what ever the Anabaptists thinks of it, this is a thing which Christ cannot take well at their
hands. Hee that was so displeased with his Disciples for keeping back these children for comming to him upon earth, will not bee well pleased with any that shall have any hand in hindering them from coming to him being now in Heaven. No one thing that Christ taketh worse at the hands of any, than to bee hinderances to others in coming to himselfe. Vse 2. Take need of hindering the salvation of any; Mat. 18. 6. In the feare of God take wee heed of it, of being any wayes accessary to so great an evill. Expresse and dreadfull is that Commination of our Saviours, Mat. 18 vers. 6. Who so shall offend one of these little ones which believe on mee, it were better that a milstone were hanged about his necke, and that he were drowned in the midst of of the sea.] Off end one of these little ones, , Scandalize them, lay stumbling-blockes in their way for them to stumble at, to impede and hinder them in their salvation. No one thing that Christ taketh more heinously than this. So much may bee colle∣cted from the punishment there mentioned. Better that a milstone were tyed about his necke, &c.] That, it Hicro. ad loc.seemeth, (as Jerome noteth upon it) was the usuall punishment where with the Iewes were wont in those times to punish the most Capitall offenders, viz. Tye a stone about their necks, and so plunge them into the water. No crime more heinous in the eye of God, than this; the scandalizing, offending any that doe but begin to looke towards Christ, and towards heaven; so to offend them, as that they should bee put off from Christ, as that the worke of their salva∣tion should any wayes be hindered. All of us beware Iohn 1. 41. 42.of it. If we can any wayes bee furtherances to others in
bringing them to Christ, this do we. So did Andrew to his brother Simon, having himselfe found the Mes∣sia, vers 45. 46.he brings his brother to him. So did Philip to Nathaniel. So did the Samaritane woman to other of Iohn 4. 28, 29.her friends and neighbours. Doe we the like. The best office that wee can performe to any. But take heed of hindering them, whether by our evill counsel, Which may be done three wayes.or evill example, or else by the abuse of our Christian liberty in things indifferent. Every of these three wayes men may bee, and often are hindered from comming unto Christ. First, By evill counsell. Thus the Scribes and Phari∣sees  hindered many from comming unto Christ, in By evill counsell.the dayes of his flesh, from believing on him, viz. by their pernicious counsels, and wicked suggestions, whereby they set them off what they could. Secondly, By evill example. So did some of the  scandalous Jewes, who made their boast of the Law, but By evill ex∣ample.no conscience of it; they thereby brought an evill re∣port upon the wayes of God, making the name of God evill spoken of among the Gentiles, (as the Apostle Rom. 2. 23. 24.chargeth it upon them) Rom. 2. And thus do scan∣dalous Christians at this day, who doe Gentes agere sub¦nomine Christi, beare the name of Christians, but live like Heathens, walking counter to their profession, they make the name of God evill spoken of amongst those which are wicked, confirming and hardening them in their wickednesse. Even as the Spaniards in the Indies, who by their horrid cruelties which they exercised upon the Natives there, they so prejudiced them against Christ, and his Religion, as that they professed their willingnesse rather to go
to hell with their owne Country-men, then to heaven with the Spaniards. 3. By the abuse of Christian libertie in things in∣different. By the abuse of Christian libertie.Hereby also Christians come to give of∣fence unto others, laying stumbling blocks in their way. Of this I shall speak some what more fully here∣after. Every of us take heed of every of these. Know∣ing that we cannot doe a greater wrong or injurie to any, then to be any wayes a cause, or occasion of hindering them from coming unto Christ. Here was the first errour in this act of the disciples; they were hereby injurious to these Infants themselves. 2. Injurie to those who brought these Infants, dis∣couraging of them. 2. They were injurious to those that brought them. By checking, and rebuking of them, they did as much as in them lay to take off the edge of their good affections towards Christ, to weaken them, to dis∣hearten, and discourage them. A thing very improper for the disciples to doe. It being their office to con∣firme, and strengthen those which were weak. That is the charge which our blessed Saviour giveth unto Pe∣ter. Luk. 22. 32.When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. This they should have done. No wonder then that our Saviour was displeased with them; to see and heare them disheartning, checking, those whom they should have encouraged, and strengthened. Applica. Take heed of discouraging or offending the weak bre∣thren; Iob 4. 3, 4. This also take we heed of. If we can any wayes promote, and further the worke of grace in any, by en∣couraging, strengthening; this doe wee. So did holy Job in his time, (as Eliphaz giveth the attestation to him.) Job 4. Behold thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthened the weake hands; Thy words have upholden him that was fallen, and thou hast strengthened
the feeble knees.] The like doe we according to abi∣litie and opportunity. But take heed of disheartning, discouraging, weakning. It is a thing which Iesus Christ will not doe, [A bruised reede shall he not break, and the Isaiah 42. 3. Math. 12. 20.smoaking flaxe will he not quench.] Take heed how we doe it, or be any wayes accessory to it. Take heed of being any wayes offensive to our weake brother. Whe∣ther it be 1. By word, as the disciples here; or 2ly. By evill example, as Peter by his Judaizing, and dis∣lembling; 2 Gal. 12. 13.or else 3ly. By the abuse of our Christian libertie in the use of things indifferent. Specially by the abuse of Christian li∣bertie. 1 Cor. 8. 9. This oft-times proves matter of scandall unto o∣thers. And such scandals take we heed of. It is Pauls caveat to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 8. Take heed lest by any meanes this libertie of yours become a stumbling-block to them that are weak.] In this case Christians must re∣strain, and abridge themselves, not doing what other∣wise they may do: exemplary is that resolution of the Apostle in the last v. of that Chapter. [If meate v. last.scandilize my brother, (offend him, so as to make him to offend, which is properly to scandalize) I will eate no flesh while the world standeth, that I may not scan∣dalize my brother.] Christians in this should be very tender, very carefull how they offend, or grieve their weak brother by the use of their Christian libertie; much more how they cause, or occasion him to of∣fend. [It is good (saith the Apostle to his Romans) Rom. 14. 2.neither to eate flesh, nor to drinke wine, nor any thing wher∣by thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak▪] Three severall words expressing (as I conceive) one and the same thing, but not without an emphasis, in∣sinuating the great and speciall care that Christians
should have for giving any kind of scandall to their weake brethren, whereby either to grieve their spi∣rits, or distract and unsettle their judgements, or much more to cause them to offend, by stopping them in, or turning them aside out of their way. This take we heed of, doe all that we can to further others in their way, take heed of hindering, stopping, di∣verting them. Cherish and blow up the sparkes of grace in others what wee can; but beware of casting a drop of water upon them, either to dampe or quench them. This was the disciples fault here in the text. Instead of welcoming and encouraging, and furthering these new-comers unto Christ, they beate them off. A thing which their Lord and master taketh ill at their hands. [He was displeased with it.] Here was the second injurie involved in this act of the disciples: They were injurious to the persons which brought 3. Injurie to Christ him∣selfe; hin∣dering his Kingdome.these children: Thirdly they were herein injurious to their Lord and master, Christ himselfe; and that in going about to straiten his jurisdiction, and lessen his Kingdome. Of this Kingdome, Infants and children are a considerable part. Now to keep them from coming unto Christ, what a dimunition was it to his Kingdome? Applic. Charged up∣on Anabap∣tists. Surely this wrong doe Anabaptists unto Christ in debarring children from Baptisme, and denying them to be members of the Church, and to have any right to the Covenant of grace. Herein how injurious are they to the Kingdome of Christ? In cutting off so considerable a part from all communion with the head, and bodie; Christ, and his Church. The story tels us of the Israelites, when they had done the great
execution upon the Benjamites. [They sate downe and wept, repenting them for Benjamin their brother, because there was a Tribe cut off from Israel that day, Judg. last.] And what lesse doth the Anabaptist in cutting off Infants from communion with Christ and his Church? In so doing there is a Tribe cut off from Is∣rael; which though it be the Tribe of Benjamin; the youngest Tribe, yet is it not the least, but a very great and considerable part of this bodie. This act of theirs cals for repentance. To which leaving them. Vse 2. Take heed of being back-friends to this Kingdome by withdrawing our selves or others from visible com∣munion with the Church. Heb. 10. 38. Take wee heed lest any of us come under the same guilt, in any other kinde least we be any wayes back-friends to the Kingdome of Christ, by with-draw∣ing our selves, or others from visible communion with the misteriall bodie of Christ. Our selves. [If any man with-draw himselfe, my soule shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.] Others, by seducing them, drawing them from visible communion with Christ in his Ordinances. What is this but a dismembring of the bodie of Christ? A thing which he cannot but be sensible of. I wish they may so be, who stand guilty of it. David when hee had but cut off the lap from 1 Sam. 24. 5, 6.Sauls garment (the skirt of his role) his heart smote him. What is it then to cut off a lambe from the bodie of Christ? Take wee heed of having any hand in it. Let all seek the inlarge∣ment of this Kingdome; Specially Mi∣nisters, Luk. 14. 21. Can wee doe any thing to enlarge, and encrease the Kingdome of Christ, this doe wee. And as all ought to doe it, so the Ministers of Christ in speci∣all; whom Christ hath sent forth with the same commission, as that great feast-maker in the Gospel did his servant, ordering him to goe into the streets
and lanes, and high wayes, and hedge rowes, and to bring in all that he met with, compelling them to come in, that his house might be filled.] This are we the Ministers of Christ to doe. Invite, perswade, command, compell, (I meane in a spirituall way, making use of spiri∣tuall 2 Gor. 10. 4. Inviting and compelling men to come unto Christ.weapons, which are the weapons of our warfare, viz. the sword of the spirit put into our mouthes) compell men, all sorts of persons to come in unto Iesus Christ, that they may have communion with him, and benefit by him. Quest. Whether men may be forced to vi∣sible commu∣nion. Answ. No, they must come willingly Psal. 110. 3. But what then, must men be forced to come unto Christ? To have communion with him in his Ordi∣nances, though against, or without, their wils? Not so. Thy people shall be willing (or come willing∣ly) in the day of thy power.] They which come to Christ must come willingly. So did they which brought these Infants here in the text. This is the maine worke of the ministers of Christ, to worke up∣on the wills of men, of unwilling to make them wil∣ling; to bring off their wills to desire and seek com∣munion with Christ; that they may come, and come willingly. Object. Are all to be admitted who offer them∣selves to visi∣ble commu∣nion Answ. Yes, unlesse there be some just obstacle. But what if they doe come, and come willingly, offering, and tendering themselves to visible com∣munion with Christ? are they now to be received, admitted to the Ordinances? Surely yes. Vnlesse there be some just obstacle to hinder them. That was the case of these Infants here in the text. They were brought unto Christ, and thee was no just obstacle to hinder them, and therefore the disciples ought not to have kept them back. No more (for ought I know) ought the
Ministers of Christ to repell, and reject any who come willingly unto Christ, desiring communion with him in his ordinances, I meane in the Sacra∣ments, whether Baptisme, or the Lords Supper. There being no just obstacle, no just exception against them, they ought not to keep them back. True it is, where there is a just obstacle, as, viz. where the person is ignorant, or scandalous, in this case there ought to be a suspension from these ordinances: Sa∣cred things ought not to be prostituted to all comers. But otherwise, I see not how the ministers of Christ can debar any from visible communion with Christ, who offer themselves to it, without incurring the displeasure of their Lord and master, as here the disciples did, by putting back these Infants against whom no just exception lay. [When he saw it, , hee was much displeased, saying, suffer little children to come unto me, &c.] 2. Our Savi∣ours speech to hs disci∣ples: Where And so I am fallen upon the second particular observable in this Historie, which informes us what our Saviour said to his disciples upon this act of theirs. Where we may first take notice of the charge hee 1. His charge to them.giveth them, viz. that they should freely permit children to come unto him. [Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not.] A double charge, or rather one and the same charge expressed, 1. Positively, [suffer little children, &c.] Then Nega∣tively, [And forbid them not.] The latter is but an inforcement of the former. Put them together, they hold forth unto us this maine truth. Observ. The grace of Christ reach∣eth unto n∣fants. That the grace of Christ extendeth even to Infants. Infants have a right to, and interest in Christ, and
are capable of benefit by him as well as others. Wherefore else should Christ call them unto him∣selfe? So hee did (as St. Luke noteth it) But Je∣sus Luk. 8. 16.called them unto him.] Them, i. e. the Infants; So the Greek expresseth it. : viz. . And wherefore else should he give so strict a charge concerning them, that they should have free accesse unto him? Had hee no interest in them, nor they in him. Surely the grace of Christ reacheth them as well as others. Reason. Otherwise no hope of salvation for them. 1 Cor. 15. 22. It must needs be so, otherwise there were no hope of salvation for them. In Adam (the first Adam) all dy∣ed. The roote dying, all the branches dyed in it, and with it. So as now the whole posteritie of Adam are all concluded and shut up under death. [Death Rom 5. 12.passed upon all, for that all have sinned, (saith the A∣postle.) All subject to a temporall, lying under the power of a spirituall, bound over unto an eternall death. Such amongst other) is the condition of Infants; which appeareth in that they are sub∣ject to temporall death as well as others. [Death reig∣ned Rom▪ 5. 14.from Adam unto Moses even ver them which had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression.] i. e. over Infants who had not sinned as Adam did, actually in their owne persons. Yet death reigned o∣ver them, they were subject to a temporall death as well as others. A plaine evidence that they were, and are guiltie of eternall death as well as others. Now there is no way, no meanes of deliverance, no way to be freed and exempted from this com∣mon condition, but by Christ. [Even as in Adam 1▪ o▪ 15. 22.all died, so in Christ shall all bemade alive,] (saith the
Apostle) i. e. all that are in him. Even as all that were in the first Adam dyed in him; so all that are in the second Adam (Christ) shall bee quickned in him. Or, all that are made alive, they are made alive in Christ, and by Christ. Freed from eternall death Ioh. 14. 6.by his merit; from spirituall death by his Spirit; from temporall death by his Power. [I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life.] No life, but in, by, and through the se∣cond Adam, Christ. So as if Infants ever come to eter∣nall life, they must come by, and through Christ, as Act. 4. 12.well as others. There being no name by which Salva∣tion can be expected, but only the name of Iesus Christ. Object. Infants can∣not come un∣to Christ, r∣g not capable of benefit by him. Ioh. 6. 37. But how can Infants, have any interest in Christ, or receive any benefit by him, when as they cannot come unto him? This our blessed Saviour saith, all that his Father hath given him must do, and shall do. [All that the Father giveth me, shall come unto me, &c.] Now, what is it to come unto Christ? Why to be∣lieve on him. So our Saviour himselfe explaineth it Veers. 35.vers. 35. [He that commeth unto mee shall never hunger, and he that believeth on mee shall never thirst.] The lat∣ter explaines the former. To come unto Christ, is to believe on him. Now this Infants cannot doe. How then can they be said to have any interest in Christ, or receive any benefit by him? Sol. 1. Answ. To this it is answered diversly. Some in the (first place) conceive that in this case the faith of the Parents is sufficient. Hereby the children of belie∣vers (say they) are brought unto Christ, even as these children here; they were brought unto Christ The faith of the Parent conceived sufficient▪in the armes of their Parents▪ so are Infants (say they) brought home unto Christ, in the armes of their
Parents faith, laying hold upon the Covenant of grace, both for themselves, and their children. Secondly, Others conceive that even Infants are Infants may have a seed of Faith.subjects capable of faith; if not of actuall, yet of habi∣all faith. Germen fidei, a seed of faith; the Spirit of God working in them promodulo, according to their capacities. Hereof I have spoken more fully here∣tofore. Thirdly, For the present (in the third place) let Being given to Christ, they shall be brought to him one way or other.it bee sufficient that some of them are given unto Christ in Gods eternall Election. And being given un∣to him, they shall come unto him one way, or other. (All that the Father giveth me, shall come unto me.) If they live to yeares of discretion, they shall come un∣to him (as I may say) upon their owne feet, by an actu∣all faith. In the meane time they are brought unto him by a secret worke of the Spirit, working upon their natures in a hidden and mysterious way, for the changing and renwg of them. Herein if we know not the way, yet let not us question the thing, seeing we have so plaine an expression from the mouth of truth it selfe. Suffer little children to come unto me and, forbid them not.] Applica. To Anabap∣tists. Applic. A Charge, and a Prohibition, both so direct against the Anabaptists of the times, as if they had been purposely intended against them. Whether our blessed Saviour did foresee what errors would spring up in these last times, and so intended to make this as a Provision against them, I will not say. But sure I am, a more direct Provision could not have beene made. In denying Baptisme unto Infants, what doe Anabaptists lesse than the Disciples here did? even (as much as
in them lyeth) forbid children to come unto Christ. Which act of theirs, how distastefull it was to him, the first words of this verse expresse, [Hee was dis∣pleased:] And how contrary to his minde, the like practise is in any other, the latter words explaine. [Suffer little children to come unto me, & forbid them not.] For of such is the Kingdome of God.] Passe we now to our Saviours Reason▪ whereby hee convinceth his Dis∣ciples The reason of this charge▪of their errour, in repulsing these Infants, keep∣ing them backe from comming unto him; and con∣sequently (as much as in them lay) debarring them from entring into that Kingdome; to which they have as good a right and title as any others. [For of such is the Kingdome of God.] Kingdome of God, 3. fold. The Kingdome of God, (by way of Explication) in phrase of Scripture is three-fold, his Kingdome of Power, Grace, Glory. You have them all three put together in that pithy doxologie; the close of the Lords Prayer; [Thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory▪] Of Power. First, Gods Kingdome is his Kingdome of Power;  even the powerfull government which God exerciseth, in, and over the world, and all the Creatures in it, all which are subject to his Providence, even the least, and most contemptible amongst them. The Sparrow Matt. 10. 29, 30.upon the house top; the hayre of our head, both of them numbered and ordered. This universall Government is Gods Kingdome. [The Lord hath prepared his Throne in Psal. 103. 19.the Heavens, and in his Kingdome ruleth over all.] Psal. Psal. 145. 13.103. viz. his Kingdome of Power. [Thy Kingdome is an everlasting Kingdome, (saith the Psalmist, Psal. 148.) What Kingdome? why, his Kingdome of
Vers. 11. power. So he explaines himselfe, vers. 11. [They shall speake of the glory of thy Kingdome, and talke of thy Power.[ Of grace.Secondly, Gods Kingdome is his Kingdome of Grace; even that speciall gracious government, which hee exerciseth over his Elect; whom having Prede∣stinated to Grace, and Glory, he calleth out of the world, to have union aad communion with Jesus Christ the head of this Kingdome, guiding and governing them by his Word and Spirit. Of this Kingdome, we finde Mat. 6. 13.frequent mention in the new Testament. [Seeke first the Kingdome of God (saith our blessed Saviour) viz. his Kingdome of Grace. So the following words explaine it. [The K ngdome of God, and his Righte∣ousnesse;] viz. Righteousnesse of Iustification, and Sanctification, wherein this Kingdome of Grace con∣sisteth. Rom. 14. 17. Luke 17. 21.[The Kingdome of God is Righteousnesse, (saith the Apostle,) [The Kingdome of God is within you, (faith our Saviour.) His Kingdome of Grace. Of glory.Thirdly, Gods Kingdome is his Kingdome of Glory; even that glorious and blessed estate, wherin himselfe reigneth, and shall reigne, with millions of Saints and Angels unto all eternity, full of heavenly glory and Luke 12. 32.felicity. Of this speaketh our Saviour. [Feare not little flocke, it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom; , the Kingdome, viz. the Kingdome of Heaven, which is the Kingdome of God. [Know ye not 1 Cor. 6. 9.(saith the Apostle) that the un-righteous shall not in∣herit the Kingdome of God.] A three-fold Kingdome. Quest. Now of which of these shall we understand our Saviour here in the Text? Answ. To this I might answer; not of one, but
of all. Take it which way we will, we shall finde a Infants sub∣jects of all these.truth in it. [Of such is the Kingdome of God.] First, His Kingdome of power. Infants they are sub∣jects  of this Kingdome. Over them God exerciseth Of Gods Kingdome of power.a Providence, a speciall providence, and that both in the wombe, and from the wombe. David acknowledg∣eth both as touching himselfe. [Thou hast covered mee Psal. 139. 13.in my mothers wombe: Psal. 139. Thou art hee that tooke mee out of the wombe: Psal. 22. vers. 9. I was cast upon Psal. 22. 9. 10.thee from the wombe: vers. 10. &c.] It is God that preserveth Infants in the wombe; It is hee that bring∣eth out of the wombe, in both which his Power and and Providence are wonderfully manifested. And he it is that taketh care of them afterwards, providing for them, as he doth for other of his Creatures. Hee Psal. 147. 9.that heareth the young Ravens when they cry, much more heareth the cries of poore helplesse Infants. [God hath heard the voice of the Lad,] saith the Angel to Ha∣gar Gen. 21. 17.concerning her sonne Ishmael. Thus the cries of poore Infants come up to heaven, prevailing often∣times for themselves, sometimes for others. So did Ion. 4. 11.the Infants at Nineveh, Jonas▪ 4 vers. last. Thus the Kingdome of Gods power belongeth, and reacheth unto Infants. A consideration not un-usefull unto Parents in respect of their children. But I will not dwell upon it. The phrase in the Text, (though it taketh in this, yet) it riseth higher. Secondly, In the second place, Infants, as they are  subjects of Gods kingdom of Power, all of them; so of Of the King∣dome of Grace.his Kingdome of Grace, some of them. [Of such is the Kingdome of God,] viz. his Kingdom of Grace, which consisteth as well of Infants, as any others. They may
Children of believing Pa∣rents, mem∣bers of the Church 1 All of them of the Church visible. Rom. 11. 16. Explained. vers. 21. Dr. Willet ad loc. be subjects of this Kingdome, members of the Church. First, Of the Church visible. So are all the children of believing Parents. The Parents themselves being subjects of this Kingdome, visible members of this my∣sticall body, such are their children also. So the Apo∣stle concludes it, Rom. 11. If the root be holy, so are the Branches.] Where, by the Root we are to understand, the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: By the Branches, the people of the Jewes, their lineall off∣spring, their naturall branches, as they are called v. 21. . From which expression, it is well collected by some, that by the Root in that place, cannot be meant Christ (as Origen of old, and our Ana∣baptists at this day would have it▪) in as much as Christ hath no such naturall Branches. His Branches are all Insititious, ingrafted, , Branches not by nature, but by Grace. The Root there is Abraham, and other of the Patriarchs, the Jewes Progenitors: who are so called, not in regard of Calvin ad loc.their persons (as Calvin well noteth upon it;) but in regard of the Promise which was made to them, and to their seed. In respect of that Promise, that Root was holy; holy, in respect of a federall holinesse, the holinesse of the Covenant. Now the Root being such (saith the Apostle) such are the Branches. Their pro∣genitors being in Covenant, such was their Posterity. Such were the children of Abraham then, and such are the children of believers now. The one being ho∣ly, so is the other. Holy, not in respect of any inhe∣rent quality of holinesse, but in respect of outward pri∣viledges, and prerogatives of grace, grounded upon the Promise made to the faithfull and their seed. The
former cannot, but the latter may, and doth descend from Parent unto the childe. A wise man doth not al∣wayes Prov. 17. 21.beget a wise sonne, communicating his wisdome Acts 22. 28.to his childe; But a free-man begets a free man. The childe being borne free by vertue of his fathers Char∣ter. Thus, though inward holinesse is not transmitted from the Parent to the childe, yet externall holinesse may, federall holines may. Thus Iews begat Iews, and Christians now beget Christians. Who yet are such (let that be still taken notice of) not by vertue of natu∣rall generation, but by vertue of the Covenant, the Promise which is made unto the faithfull, and their seed. Thus the Root being holy, so also are the Bran∣ches. The Parents being in Covenant, so are their children to be accounted. They are all of them mem∣bers of the Church visible. Some of them of the Church In∣visible. Secondly, I, and some of them of the Church In∣visible,  not only belonging to Gods Election of grace, but subjects of his Kingdome of grace: Such as Christ exerciseth a gracious government upon, and in; Re∣generating, Justifying, Sanctifying them, induing them with his holy Spirit. That Christ doth exercise such an operation in, and upon some Infants, it must not bee denied. Two instances are usually brought to prove it, the one of Ieremy, the other of Iohn the Bap∣tist, both which are sayd to bee sanctified in the Iere. 1. 5.wombe. So was Ieremy. [Before thou camest out of the wombe, I sanctified thee.] But this (I consesse) I dare not build upon. By [Sanctification.] I take there to be meant only a separation unto a speciall use and ser∣vice. So the next words seeme to expound it. [I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a Prophet unto the Na∣tions.]
That seemeth to  the  spoken of. Not any infusion of any  of grace into Calvin ad loc.his soule, (that faith Mr. Calvin, is nimis argutum, the Text will not beare it,) but onely a designation▪ a set∣ting of him  unto his propheticall office. To wave that. The latter is cleere. John the Baptist, he was sanctified in, (or from) the wombe, and that by the secret worke of the Spirit upon his soule. The Luke 1. 15.Text is expresse. [He shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his mothers wombe.] This God did to him. The like he can doe for others, and no question fre∣quently doth it; Communicating his Spirit even to Infants, though not in so large a measure as to the Baptist, yet in such a measure as may be sufficient for them, sufficient to make them, and prove them sub∣jects of this Kingdome of God, his Kingdome of Grace. Of the king∣dome of glory.I, Thirdly, to give them a right to, and interest in his Kingdome of glory. That also is the Kingdome of God, and of such is the Kingdome. A truth which necessarily followes upon the former. Being subjects of Gods Kingdome of grace, they have also right to Psal. 84. 11. Rom. 8. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephes. 1. 14.his Kingdome of glory. [He shall give grace and glory, Psal. 84.] Grace as the first-fruits, Glory, as the full crop; the one a pledge, a seale and earnest of the other. But upon this I will not insist. I presume I shall meet with none so uncharitable as to deny or question it. Come wee rather to make some Application of this Truth. Applica. A warrant for Baptizing nfants. Vse 1. Here is first a Warrant for what the Church of God in all Ages hath practised, the Baptizing of Infants. This the Church hath done, and this it doth.
I, but quo jure? (saith the Anabaptist) what warrant hath it for it? why, Christs owne warrant, who here telleth us, that of such is the Kingdome of God; the Kingdome of Grace, and Kingdome of Glory. Now being subjects of this Kingdome, they have right to the priviledges of subjects; amongst which, this seale of the Covenant is none of the least. Replica. The Ana∣baptists evasi∣on. Not [Them] but▪ [Such] Repl. I, but (saith the Anabaptist) we mistake the Text. How so? Why, the Text doth not say to [them] belongeth, or [theirs] is the kingdome of God, but of [such] is the kingdome of God;  not , meaning thereby (say they) not those, or any other Infants, but such as are like unto them in some qualifications. So divers Interpreters expound it. Theodor. Aquin. Stella.Non istorum, sedtalium; Not of these, but of such. Such as are like to those Infants. Like them, non aetate ed moribus, not in age, but in manners, in some imitable qualities, as viz. Innocency, Simplicity, &c. So much (say they) may be collected from the verse after the Text, where our Saviour explaineth his owne mea∣ning, what he meaneth by [such] viz. such in hu∣mility, [Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdome of God as a little childe, he shall not enter therein.] Such are the children (say they) to whom our Saviour here averres the Kingdom of heaven to belong. And thus they thinke to elude and evade the force of this Ar∣gument, and the evidence of this Text, triumphing in this subter fuge. Solu▪ Cleared. Answ. But all in vaine; as will easily appeare, if we do but consider the true intent of our Saviour in this place, as also the true sense and meaning of the word.
1. From our Saviours in∣tent. First, for the former, our Saviours intent. The text is cleare. Hee was displeased with the disciples for repelling of these Infants, and hee giveth this as a reason to convince them of their error, [For of such is the kingdome of God:] viz. those Infants, and others like unto them in age: otherwise his Argu∣ment had been of no force. [For of such &c.] 2. From the proper sense of the word [such.] For the word (,) [such▪] it cannot be con∣ceived to exclude these Infants, but to take them in, as primarily and properly here intended. So the word is commonly used (as in our ordinary speech, so) in phrase of Scripture, Parallel instances are ve∣ry Nehem. 6. 11obvious. Should [such] a man as I fly, (saith Ne∣hemiah meaning himselfe.) Paul writting to Phi∣lemon, Philem. v. 9[For loves sake (saith he) I rather beseech thee, being [such a one as Paul the aged] , Such a Rom. 1. last.one, meaning himselfe. [Those which doe [such] things (saith the same Apostle) are worthy of death.] ; such things, viz. those things  5. 21.before specified in the Chapter, and things of like nature, as himselfe expoundeth it, Gal. 5. 21. Thus the word is commonly used inclusively, still taking in the thing, or person it selfe, to which any other is equalized, or coupled. If need were, more instances might be mustered up: But I shall save that labour. In the meane time challenging our Adversaries to shew any one place in all the Scrip∣tures where the word is so used as they would in∣terpret it in this text; viz. Where the word (such) is put exclusively, excluding the person or thing it selfe, to which any other is compared; but so as still it intends either directly and peculiarly the same
person and thing instanced in, or else that, and o∣thers like unto it. So without question must it be understood here in the text. Of [such;] i. e. these Infants, and others like unto them, whether in age or condition. So as there can be no advantage justly taken from the word. The argu∣ment retor∣ted. Chemnit. Musculus ad loc. 2. Nay (as it is well pressed by some) it mak∣eth the more strongly against the adversarie. [Of [such] is the kingdome of God, , not . Non horum, sed talium; Not of [these,] but of [such.] Plainely importing, that the Kingdome of God did belong not only to those particular Infants then and there brought unto him, but unto them, and others that should at any time be brought unto him after the like manner. The word [such] is of larger ex∣tent, then [them.] Had our Saviour here said, to [them] belongeth the kingdome of God: Then might the Anabaptist here have found a more colourable e∣vasion; alledging that Christ who knew all things, might know them to be elected, and so might say that, theirs was the kingdome of God; but that it could not from thence be inferred, that any other of like condition could claime the like right to it. But saying [such,] now hee taketh in others with them, even all that should be offered and presen∣ted unto him after the like manner. Conclude we it then: This Argument ordinarily taken up by Divines from this text of scripture, for the maintenance of Infants Baptisme, it is of force and validitie, carrying out the cause against all op∣position. They to whom belongeth the kingdome of God, who are subjects and members of the kingdome of Grace, and heires of the kingdome of Glory, they have right to
this seale of the Covenant, whereby this their interest may be confirmed and sealed up unto them. This by way of Instruction. Ʋse 2. Comfort & hope to be∣lieving Pa∣rents touch∣ing their In∣fants dying without Bap∣tisme. In the second place, here is a ground of comfort and hope unto believing parents as touching their chil∣dren, whom God is pleased to take ab utero ad ut∣rum, from the grave of the wombe, to the wombe of the grave; cropping them in the bud, taking them hence before ever they know the right hand from the left; it may be, before such time as they could be made partakers of the seale of the Covenant. Yet let not such parents mourne as men without hope. Let them not perplex themselves with a doubtfull anxi∣etie touching their eternall state, and condition. The text in this case yeelds a ground of comfor∣table hopes. [Of such is the kingdome of God] saith our Saviour here concerning these Infants, who were as yet onely intentionally tendred to him, not actually touched by him. Is it so that we have done the like for our Infants? Presented and tendred them unto Christ, and to this Ordinance in the unfeigned de∣sires and intentions of our hearts, doubt not but the kingdome of heaven is theirs, theirs as well as any Gal. 3. 28.others. You know who spake it, [In Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither male, not fe∣male, (and I may adde, neither young, nor old) for they are all one in Christ Jesus.] Being given unto Christ, they shall come unto him, be brought unto him one way or other; and coming unto him they shall be all alike saved by him, made partakers of the same Kingdome with him. And thus much for this Reason, as it is here simply propounded.
Vers. 15. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdome of God as a little childe, he shall not enter therein. Our Saviours Reason am∣plified. COme wee now to looke upon this our Sa∣viours reason as it is illustrated and amplified in the verse following; viz. by an Argument a ma∣jori Piscat. Anal. in loc.(so Piscator conceives of it;) an Argument from the greater to the lesse. As if he had said: Wonder not at this that I have said▪ that the kingdome of God belongeth to Infants. I tell you more; whosoe∣ver would enter into this Kingdome must become an Infant, an Infant by way of resemblance; imi∣tating, and being made like unto such a one in some imitable and observable qualities. Otherwise hee never shall, he never can enter into this Kingdome. [Whosoever, &c.] The wordes make up but one entire proposition, or conclusion. In effect the same with that which we meet with Matth. 18. 3. Where our Saviour (upon an other occasion) taking a little childe, and setting him in the midst of his disciples, hee propounds him Mat. 18. 3. Observ. All that would enter into Gods Kingdome must be come as little chil∣dren.to them as a patterne for their imitation; telling them. [Verily I say unto you, except yee be converted, and become as little children, yee shall not enter into the Kingdome of God.] Behold here then a patterne for every one of us. As many of us as would enter into Gods Kingdome (his
Kingdome of grace and glory,) we must become as lit∣tle children. Explic. Ioh. 3. Resembling Children in some imita∣ble qualities. Q. As little children? How shall this be? What must aged persons (according to Nicodemus his con∣ceite of the doctrine of Regeneration) repuerascere, turne children againe? A. Yes. This aged persons oft-times doe in a na∣turall way. Bis pueri senes. Old men are twice children. And all Christians must doe it in a supernaturall and spirituall way. They must be twice children. As once by nature▪ so once by grace: and that by the imitati∣on of children in some of their imitable qualities. Q. But what qualities are these? Wherein must Christians be like unto children? A. To single out some particulars, some of the chiefe. 1. Without malice. 1. A first is that which the Apostle himselfe propounds to, and presseth upon his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14. Where hee sheweth them both wherein they should not be like unto children, and where∣in they should. Non mentibus, sed moribus: where∣in not. Not in understanding. Herein he would have 1 Cor. 14. 20.them not children, but men. [Brethren, be not chil∣dren in understanding, &c. But in understanding bee men,] , Perfecti, perfect, Adul, of ripe age. Wherein then? why in malice. [How e it in malice e ye children.] Children they are free from malice, and envie; there is not so much as a sparke of this fire in those breasts. Herein a patterne for Christians, even for all that would enter into the Kingdome of God. Let them in this become as children, laying aside ma∣lice. 1 Pet. . 1.So St. Peter presseth it, [Wherefore laying aside
all malice, &c. As new borne babes desire the sincere milk of the word.] New borne babes are voyd of malice. So should all Christians bee. Not seeking, not wishing evill to any; wishing, and doing what good they can to all, but hurt to none. As children concerning malice. 2. Without Guile. Secondly, as children concerning guile. So the Apostle Peter there goeth on. [Laying aside malice, guile.] Such are infants, ; there is no guile, no fraud, no deceit, no hypocrisie in them. They doe not pretend one thing, and intend another. They doe not goe about to over-reach, or circum∣vent others; but in all their actions there is a plaine∣hearted Matth. 10. 16 ▪ ab  & , Cui nihil est admixtum. Rom. 16. 19. . . In their actions. 1 Thes. 4. 6. simplicitie. And such should Christians be. , Simple as doves. So our Saviour presseth it upon his Disciples. I, simple as children, [Sim∣ple concerning evill, (as Paul explaines it) without guile, and that; 1. In their actions; not circumventing, defrau∣ding others. So the Apostle presseth it upon his Thessalonians, 1▪ Thes. 4. That no man goe beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter.] As, viz. in buy∣ing and selling, and bargaining, &c. 2. Without guile in their words? This is the cha∣racter which Peter gives of his Master. [Who did no 2. In words. 1 Pet. 2. 22.sinne, neither was there guile found in his mouth.] So should it be with Christians; there should be no guiles in their mouthes, in their words, in their pro∣mises, testimonies, &c. So Paul chargeth it upon his Ephesians. [Therefore putting away lying, speak the Ephes. 4. 25.truth every man to his neighbour.] Truth is the Chri∣stians girdle. [The girdle of truth.] And in this sense Ephes. 6. 14.
the Proverbe holdeth true. Vngirt, unblest. 3. Without guile in their hearts and spirits. It In heart, Psal. 32. 2.is one branch of Davids description of a blessed man. [Blessed is the man in whose spirit there is no guile.] Such is the spirit of a childe. There is no guile, no hypocrisie in it. It is such a one as it seem∣eth to be. And O that it were so with all Christi∣ans! That they were in this respect as children. As children for sinceritie; without guile. Here is the second of these properties. Children for humility. Mat. 18. 4. 3. A third followes. As children concerning pride. Children for humilitie. This I take from our Saviour himselfe in the place forenamed. Whosoever shall humble himselfe as this little childe, &c.] Chil∣dren, we see how humble, how lowly they are. Their spirits are not haughtie, high minded. There are no proud, ambitious, vaine glorious, aspiring thoughts in them. They are as well content with their rags, as with their robs; with a cottage as a pal∣lace; A childe sit∣ting in the dust, an Em∣bleme of hu∣mility and contentation.often sitting in the dust. An embleme of humi∣litîe. A childe sitting in the dust, and as well conten∣ted there as if it were a throne. Such should Chri∣stians be; of humble and lowly spirits. Such a frame of spirit we finde in the man after Gods own Psal. 131. 1. 2heart [Lord, mine heart is not haughtie, &c. Sure∣ly I have behaved my selfe as a childe, &c.] It is not for Christians to have haughtie hearts, or lofty eyes; so as to have high thoughts of themselves, Iere. 45. last.or▪ seek high things for themselves. [And seekest thou great things for thy selfe? (Saith the Lord to  seek them not.] This will not children, this should not Christians doe. Their spirits should lye
low, so as they may be willing to embrace the Dust, if God shall bring them thither. This carnall wicked men sometimes do by constraint. So shall Babylon do. [Come downe and sit in the dust, O Virgin daughter of Isa. 47. 1.Babylon.] Babylon a Virgin; (So called, because then not deflowred by the enemy. Even as Cities that were never sacked nor conquered, but have enjoyed a long continued peace, they are called Virgin, May∣den-Townes; as Venice in Italy, Dordrecht in Holland: so Babylon there, in that respect is called a Virgin;) She shall sit in the dust, saith the Prophet (which is long since accomplished in typicall, and ere long shall be in mysticall Babylon.) And this Gods own some∣times doe, [They which were brought up in Skarlet, em∣brace Lam. 4. 5.dung-hills;] It is sayd of the precious sonnes of Sion, the Nobles of Israel, Lam. 4.) and this they ought to do willingly, when God calls them to it. In this (as I sayd) like children, who if their Parents set them in the dust, they are willing withall. Is it so, that God is pleased at any time to bring any of his chil∣dren from high estates, to meane and low conditions, to set them in the dust; I, suppose with Job upon the dung-hill, yet should they herein submit to the will of their heavenly Father: Ever having their spirits as low as their conditions. Herein again should Chri∣stians Col. 3. 12.be as children: Children in humility, putting 1 Pet. 5. 5.on this as a robe, being clothed with it, as the Apostles both Peter, and Paul presse the exhortation. Contentati∣on. Fourthly, to this (in the fourth place) let me joyn  another quality not much different from the former, and that is Contentation. A quality very observable in young children. If they have but enough to suf∣fice
nature, how contented shall we see them. If they have but cloathes to keepe them warme, be they rich, or meane. If they have but food to satisfie their hun∣ger, and drinke to allay their thirst, how quiet are they. What their Parents give them, they receive it, and are contented with it. Oftentimes put to bed with a little. In this again should Christians be as children, Content with their heavenly Fathers portion, whate∣ver it bee; be it much, be it little. It is the Apostles Phil. 4. 11.lesson; A lesson which himselfe had taken out. [I have learnt in whatsoever state I am, therewithall to bee  Tim 6. 8.contented.] And a lesson which he reads others. [Ha∣ving food and rayment, let us therewith bee content.] A lesson which very nature can teach, and sometimes hath learnt. Natura paucis. Nature is content with a little. Meere naturall men how contented doe wee finde them oftentimes in their meane conditions? And shall not grace doe it much more? Innocency.Fifthly, Againe, children are Innocent, harmlesse creatures. So we use to call them. [Innocents.] And it is no other language, than what the Spirit it selfe is Iere. 2. 34.pleased sometimes to make use of. [In thy skirts is found the bloud of the poore innocents.] So it is charged upon Hierusalem, Jer. 2. And who were these poore Innocents? Calvin and some others, understand it of the Prophets of God, whom they had slaine cruelly, and causlessely. But it may seeme rather to be meant of Infants. So the same Prophet else where seemeth to expound himselfe; chap. 19. where charging up∣on Iere. 19. 4. Vers. 5. Diodat. ad locHierusalem the same sinne, [They have filled this place (saith he) with the bloud of Innocents.] And who were they? The next verse explaines it, viz. little
children whom they offered up unto Moech: These were the Innocents, with whose bloud they had filled the valley of Gehinnon. Such are children, and such should Christians bee. Innocents, though not to God∣ward, (which yet they must endeavour) yet to man∣ward. Heb. 7. 27.Harmlesse; So was our heavenly patterne. Ho∣ly, harmlesse, &c. In this should Christians labour to resemble him; being innocent as Doves, (so our Sa∣viour Mat. 10. 16. , ab  & , sine cornibus. Scap.presseth it in the place forenamed.) I, innocent as children: Having innocent hands, and innocent tongues. Two properties of a man that shall ascend the hill of the Lord. So David maketh them. [Who shall ascend into thy Hill? Psal. 24. He that hath cleane Psal. 24. 4.(or innocent hands.) vers. 4.] Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy hill? Psal. 15.] Psal. 15. 3.He that back-biteth not with his tongue, &c. vers. 3.] Such hands, such tongues have Infants, both innocent. And such should the hands and tongues of Christi∣ans bee. Forgiving & forgetting injuries. Sixthly, To these I might yet adde many more. Children are apt to forgive and forget injuries. If they be angry, yet they hold it not, they are easily appea∣sed and reconciled. And in this respect againe, should Christians be as children, viz. apt and ready to for∣give, and forget wrongs and injuries. A lesson which our blessed Saviour frequently inculcates upon his disciples. [If thy brother trespasse against thee, forgive him; and if he trespasse seven times in a day, yet forgive him.] Luke 17. 3, In this should Christians Patrizare, resemble their heavenly Father. Being ready to forgive; so is hee. [Thou O Lord ar good, and ready to forgive, Psal. 86.] Psal. 86. 5▪Not retaining their anger. So doth not hee. [He will
not alwayes chide, neither will he keepe his anger for ever, Psal. 103. 9.Psal. 103.] Anger rests not in Gods bosome against his children; Let it not rest in ours against our bre∣thren. Eph. 4. 26.Let not the Sun go downe upon your wrath, (saith the Apostle) Ephe. 4.] In this be like unto children. Seventhly, Againe, children being wronged and Making use of cries and teares for their wea∣pons▪ Exod. 2. 6.injured by others, what are their weapons? Why, their cryes, and their tears. This was Moses his Rhe∣toricke, wherewith he tooke Pharahs daughter▪ when she opened the Arke; [Loe the Babe wept.] In this should Christians bee as children in all their straights and difficulties, making use of these weapons, their prayers, and their teares, crying to their Heavenly Father. But passing by this, name but one more. Eighthly, And that is a very observeable one, Obedience to their heaven∣ly Father.viz. their obedience; Obedience to their Parents, to whom they submit, and subject themselves to be or∣dered by their commands, being afraid of their threat∣nings, standing in awe of their frownes, readily be∣lieving, and firmly building upon their promises. And herein should Christians bee as children; yeeld∣ing such an absolute obedience to their heavenly Father. Submitting to his commands, trembling at his threats, aw∣ed by his frownes, readily believing, and confidently re∣sting upon his promises. All this, without any Ifs and Ands; without disputing about them, or demurring upon them. This is that which our Saviour here principally driveth at in the Text. [Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdome of God as a little childe.] viz. receive the mysteries of this Kingdom; yeelding an humble and submisse obedience to the will of God revealed in his Word. Therein making more use of
Faith, than either of sense, or reason. So doe children, they believe what is told them, what is promised them, specially if it be by their Parents; therein (as I may say) making more use of their beliefe, then their reason. And this must Christians doe, in apprehending hea∣venly mysteries; they must captivate sense and rea∣son, bringing them both to the obedience of faith; yeelding an absolute and universall▪ both credence, and obedience unto God, in what ever hee shall make knowne to them, to be according to his will. In all these (besides many other qualities, for the Argu∣ment is very fruitfull, would we follow it so farre as we might,) ought Christians to imitate and resemble children. Applica. Enquire whether wee be such. But do we thus resemble them? Let that be the first use that we make of it. Bring we it home to our selves; enquiring whether we be all like children, in all the forenamed particulars, viz. without malice as children; without guile as children; hand-guile, tongue-guile, heart-guile. Without pride, as children; innocent and harmlesse as children, apt and ready to forgive and forget injuries as children; ready to poure forth cryes and tears into the bosome of our Father, as children; as ready to yeeld obedience to our heavenly Father; as children to their naturall Parents. Are we such? O that every of our hearts could now Eccho backe againe, and say, such we are. Such in our measure, such at least in un∣feigned desire, and serious endeavour. But, alas, is it not far otherwise with some amongst us? Are there not some whose hearts are full fraught with rancour, malice, envy? their hearts, hands, tongues full of guile, full of deceitfulnesse, full of hypocrisie? Is
there not a spirit of pride in some of us, filling their hearts with ambitious, vaine-glorious thoughts; making them thinke highly of themselves, and mean∣ly of others; puffing them up, and exalting them above measure? Is there not in some of us a spirit of discontent, so as we are not contented with Gods dis∣pensations and dealings; but upon all occasions, if we have not what wee would have, our hearts are ready to repine and murmure? Are there not some amongst us, who care not what wrong, what injury they do to others, so they may but benefit and ad∣vantage themselves? Are there not others of an im∣placable spirit? Being once offended, once provo∣ked, they will never be reconciled; never forgive, much lesse forget injuries? Are there not some who do not know what it is to un-load their cares, their fears, their sorrowes into the bosome of their heavenly Fa∣ther, by powring forth their soules before him? And are there not others who walk stubbornly against God, not regarding either precepts, or promises, or threat∣nings; Isa. 48. 4.no, they are obstinate: Their necke is an iron sinew, and their browbrasse; (as the Lord complaines against the people of the Jewes.) Surely, such there are, some of every of these sorts to bee found a∣mongst us. And is this to be like unto Children. In this to re∣ceive the Kingdome of God as little children? Let the All who are not such shut out of Gods Kingdome.Conviction take place with those to whom it be∣longeth; who may here see themselves shut out of the Kingdome of God. Marke the Text.] Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdome of God as a little childe, he shall not enter therein.] As for such
then who are un-like unto children, it may bee every wayes un-like, un-lesse happily therein, wherein they ought not to resemble them, viz. in knowledge, and understanding. [Brethren, be not children in under∣standing (saith the Apostle.) Herein happily they are too like unto children, having no more understand∣ing in spirituall matters, the mysteries of Gods king∣dome, then they. But in all other imitable qualities, they are altogether un-like them. Now let not such flatter themselves with vaine hopes, of ever entring into Gods Kingdome. No, it cannot bee. Hee that Ioh. 14. 6.is Truth it selfe here speaketh it; and hee speaketh it both earnestly, and peremptorily. So much will ap∣peare from a re-view of the words. First, earnestly. So much that Asseveration, which we meet with in the entrance of the Text, imports. [Verily I say unto you.] Amen; which in the begin∣ning of a sentence hath the force of a vehement As∣severation, importing a serious and earnest affirmati∣on, or negation. Secondly, Peremptorily. [He shall not enter.] There is an Emphasis in the originall, which our Transla∣tion here hath not expressed. . Two ne∣gatives put together, which in the Greeke tongue do vehementius negare, confirme the negation or denyall of a thing (like two witnesses to a Testimony) ma∣king it more peremptory, more certaine. [He shall not enter.] Nequam ingredietur. He shall [in no wise] enter. So we finde it translated else-where, and so it ought to be here. , [In no wise] or [by no means.] Ioh. 6. 37.Thus is the Kingdome of God both locked, and boul∣ted against all such. Locked, and that by him who
Re. 3. 7. hath the key of David, who shutteth and no man openeth. Bolted, and that with a double boult. , He shall in no wise enter. Thus hath Christ put it out of doubt. [Who∣soever shall not receive the kingdome of God as a little childe, he shall not enter therein.] Vse 2. Be we as chil∣dren. Vse 2. Let this then (in the second place) bee a motive to every of us, setting on this usefull exhorta∣tion, that we would labour to be such. Would we enter into the kingdome of God, of Grace here, of Glory hereafter; Be we as children. It is a Copie (you see, which our blessed Saviour himselfe hath set before us. Let us write after it; propounding this patterne to our selves, study to imitate it. Bee wee as children. As children without malice, as children without guile, as children for humility, as children for contentation, as children for innocency, forgiving and forgetting in∣juries as children; upon all occasions complaining to our heavenly Father as children; Obedient as children Imitate we them in every of these. Specially in the last. That the Text leadeth us to more particularly. Receive we the kingdome of God as little Children. Receive the Kingdom of God as chil∣dren. The [kingdome of God] (as I told you) is here, his Kingdome of grace, and glory. His kingdome of grace. The government which hee exerciseth in and over his Elect upon earth, whom he guideth and go∣verneth by his Word, and Spirit. His Kingdome of glory: That blessed state which hee hath provided for his Elect hereafter. Now receive we both these as little children, viz. humbly, submissively. His kingdom of Grace.First, Thus receive we his kingdome of grace. Yeeld∣ing up our selves (as little children do themselves
to their Parents, and Governours) to bee instructed and ordered by him, according to his good will and pleasure. Resigning up our understandings, and our judgements unto him. So doe little children; they yeeld themselves as an abratatabula, white paper for To be taught by God.their teachers to write any thing upon, what they please; receiving their instructions quietly, submis∣sively, without quarrelling or cavalling. Even thus receive we the Kingdome of God, the mysteries of his Kingdome. Such truths as God hath been pleased to reveale unto us in his Word, let us receive them, entertaine them quietly, readily, with a holy submis∣sion of our understandings, and judgements; not standing to quarrell with, or cavill against any truth of God, because we cannot apprehend the reason of it. Herein looke upon our patterne. Children do not apprehend the reason of things which are taught, and told them; yet they receive them, and believe them. The like do we in the mysteries of Gods Kingdome. 1. Captivating our understandings and judgements, yeel∣ding up both unto God, to receive, and believe what To bee orde∣red by him.ever is held forth unto us in the Word. And then 2ly. In like manner yeeld up our wills and affections. Let Gods will, be our will; to which let us stoope and submit, though contrariant, and crossing to our wills. So doth the childe. Though happily it may be crossed in what it would have, and doe; yet it submits, it yeelds. Even so doe wee. Yeeld wee up our selves (as to be instructed, so) to bee ordered by God; to be in what state and condition he pleaseth; to doe, and to suffer what he will have us to do. In life. Thus behave we our selves in life; even as a child.
So did David as himselfe telleth us, Psal. 131. [Surely Psal. 131. 2.I behav'd and quieted my selfe as a Childe that is weaned, &c.] A childe in the weaning is froward, and tangle, then nothing will please it but the breast. But being once weaned; then usually it is quiet, and contented with any thing. In this be we as children; not like children in the weaning, so as if we have not what we would have, nothing shall please us. But like children weaned; behaving our selves quietly, and contentedly; yeelding up our selves to the ordering of our heavenly Father. In death. And thus behave we our selves in death. Therin also as children. Children, Infants, as they are orde∣red by their Mothers, or Nurses in the day, so they are put to bed by them at night, when, and where, and af∣ter what manner they please; for the most part fal∣ling asleepe in the Nurses lap. Even thus do we re∣signe up our selves unto God our heavenly Father, to be disposed of him, as in life, so in death: to bee put to bed, the bed of the grave; when, and where, and after what manner he pleaseth. Falling a sleep in 1 Pet. 4. lasthis lap, in his armes, committing our soules unto him as to a faithfull Creatour, and mercifull Redeemer. Thus receive we Gods Kingdome of Grace, his government here upon earth. And secondly, Thus receive we his Kingdome of His Kingdom of Glory.Glory. Still as little children. Receiving it in Gods way, and upon his tearmes. Thus do little children take  things from their Parents hands, upon their Parents Receiving it upon Gods tearmes. Rom 6. 23.tearmes, and in what way they will have them. And thus receive we this Kingdome of God. Receive it, first upon Gods tearmes, viz. as a free
gift; freely bestowed upon us, without any merit, any desert of our own. Thus do little children receive every thing at their Parents hands. All of gift. Ne∣ver dreaming of any merit, any desert in themselves. Secondly, Receive it in Gods way: in what ever  way he shall in his Providence lay out to bring us to In God s wayheaven by. Even as the Israelites, so they might but come to Canaan, they care not what way they go; be it through the sea, or through the wildernesse. What if God will lay out unto us the like way to bring us to our heavenly Canaan; a troublesome and tedious way, yet baulke it not. [I presse forwards towards the Phil. 3 11. 14.marke, (saith the Apostle). , If by any meanes I might attain the Resurrection of the dead.] Herein yeeld we up our selves unto God to be led by him, as sheep. Psal. 77. 0.So it is sayd of Israel. [The Lord led them as a flocke, (as a flocke of sheepe, as the word signifieth▪) by the hands of Moses and Aaron.] Or (to hold to the Text) as Children. Children are led by the hand, or carried in the armes of their Parents, whether they will have them. Even so yeeld we up ourselves to the will of our heavenly Father. So he may but bring us to hea∣ven, let him lead us, and cary us which way he plea∣seth. What ever the tearmes be, what ever the way bee; let us accept of this gift at his hands. Receiving the Kingdome of God as little children. And thus I have done with this Speech of our Saviour to his Disciples.
Vers. 16. And taking them up in his Armes, hee layd his hands on them, and blessed them. Christs act towards these Infants, three-fold. COme we now to the last branch of this Story, which informes us what our blessed Saviour did to these Infants. Herein we may take notice of a three-fold act; the two former introductory to the latter. 1. His Ssception. 2ly, His Imposition of hands. 3ly, His Benediction. [1. He tooke them up in his Arms. 2ly, Hee layd his hands upon them. 3ly, And blessed them.] Thus doe these Petitioners receive what they de∣sired, and more. That which was desired for these children, was onely a touch of our Saviours hands. So the 13th ver. of this Chapter expresseth it. [They brought children unto Christ, , that he should [touch] them.] Now this he doth for them, and more. [Hee embraced them in his Armes, layed his hands upon them, and blessed them.] Obser. God some∣times doth for his peo∣ple above their desires. Ephes. 3. 20. Thus God is pleased some-times, often-times to doe for his people above their desires. This hee can doe. [Now unto him that is able to doe exceeding abundantly a∣bove all that we aske or thinke; (saith the Apostle.) God can doe for his people exceeding abundantly above their desires, or thoughts. There being in him abun∣dance Malac. 2. 15.of Spirit, as the Prophet Malachi hath it. [Did not he make one? yet he had abundance of Spirit. (So the Geneva readeth it, Residuum Spiritus (saith Montanus)
a residue (as our new translation hath it) an over∣plus of spirit, that is, of power and vertue to have done more then he did. Whereas God at the first made but one woman for one man, it was not for want of power; hee could have made more if hee had pleased. He hath no measure of his power, but his will▪ [If thou wilt, thou canst,] saith the leaper to our Matth. 8. 2.Saviour. So as out of this plenitude, and abun∣dance of power God is able to supply all the wants of his people; o doe for them above their desires: which also sometimes he doth. Solomon having his choice to aske what hee would, hee begs wisdome from God; [Lord give me an understanding heart.] 1 King. 3. 12, 13.God giveth him that and more, viz▪ riches, and ho∣nour: [I have also given thee that whic thou hast not asked.] The poor Paralytick in the Gospel is brought unto Christ for a bodily cure: Christ doth that for him, and more; sending him away with a double cure; the one of his bodie, the other of his Soule. [Sonne, thy sinnes are forgiven thee: Take up thy bed and Matth. 9. v. ▪ v. 6.walke.] Thus Christ dealt with others; and thus ordinarily he dealeth by all that come unto him: doing for them above their desires, and thoughts. The ground whereof is, his abundant mercie. That Reason. He is abun∣dant in mercy▪ 1 Pet. 1. 3.is the epethite St. Peter giveth it: [According to his abundant mercie.▪] Rich mercie: So the Apostle St. Paul, [God who is rich in mercie.] God is rich, as Ephes. 2. 4.in power, so in mercie. The one maketh him able, the other willing to doe for his people above their de∣fires. As a man having a large purse, and a large heart, he giveth to a poore beggar more then he askes: He
askes a penny, hee gives him two. Thus God dea∣leth with poore suppliants that come unto him in the sense of their wants suing for mercie. He often doth for them what they desire, and more. Being, as rich in himselfe, so rich unto them. [God is rich un∣to Rom. 10. 12.them that call upon him,] (saith the Apostle.) God is rich; having an abundant fulnesse of all good∣nesse Luk. 12. 21.of himselfe. And hee is rich not to himselfe, (as the covetous iser is,) but unto others: Being ready and-willing to communicate, and let out his goodnesse unto all that seek it, (even as the foun∣taine that is ready to communicate of its water to all that come for it, and bring vessels to receive Iames 1. 5. 1 Tim. 6. 17.it.) And that not sparingly, (saith St. James.) He giveth us richly all things to enjoy (saith the A∣postle.) Applica. Come unto God and Ie∣sus Christ. 1. By prayer. A meditation which may serve as a forcible motive, and inducement to make us come unto God, and to Jesus Christ. Vnto God by prayer: Vn∣to Iesus Christ by faith. ▪ Come we to th throne of Grace for a supply of our wants▪ what we aske, Ioh. 16. 23.being fit for us, wee shall receive. [Whatsoever yee shall aske the Father in my name, it shall be given you, Matth. 7▪ 7(saith our Saviour.) [Aske, and it shall be given you;] It, what you aske, and more: God giveth, and he giveth not sparingly▪ but liberally[: Therefore come wee, and come boldly. [:If any man lk wisdome, let Iames 1. 5.him aske it of God▪ (saith St. James;) why? For he giveth to all men liberally.] 2. By faith. 2. Come wee unto Jesus Christ by faith▪ e shall sinde more in him, and from him, then ever
wee thought of So did these mothers (or who∣ever) that brought these their children unto Christ. They found more tendernesse, more love, more af∣fection in him, then they could have expected. They come for a touch; he embraceth, blesseth them. Such over▪flowings of mercie there are in God▪ and in Jesus Christ towards poore sinners. The prodigall coming to his father, little did he dreame of such affection, such entertainement as he met with. His thoughts were, if he might but get a roome in his fathers house, to eate bread with his servants, that was all he could looke for, and more then he was wor∣thy of. But see what he found: No sooner doth his father see him a farre off, but he runs to meet him, Luk. 15. 20▪ 22.Jils upon his neck, and kisseth him, bringeth farth the best oabe▪ and killeth th fatted calfe for him. Such o∣ver▪flowings of unexpected, undeserved mercie and compassion there are in our God towards poor penitent sinners. Vpon there returning and com∣ing home to God they shall finde abundant mer∣cy, abundant compassion, more then ever they could have promised to themselves▪ considering their own unworthnesse of the least mercie. And therefore come we unto God, and come we unto Jesus Christ. But this I take up by the way, from the joynt con∣sideration of the words. Come we now to looke upon particulars▪ And  therein begin with the first act. viz. The act of sus∣ception; The first act, viz. Sucep∣tion.[Hee tooke them up in his armes.] , Complexans os, (saith the vulgar latine) Im∣bracing Piscator schol▪ ad locum.them. But the word (by Piscators leave) in
proper signification importeth more. Not any kind of embracement, but an embracement peculiar to chil∣dren; whom others use to take in their armes. Thus Simeon embraced our Saviour, when his Parents came to present him in the Temple, Simeon tooke Luk 2. 28.him up in his armes; , Which is but a periphrasis, of the word in the text, giving us the true sense and meaning of it. Surely even as Simeon there embraced our Saviour, so dd our Sa∣viour here embrace these children: In ulnas suscepit. Hee tooke them in his armes.] These chil∣dren were In∣fants. From whence (by the way) it is rightly con∣cluded against the Anapabtists, that these children which were brought unto Christ, they were young Suidae.children; not children capable of Instruction, but Infants, , Little children, such as were brought in the armes of their parents unto him, and by him taken into his armes. But letting that passe, Obser. Christs singu∣lar affection to Infants.n That which we shall here take notice of, is, the singular affection of Iesus Christ towards these In∣fants; which he expresseth by this act of his: Take∣ing them into his armes,] that so hee might (as it were) lav them in his bosome, nigh to his heart; Chemnit. Har. ad loc.tnquam charistima▪  (as Chemnitius glosseth upon it) as a deare and choice treasure which he made speciall account, and reckoning of. Thus doe . Zenoph. Pad. 7.tender mothers (not knowing how better to doe it▪) expresse their affection to their babes; taking and carrying them in their armes, as neere their heart as may be; embracing, and hugging them. And how could Christ have expressed greater af∣fection
to these babes then he did? Applic. Papists and Anabaptists, herein unlike unto Christ. And did he shew such affection to them? How then dare any shew such dis-affection towards them, as to shut them out of the Church, whether trium∣phant, or militant? Triumphant; So doth the Papist all children dying without Baptisme. Militant: So doth the Anabaptist, who denies Baptisme unto In∣fants, because (as they would have it) they are no members of the Church. And what rigour? What unwarrantable, uncharitable, and unchristian rigour is this? What is this, but even (as it were) to pull Infants out of the armes of Jesus Christ? Surely, he who tooke these Infants into his armes upon earth, doth as much to some of them being now in hea∣ven, and will doe the like to such as are tendred to him as these were; viz. brought to him in the armes of their Parents faith. He will receive them, embrace them, take them into the armes of his mer∣cie. And there let believing Parents leave them (I meane, their Infants deceased) in a comfortable hope, and perswasion of finding them there ano∣ther day. I shall goe to him, but he shall not returne to 2 Sam. 12. 23.me (saith David of his childe.) This for the dead. As for the living, take heed how we shut them out of the Church: Seing we here find them in Christs bosome, take heed how wee cast them out of the Churches bosome, by denying unto them the Churches priviledge, the badge and seale of their Christianity. This for Infants. Ʋse 2. Be incoura∣ged to come unto Christ. As for our selves, be we all encouraged to come unto Jesus Christ. He that had armes to receive these
poore Infants being brought  him, he will have armes to receive us coming unto him. [Him Ioh. 6. 37.that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out.] Hee v. 40.that [cometh] unto me, that is, [believeth] on me; coming to me as a Saviour, and a Lord▪ to be sa∣ved and governed by me, [I will not cast him ou.] There is a mesis in the phrase, lesse said, but more intended. I will not cast him out, that is, I will re∣ceive, I will embrace him. Surely Iesus Christ hath lost none of his affection, none of his compassion▪ What he had, he hath: hee carried his wels, and his armes to heaven with him. And therefore come wee unto him. Q How shall we come. A. Not by any power of our owne. Ioh. 6. 44. Q. How shall we come▪ A. 1. Not by any power of our owne. Thus none can come unto Christ. [No  cometh unto me, except my Father which hath sent me draw him.] Even as these chil∣dren could not have come unto Christ, had not their Parents brought them. Thus unlesse our hea∣venly Father bring us, lead us, draw its, (that is, effectually perswade our hearts to believe on him, working upon them by his word and spirit) wee will never come▪ can never come unto Christ; be∣ing of our selves both unwilling, and unable. 2. Not in any confidence of selfe-worthi∣nesse. 2. Not yet (secondly) in any confidence of any worthinesse in our selves, as if we should be the rather received and embraced of Christ for any thing that we bring with us. No, this also wee doctrinally renounce, and that as clearly, as firmly, as any  whatever; averring that he which ill come unto Christ, must come emptie-handed, bring∣ing
with him nothing of his owne. So say they, and so say wee▪ Nothing save onely an eye, and a hand, (which yet are not our own neither.) An eye to looke up unto Christ, a hand to receive him, both which are done by faith. . Bring faith with us▪ Hab. 2. 4. 3. And this (in the third place▪) every of us must brig with us. Every one his own faith▪ [The just shall live by his faith.] Whatever the case of Infants be, sure we are, in persons of age thus it must be. These Infants here they are brought unto Christ that he should  them. But the woman with the Matth. 9. 20. 21. Mark 6. 56 c. 3. 0.bloudy issue shee cometh unto Christ that shee might touch him, (as also other sicke persons usually did.) Whether Infants may bee saved by their Parents faith, or no, it is disputable▪ But as for us▪ it is out of doubt; it is our owne faith must benefit us. Even as it is with a childe in the wombe▪ and out of it. In the wombe it is nourished by the meate which the mother eates▪ but not so out of the wombe; then it must live by the meate which it selfe eateth. Whether it be so with children in their infancie▪ whether they they live by the faith of their Parents, it is a question which I will not peremptorily de∣determine▪ (I know it was the opinion of the An∣cient Church.) But afterwards when they come to yeares of discretion▪ then they must live by their owne faith. Then they must come unto Christ (as I may say) upon their owne leas, though still led by the hand of another. And thus let us come. So coming, doubt not but e that had armes to receive these Infants being brought to him in the armes
of others, will also have armes, armes of mercie and tender compasson▪ to receive, to embrace us, coming unto him, believing on him▪ submitting to him. Passe wee now to the second and third acts, in both which I will be very briefe hasting to a con∣clusion of this subject. [He laid his hands upon them, and blessed them▪] Wherein we have, first the out∣ward ceremonie or signe, Imposition of hands: [He layd his hands upon them.] Then the thing signified, the grace conferred, Benediction: [Hee blessed them.] Briefly of each. Act 2. Imposition of hands. A ceremonie of ancient use in case of 1. Benedicti∣en. 48. 14. [Hee layd his hands on them▪] A ceremonie of very ancient use amongst the people of God, and that in diverse cases: Specially in two. 1. In the case of benediction, and blessing. Thus the Patriarch Jacob being to blesse the sonnes of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses, he layd his hands up∣on their heads, praying for, and pronouncing a blessing upon them. And thus our Saviour here blessing these children, hee layd his hands upon them. 2. Consecra∣tion. 2. In case of Consecration. When a person, or thing was to be set a prt to some speciall use, and service; this was done by imposition of hands. Thus the sacrifices under the Law were consecrated by Exod. 29. 10. Numb. 8. 11.the Priests. [Aaron and his sonnes layd their hands up∣on the head of the sacrifice;] which they did (amongst other ends) in a way of consecration. Destinarunt il∣lud Osiander ad loc.ut ieret sacrificim, (saith Osiander upon it;) de∣stinating and setting a-part that creature to be a sacrifice. And as their sacrifices were thus consecrated, so
were (at least) some of their Church-officers also. Numb. 8. 10.So we read that the Levites were to be consecra∣ted by imposition of hands, Numb. 8. Thus was it under the Old Testament. And thus we find it under the New. Our bles∣sed Saviour (our great high Priest) being to con∣secrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper▪ hee Mat. 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 24.tooke the Bread, and hee tooke the Cup (saith the Text.) Either taking them into his hand, or lay∣ing his hand upon them, setting them apart from a common, to a sacred use. And in like manner were the officers of the Church, the Ministers of Acts 6. 6. Acts 13. 3.  Tim. 4. 14.the Gospell consecrated; set apart to their Mini∣steriall Offices, by Imposition of hands. A usefull Ce∣remony, though not simply neces∣sary, yet expe∣dient. A usefull Ceremony in both these cases. Whe∣ther necessary, or no, it is made a question? Pa∣pists contend for it as absolutely necessary, making it the outward signe in two of their Sacraments, (so they call them, and make them) viz. Confir∣mation, and Ordination. In the latter of these (not to speake of the former now, which I have touch∣ed upon already,) wee generally allow it, ap∣prove it as very convenient▪ not onely warrantable but usefull, warrantable by the practise of the Apo∣stles, and the Church of God in all Ages. Vsefull, both in respect of the solemnity, and significancie of it, suting well with the businesse that it is applied to, (Ordination; wherein there is a charge) layd upon the person ordained, and the person set apart unto a speciall use and service. Warrantable and usefull wee allow it; yet lea∣ving
it as an indifferent Ceremony, as not being of the essence of Ordination, (much lesse of Confirma∣tion,) which may be performed without it, viz. by Fasting, and Prayer. And so not absolutely ne∣cessary, there being no expresse precept in Scrip∣ture  inforce it. As for that obvious Text in 1 Tim. 5. 22. Vide Piscator: sup. Mat. 19. vers. 15.Timoty, where the Apostle willeth him not to  on hands suddenly upon any man. It sheweth indeed, what the usuall Rite and Ceremony then was not what of necessity it must bee. But of this enough. The signifi∣cation of this Ceremony, viz. the con∣ferring of some gift; ei∣ther The case which the Text leadeth us to, is the for∣mer of these, the case of Benediction. And with this the Ceremony suteth well. Importing a putting, or conferring▪ of some gift upon ano∣ther; whether by bestowing of it, or praying for it. By bestow∣ing, &c.First, By bestowing it. Thus our blessed  blessed these children: Not onely praying for, but Thus Christ blessed.bestowing a blessing upon them. (D ene dicre  beefacere;) which was in his power, in his hands to doe. And therefore hee layed his hands upon them. Blessed hands, hands full of blessing. In which was, and is committed the dispensation of all blessings, both heavenly, and earthly▪ This is that which our Saviour saith of himselfe, Mat. Mat. 21. 18.28. (All power is given unto vice, both in heaven, and in earth.) This hee spake after his  Not but that he had this power  how ve from thence▪forth hee was to exercise it more
freely than formerly. Before this he had all power in his hands; a power to conferre and bestow what blessings, and where hee pleased. Not un∣fitly then did he lay on hands upon these Infants here, being about to blesse them; hee having all blessings in his hands. By praying for it, and pronouncing it. Secondly, But so have not others, why then  should they lay on hands? I answer, though they cannot conferre them, yet they may pray for them. I, more. In the name of God pronounce them, and make promise of them: And therefore to confirme the persons in the apprehension of obtaning what is so prayed for, so pronounced, so promised; therefore they lay on hands upon them. Thus Jacob in the place forenamed, layd on hands Gen. 48.upon the sonnes of Joseph, praying for, and pro∣nouncing a blessing upon them. Thus Moses lay∣ed hands upon Josuah, who thereupon was filled Deut. last▪ vers. 9.with the spirit of wisedome, as you have it, Deut. last. Not that Moses could put his spirit upon Jo∣shuah, but he praying for it, God conferred it. And thus the Apostles in their time layed their hands upon divers, who thereupon received the holy Ghost, as it is said of those Disciples, Acts 19. Not Act. 19. 6.that they of themselves could conferre the holy Ghost, but God did it by their Ministery. But I promised to be briefe. Act. 3. Christ bles∣sing of these Infants. A word or two of the last branch of the Text, and so I will dismisse it, and you for the present, viz. the thing signified by this Ceremony. [Hee layd his hands upon them, and blessed them.] He blessed
them. How? why, by praying for a blessing, pro∣nouncing a blessing, conferring a blessing upon them▪ All this hee could doe, having authority to blesse, and having all power in his hands to conferre, not onely temporall, but spirituall, and heavenly bles∣sings. Ioh. 17. 2.[Thou hast given him power over all flesh, that hee should give eternall life to as many as thou hast gi∣ven him.] Quest. But the question is, what blessing it Quest. What bles∣sing Christ bestowed on these Infants.was that Christ here bestowed upon these In∣fants. Christ hath many blessings (saith the A∣nabaptist,) right-hand, and left-hand blessings. In the dayes of his flesh, hee healed the sicke, clean∣sed the leapers, made the dumbe to speake, the blinde to see, &c. And who knoweth (say they) but some such blessing it might bee that Christ here bestowed upon them, some temporall bles∣sing? Answ. Not onely a temporall, but a spiritu∣all and eter∣nall blessing. Answ. To this wee answer, that possibly it might be so. Hee might, possibly, and probably prav that they might live and grow in stature, in wisedome, and favour, and the like. But surely, this blessing of his imports more▪ The Text tel∣leth us here, that Christ layd his [hands] on them. Not one hand, but both. Christs blessings when hee was upon earth, seldome went single. Seldome did he bestow a left-hand without a right-hand blessing. Seldome did hee cure any in their bodies, but hee cured them also in their soules. And surely such was his blessing here. More than a bare temporall blessing; chiefly, and principally a spirituall▪ and
heavenly blessing▪ even the blessing of Gods King∣dome. This hee had before avowed to belong unto them. [Of such is the Kingdome of God;] and the blessing of this Kingdome hee here conferred upon them. Observ. Christs bles∣sing, the best blessing. Hee blessed them.] And what could hee have done more for them? or for any? This was the best thing that Isaac could doe to, or for his sonne Jacob, to blesse him. And what could Christ have done better for these Infants▪ Hee blessing them, they were blessed. I have blessed him, and hee shall Gen. 27. 33.bee blessed, saith Isaac concerning his sonne. And those whom Christ blesseth▪ they shall bee bles∣sed. Applica. Seeke this blessing. Applic. O seeke we after this blessing, the root of all blessings. Seeke it for our selves, and seeke it for our Children. Without this, our blessing of them, our providing for them▪ will be little worth. Let it be our care and endeavour to bring them to Christ; to know him, to believe on him, that hee may blesse them. If he blesse them, they shall be blessed. And thus I have (as briefly as I could) run over this portion of Scripture, both in a Doctrinall, and Practicall way; shewing you still (by the way) what it maketh for that end to which it hath beene ordinarily made use of amongst us, viz. the Bap∣tisme of Infants. Such they were that were here brought to Christ. Such they were, whom the Dis∣ciples here (out of no ill intent) attempt to keepe
backe from ming t Christ. Such they were whom Christ here inviteth to come unto him; prohibiting his Disciples, or any other to hinder them. Such they were to whom hee avoweth the Kingdome of God, both of Grace, and Glory, to belong. Such they were whom he here embraceth, luyh his hands on, blesseth. Object. Christ did not Baptize these Infants Answ. Object. But (saith the Anabaptist) what is all this to the point in hand? All this while wee doe not read that Christ Baptized these Infants? Answ. True. No more did he any others. [Ie∣sus himselfe baptized not.] Iohn 4. 2. But yet hee expressed a singular and peculiar affection to them; Invites them to communion with himselfe, avowes the Kingdome of God to bee theirs; and conferres upon them the blessing of that King∣dome. And hath Christ thus honoured some of this tender age▪ What shall new bee done to them, He. 6. 6.whom the King of Heaven delighteth to honour? Doth hee invite them to communion with him∣selfe▪ Who shall keepe them backe, by debar∣ring them of the meanes of that communion? Doth hee avow, and conferre the thing signified, who shall then deny them the signe? FINIS.
