B4719 E1249_1 R208891 99867809 169495
The MYSTICAL BRASEN SERPENT: WITH The Magnetical Vertue thereof. OR, CHRIST exalted upon the CROSS, WITH The blessed End and Fruit of that his Exaltation, in drawing the Elect world to Himself, to be∣lieve on Him, and to be saved by Him. In two Treatises, from John 3.14, 15. John 12.32. Whereunto is added A TREATISE of the Saints JOINT-MEMBERSHIP each with other. As they were delivered to the Church of God at Great YARMOUTH, By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel, and Preacher to that Incorporation. Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy. July 30. 1652. 1 COR. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you, saving Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 1 COR. 1.18. For the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishnesse; but unto us which are saved, the power of God. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Maxey for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhil, neer the Royal Exchange. 1653.
To The truely Honourable, The LADY FRANCIS HOBART, Grace and Peace. Madam, I Plead no ex∣cuse for the homelinesse of this present. Whatever the Workmanship be, sure I am the matter is such, as shall find acceptance at your La∣dyships
hands. I question not but your Honour hath often read of what esteem the Typicall Brasen Serpent was with the Israelites,2 King. 18.4. even then when it was out of date, a bare Nehushtan, no more worth then what the metall weighed: And I presume you have as often heard what ho∣nour (at least) the ignoranter sort of the Romish perswasion are wont to give to the Cru∣cifixes of their own making: Both of them superstitiously and idolatrously yeilding that respect to the shadow, which
is appropriate to the sub∣stance. This it is which I here present to your Honours view; The Mystical Brasen Serpent; the Reall Crucifix, Christ himselfe exalted upon the Crosse. Of whose Magne∣ticall Vertue, I doubt not but your precious soule hath al∣ready had so much experi∣ence, as that you earnestly desire to feele more of it. In this way, if these my poor labors may contribute ought either to your selfe, or any other, I shall blesse that God who hath made use of
me as his Instrument in so honourable a service. In the hope and confidence hereof, I shall put them into your Ladyships hand, and rest Great Yar∣mouth, June 24. 1642. Ready further to serve Your Honour in all Christian Offices, JOHN BRINSLEY.
An Alphabeticall Table. A. ADversaries not to be feared. 140. Affections towards Christ, evidencing mans draw∣ing to him 183 Christ offered to All, how and why 146 Attractive vertue in Christ to be sought after 188 B. BEnefit of Christs death extending to all Beleevers. 111 Beleeving on Christ, the onely means to receive benefit from him 73 Discouragements in Beleeving answered 115 Blindnesse naturall to all men 153 Brasen Serpent both a medicine, and a mystery 3 Brasen Serpent a lively and convincing Type of Jesus Christ 5 Brasen Serpent resembling Christ in five particulars 16 Brasen Serpent to be looked up unto 96 C. Carnall persons not drawn to Christ 181 Christ a mighty Saviour 17 Christ like unto men, and sinfull men, yet without sin 18 Christ crucified the onely Sole-Remedy 51 Christ a Saviour by his Fathers Ordination 22 Christ to be looked up unto, and how 124 Motives to come unto Christ 71 Discouragements in coming unto Christ answered 115 Motives to look up unto Christ 97 Strength of Corruption no just discouragement in coming to Christ 122 Conversion to be ascribed unto Christ 161 Common work of the Spirit not to be rested in 191 Crosse of Christ a memoriall of mans sin and misery. 21 Crosse of Christ the way to his Crown 27 The Crosse an Exaltation to Christ 28 Christ crucified the onely Saviour 62 Cure of the Soul to be locked after 48
D. Darknesse mans naturall estate 30 Death passed upon all 115 Death of Christ necessary in a threefold respect 45 Death of Christ not dubious 132 Drawing of men by Christ to Christ 143, 150 Drawing, a fruit of Christs death 134 Men drawn to Christ as a Saviour, and Lord 169 God the Father draweth men to Christ, how 144 All men, and all things drawn to Christ, how 145 Drawing, what it importeth 152 Whence Christ draweth men 164 Men drawn out of themselves, how 168 Evidences of men not drawn to Christ 179 Evidences of men drawn to Christ 183 Drawing to Christ a ground of comfort 187 Outward Drawing not to be rested in 190 Drawing back to be taken heed of 163. 191 E. Elect ones drawn to Christ 149 Enemies still infesting Beleevers 53 Enemies of Christ disappointed 135, 136 Christ exalted upon the Crosse 28 F. Faithfulnesse of Christ in his obedience 56 Faith justifying and saving, what 75 Faiths object and act in justifying 79 Faith how it healeth and saveth 80 Faith and Christ as the Ring and the Bloodstone 92 Faith the only Instrument in healing the soule 93. 101 Weaknesse of Faith, no just discouragement 123 H. Christ Healing his people, how 58 I. Ignorant persons not drawn to Christ 179 Impediments in coming to Christ 119 Mans naturall Impotency 154 Weak Instrument effecting great works 174 God blesseth all, and only his own Institutions 10 Intercession of Christ effectuall 57 Inveterate sins not hindering benefit by Christ 119
Civil Justiciaries not drawn to Christ 182 L. Lamenesse naturall to all men 155 Christ Lift up four wayes 25 Lifting up of the Brasen Serpent shadowing the death of Christ in five particulars 29 Lifting up of Christ drawing men to him 173 Life eternall, what 109 Life, all men deprived of 44 M. Mans Misery the occasion of Gods Mercy in sending his Son 20 Mans naturall Misery described 33 Gods Mercy in providing a Remedy 38 Ministers of God to be enquired of for Soul-cures 49 N. Natures power in the work of Conversion, decayed 160 O. God not tied to costly Ordinances 7 P. Penitent sinners only capable of benefit by Christ 113 The Estate of Nature, a Perishing Condition 43 Whether men Perish in death 105 No Perishing to Beleevers 107 Profane persons not drawn to Christ 180 R. Man Repenting God Repents 9 Refusing of Christ a just Condemnation 71 Relapses dangerous, not desperate 120 Reluctancy against receiving of Christ with the grounds thereof 158, 159 S. Salvation to be sought onely in Christ 63 Satan resembled by a Serpent, in three particulars 34 Satan hindering men from coming unto Christ, how 156 Men drawn from under the power of Satan, how 156 Christ a Saviour to lost mankind 152 How Christ cometh to be a Saviour 154 Christ the onely Saviour 159 Ministers how called Saviours 161 How men save themselves ibid. Christ a perfect Saviour 68
Sense of misery a preparative for mercy 46 The Serpent the Instrument of mans misery 45 Shadowes made use of by God to work reall effects 8 Great Sins great punishments 9 Discouragements from magnitude or multitude of Sins answered 116, 117 Son of man, the phrase opened: being given to Christ, what it imports 12, 14 Spirit of Christ drawing men to him 175 T. Type, why made use of by our Saviour 4 W. Liberty of Will in the work of conversion decryed 160 Will, not forced in the work of Conversion 192 Men drawn out of the World, how 166 The Word Christs Instrument in drawing men to himself 171 The Word being the Drawing Ordinance is to be sub∣mitted to 191 ERRATA. P. 2. l. 27. r. represented. p. 8. l. 9. r. Handkerchiefes. ibid. marg. r. Fernelius. p. 18. marg. r. per Serpentem. p. 21. l. ult. dele And. p. 23. l. 30. for where, r. whence. p. 29. marg. r. , p. 30. l. 11. r. . p. 33. l. 8. for hear, r. here. p. 41. l. 9. for grace, r. cure. p. 70. l. 32. dele up. p. 7. 6. l. 7. r. quovis. p. 107. l. last. r. turned to dust. p. 145. marg. r. salvet. p. 149. marg. r. ex Gentibus. p. 160. marg. for decayed, r. decryed, p. 162. l. 29. r. not all.
THE MYSTICALL BRASEN SERPENT. JOHN 3. Ver. 14.15. 14. And as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wildernesse, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, 15. That whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but have eternall life. THE former part of this Chapter spends it selfe in the report of a use∣full conference betwixt our Blessed Saviour and Nicodemus.Coherence. Wher∣in we may hear a gra∣cious Master teaching and instructing an un∣toward and ignorant Scholer insome of the chiefest principles of Christian Religion; as
viz. The Mystery and Necessity of Spirituall Regeneration; that he doth in the verses before the Text. The Meritorious and Instrumentall cause of Man's salvation. The meritorious cause of it; his owne Death and Passion. The Instrumentall cause of it; Faith in himselfe. Both these you have in the words which I have now read unto you. [And as Moses, &c.] Division.In which two verses our Blessed Saviour in∣formes this his Scholer, and us, of two things; 1. The manner of his owne Death; 2. The end and use of it. The manner of his death, ver. 14. [As Moses, &c.] The end and use of it, ver. 15. [That whosoever beleeveth, &c.] The manner of Christs death set forth by a Typicall expression.Begin with the former of these; which our Saviour sets forth (as you see) not in plaine and open termes, but under a covert expressi∣on: making use of one of the Types and fi∣gures of the old Testament for the confirming and illustrating of what he would have Nicho∣demus and us to know and beleeve concerning his own death, as, viz. That he should die; How he should die; To what end he should die: What benefit should redound from his death; and By what means it should be con∣veyed: all lively presented and held forth in this Type of the Brasen Serpent which Moses lift up in the Wildernesse [Even as Moses, &c. So must the Son of Man be lift up.] Here two things consi∣derable, the Type. Truth. Here then two things mainly considerable: the Type and the Truth: the Shadow and the Substance. The Type or Shadow; the Brasen
Serpent lift up. The Truth or Substance of that Type, that shadow, The Son of Man lift up. These two I shall look upon first severally, then joyntly. Severally;1. The Type; the Brasen Ser∣pent. Beginning with the former of them, the Type: For so I look upon this Brasen Serpent, as having in the first institution of it a double use to the Israelites; the one Cor∣porall, the other Spirituall. A Corporall use, for the healing of their Bodies. A Spirituall use, directing them to Christ for the healing of their Souls. Of such double use was the Mannah to them; both Corporall and Spiri∣tuall food. Corporall food, given them for the present refreshing and nourishing of their bodies. Spirituall food, as being a Sacra∣ment of the Body of Christ, and of the nourish∣ment which they might receive from him. And of like use was the water which issued out of the Rock. Usefull as water for the quench∣ing of their bodily thirst; as a Sacrament, re∣presenting the Blood of Christ: and so was to them not only Corporall, but Spirituall drink; so saith the Apostle himselfe expresly concer∣ning both these, 1 Cor. 10.3.4. Our fathers did all eat the same Spirituall meat: and did all drink of the same Spirituall drink, &c.] The same not only with themselves, but with us Christians, viz. the Body and Blood of Je∣sus Christ, represented by those Sacra∣ments. And the like we may say of this Brasen Serpent.The Brasen Serpent both a Medicine and a Mystery It was to the Israelites both a Me∣dicine,
and a Mystery. Having in it a Medi∣cinall use for the curing of their Bodies; a Mysticall use, for the representing of Christ to them, by whom their Souls might be cured saved. And of such use our Saviour here maketh it; bringing it in not barely by way of Simili∣tude and resemblance; but as a Type and Fi∣gure, purposely destinated and appointed to point at himself. So taking it; here premise we these two en∣quiries concerning it; the one more Generall, the other more Particular. 1. Why did our Saviour here make use of a Type, a figure? 2. Why of this Type, this Figure? Quest. 1. Why our Savi∣our here ma∣keth use of a Type?Quest. 1. For the former, Why did our Sa∣viour here make use of a Type? Answer. Ferus ad loc.Answ. For this we shall need no other rea∣son, but only to look upon the Scholer with whom he hath to deal, Nichodemus a Phari∣see, ver. 1. A Master in Israel, ver. 10. , a Doctor, a Teacher of the Law, one well versed in the Law, one that stood much upon the Law,Joh. 9.28, one of Moses his Disciples. And hereupon our Saviour being to deal with him, deales with him in his owne Element, fetching an Argument from the Old Testa∣ment, from Moses, to teach and convince him concerning that which should be accom∣plished under the New Testament in him∣selfe. Quest. 2. Why this Type.Quest. 2. But why doth he single out this Type, rather then any other? Many other
Types and Figures there were in the Old Testa∣ment very lively representing and holding forth the Death and Passion of Christ. As, viz. the Paschall Lamb, and the daily Sacri∣fices; both which the Jews themselves do ac∣knowledge to point at the Messiah. Why doth our Saviour here make choice of this? Answer 1. To this it may bee answered:Answ. 1. No Type more lively re∣presenting the thing typifyed 1. Amongst all those Types there was not any more lively, more fully representing and set∣ting forth the mystery of Christ then this of the Brasen Serpent. A Type which contains in it a Sermon of the whole summ, and Mar∣row of the Gospel. Little or nothing necessary to be known and beleeved concerning Jesus Christ, but wee may read it in this one Type. 2. Besides (in the second place,) amongst all the Types in the Old Testament,2. A convincing Type. as there was none more lively representing, so we shall find none more strongly convincing; con∣vincing the unbeleeving Jewes: and not on∣ly convincing, but confounding them, and all others, who deride and make a mock of Christ crucifyed, as if it were a thing not pos∣sible, that a crucifyed Christ should be the Sa∣viour of the world. How can he save others, (say they) that could not save himself?Mat. 27.42. How shall hee save others from the wrath of God, that could not save himself from the rage of men? What power, what vertue can there be in his death? To them this Type returnes
answer. Why, how could the Brasen Ser∣pent, being but the shape and Image of a Ser∣pent, a livelesse piece of Brass, Nehushtan (as Hezekiah in a vilifying way calls it) a Brasen piece;2 King. 18.4. how could this cure and heal their fore-fathers in the wildernesse? That which had no life, how could it save life? Yet this did that Serpent being lift up, to the bodies of all that beheld it. And why then may not the Son of Man being lift up, a crucifyed Christ, do as much for the souls of all that beleeve on him. It was not without good reason then, that our Saviour maketh choice of this Type, this Figure. Amongst all the Types of the Old Testament, none more demonstrative, none more clearly representing, more strongly con∣vincing what here he layeth down concerning himself. To make this good, come we now to take a nearer view of this Type it selfe.Things consi∣derable in the Type. The Histo∣ry whereof you have set forth briefly, and ful∣ly in those four verses of the 21. of Numbers, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. which if you cast your eyes upon, you may at the first sight take notice of divers particulars very observable concerning this Brasen Serpent; as viz. 1. The Matter of it: 2. The Form and fashion of it: 3. Upon what occasion it was made: 4. At whose ap∣pointment: 5. How used: 6. To what end: 7. With what efficacy. All of them to be ta∣ken notice of by us, that we may see what a correspondence and agreement there is be∣twixt
this Type and the Truth of it, which is Christ. To touch upon the particulars briefly. 1. For the matter of it;1. The matter. it was Nehushtan, Brasse; not Gold, but Brasse.ver. 9. Observ. God tieth not himselfe to the costli∣nesse of Ordinances,Observ. God not tyed to costly Or∣dinances. nor to the excellency of means. By weak and contemptible wayes and means he oftentimes effects great mat∣ters. Reas. This he doth, that the work may be known and acknowledged to be His; and that all the glory of it may returne clearly to him∣self, not sticking by the way in the Ordinance, or Meanes. God could have commanded Moses to have made this Serpent of Gold, as well as the Israelites required Aaron to make their Calf. But he would not have them to make an Idol of the one, as they had done of the other. He would not have them to look too much at the means, but through it to look at him who coveyed that cure and com∣fort to them through that means. But this by the way. 2. For the Form or Fashion of it:2. The forme. Serpens aeneus factus est, quo magis Preste∣rem qui aeri con∣color erat, refer∣ret. H. Grot. ad Text. ver. 8. ver. 6. it was a Serpent; not a true reall Serpent; It had nei∣ther life nor venome in it, only an Effigies, the shape of a Serpent, resembling one of those Serpents wherewith the Israelites were stung, and that both in shape and colour. And thence called a Fiery or Burning Serpent: carrying the similitude of one of those Presteres, those Fiery Serpents (so called as from the colour, so
from the inflamation which they caused in the bodies which were stung with them.) And this was Israels Antidote against the biting of those reall Serpents. Observ. Thus doth God sometimes make use of shadowes for the working of reall effects.Observ. God worketh reall effects by Shadowes. So we read of Peters shadow working strange cures upon all that came within the verge of it: Act. 5.15. and of Pauls Hand-kerchiefe do∣ing the like, and more, to those to whom they were applyed, driving away Diseases and E∣vill spirits too. Act. 19.Act. 19.12. Not that there was any such inherent vertue in either of these, but that God was pleased to manifest his Power in weaknesse;2 Cor. 12.9. which ofttimes he doth: working not only by unlikely, but even by contrary means; bringing good out of evill, making a Serpent to heal. Thus the skill of the Physici∣ans turnes Vipers into Treacles (which take the name from that ingredient) Poysons into Antidotes,Theriace, Medicamentum Theriacum. Fernetius Junius. repelling or driving out one poyson with another. And thus doth the wisdom of our God make use sometimes not only of the e∣nemies, & crosses, but of the sins of his people, turning them to their great good: making use sometimes of one sin for the curing of ano∣ther; I, of many; I, of all; as here he maketh use of one Serpent for the curing of the stings of all other Serpents. Here is a second particular. 3. The third is, upon what occasion3. The occa∣sion. this Brasen Serpent was made. This the story layeth down clearly and briefly thus:Numb. 21.5. The Israelites beginning to laoth their Mannah, they mur∣mure
against God, and are readie to rise up a∣gainst his servant Moses. Thus complaining without a cause, God giveth them a cause to complain:ver. 6. He sends Fiery Serpents amongst them; by the stinging whereof, many of them die,ver. 7. others of them come to Moses now com∣plaining of their misery, who before were sur∣feited of God's mercy. Their earnest suit to him is, that he would be a Suitor for them, that God would take away the Serpents from them. This request of theirs Moses presents,ver. 8. and God hears and answers, Non ad volun∣tatem, sed ad Salutem; not removing the Serpents from them, but providing an Anti∣dote, a remedy against them, which remedy was this Brasen Serpent. Observ.Observ. 1. Great sins, great punish∣ments. 1 King. 12.11. Thus God often deals with the sons of Men, visiting their iniquities not only with Rods, but with Scorpions (as Rehoboam threa∣tens the men of Israel) specially their ingra∣titude, their murmurings and repinings at his dispensations, their slighting his mercies, a∣bove all their loathing of Heavenly Mannah. For these sins God often sends sharp and sting∣ing judgements. Despisers of the riches of Gods goodnesse, treasure up wrath to themselvs, Rom. 2.Rom. 2.4, 5. 2, But (in the second place) upon their re∣penting he repents;Observ. 2. Upon mans repenting, God repents. Deut. 32.39. 2 Cor. 12.9. upon their humbling and returning, he returnes and heals: not always by removing the judgements. No, Pauls thorn sticks in his flesh, notwithstanding his frequent and earnest solliciting the Throne of Grace about it. But by reaching forth
unto them something that shall be equivalent; as he did a sufficiency of Grace to Paul. I hasten.Ibid. 4. By whom appointed.4. The fourth particular is, by whom was this remedy appointed. The Text tells us, that Moses set up this Brasen Serpent. (A presi∣dent for the Ministers of the Gospel, who in their ministrations, ought to make it their work to advance and lift up Jesus Christ, as Moses did this Serpent.) But what, did he do it of his own head? Not so, but by a Di∣vine direction.Numb. 21.8. It was God himself that found out this way and means of cure; it was hee that directed Moses how to make it, and how to use it. Observ. God saves by his own meansObserv. God will save only by his own means. He will blesse all, and only his own Insti∣tutions. As for humane inventions, how spe∣cious, how plausible soever, yet they have no assurance of a blessing from God. Had Mo∣ses made and erected this Serpent of his owne head, as Aaron and the people did their Gol∣den Calf, it might have proved to them, as that did, a snare, but not a remedy; pernici∣ous, but no wayes profitable. What ever vertue this Brasen Serpent had, it had it from a Divine Institution.August. de Mi∣rabil. Scripturae lib. 1. cap. 33. Non in Serpente, sed in Domini imperio salus continebatur (saith Au∣gustine upon it.) The healing vertue was not in the Serpent it self, but in the comman∣ding power of God. It was not the Serpent, but the word; so saith the Psalmist, Psal. 107Psal. 107.20. He sent forth his word and healed them.] His
word; Verbum Jussionis, & Promissionis (saith MusculusMuscul. in Text.) his word of Command, and his word of Promise. This Word it was that made this an effectuall means for the healing of their Bodies. And the same word it is that maketh the Sacraments of the New Testament to be effectuall means for the conveying of Spirituall good to the Souls of Beleevers. It is not in the outward Elements, nor yet in the hand that reacheth them forth. It is not in the Water in Baptism; It is not in the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist; which being in themselves but common water, and common Bread and Wine, what can they do to the washing, nourishing, refreshing of the Soul; or what vertue can the Minister infuse into them? No, it is the Word, the word of Di∣vine Institution, the word of Command, the word of Promise that maketh these effectuall to such ends and purposes, which otherwise have no more power and vertue in themselves, then the Brasen Serpent had, which Moses lift up in the wildernesse. 5. There is the fifth particular.5. The use of it. How this Brasen Serpent was used by Moses. It was on∣ly to be lifted up, set upon a Pole or Pearch, lifted up on high. 6. And to what end must it so be lifted up?6. The end of it. Why, that all Israel might see it; special∣ly, that those who felt themselves stung with those fiery Serpents might look up un∣to it. 7.7. Benefit by it And what benefit had they by thus look∣ing
upon it? why thereby they were healed, how mortally soever they were wounded. The mysticall Brasen Ser∣pent, Jesus Christ.Thus I have briefly touched upon the most materiall particulars observable in the Type. To follow this shadow no further; Come we now to look upon the truth of this Type, which is Jesus Christ: the truth of all those Types and Ceremonies under the Law; I am the truth, John 14.1 Cor. 10.4. John 14.6. the substance of all those shadowes. Among other, the true brasen Ser∣pent. So it followeth, As Moses lift up the Serpent, &c. So must the Son of man be lifted up. The Son of man:]The Son of man; the phrase opened. A stile or appellation given in the Scriptures sometimes in common indefinitely, universally to all men; all sorts of men, all of those sorts; All which being men, descended from men by the way of naturall generation, they are called the sons of men, and every one the son of man. Instan∣ces for both are obvious. O yee sons of men, (saith the Psalmist, Psal. 4.Psal. 4.2.) God is not as man (saith Balaam) that he should lye, neither the son of man that he should repent, Numb. 23.Numb. 23.19. Blessed is the man that doth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it, (saith the Pro∣phet Isai. cap. 56.Isai. 56.2.) The son of man, that is every man of what quality or condition so∣ever. Sometimes it is more peculiarly appro∣priated to some one particular person; So we find it given (as I remember) onely to three; viz. to Ezekiel, Daniel, Christ. To Ezekiel it is given by God himselfe, speaking to him
in the second Person, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, Ezek. 2.1.Ezek. 2. ver. 1.3, 6. &c. And so frequently in most Chapters of this Prophesie. In like manner it is given to Daniel by the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 8.Dan. 8.17. Ʋnderstand, O son of man.] To Christ, it is given in the Old Testament by Daniel, who tels us how in his vision he beheld one like the son of man, Dan. 7.Dan. 7.13.] And (as some conceive it) by Asaph, Psal. 80.Psal. 80.17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand,Chald. Paraph. Basil. Muscul. Ainsworth. Junius. and the son of man whom thou madest strong for thy selfe.] The Son of man, that is, the Messia, who is before called the Branch, ver. 16. even that Branch that grew out of the Stem of Jesse, Isai. 11.1. My servant the Branch, Zach. 3.8. Be∣hold the man whose name is the Branch, Zach. 6.12. even he is there called the son of man. In the New Testament it is given to him only by himselfe, speaking of himself in the third Per∣son. The son of man hath not where to lay his head, Mat. 8.20. The son of men is come to save that which was lost, Mat. 18.11. The son of man must be lifted up, (saith the Text.) Quest.Quest. Why given to Christ? But why is this appellation thus fre∣quently given unto Christ? Ans.Answ. To import Many answers are returned; some of them more witty then weighty. I shall onely single out three of them; The two former more generall; the other more particularly applia∣ble to the Text: Christ appropriates this stile to himselfe, to import principally these two things: 1. His Nature. 2. His condition: the truth of the one, the meannesse of the o∣ther.
1. His Nature.1. His Nature. The truth of his humane nature. To shew that he was truly man, though not descended from man by that ordinary way of naturall generation, yet a true man, having a true humane soul, a true humane bo∣dy. The Son of God, made the Son of Man, by taking the nature of man into personall u∣nion with his Godhead.Heb. 2.16. He took not upon him the nature of Angels, (saith the Apostle) but the seed of Abraham,] And so was he made the Son of Abraham, the Son of David, the Son of Man. Here is the truth of his humane nature. 2. The Meannesse of his condition.2. The mean∣ness of his condition. Thus the phrase is sometime used in Scripture, car∣rying a Tapeinôsis with it. The Son of Man, that is, mean man, miserable man. Man that is a worme, and the Son of man that is a worm, (saith Bildad in Job) chap. 25.Job. 25.6. Lord, what is man (saith the Psalmist) that thou art mind∣full of him,Psal. 8.4. Isa. 51.12. or the Son of Man, that thou re∣gardest him?] Poor man, base man. So our Translation renders that of the Psalmist, Psal. 49.2. Both [Low] and high, rich and poor together.] And so again, Psal. 62, 9. Surely [men of low degree] are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie.] In both places the Origi∣nall hath it, Beni Adam, Filii Hominis, The Sons of man, that is, (as the Septuagint ren∣ders it) , Earth-born: As the Latines were wont to call ignoble persons,H. Grot. Annot. in Mat. 8.20. Terrae filios, Sons of the earth; so here, Filii Adam, Sons of earthie man, base man, opposed there to Beni Ish, Filii viri, The sons of noble man.
The phrase there imports meanness of condition. And so it doth in those places forenamed, where this stile is given to Ezekiel and Da∣niel. The Angel calls them, Sons of Man, to humble them by puting them in mind of their frail condition. And in a like sense our Saviour applyeth it to himselfe, importing his state of humiliation and abasement upon earth, wherein he subjected himselfe to a meane and vulgar condition. Being God blessed for e∣ver, and the Lord of all, he emptied himselfe, (so the Originall hath it, Phil. 2.7.Phil. 2.7. Descripsit hāc voce Christus suam illam , de quae agitur Phil. 2.7 H. Grot. ibid. Quasi ex Omni Seipsum ad Ni∣hil redegit. Bez. Annot. Gr. Mat. 8.20. Nec aliud est hic , quàm apud Isaram, cap. 53.3.  H. Grot. Annot. in Matt. 8.20. , sese inanivit, he evacuated himself) made himselfe of no reputation (saith our Transla∣tion) devesting himselfe of his robes of Maje∣sty and glory, he brought himselfe (as it were) from all things to nothing; And took upon him the form of a servant] subjected him∣self to a servile mean condition, so as not to be the owner of any thing; And in this regard he calls himselfe the Son of man. The Son of man hath not where to lay his head; the phrase sounding as much as that of the Prophet Isai∣ah, Isai. 53.3, Contemptus, & abjectissimus vi∣rorum (as Junius renders it) a man despised and rejected of men. 3. These reasons of the phrase are generall. There is a third which is more peculiar to the Text; Christ here stileth himselfe the Son of Man,3. The Nature which suffered. shewing in what nature he was to bee lifted up, to be crucifyed, viz. in his humane nature: Not as the Son of God, but as the son of Man. True indeed, by reason of the u∣nion
of the two Natures in one Person, and by a communication of properties (as Divines call it,) the Death and Passion of Christ is attributed to the whole Person, which is denominated sometimes from one nature, sometimes from another. And thence it is the Apostle saith, That,Acts 20.28. God purchased the Church with his own blood: that is, that person who was truly God, as well as man,1 Cor. 2.8. he shed his blood, which he did not as God, but as man. Whole Christ was lift up, suffered, died; but it was according to his humane Nature. So St. Peter explaineth it, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ was put to death in the flesh. So again Chap. 4.1. Christ suffered in the flesh; that is, in, or according to his humane Nature. As for the Godhead, it was immortal, impassi∣ble, it could neither die, nor suffer. It was the Manhood that was the proper and immediate subject of this Passion. And therefore saith our Saviour, The Son of Man must be lift up. The Type re∣sembling the Truth; the Brasen Ser∣pent, Christ, inTo dwell no longer upon the Phrase. Come we now to bring these two together, the Type and the Truth, the Serpent and the Son of Man, and see how the one resembles and an∣swers to the other. These Resemblances are many. But I shall not take up every particular. I shall onely reflect upon those few which I named already. Beginning with 1. The Matter. Isai. 45.2.1. The Matter of the Serpent. It was Brass. Brass, a strong and durable mettal, enduring both the Hammer and the Fire; a fit Emblem of strength. Whence it is that strong impedi∣ments are called Gates of Brass, Psal. 107.16.
And an imprignable strength is called a Wall of Brass, Jer. 1.18. and Chap. 15.20.Dr. Taylour, Christ revea∣led. p. 308. Isai. 9.6. And herein some observe a fit resemblance of Christ, who was the Lord, strong and mighty, as he is called, Psal. 24.8. strong, to stand against all the powers of Hell, A brasen wall: mighty, to de∣liver his people; Mighty to subdue and destroy his enemies. And thence described by his feet of Brass, Revel. 2.15. Able to tread under foot all adverse power. Mighty to suffer and un∣dergo what ever the Justice of God should in∣flict. The humame Nature of Christ in it self was weak, but being supported by the power of the Godhead dwelling in it, it was mightily enabled for the enduring of what ever suffer∣ings: Hereby the flesh of Christ became as Brass. It was Jobs speech of himself: Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh of Brass? Job 6.Job 6.12. Truly, such was the flesh of Christ in his sufferings, made able to undergo that which all the men and Angels in the world must needs have sunk under. 2. For the form or fashion,2. The Form. It was a Serpent; such in appearance, not in truth; having the shape of a Serpent, but neither the sting, nor poyson. And herein again fitly representing this Son of man,Heb. 4.15. who was a man like unto us in all things, sin onely excepted. Herein two par∣ticulars. 1. Christ was like unto us, To us Men:Christ like unto us men. He was made in the likeness of men, saith the A∣postle, 2 Phil.Phil. 2.7.) that is, of us meer men; I, of us sinful men:Rom. 8.3. God sending his Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, Rom. 8. Even as that Brasen ser∣pent carried the likeness of other poysonous and venomous Serpents, so did Christ carry the similitude of sinful flesh; being a sinner both by Reputation, and Imputation: In com∣mon repute a sinner, a great sinner: We know that this man is a sinner (say the Pharisees to the blind man) John 9.Joh. 9.24. that is, a great and notori∣ous sinner:Mark 15.28. Isai. 53.12. He was numbred among the trans∣gressors, (saith the Evangelist, citing that of the Prophet Esay;) Nay more, having as a surety taken upon him the sins of the world (the world of his Elect) he was now a sinner by imputation, and the greatest sinner in the world.2 Cor. 5. last. He was made sin for us, (saith the A∣postle) viz. by Imputation, having the iniqui∣ties of many,Isai. 53. ver. 6. and 12. of us all laid upon him: And here∣in fitly answering the Type; wherein we have a Serpent stinging, and a Serpent healing. Rom. 5.19. Ex serpente morbi; per ser∣pente medicinae: Per hominem peccatum & mors, per homi∣nem justificatio & resurrectio. H. Goti. in Text.Even thus by a man came sin and death, and by a man cometh righteousness and life: The first Adam woundeth, being a man like unto us; the second Adam healeth, being a man like unto us also. God could have found out many other Antidotes, and remedies against the poysonous stingings of these Serpents, but he makes choise of this. A Serpent stings, and a Serpent must heale: Even so possibly he could have found out many other wayes and means for the Re∣deeming and saving of his people, but his Wis∣dom puts it upon this way as most congruous and convenient;1 Cor. 15.21. that as by a man came death, so by a man should come the Resurrection of the
dead; that as in Adam all die, so in Christ should all be made alive, (as the Apostle goeth on,) 1 Cor. 15. 2. Christ was like unto us Men,Christ like unto us sinful men. Serpentem hunc aeneum in eo Christi gessisse imaginem, quòd alius erat quàm videbatur, rectè notavit adver∣sus Tryphonem Justinus, de eo serpente sic lo∣quens, , H. Grot. ibid. us sinful men, but himself not sinful. Even as that Ser∣pent was like unto other Serpents, but with∣out the sting, and poyson that was in them. Thus our blessed Saviour, how ever he carried the similitude of sinful flesh, yet he was no wayes infected or tainted with sin, whether Original, or Actual. Free from the poyson of Original sin, which had infected the nature of all other men: Being sanctified in his concep∣tion by the supernatural work of the Spirit, he was born holy. That holy thing which shall be born of thee, Luke 1.Luke 1.35. Free from Actual sin. He did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.1 Pet. 2.22. And here again behold the Truth answering to the Type. The stinging of those poysonous Serpents cured by a Serpent that had neither sting, nor poyson. The sting and poyson, guilt and power of sin, taken away by him that was free from both. Christ hath suffered for sins (saith St. Peter (the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.1 Pet. 3.18. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righ∣teousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. last. Here is a second resemblance, in the form of this Serpent. 3.3. The occasion of making, and setting it up. Ʋpon what occasion was this Serpent made, and set up? Why, upon the deadly bi∣ting and stinging of the Israelites by those fiery Serpents, whereof some were dead al∣ready,
others in eminent danger of death. Be∣hold here what it was that occasioned the making and lifting up of this true Brasen Ser∣pent: what occasioned the Eternal Son of God to take our nature upon him, in that nature to suffer, to die: It was our Misery that called for this Mercy: we were all stung, and mortally stung by the old Serpent, who fastning upon our first Parents, through them transfused his poyson unto all their posterity: Even as one of those fiery serpents fastning upon one member, the poyson thereof ran through the whole bo∣dy, inflaming, and infecting the blood and spirits in every part. Even thus that old serpent (the divel) fastning the sting of his Tentation in the heart of our first Parents, bringing them to transgress the Command, and so to break the Covenant of their God, he thereby not only wounded them to the death, but through them trasmitted that deadly poyson to the whole mass of mankind, being then in their loyns:Rom. 5.12. so Death passed upon all men (saith the Apostle) For that all have sinned. All the sons of men being in Adam, tanquàm in radice, as in the common stock and root, they sinned in him; and so death, which had seazed upon him, passed upon them; , pervasit; a Metaphor taken from poyson (say some,Instar occulti veneni penetra∣vit. Pareus Com. ad loc.) which being re∣ceived into the stomack, it passeth through the whole body, secretly dispersing it self through all the veines. Thus did the poyson of the old Serpent, being taken in by our first Parents, it presently passed through the whole body of
mankinde, transfusing it self into our veynes, so as we are all by nature no better then dead men; As Mephibosheth once said to David, All of my fathers house were but dead men before my Lord the King:2 Sam. 19.28. Such are all the posterity of Adam through his transgression, and rebel∣lion against the God of heaven, Dead men, An∣shei, Maveth, Men of death; not only subject to natural, but under the power of a spiritual, and bound over unto eternal death; And here is the occasion of bringing in this true Brasen Serpent, of sending a Saviour into the world: Had not the Israelites sinned, and upon their sin been punished after that manner, that Bra∣sen Serpent had never been made: Had not Adam sinned, and sinning died, and all his po∣sterity in him, we should not have needed a Saviour: The Son of God should not have needed to take our nature upon him, in that nature to suffer, to die. It was our sin and mi∣sery that occasioned this Mercy. And let the one ever put us in minde of the other.The Cross of Christ mind∣eth us of our sin and mise∣ry. The Brasen serpent standing in the midst of the Campe, it could not but be a me∣morial to the Israelites to put them in minde of what misery they had brought upon them∣selves by provoking the anger of God against them. The like use make we of the beholding of Christ crucified. When he is held forth un∣to us by the Ministers of the Gospel, in the Word and Sacraments,Gal. 3.1. there crucified before our eyes: when we consider what he hath done, what he hath suffered for us, and reflect upon
our selves, and there take notice of the occasion of this abasement. What was it that should draw the Son of God from heaven to earth, to become the son of man, to take our nature up∣on him; in that nature to do and suffer what he did? In us there was nothing but our mi∣sery, which we had brought upon our selves by reason of sin. And this it was that invited and occasioned this transcendent act of mercy; that, next unto the free-grace, and mercy of God, (a motive within himselfe) moved him to send his Son into the world. 4. The Au∣thour and ap∣pointer of it.4. Which is the fourth particular which the Type leadeth us to: viz. By whom was this means of cure devised and appointed? why, by God himselfe. He it was that directed and commanded Moses to do what he did about the making and setting up of the Brasen Ser∣pent. And behold here, who it was that found out, and appointed this way and means of sal∣vation for poor sinners by Jesus Christ; even God himselfe. Hence is it that Christ is som∣times called the Lords Christ, Luke 2. It was revealed unto Simeon that he should not depart hence before hee had seene the Lords Christ: , Christum Domini: that An∣nointed of the Lord, Christ, who was designed and appointed by God his Father to the of∣fice of Mediatorship. He it was that found out this way of salva∣tion: And who but he could have done it? not men, not Angels. As for men, they with∣out a supernaturall light cannot comprehend
this mystery now it is revealed. The light shi∣neth in darknesse, and the darknesse comprehen∣deth it not, John 1.5. The light, that is, Christ (as the verses following explain it;Rom. 1.21. Eph. 4 18.) shineth in darknesse, that is, in the mind of man, which since the fall, is full of darknesse: but this darknesse comprehendeth it not;1 Cor. 2.14. the naturall man , he receiveth not, (viz. into his understanding) the things which are of God; the Mysteries of the Gospel, specially this great mystery concerning the salvation of mankind by Jesus Christ: No, notwithstanding that it is now so clearly revealed; how much lesse could he ever have invented, and found it out. Had not God himselfe found out this way and means of cure for the Israelites by this Brasen Serpent, it was not Moses could have done it, the Israelites themselves would never have thought of it. Had not God in his infinite wisdome found out this way and means of sal∣vation for poor sinners by Christ, man himself could never have thought of it, would never have dreamed of it. No nor yet the Angels: As for them, they now stand admiring, and adoring this sacred mystery,1 Pet. 1.12. desiring more and more to pry and look into it (as Saint Peter tels us) though fully revealed: Impossible that ever they should have found it out: Here was the Wisdome of God himselfe, where the Apostle speaking of the Doctrine of Christ crucifyed, he calleth it the Wisdome of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. and the wis∣dome of God in a mystery, even hidden wisdome,
1 Cor. 2.7. Hidden from men and Angels; so it was, and so for ever it had been, had not God himself revealed it. Devised by God; and Ordeined by him; so it there followeth. Hidden wisdom, which God ordeined before the world, for our glory,] This God having found out, he determined with himselfe before time; and what he deter∣mined before time, he excuted in time; giving, sending his Son; So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, &c. in the verse after the Text: When the fulnesse of time was come, God sent forth his Son, &c. Gal. 4.4. What ever Christ did, or suffered in his whole course upon earth, it was all by his Fathers ap∣pointment, by Commission from him: This is that which our Saviour saith of himselfe, Joh. 6.27. Him hath God the Father sealed. A Metaphor taken from men who give Commission to their Agents and Deputies, under their hand and seal. True it is, God made use of Instruments in bringing him to the Crosse; as here he made use of Moses as his instrument in setting up the Brasen serpent: But what they therein did, it was not only by a Divine Permission, but Ordination. Even as Moses, what he did a∣bout the Brasen Serpent, it was by Gods dire∣ction and appointment: So, what ever they did about the Crucifying of Christ, they did it (though not by Warrant and direction from God, as Moses did, yet) by his ordination, determination; so Saint Peter tels some of them, Act. 2.23. Him, being delivered by the
determinate counsell and fore-knowledge of God, yee have taken and crucified.] Act. 4.27. Of a truth, against thy holy child Jesus, Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles, &c. were as∣sembled to do; what? whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.] Not a cir∣cumstance in all his passive obedience; but was ordered and determined by God himself. Here is a fourth particular. A fifth followes.5. In the use. How was this Brasen Ser∣pent used? It was lift up (saith the Text;) As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wildernesse. And herein againe behold a lively type of Christ the true Brasen Serpent, who was also lifted up, and so lifted up. [So must the Son of Man be lift up. Quest. For the opening of the phrase,Quest. How Christ is said to be lift∣ed up. How is Christ said to be lifted up? Answ.Answ. 1. In his Passi∣on. Christ may be said to be lifted up di∣vers wayes. 1. In his Passion, his Death: lifted up up∣on the Cross. 2 In his Resurrection;2. Resurrecti∣on. lifted up from the Grave, from which he rose the third day. 3 In his Exaltation, his Ascension3. Ascension. into Heaven, and Session at the right hand of God. Of these two later, the Apostle S. Peter speaks, Act. 2.32, 33. This Jesus God hath raised up: Therfore being by the right hand of God exalted, , lifted up: 4. And lastly, He may be said to be lifted up in the Preaching of the Gospel.4. The preach∣ing of the Go∣spel. And in this fourth and last sense, Mr. Calvin understands
the phrase here in the Text; The Son of Man must be lifted up;Hoc factum est in Evangelii praedicatione. Calv. ad. loc.] And so he is (saith he) in the preaching of the Gospel: There is Christ held forth and lift up even as the Brasen Ser∣pent was lift up in the wildernesse: How was the Brasen Serpent lift up? Why it was set up for a signe, an ensigne, that all the people might take notice of, and look up to for their bodily cure: And even thus is Christ lift up in the preaching of the Gospel: Lift up for a sign and an ensigne; so the Prophet Isaiah hath it, Isai. 11. In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people, ver. 10. Hee shall set up an ensign for the Nations, ver. 12. So again, Isai 49 22. Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to that people, &c. This Ensigne, this Standard is Christ, who is lift up where ever the Gospel is preached. God's Ministers they are his Stan∣dard-bearers, and their work is to lift up Christ; for indeed, what is the Gospel but a Doctrine concerning Christ? concerning his one Person, two Natures, three Offices, his Obedience, Merits, Benefits; In all holding forth Christ, that the people might behold, look up to him, beleeve on him. Thus is Christ there lifted up: A truth, and a usefull one, which I will not wholly exclude out of the Text. The first sense proper to the Text.But the stream of other Expositors, Ancient and Modern, and that (for ought I know) with one consent, carry the sense another way, understanding the phrase in the first sense, of the Death and Passion of Christ; There was
the Son of Man lift up, and that in a literall sense; lift up upon the Crosse; and of this I conceive our Saviour here to speak: In this sense we find this phrase used by himselfe in two other places of this Gospel, Joh. 8.28. and 12.32. in the former place he tells the Jewes, When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you shall know that I am hee. Now how did they lift him up? Why, by crucifying him, lifting him up upon the Crosse: The later Text is expresse and full; And I, (saith our Savi∣our) if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men after me. Lifted up, how? why, the next verse explains it; This spake he (saith the E∣vangelist) signifying what death he should die; Thus the people there understood him: as appears by the 34. verse of that Chapter; and I see no reason why we should not so under∣stand him here in the Text, as under this phrase notifying to Nichodemus and us, both his owne death, and the Manner of his Death. Quest. But here the Question may be, why our Saviour should here make use of this dark and covert expression?Quest. Why our Savi∣our here ma∣keth use of this expression. why doth he not ra∣ther in plain and simple termes say, So must the Son of Man be crucifyed? but he must bee lifted up? Ans.Answ. Not to insist upon what some collect from it, though true and usefull. 1. Our Saviour calleth his Death a lifting up, because (say they) it was the way to his Ex∣altation.1. The Cross the way to his Ex∣altation. He shall drink of the Brook in the
way (saith the Psalmist) therefore shall he lift up the head, Psal. 110.Psal. 110. last. which some understand of the bitter Cup of the Passion, making way to his glorious Exaltation; Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? Luk. 24.Luke 24.26. He humbled himself, &c. Therefore God highly exalted him, lifted him up, Phil. 2.Phil. 2.8, 9. His Humilintion was the way to his Exaltation. 2. Nay more: It was to him an Exaltation:2. The Crosse it self an Exalta∣tion. Christ in his death, however he seemed to be depressed, humbled, yet he was even then ex∣alted, in as much as therein he triumphed o∣ver his and his Churches enemies; overcom∣ing even there, where he seemed to be over∣come: Overcoming Death by dying; Sin, Satan, Hell, by suffering, yeelding: Even there in his Passion upon the Cross, he spoyled Principalities and Powers,Colos. 2.15. triumphing over them (as the Apostle hath it.) In it, , viz. in his Passion upon the Crosse, which was to him as a Chariot of Triumph: Never did Conqueror triumph so gloriously in his Chariot, as Christ upon his Crosse. And in this regard the Death and Passion of Christ might here be called an Exaltation, a lift∣ing up. 3 The phrase al∣luding to the Type, the Bra∣sen Serpent; which was3 But to let both these passe. It is enough our Saviour here maketh use of this phrase be∣ing led to it by the Type, which not onely shadowed out his Death, but the manner or kind of his death; and that most clearly and lively, as I might show you in some particulars.
1 The Brasen Serpent was lift up above the Earth:1 Lift up a∣bove the earth. so was Christ in his death, he was lift up from the earth, as himselfe phraseth it, Joh. 12.32. 2 The Brasen Serpent was set upon a Pole2 Upon a pole. or perch; and thus was Jesus Christ lift up upon the Tree. He bare our sins (saith Saint Peter1 Pet. 2.23. . Just. Apol. 2.) in his own body upon the Tree, , super lignum illud, upon that wood, the wood of the Crosse: The one typifying the other. 3 The Brasen Serpent was lift up in the wil∣dernesse,3. In the Wil∣dernesse. , In loco vasto, pleno veneni, in quo figura mun∣di Christi tem∣poribus corrup∣tissimi. H. Grot. ad loc. so saith the Text, in a waste and so∣litary place, full of venome and poyson; and such, (saith Grotius) was the world (nay the Church) in the time of Christ, marvellously corrupted and impoysoned with all kind of Er∣ror and Superstition. 4 The Brasen Serpent was so lifted up as that all the Camp of Israel might see it; and to that end set up in the midst of the Camp,4. In the midst of the Camp. that they might behold it from all quarters: Thus was Christ lift up as it were in the midst of the world, that the Elect of God in all ages, in all places of the world, might look up unto him. 5 And lastly. The Brasen Serpent was lift up, that whoever beheld it might be healed,5. For a heal∣ing medicine. .] Simi∣li effectu. Grot. how mortally soever he was stung: And to the same end was Christ lift up, that whosoever looketh up to him by faith might be saved, as the verse following explains the resemblance betwixt these two. Thus was the Brasen Serpent lift up,Christ lift up after the like manner. and so was the Son of man lift up.
The death of Christ necessa∣ryAnd it was requisite he should be so, so saith the Text, So must the son of man be lifted up.] Must.] So our Saviour often layeth it down, inculcating upon his Disciples, the ne∣cessity of his death, Matth. 16.21. From that time began Jesus to shew unto his Disci∣ples, how that he [must] go up to Jerusalem, and suffer many things, &c. . Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things? . And so here, , Oportet exaltari, He [must] bee lift up. The death of Christ was not a thing casual, accidental, much lesse needlesse; no, it was both needfull and necessary. In a threefold respect.Necessary, How? What in respect of Christ himself? no. In him it was a free and volun∣tary act,Phil. 2. 8. He humbled himselfe, and became obe∣dient to the death, even the death of the crosse. How then? Why necessary in a threefold re∣spect. 1 In respect of God. 2 In respect of the Scriptures: 3. In respect of us. In re∣spect of God who had decreed it: In respect of the Scriptures which had foretold it; In respect of us, who needed it, had perished without it. 1. Of God.1. In respect of God, who had decreed it. God in his eternall counsell had determined that his Son should suffer, should die. Thence he is said to be the Lamb slain from the foun∣dation of the world,Rev. 13.8. viz. (as in regard of the vertue and efficacy of his death; which exten∣ded to the first age of the world, as well as the last, so) in regard of Gods Decree. Now Gods Decree being immutable, it imposeth a
necessity upon that which in regard of secon∣dary causes, is contingent and accidentall. His Decree is irreversible;Isai. 46.10. My counsel shall stand. In this respect the son of man [must] die. Must] is for the King, for the King of Heaven; whose will is a law, imposing a ne∣cessity upon the creature, a necessity of obey∣ing. 2. Necessary in respect of the Scriptures,2. The Scrip∣tures. which had foretold it. The Scriptures in the Old Testament they had foretold the death and passion of Christ, and that both by word, & by signe. By word fore-prophesied it, by signes fore-typified it. Fore prophesied it; After sixty & two weeks the Messiah shal be cut off, (slain) but but not for himself, (saith Daniel,) Dan. 9.26. He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, (saith the Prophet Esay) Isai. 53.7. Both foretelling the death and passion of Christ. Foretipified it; Isaak lifted up, and laid upon the Altar by his father; the Paschal Lamb, the daily sacrifices, all shadowed out the sacrifice of Christ, none more clearly then that in the Text. The lifting up of the brasen Serpent in the wildernesse. Now that all these, these, prophesies, these tipes might be fulfilled, there∣fore [must] the son of man be lift up, suf∣fer, die. For (as our Saviour tels the Jewes) The Scriptures cannot be broken,John 10.35. . Non potest solvi, It cannot be frustrated, made void. Rather then the Scripture shall be broken, the son of man, I, the Son of God shall be broken. He was broken for our iniqui∣ties, Isai. 53.5.
3. Of man∣kind.3. Necessary in respect of us who needed it. God needed not to have given his Sonne: Christ needed not to have given himself; but we needed it. It was not the Fathers neces∣sity, nor the Sons necessity, nor yet any advan∣tage that could hereby accrue unto either, but our necessities, that brought the Sonne of God to the Crosse. He must suffer and die, otherwise we must have suffered and died, and that eternally. No other way to redeem us, to save us; the justice of God requiring that the same nature which had sinned, should satisfie; such was the cure which God pre∣scribed to the Israelites. They were stung by a serpent, and they must be healed by a serpent; and therefore the brasen serpent must be lift up; otherwise they were but dead men. And such was the way which the wisdome of God had found out for the redeeming of lost mankind: Man sinneth, and man must suf∣fer; the same nature, though not the same person: Mercy dispensed with the one, but justice required the other And therefore the Son of man must be lift up, otherwise all man∣kind had perished, and that for ever, so much the verse following clearly imports. The Son of man must be lifted up, that whosoever belee∣veth on him, should not perish: Intimating, that had not the Son of man been thus lift up, had not Christ died, we had been in a hopeless con∣dition: no way for us but we must needs have perished. In regard of us then it was expedi∣ent: It is expedient for us (saith Caiphas,
speaking by a spirit of prophesie) That one man should die for the people,Joh. 11.50, 51 and that the whole nation perish not. And thus you see how, and in what respects it is here said, that The Son of man [must] be lift up. Applic. To make some Application of this useful truth. In the first place by way of Infor∣mation.Applic. By way of In∣formation. Behold we hear the depth of mans mi∣sery, the height of Gods mercy. Mans misery which required such a remedy, Gods mercy in providing and reaching it forth. Ʋse 1. Take wee notice here of the depth of our own misery, our naturall miseryƲse 1. Mans naturall misery. by rea∣son of sin, fitly represented, and shadowed out in the condition of these Israelites, being stung or bitten by these serpents. Touching which, that the resemblance betwixt the one and the other, may more clearly appear, wee may in the Type consider, and take notice of three particulars.Three parti∣culars notified in the Type. 1. The Serpent it selfe. 2 The sting of this serpent. 3. The deadly effect of that sting where it fastened. The Serpent it self, a venemous and poisonfull crea∣ture; such generally are all serpents, but this more then other; and thence called a fiery serpent, both from the colour, which through the abundance of poyson, was shining and glistering like fire: and also from the nature and quality of its poison, which inflamed and burnt the body like unto fire. The sting, or teeth of this serpent, the instrument whereby it conveyed that poison, the effect of that stinging, which was not onely painfull and
dangerous, but deadly. Now I suppose your thoughts run before my meditations in apply∣ing of every of these. All which read us a usefull lecture touching our naturall mise∣ry, shadowing out unto us how wee are all stung by that old Serpent, whose sting is sin, and the fruit thereof death. Briefly of each. 1. The Serpent; Satan. Revel. 12.9.20.2.1. Behold here the Serpent which hath stung us; Sathan, that old Serpent, as he is sometimes called, and that not unfitly. 1. A Serpent, in as much as in that shape he seduced our first parents,1. Seducing our first pa∣rents in that shape. coming to the woman in the shape of a serpent, speaking in, and by the serpent, making use of that crea∣ture as his instrument in conveying his sug∣gestions;2 Cor. 11.3. whence it is said, that the serpent be∣beguiled Eve, that is, Satan in the Ser∣pent. 2. Resembling the serpent,2. Resembling the serpent. and that in two prime qualities and properties of that creature, viz. the subtilty, and poysonous nature of it. 1. In Subtilty;1. In subtilty. Gen. 3 1. The serpent was more subtil then any beast of the field, Gen. 3. Satan more subtil then any of the sons of men; Crafty to deceive.2 Cor. 11.3. [The Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty.] Having his windings and turnings,2 Cor. 2.11. , Ephes 6.11. . and subtile insinuations, his Devices, his Methods, as the Apostle calleth them, whereby he winds himself in and out: Even as that serpent was able to creep in and out of the Garden unespied; so doth Sathan insinu∣ate himselfe into the most sacred societies,Job 1.6. into
the most holy duties; I, even into the bo∣somes of men, secretly, closely. 2. A Serpent for his poison. The Serpent is full of venome, and so is Satan of malicious wickednesse.2. In malicious wickednesse. O thou full of all subtilty and mischiefe, thou child of the Devil, saith Paul to Elimas the Sorcerer, Acts 13.Acts 13.10. Such was the child, and such is the father; Satan full of wickednesse in himself; thence called some∣times , that wicked one.Matth. 6.13. Ephes. 6.16. And full of poisonous malice against God, and his peo∣ple, which upon all occasions he is ready to vent, and spit forth in mutuall accusations, accusing God to man, and man to God, see∣king to communicate his poison, to infect, and impoison, and destroy others. Here is the Serpent which stung our first parents, and in them all their posterity. But what is the sting of this Serpent? sin.2. The sting of this Serpent, sin. Serpents have their stings or teeth, whereby they convey their poison, wounding where they fasten; so hath this old serpent, whose sting is sin. The sting of death is sin (saith the Apostle) and so of Sathan,1 Cor. 15.56. who hath the pow∣er of death. Had it not been for this,Heb. 2.14. Satan could never have hurt our first parents. A serpent may wind round about the body of man, yet unlesse it fasten the sting or teeth in him, it hurts him not. Had not Sathan faste∣ned the sting of his tentation in our first pa∣rents, drawing them to sin against their God, all his assaults had been to no purpose. Hence was it that our blessed Saviour came off safe
from those incounters with this old serpent, both in the wildernesse, and in the garden. The Prince of this world cometh (saith our Sa∣viour;) but hee hath nothing in me, John 14.John 14. He assaults him as he did our first parent in the Garden; but he could not hurt him, be∣cause he could not fasten the sting of his ten∣tation in him, to draw him to sin. But in our first parents hee did, wounding first the wo∣man, then the man, drawing both into the transgression; and so by that means impoi∣soning the whole nature of man; inwrap∣ping all their posterity both in the guilt, and stain, and dominion of sin. Hence is the sting of this serpent. 3. And what is the effect of this stinging?3. The Effect of this sting∣ing. why, behold that not onely painfull and dan∣gerous, but deadly: Hereby whole mankind was poisoned, and the whole of man. Like as those serpents stinging the one part of the body, the poison spread it selfe through all the members: Thus the poison of sin enter∣ing by one man, it hath poisoned the whole Masse of mankind, and every part of man: so as every power, and faculty of the soule, and every member of the body, they are all poisoned, and that mortally. Such was the stinging of those serpents; it was mortall, deadly,Rom. 6. last. incurable by any naturall means; and such is the effect of sin. The wages of sin is death. Death not onely temporall, but spiri∣tuall and eternall. Of which I shall have occasion to speak hereafter.
Lo here then the condition of all the sons of men by nature.Mans naturall condition very miserable. A condition how mise∣rable? Who is there but so looketh upon the condition of a poor Israelite, being stung with those fiery serpents? what was his smart, his anguish? Thinking of them, learn to pity our selves, or others, being yet in the state of nature: having the sting of sin sticking in our soules, O what horrour, what torment will this procure to us, if not speedily cured? That we feel it not now, it is because we are asleep. An Israelite being asleep, possibly he might not feel the anguish of his stinging, but be∣ing awakened, hee could not but be sensible of it. Hence it is that wicked men now feele not the smart, and anguish of their sins; A∣las, they are asleep: but if ever God awa∣ken them (as sooner or later hee will, in this life, or in hell) what horrours, what torment will these procure unto them? See it in Ju∣das, when the old Serpent had fastened the sting of his tentation in him, and brought him to betray his Lord and Master, at first he feeles it not; but so soon as God had awa∣kened his conscience, see now how in the an∣guish of his soule he runs to the Chief Priests, (even as these Israelites being stung did to Moses) bewailing his condition, complaining of his sin and misery;Matth. 27.4. I have sinned in betray∣ing innocent blood: but all in vaine, without either cure or ease. The poison being got to his heart, he swels, and bursts, and dies upon it. And here is the first thing which I pro∣pounded
to be taken notice of: Mans misery by nature, represented and shadowed out by the condition of an Israelite stung with these fiery serpents. Ʋse 2. Gods mercy in providing a remedy.2. In the second place, behold we also in the same glasse the height of Gods mercy, in providing a salve for this sore, a remedy for this misery. What a mercy do we account it in God, that hee was pleased to provide a brusen serpent, to cure the stinging of those fiery serpents? And so indeed it was, speci∣ally if looked upon according to the circum∣stances of it: That he who was justly provo∣ked to wrath against them for their sins, their ingratitude, their murmuring and repining against him, that he should provide a remedy for them; and that hee should then do it, when all other means had left them despe∣rate; that he should step into them in this their great necessity; what a mercy? Be∣hold the like, a far greater mercy in the thing signified: That God should provide a way and means of deliverance for us when wee were enemies to him;Rom. 5.8.10. and that he should then do it, when neither men nor Angels could do any thing for us, behold here as infinite wis∣dome, so infinite mercy. And who can be∣hold it without a thankfull admiration? That God should turn Physician to such a Patient; that he should devise for them, and prescribe to them, who spared not to devise, and speak, and act against him; then taking them in hand for cure, when all other means had given
them over, how doth this commend the mer∣cy and love of God both towards them and us? Behold here the truth of that prophetical protestation, Ezek. 33.Ezek. 33.11. As I live (saith the Lord God) I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. That God punished some of the Israelites with death for their rebellions, it was but justice: making them exemplary to the rest. Poena ad paucos, terror ad omnes; That he spared the rest, providing a cure for them, this was mercy; wherein God declared that hee was not delighted in the misery and destruction of his creature. That God bin∣deth some wicked and ungodly men over un∣to just condemnation for sin, this he doth in justice; yet is he not delighted in the destru∣ction of his creature; and thence is it that he hath provided a way and means of salva∣tion for others. Hee that lift up this brasen serpent in the wildernesse for those surviving Israelites, he hath also lift up a Saviour for us, delivering his own and onely Son to the death for us; that he dying, we might not die; that believing on him, we might not perish, but have everlasting life. Ʋse 3. And hath God done this for us?Ʋse 3. Exhortation to make use of this remedy. O let not this grace and mercy of his bee in vain to any of us! When God had caused the brasen serpent to be set up in the wildernesse, such as were stung with those fiery serpents, (I suppose) they should not need to have been pressed to go out of their Tents, to re∣paire and look up unto it for cure. Such is our
condition (as you have heard,) All stung, and that mortally by this old Serpent: And such hath Gods mercy been, he hath provided a brasen serpent for us, caused his Son to bee lift up for us: O let us not now neglect so great salvation, but come forth of our Tents, go we out of our selves, and come unto Jesus Christ, looking up to him that we may bee made partakers of the benefits of his death and passion. To this end was the brasen serpent lift up, that the people might look up to it. And to this end was the Lord Jesus Christ lift up upon the Crosse, that poor sinners might look unto him. And this let us do. I mean, as many of us as feel the need wee have of him: as feele the sting of sin stick∣ing in our souls, and so desire to be freed not onely from the guilt and terrour, but also from the power of it. For such and onely such they are that shall have benefit by Christ. The brasen serpent being lift up, all Israel might look upon it, but they only had benefit by it, who feeling themselves stung, looked up to it for cure. Thus is it with our Brasen Serpent, the Lord Jesus. Others may look upon him, and yet be ne∣ver the better for him: So did the Jews, who saw him crucified, yet had no benefit by him:Ferus ad Text. Multi viderunt & oderunt, Many of them saw him, and hated him; and so had better never have seen him. Thus do many Christians behold Christ in the history of
the Gospel, behold him crucified before their eyes in the preaching of the word, and yet not feeling the neede they have of him, they shall never have any benefit by him. O then labour wee first to be sensible of this, to feele our selves stung, mortally stung.Be we sensible of our conditi∣on. So we are, whether we feele it or no? and the lesse we feele it, the greater is our dan∣ger, and the lesse hope of grace: onely labour to bee thus sensible hereof, that so wee may feele the need wee have of Jesus Christ, that wee may see our selves dead men without him. Now, and not till now, are we fit for him: Other qualifications or predispositions hee requireth none; onely that we be sensible of the need we have of him. Being such, now come we unto him, and come with boldnesse and confidence, being assured that wee shall finde a perfect cure in him, and from him, wee shall not die, but live. So much the verse following will assure us of, wherein we shall meet with the two other particulars, which I took no∣tice of in the Type, fully answered; viz. the end and efficacy of this our Brasen Serpent, To which I now come. Ver. 15. That whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but have Eternall life.] IN which words wee may see the Truth not onely Answering,The Truth ex∣celling the Type. but Excelling
the Type, advanced above it, and that in two particulars: In the Effect of it, and in the Extent of that effect. For the Effect: The brasen serpent was the means of a bodily cure, of preserving a temporall life. But Christ is the means of a spirituall cure, of procuring an eternall life. For the Extent of that ef∣fect; The brasen serpent was erected for the use and benefit of the Jew; Christ crucified is a Saviour both of Jew and Gentile; the effi∣cacy and vertue of his death extending to both alike. That whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but have eternall life.] Division.Shall we devide the words? we may take notice in them of two things; a Condition, and a Promise: A condition, the same with the conditi∣on of the new Covenant, the Covenant of Grace; viz. believing on Jesus Christ; Whosoever belie∣veth on him. The Promise, importing the great benefit accruing to them who shall rightly performe this condition. They shall not perish, &c. Wherein wee may take no∣tice, first of the benefit it selfe; then of the persons to whom it extends. The Benefit it selfe, which is partly Privative, partly Po∣sitive. Privative, deliverance from death, [They shall not perish.] Positive, fruition of life, and that eternall life; They shall not pe∣rish, but have eternall life.] The Extent of which benefit is indefinite, universall, to all those that shall performe the condition. [That whosoever believeth, &c.] It is not my purpose to insist precisely
in the steps of this Division. I shall ra∣ther, for our better and more profitable proceeding, draw forth the words into four distinct and plaine doctrinall Propositions, or Conclusions. The first whereof is necessarily implyed, the rest plainly expres∣sed. 1.Four Doctri∣nall Conclu∣sions. All men by nature are in a perishing e∣state and condition. 2. The onely way and means of deliverance out of that perishing state, is by Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 3. The onely way and means of receiving be∣nefit by and from Jesus Christ, is, to believe on him. 4. Whosoever so believeth on him, shall have perfect salvation by him. Four main and usefull Conclusions, each a Principle of Christian Religion, a Head of Catechisme, necessary even for children to know and understand, and yet of soveraigne use for the most growne Christian. I shall handle them distinctly, and plainly; still ha∣ving an eye to the Type here set before us, wherein (as in a glasse) we may read the truth of every of these perticulars, and of the grea∣test part of what I shall say concerning them. Begin with the first:Conclusion 1. All men by nature in a pe∣rishing condi∣tion. A truth, though not directly expressed, yet necessarily implyed: All men by nature are in a perishing condition. Mark it; Christ the true Brasen Serpent was lift up, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish, &c. A cleare intimation that
without Christ, and without faith in Christ, all men are but dead men, in a perishing state, a state of perdition, deprived of life, subjected unto death. 1 Deprived of life.1. Deprived of life, that life which the Text speaketh of, viz. Eternall life, which is begun in Grace, perfected in Glory; of this life are all men naturally deprived. Being destitute of the Life of Grace, so saith S. Paul of the Gentiles before conversion,Eph. 4 18. They were aliena∣ted (estranged) from the life of God. That life whereby God liveth in his Saints, the life of grace; they were strangers to it, they knew not what it meant; destitute of this Spirituall life, and shut out from the life of glory;Rom. 3.23. All have sinned (saith S. Paul speaking of the universa∣lity of man-kind) and are deprived of the glory of God;] They come short of it, , De∣ficiuntur, they are cast behind; A Metaphor (saith Beza) taken from runners in a Race,Beza Gr. Ann. who through naturall weaknesse, or by a fall, or some like impediment, are so far cast be∣hind, as that it is not possible they should e∣ver fetch it up again, so as to win the prize. So fareth it with all men naturally; through the fall of Adam, in whose loyns then they were, and through their own naturall weak∣nesse thereby contracted, they are so far cast be∣hind, that do what they can, improve the pow∣er of nature to the uttermost, they can never of themselves come up to the goal, so as to win the prize, never attain eternal life. All depri∣ved of life. And
2. All subjected unto death;2. Subjected unto death. Gen. 3.17. and that by ver∣tue of that first threatning, The day thou eat∣est thereof thou shalt die the death, Gen. 3. All subjected to a threefold death, Temporall, Spirituall and Eternall. Temporall of the Body; Spirituall of the Soul; Eternall both of Soul and Body: Being all inevitably sub∣ject to the first, lying under the power of the second, and under the sentence of the third: Having their Bodies mortall, their Souls dead, Dead in trespasses and sins:Eph. 2.1. Souls and Bodies bound over unto Eternall death, which consi∣steth in an eternall separation from the pre∣sence of God, in whose presence is life: an e∣ternall confinement to that place and state of torment, prepared for the divel and his an∣gels; all which (if need were) might be made good in particulars. And herein is the forlorn perishing state and condition of all men by na∣ture; that it is so, it cannot be denyed. But how cometh it to be so? See the ground and cause of it in the Type: This hath the Serpent done;Reas. This hath the Serpent done. The Israelites be∣ing stung or bitten by those fiery serpents, though both strong and healthfull before, they were now but dead men, carrying death in their bosomes; and so fareth it with the sons of men, however created in a blessed state and conditi∣on, in a healthfull constitution (as I may say) with a posse non mori, a possibility of being im∣mortall, yet upon the stinging of the serpent, the old serpent fastning his sting in Adam, through him transfusing his poyson, the deadly poyson
of sin to all his posterity, hereby they are be∣come so wretched, so miserable, all dead men, in a perishing condition; so the Apostle lay∣eth it down clearly and plainly in that knowne Text, Rom. 5.12. As by one man sin entred in∣to the world, and death by sin, so death passed upon all, for that all have sinned:] Mark it; Here is the head and spring of all that evill of sin and misery which hath broken in upon mankind. Adam sinned, and sinning died, being thereupon subjected to that threefold death. Now Adam thus dying and perishing, all his posterity perished in him, and with him; even as it is with a tree, the Root dying, all the Branches die in it, and with it: So stand∣eth the case betwixt Adam and his posterity: Adam was the common Root of mankind, all o∣thers of the sons of men were in him Tanquam in radice, as Branches in the Root; and so consequently he dying, they all die in him, and with him. Thus briefly you see both the truth of this first Conclusion, and the ground of it. As briefly bring we it home by way of Application, and so passe to the other Con∣clusions which are here more expresly layd down in the Text. 1. By way of Conviction:Ʋse 1. Conviction. See this to be our state. Is this the state of all men by nature? Be we then convinced that this is our estate in particular. An easie matter it is to beleeve, confesse and acknow∣ledge this truth in the gross, in the generall, that all men by nature are in a perishing state, lost men and women, children of perdition.
to bring it home to a mans selfe in particular, to be convinced and made sensible that this is my estate, thy estate, here is a difficulty; a thing which few do, or endeavour to do; and hence it is that men being in the state of na∣ture, are so little or nothing affected with the dangerousnesse of that condition: They can lie and continue in that estate wherein they were born, and yet never be troubled at it, never affected with it: What is the reason here∣of? Why, they look upon this truth only in the grosse, in the generall notion of it; Now Generalities doe not affect; Genera nec agunt, nec patiuntur. Certainly, were men but once throughly convinced and perswaded that this is their estate in particular, they would not so quietly and contentedly sit downe in it; they would never be at rest untill they have got some evidence, some assurance unto their own souls, that they are gotten out of that estate, brought out of this state of nature into a state of grace. And therefore in the fear of God, as many of you as were never yet throughly convinced of the truth hereof, now let it into your souls, and do not suffer vain thoughts to lodge within you, as viz. that you shall do as well as others, (so you may, and yet be miserable enough;) or, that whatever become of others, yet it shall go well with you; what saith our Saviour to the Jews flattering themselves with the like thoughts? viz. That however the judgements of God might light upon others, yet they
should escape. Not so (saith he) Except ye repent,Luke 13.3. ye shall all likewise perish: Let it be spo∣ken to every secure sinner that stands before me this day, that lieth sleeping in his naturall state and condition, flattering himselfe with a selfe conceited apprehension, that he is not as some others, (as the Pharisee said of himself) no Swearer, no Drunkard, no profane, no scandalous person, and hereupon speaks peace to his own soul, promising to himself immu∣nity from that wrath of God which shall fall upon others, I tell you nay; but except ye re∣pent, except ye be renewed, changed, brought out of that estate of nature, and brought home unto God by Christ, ye shall likewise perish; Your estate being for the present that estate wherein you were born, it is a perishing state, a state of perdition; so as living and dy∣ing in it, there is no hope but you must perish, and for ever perish. An Israelite being stung, was now but a dead man; and so art thou be∣ing under the guilt and power of sin. O that this apprehension were but let in, and through∣ly set on upon every soul here present, then should I not need to presse, what at present I intend only to propound by way of Exhorta∣tion. Ʋse 2. Look out for cure.That every one of us here present would look out for our selves, our owne safety, our owne security, never giving rest unto our souls untill we be upon good grounds ascertained that we are got out of this state. My Brethren, will any creature (man only excepted) rest
in such a state as threatens destruction to it: Such is the state of nature, a state of perditi∣on, threatning certaine destruction to every soul that lieth and continueth in it. And therefore every of us (in the fear of God) be excited to a serious and earnest inquiry after some way and means of delive∣rance out of this estate; that having found it out, we may put our souls upon it, so as we may not perish with the rest of the world. The Israelites feeling themselves stung with these Fiery Serpents, they look out for cure: To that end, they repair unto Moses, making their moan unto him: the like will we do for our bodies; Do we find them distempered, wounded, we will look out to the Physician, Chyrurgion, for remedie and cure. O, be as wise for our souls! Do we feel them wound∣ed, stung with this Old Serpent? Do not now lie and die in our sins; God hath provided a means of cure, seek we, enquire we after it, and make use of it. And to that end, come with these Israelites to Moses, come to the Ministers of God,Come to Mo∣ses, the Mini∣sters of God. enquiring from them out of the word what course is to be taken; this will a wounded soul, a soul rightly humbled do, feeling the sting of sin sticking in it, and apprehending the dead∣ly consequence of it, it will now have recourse to God, to his Word, to his Ministers, asking counsell of them. So did the Jews being prick∣ed in their hearts, they come unto Peter and the rest (even as the Israelites here did unto
Moses:) and what is their errand? Men and Brethren,Act. 2.37. what shall we do? The Jaylor the like; being stung, and sensible of his pain, he cometh to Paul and Silas; and what is his Question?Act. 16.30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? O that men would take the same course; feel∣ing the sting of sin sticking in their souls and consciences, not let it alone festring and wrankling, and spreading the venome of it more and more, till it be past cure; nor yet seeking out after indirect and unprofitable wayes and meanes of cure: As it is in the case of some, of many, when they feel the smart, the sting of sin galling their consciences, what course take they? Why (it may bee) with Saul, send for a Musician to charme that evill and unquiet spirit; or with Cain, fall to buil∣ding of Cities, plunge themselves into business and imployment of the world; use some dan∣gerous, it may be desperate Anodynes, some means or other to cast the soul into a dead sleepe, to benum the sense of it, which they ordinarily do by drowning and surcharging it with the pleasures or profits of the world; A∣las, it is not this will do it. It was not all the Physicians and Magicians in the world that could have cured a stung Israelite. No, when they have done all, they must come to Mo∣ses: They are not all the carnall comforts and contentments in the world that can cure a wounded soul; possibly they may lull it a∣sleep for a time, and stupifie it so as it shall not feel the pain; (as haply some stupifying me∣dicines
might have been found out for the Is∣raelites) but it is only God and his Word that can prescribe meanes of comfort and cure: And therefore hither have we recourse, enqui∣ring of God's Ministers what we shall do; by what means we may obtain deliverance and salvation. This being the question, now know we for our comfort, that God hath pro∣vided a way and meanes for this purpose; when neither Man nor Angel could do it, God himselfe in infinite wisdome and mercy hath found out a way and meanes for the cu∣ring, healing, saving of our souls: And what is that way, that means? Why, only Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And so I am fallen upon the second Conclusion. 2. The onely way and meanes of deliverance and salvation for poor perishing sinners, is by Je∣sus Christ, and him crucified.Conclus. 2. Christ crucifi∣ed the only re∣medy. A Truth clear∣ly held forth in the Type: The Israelites be∣ing stung with these deadly Serpents, they had no means of cure but only this Brasen Serpent being lift up; this was to them the Soveraign and only Antidote, and remedy. Even thus mankind being mortally stung by that Old Ser∣pent, brought into a perishing condition by sin, they have no other remedy, no other way or means of salvation but Christ, and Christ lifted up upon the Crosse, Christ crucified; so the Text it selfe plainly expresseth and ap∣plyeth it; So must the Son of Man be lift up, That whosoever beleeveth on him should not pe∣rish, &c.
A Principle, I, the Principle of Christian Religion,The Cardinal Principle of Christian Re∣ligion. containing in it the summ and sub∣stance of the Gospel. For the better handling of it, I shall draw it forth into three distinct Branches.The Conclusi∣on divided in∣to three Pro∣positions. 1. That Christ: 2. Only Christ: 3. Only Christ crucified is the meanes of man's deliverance and salvation. Open these three severally by way of Explication, Illustration; put them together in the Application. Prop. 1. Jesus Christ is the Saviour and de∣liverer of lost mankind.Prop. 1. Christ the Sa∣viour of lost mankind. A Truth first preached in Paradise by God himselfe; where he tells the Serpent, that the Seed of the woman should bruise his head, Gen. 3.15. It shall bruise thy head.] It, viz. the Seed of the woman, Christ the Seed of the Virgin, the singular seed of the woman. Shall bruise thy head, i. e. Break the power of that old Serpent, Satan; And this hath Jesus Christ done, and daily doth. And hence is it that he is called sometimes by the name of a Redeemer, a Deliverer. I know that my Redeemer liveth (saith Job:Job. 19.25.) The Re∣deemer shall come to Zion (saith the Prophet) Isai. 59.Isai. 59.20. There shall come out of Zion the Delive∣rer (saith the Apostle, relating to that of the Prophet) Rom. 11.Rom. 11.26. Elsewhere and often a Sa∣viour, Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour (saith Peter) Act. 5.Act. 5.31. The Au∣thour of salvation, and that, Eternall salvati∣on. Being made perfect (saith the Apostle) hee became the Author of Eternall salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.Heb. 5.9. A Saviour to his people, his Elect: So much his name
imports, Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people (saith the Angel to Joseph, Mat. 1.Mat, 1.21. Saving them from spirituall enemies, sin and Satan. Save them; from what? why from sin and Satan, their Spirituall enemies; He shall save his people from their sins: Sin is the sting of the Old Serpent (as I have shown you.) And from this Christ the true Brasen Serpent, saveth his people. Obj. Saveth them, you may say,How it is that Beleevers are infested with both? How then is it that they are daily so infested as they are? Infested by sin and Satan; assaulted by the one, and foiled by the other? Answ. To this let the Type make answer, which meets with it fully. The Israelites af∣ter the Brasen serpent was set up, they were still infested with those Fiery Serpents, still stung by them, and that stinging as painfull to them, and in it selfe as dangerous and deadly as formerly it was; but it was not so mortall to them who looked up to that Brasen serpent. Here was the vertue of this soveraign Anti∣dote. The brasen serpent saved them not from the stinging of the Serpents, but from the deadly consequence of that stinging. Thus doth Christ save his people from sin and satan in this life, not from being infested by them (though in part also he restrains the malice of Satan, and abates the power of sin in his peo∣ple; the Truth herein again excelling the Type) but from perishing by them. Mark the Text, [That whosoever beleeveth on him, should not pe∣rish:] Thus doth Christ save his people, though not altogether from sin it selfe, yet from the
consequence of sin, which is death, and condem∣nation: There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Rom. 8.1. In the wildernesse, the Serpents themselves were not taken away, nor yet the sting from these Serpents, nor yet the venome from that sting; onely rendred not mortall to those who made use of this means of Cure. Thus in this life sin is not quite abolished, nor yet the guilt taken away from the sin: No, even in a justified person sin still remains, and that as sin, which the beleever often feeleth the smart of, but the guilt, and punishment, and power of it is so taken away by Christ, as that it shall not be mortall to the person that looks up unto him: They shall not perish, but have eternall life. Thus is Christ a Saviour to his people. Quest.Quest. How Christ cometh to be a Saviour. But how cometh he to be so? Ans. He is so by his Fathers appointing, his own undertaking, and discharging of this office. 1. By his Fathers OrdinationAnsw. 1 By his Fa∣thers Ordina∣tion. and appoint∣ment. How came the Brasen Serpent to be an Antidote against the biting or stinging of those fiery serpents? why God had designed and appointed it to be made, and set up for that end and purpose. Even thus cometh the Son of man to be the Saviour of mankind. God his Father designed and appointed him to this office;Psal. 89.19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty, (saith the Psalmist.) It is spoken literally of David, mystically of Christ, upon whom God the Father laid the office of re∣conciliation,
of propitiation. Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation, (saith the Apo∣stle, speaking of Christ) Rom. 3.Rom. 3.25. A Propiti∣ation, that is, a means of reconciliation and attonement. Hereunto God his Father ap∣pointed him; , fore-appointed, fore-ordained him, viz. from eternity. This God did before time, and having designed him to this office, he fitted and furnished him for it. A Body hast thou prepared (or fitted) for me.Heb. 10.5. It is spoken in the Person of Christ: And ha∣ving thus fitted him for it, he puts him upon it, sending him into the world upon this ser∣vice, to be the Saviour of it.John 3.17. God sent his Son into the world, not to condemne the world, but that the world through him might bee saved, (saith the 17th verse of this Chapter.1 John 4.14.) We have seen, and do testifie (saith this same Apostle) that the Father sent the Son to bee the Saviour of the world. Thus hee came by his office; His Father designed him to it, fitted him for it, put him upon it. 2. By his own undertaking.2 By his own undertaking. Being thus put upon it, he undertook it, and that voluntari∣ly, willingly: Lo I come to do thy will, O God,Heb. 10.7.9. (It is the speech of Christ himselfe to his Fa∣ther) Heb. 10. And what was the will of his Father? why, that he should undertake this great work of Redemption, the saving of his Elect people, that none of them might perish. This is the Fathers will which hath sent me, (saith our Saviour to the Jews) that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but
should raise it up again at the last day.John 6.39, 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life, &c. And this will of his he came to performe.Luke 19.10. The Son of man is come to seeke, and to save that which was lost.] He is come, venit promptus & paratus, rea∣dy to do whatever his Father required from him, for the saving, and redeeming of his E∣lect. 3. What he undertook, he hath also dis∣charged.3. By his faithfull dis∣charging. As he undertook it willingly, so he hath discharged it faithfully. He was faith∣full to him that appointed him, Heb. 3.2. Faith∣full in discharging that office which God his Father had appointed to him for mans re∣demption. In that regard, called a faithfull High Priest, Heb. 2.17. A faithfull High Priest in things appertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. Christ faithful in his obedi∣ence. 1. Active.Faithfull. So he shewed himselfe both in his Active and Passive Obedience. 1. In his Active Obedience, fulfilling the Law. It becometh us to fulfill all righteousness, (So he telleth John the Baptist.) Mat. 3.15. This he came to do, I am come not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Mat. 5.17. And this he did, He fulfilled the Law, not onely the Ceremoniall Law, which was fulfilled in him; but also the Morall Law, which was fulfilled by him; and that, as by instruction to o∣thers, so by observation in himselfe. 2. In his Passive2. Passive. Obedience, he suffered
the curse of the Law.Gal. 4.2. Being made under the Law, (as the Apostle hath it,) as under the Observation, so under the Malediction of it: Being a Surety for his Elect, hee made a full and plenary satisfaction, (as by doing, so) by suffering what the justice of God required at their hands: Bearing the sins of the world, (the world of his Elect;) which were layed upon him by his Father: He bare the sins of many, (saith the Prophet) Isai. 53.Isai. 53. last. Of many, id est, of his Elect. He bare them as a Surety: They being charged upon him, he bare the penalty of them: He bare our sins in his Body upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. And thus bearing them, he expiated them, took them away. Behold, the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world, John 1.29. , ferens, & aufe∣rens; Bearing them, and bearing them away, Even as that Leviticall Scape-goat, having the sins of the people put upon it by the Priest, it bare them, and bare them away, carried them into the wildernesse out of sight. Even thus did the Lord Jesus; having the sins of his Elect layed upon him by God his Father, he bare them, and bare them away, taking them out of the sight of God. This hee hath done, this hee hath suffered for his peo∣ple. 3. To which I might adde what hee yet continueth to do for them, viz. to make Inter∣cession3. His effe∣ctuall Interces∣sion. Isai. 53. last. for them: He bare the sins of many, and made Intercession for the Transgressours, (saith the Prophet in the place fore-named.) This
he did upon the Crosse: There he prayed for his Persecutors; Father, forgive them; And this he still doth being in Heaven: It is Christ who dyed, ye rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Rom. 8.34. By which means he becometh a compleat and perfect Saviour to his people; daily applying to them, what by the once offering up of himselfe he impe∣trated and obtained for them; Wherefore (saith the Apostle) he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, see∣ing he ever liveth to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. And thus you see the first of these Branches opened unto you; viz. That Christ is a Savi∣our to lost mankind, and How he cometh to be so. I might here for further Illustration, shew you yet more fully, Quest.Quest. What Christ hath done for the healing and saving of his people. What Christ hath done for his peo∣ple in order to their salvation, for the healing and saving of them. Ans.Answ. 1. He was made the son of man. 1. For answer hereunto, I shall not need to go out of the Text; He was made the Son of Man, and being so, he was lift up for that purpose. Even as the Brasen serpent, it was first made in the forme and fashion of other Serpents, and being so made, then it was lift up on high; even thus the Lord Jesus Christ, he was first made the Son of Man, a man like unto us, In shape and fashion as a man (as the Apostle hath it;Phil. 2.6. Vid Muscul. ad loc.) Not that he was not a True man, as the Manichees, and some other He∣reticks
would have it, who bring in the Type here in the Text for countenance of this their error. The Brasen serpent (say they) was not a true Serpent, only it had the shape and fa∣shion of a Serpent: So Christ (say they) he was not a true man, only he was in shape and fashion as a man. Not so, Our Saviour him∣selfe here sufficiently refutes this error, cal∣ling himselfe the Son of Man: A phrase importing the verity of his humane nature: He took a true humane nature upon him, being made like unto us in all things, sin only ex∣cepted. 2. And being thus made the Son of Man,2 He was lift up. he was then (in the second place) lift up: Lift up upon the Crosse, suffering, dying for the sake of his people; Humbling himselfe and becoming obedient unto the death, even the death of the Crosse. Of which more anon. Passe wee to the second Branch of this maine Con∣clusion. Prop. 2.Prop. 2. Christ the only Saviour. Christ is the onely Saviour of lost mankind. Mark the Text; Like as Moses lift up the Serpent, &c. so must the Son of Man be lift up. The Israelites in the wildernesse had no means of cure against the stinging of those Fiery Serpents, but the Brasen serpent; and that not many, but one Brasen Serpent. Chri∣stians have but one Jesus; To us (saith the Apostle) there is but one God, and one Lord Je∣sus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. One Saviour: True, Temporall saviours we have read of many, whom God occasionally and succes∣sively
raised up unto his people, as Moses, and Joshuah and Gideon,2 King. 13.5. & last. Nehem. 9.27. &c. Instruments im∣ployed by God for the working of temporall salvation and deliverance, unto his people; and in that respect sometimes called Saviours: But these were all but Types of this true Saviour, the Lord Jesus, who is the onely Eternall Savi∣our to the sons of men. That of Saint Peter (as it is full, so it) is very Emphaticall, spe∣cially as some, and most Greek Copies read it, Act. 4 12. Neither is there salvation in any o∣ther. ; Non est in alic, in nemine: Salvation is not in another, in any other; For there is no other name under heaven given amongst men by which we must be saved: No other Name, i. e. no other power, or ver∣tue by which salvation can be hoped, or look∣ed for: By this Name were the Fathers be∣fore Christ saved, and by the same Name must we be saved; We beleeve (saith Peter) that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they, Act. 15.11. E∣ven as it was in the Camp of Israel, there was but one Brasen serpent, which they looking up∣on from all quarters, were all cured by it; Thus but one Jesus, one Saviour in, and for the whole world; whom the Fathers looked upon forwards, we backwards, both alike sa∣ved by him. Christ the alone Saviour. Ministers how called saviours, and how men said to save themselves.Object. Here a triviall Objection meeteth us (which I should not have taken up, did not I find the Type in the Text so fully meeting with it.) How then are Ministers said to be
Saviours? How are men said to save them∣selves? It is Pauls charge to Timothy, 1 Tim. 4.1 Tim. 4. last. that he should take heed to his Doctrine, &c. adding this for a reason, Because in so doing, he should save both himself and others. And it is Saint Peters exhortation to the Jews, that they would save themselves from that untoward generation, Act. 2.Act. 2.40. viz. from partaking in their sin and punishment. Answ. For answer. Ministers save others, and private persons save themselves. How? Why, only as Gods Instruments, in holding forth, and working out of this salvation. Thus do Ministers save others, even as Moses saved the Israelites, by lifting up the Brasen serpent amongst them. This is all we can do, to lift up the Brasen serpent, to lift up and hold forth Christ crucified; to crucifie him before your eyes in the preaching of the Word; to set him be∣fore you, to offer him to you, to perswade and command you to look up unto him. On the other hand, Men save themselves, How? Why, even as the Israelites did by looking up to the Brasen serpent; this is all that we can do, and more then we can do of our selves, but be∣ing inabled by the grace of God opening the eye of the soul, we look up unto Christ for cure; in the mean time the healing, saving vertue is not in the Minister, not in our selves, but in Christ; even as that healing vertue was not in Moses who lift up the Brasen Serpent, nor yet in the eye that look'd up to it; but in the Brasen serpent being lift up, and looked upon.
The saving vertue is not in the Minister that lifteth up and holdeth forth Christ in the Mi∣nistry of the word, though dispenced with ne∣ver so much evidence and demonstration of the Spirit;Act. 3.12. Why look ye upon us (saith Peter to the people) as if we by our own power or vertue had made this man whole? There was no vertue in the Apostles themselves to do any outward cure upon the Bodies of men, much lesse to do any spirituall cure upon their souls; The vertue is Christs, the merit is his, the efficacy his; who is the alone Saviour of his people. The third Branch is yet behind, of which but a word. Prop. 3.Prop. 3. Christ [crucifi∣ed] the only Saviour. Only Christ [crucified] is the means of mans salvation. Mark the Text, So must the son of man he lift up, (viz. upon the Cross) That whosoever beleeveth on him (viz. so lift up) should not perish, &c. The Saviour of lost man∣kind is Christ crucified: Hence is it that Paul attributes such a saving vertue to the Crosse of Christ,1 Cor. 1.18. The preaching of the Cross is to them which are saved the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. that is, the preaching of Christ crucified, so the 23. verse of that Chapter explains it; Wee preach Christ crucified,ver. 23. &c. to them which are called, Christ the power of God. This was the subject of Pauls preaching, Christ, and Christ crucified:1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. He is the alone Saviour of the world; and how hath he wrought this salvation for it? Why, by his Cross: By this means he wrought
that reconciliation betwixt God and man; He reconciled both (viz. Jews and Gentiles) unto God in one body by the Crosse,Ephes. 2.16. having slain the enmity thereby. By the Crosse, that is, by his sufferings upon the Cross, which is the merito∣rious cause of mans salvation. True it is, salvati∣on is the fruit & result of the whole obedience of Christ, his Active, his Passive obedience; but the Spirit of God ordinarily attributes it to the later, his Passive obedience, and that to the last Act of it, his suffering upon the Crosse; in as much as that was the chief part of his obedience:Phil. 2.8. He humbled himselfe and be∣came obedient unto the death, even the death of the Crosse. And thus you see this principle of Christian Religion opened and illustrated in the severall branches of it. That which re∣maines is the Application of it, which I shall direct onely by way of a serious Exhor∣tation. Exciting and perswading every one of us, that renouncing all other wayes and means,Ʋse. Seek salvation only by and through Christ we would put our souls onely upon this, seek∣ing salvation only by, and through Jesus Christ, and him crucified. The Motion consists of two Branches; the former taking off our eyes and hearts from all other things; the later directing and fixing them upon Jesus Christ. Touch up∣on them severally. 1. Away with all other wayes and meanes of salvation but this. This is Gods way,1. Renoun∣cing other wayes. which in his infinite wisdome and mercy hee hath found out, and laid out; All other wayes
are but by-wayes, false wayes. Such are the wayes of our owne devising; wayes wherein we may, and certainly shall lose our selves, but never find what we seeke for. And therefore away with them,Take heed of setting up any thing. taking heed of setting up any thing in stead of Christ, or together with Christ. 1. In stead of Christ.1. In stead of Christ. Had the Israelites any of them left the Brasen Serpent of Gods ap∣pointing, and trusted to Chyrurgeons or Physi∣cians, or made use of any salves or medicines of their own, how skilfull soever the one, or sove∣raign the other, yet they had died for it. And so is it with the soul that seeketh for justifica∣tion and salvation, in or by any thing but the Crosse of Christ; so doing, hee shall perish in his sins. Renounce wee then all other means. In speciall, away with our owne Righteous∣nesse,Renounce our own righte∣ousnesse. the righteousnesse of the Law, that great Idol which not onely blind Romanists, but even many ignorant and formall Prote∣stants among our selves, set up in stead of Christ. Ask them how they hope to be saved? Why, by their good doings, their good mea∣nings, their just and righteous dealing, their harmlesse, and blamelesse lives and conversa∣tions. Now alas, what is this, but as if the Is∣raelites being stung, should have applied only plaisters of their owne making? in the mean time neglecting the Brasen Serpent, the means of Gods appointing. Away with this, know∣ing that it is not the Law that can cure, that
can save us. It was not Moses could cure the Israelites when they came unto him: No, he sendeth them to the Brasen Serpent. It is not Moses, it is not the Law that can cure, that can justifie and save us:Rom. 3.20. By the deeds of the Law, (saith the Apostle) there shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God. For by the Law is the knowledge of sin. This is all that the Law can do, to convince a man of his sin and mi∣sery; Help him it cannot. Wound the soule it may, thrusting that sting of sin deeper into the conscience, irritating the guilt, and by accident increasing the power of it; but heale it, it cannot: And therefore never look for cure in this way; A mistake that is common and ordinary. Men when they are a little awa∣kened, and begin to feele the sting of sinne sticking in their soules and consciences, being convinced of the dangerous condition they are in, what course take they? why, presently they run to Moses, they flie to the Law, they resolve upon a new course of life, thinking of doing this or that, setting upon a course of duty; but in the meane time never think of the Brasen Serpent, never think of Christ, in, and by whom alone salvation is to bee expected: Alas, be not deceived; It is not Moses, it is not the Law can do it. True, a time there was when the Law might have done it. In state of innocency when man was able to have fulfilled the Righteousnesse of the Law, then might the Law have given life: But now it cannot do it, being grown weak and impotent
through the flesh,Rom. 8.3. (as the Apostle tels us.) Weak through our weaknesse; Impotent through our impotency. As for the Law it selfe, it is in it selfe as strong now as ever; as able to give life as ever, were wee but alike able to fulfill it. But this we cannot do. And there∣fore rest not here, leane not upon the Law; but renounce our owne righteousnesse, what ever is ours. Learne wee wholly to go out of our selves. An Israelite that was stung, must go out of his Tent; whatever medicines or plaisters were there, they could not cure him. A Christian is never in the way of cure, untill he hath learn'd wholly to go out of himself, to renounce his owne righteousnesse, what∣ever hee hath done, or can do. Take we heed of setting up any thing in stead of Christ. 2. Or, Together with Christ.2. Together with Christ. This is the thing which the more learned of the Papists plead so much for: They will by no meanes shut out Christ, so as to set up any thing in stead of him; but they will set up something together with him. This they do, and this they plead for; Why may they not doe it? Set up the Brasen Serpent and Moses, Moses and Christ together. Trust in the merits of Christ, and yet in their own merits, and the merits of others: Abundans cautela. Hee that standeth upon two Branches of a Tree, (it is their own illustration,) he may be suppo∣sed to stand surer, then he that standeth onely upon one.
1. Ans. Not so (say we) in case the one be sound, and the other rotten.Popish allega∣tion refuted. And that is the case here: As for Christ, we know him to be a sound and firme Branch, that will beare all the weight which we can lay upon it: But so is not our own righteousnesse, which being imperfect, defective, is but like a rotten bough,Mans owne righteousnesse a rotten bough, not to be tru∣sted to. which being trusted to, will faile us. Where∣upon Bellarmine himselfe, when he had plea∣ded all that he could, for a mans own merits, and confidence in them, yet he concludes in∣genuously, Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, &c. In regard of the uncertainty of our own righteousnesse, &c. The safest way and course is to repose all a mans confidence whol∣ly and alonely (totam in solâ) in the mercy of God, and in the merit of Jesus Christ. 2. Besides, in this supposition they sup∣pose what is not to be supposed; viz. That a man may trust to, and rest upon both these together, Christs righteousnesse,No resting upon Christ, and a mans own righteous∣ness together. and his own righteousnesse; Christs merits, and his own merits. Not so, (say we) In as much as re∣sting upon the one, he falleth from the other: So much Saint Paul telleth his Galatians ex∣presly, Gal. 5.Gal. 5.4. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. Mark it; the Galatians some of them were sowred with this very leaven, they were of the selfe same opi∣nion that the Papists at this day are, viz. that they might trust to Christ, and yet trust in Moses, that they might set up the Law
together with Christ in the point of justifica∣tion, and salvation: This the Apostle there tels them they could not doe. Moses and Christ, the Law of Works, and the Law of Faith, they are two Masters, which in this case, it is impossible to serve: leaning to the one, a man falleth from the other. Putting confidence in our own righteousnesse, or what ever it be besides Christ, we fall from Christ: Christ will either be a whole Saviour, or no Saviour. Christ a per∣fect Saviour.And therefore as ever we desire to have a∣ny benefit by Christ, renounce all other things besides him. He is a perfect, an All-sufficient Saviour, (as God willing I shall shew you hereafter.) And whither shall we looke for salvation but unto him?John 6.68. Master, whither shall we go, thou hast the words of Eternal life? (saith Peter to our Saviour.) Whether shall an Israelite being stung, go, but to the Bra∣sen Serpent? And whither shall a poor soule feeling the sting of sin in his conscience, whi∣ther shall hee look but unto Jesus Christ? Him hath God his Father caused to bee lift up; Him hath he designed and appointed to be the Saviour of the world: And who shall lift up any thing in stead of him, or together with him? There was but one Bra∣sen Serpent in the whole Camp of Israel, nei∣ther were any so bold, as under whatever pretence, to set up another. There is but one Sun to enlighten the whole world; And but one Sun of Righteousnesse, one Son of
Man, one Saviour, that bringeth light of comfort and deliverance to lost mankind. Be we therefore perswaded to turne our eies from all other things. Away with those Ro∣mishRomish Rags to be cast to the dunghill. Rags which false Teachers hold forth, and their ignorant Disciples are ready to catch at to cover their nakednesse with. Our owne works, merits, satisfactions, indulgencies, pardons, the merits or Intercessions of others, Saints or Angels, the Churches Treasury, &c. such mock-stayes Satan hath cast into the world for despairing consciences to lean upon; knowing that drowning men will catch at any thing, though fitter to sink them, then to save them: and such indeed are all things whatso∣ever a poor sinner shall lean upon in stead of, or besides Christ: They may, and will help to drown it, to sink it deeper into the pit of destruction; but save it they cannot. This is peculiar to Jesus Christ, whom God hath there∣fore caused to be lift up, that poor sinners com∣ing and looking up unto him, might not pe∣rish. Away then with all other things, I mean all affiance and confidence in them. 2 And (secondly) having layed all other things aside as uselesse,2. Come unto Jesus Christ. helplesse in the matter of Justification and salvation, now be we per∣swaded to come unto Jesus Christ: It is that wherewith our Saviour upbraids the Jewes, Joh. 5.40. Yee will not come unto me, that yee might have life; And it is this which shall one day be cast in the teeth of all faithlesse un∣beleevers (I mean such as live within the pale
of the Church, where Christ is lifted up be∣fore them preached and offered up unto them;) Yee will not come unto me, that you might have life: This is the great charge which shall be laid against them. As for o∣thers who are without the pale of the Church, such as never heard of Christ, it shall be e∣nough to condemn them, that they would not come unto Moses; that they have rebelled and risen up against him (I mean) rebelled a∣gainst the Law of God, the Law which was written in their hearts; this shall condemne them. But as for unbeleevers, such as live un∣der the sound of the Gospel, within the kenn of this Brasen serpent, under the offers of Grace, this shall be their condemnation, that they will not come unto Jesus Christ. And who but must needs acknowledge this a deserved condemnation?Refusing of Christ a just condemnation When God had provided a Brasen serpent, and caused it to be lift up in the Camp of Israel, for a remedy a∣gainst those fiery Serpents, had there been a∣ny amongst them who feeling themselves stung, yet out of a contempt or neglect of the ordinance of God, had refused to repaire unto it, who but would have adjudged him guilty of his own death, and have accounted him worthy to perish and die? This hath God done for us; wee being all of us mor∣tally stung by that Old serpent, God himselfe of his infinite wisdome and mercy hath found out, and laid out a means of cure for us. He hath given his Son for us, to be made like unto US,
to take our nature upon him, in that nature to be lift up upon the Crosse, to suffer, to die for us: Not only so, but he causeth him also to be lift up in the Ministry of his word, there to be held forth, to be crucified (as it were) before our eyes daily; nor yet only to bee set before us, but to be offered to us with a Command and a Promise; The one requiring us to look up unto him, the other assuring us of a perfect cure upon our so doing; Now what, shall we slight and neglect so great sal∣vation? Shall we so far abuse this grace and mercy of God, as not to make use of this means of salvation? What shall now be said for us! Our blood be upon our own heads; we must perish in our sins, and that deserved∣ly. And therefore (to draw to a conclusion of this point) be we all of us perswaded to look out for our selves; Come we; O come we unto Jesus Christ, that we may be made partakers of this healing, saving vertue which is to be found in, and from him. MotivesMotives. (me thinks) I should need none, to set on such a motion, to perswade all of us to come unto Jesus Christ. 1. Do but consider our own misery1. Our misery without Christ. with∣out him, fitly (as I have shewed you) repre∣sented and shadowed out in the condition of a poor Israelite being stung with some of these Serpents. We are by nature in a peri∣shing state; and there is no Medicine can cure us but this; no name under Heaven, by which we can have any probable or possible hopes of
salvation but this; Let our necessities then drive us unto Christ: Without him we perish, ha∣ving no other means of cure but by him. Had there been any other Salve or Medicine in the world that could have cured a stung Israelite, he should not have needed to have made use of the Brasen serpent: Were there any other way or meanes whereby salvation might possibly be attained, there might be some plea for our not coming unto Christ. But wee are here concluded and shut up; unlesse hee save us, wee perish. Let our necessities drive us. 2. Attractive∣nesse in Christ.2. And (secondly) there is that in him which may draw us; viz: His willingnesse to receive us, and his Ability to help us. Of the former of these our Saviour himself assures us, Joh. 6.37. He that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out, . The later wee may see in the Type in the Text: The Brasen serpent was a present cure to all that came, it matters not how mortally stung they were, in what part of the body; whether with one or more Serpents; of what continuance it was, here they found a present remedy; Even such vertue is there to be found in the Lord Jesus: It matters not what our sins be; what for number, what for nature, what for continu∣ance, how many, how great, how inveterate soever, only come unto Jesus Christ, we shall find it true by experience, that he is an Alsuffi∣cient Saviour. Quest. The Question then will bee, How
shall a poor sinner come unto Jesus Christ, so as he may obtaine salvation by him. Answ. To this the third Conclusion re∣turnsConclus. 3. answer; Only by beleeving on him; So you have it in the Text; The Son of Man must be lift up, That whosoever beleeveth on him should not perish. Doct. Behold here the onely way whereby a poor perishing sinner may come to be made partaker of that saving vertue which is in Je∣sus Christ, viz. By beleeving on him.Beleeving on Christ, the on∣ly means of re∣ceiving bene∣fit by him. A Truth lively shadowed out in the Text (which still upon all occasions I shall have recourse unto.) What was the way and means whereby an Is∣raelite being stung came to partake of healing vertue from the Brasen Serpent?Num. 21.8, 9. Why it was by looking up unto it; When he looketh up up∣on it he shall live: Even thus is the saving ver∣tue derived from Christ unto sin-stung sinners; viz. By looking upon him. Looking upon him, not with a bodily eye, as Papists do up∣on their Crucifixes, or as the Jewes did, who beheld him hanging upon the Crosse, who had better never have seen what they did; but with a Spirituall eye, the eye of the Soul, the eye of Faith: by beleeving on him; This is the way and means which every where we are directed to. This was John the Baptist's Do∣ctrine, he preached Faith, as well as Repen∣tance; John Baptized with the Baptisme of Re∣pentance, saying unto the people, that they should beleeve on him which should come after him, that is, on Jesus Christ, Act. 19.Act. 19.4. This did our
Saviour himselfe presse, Ye believe on God, be∣lieve also on me, John 14.John 14.1. And the same did his Apostles after him. When the Jaylour came to Paul and Silas, putting the questi∣on unto them,Acts 16.31. Sirs, what shall I do to be sa∣ved? They presently returne him this briefe answer, Beleeve on the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved. Even as if a poor Israelite be∣ing stung, had come unto Moses, enquiring of him what he should do to be healed; Mo∣ses could have returned him no answer but this, Look up unto the Brasen Serpent, and thou shalt be healed. Thus, when a wounded soule, feeling the sting of sin sticking in the conscience, cometh unto the Ministers of Christ, and desireth direction from them what to do; their answer is, Go, look up unto Christ: Beleeve on the Lord Jesus, thou shalt be saved. Here is the way, the onely way and meanes of obtaining benefit by Jesus Christ;Heb. 2.4. Faith. Justus ex fide, The just shall live by faith. Explic. For the opening and illustrating of this usefull Truth; give me leave briefly to unfold unto you these three particulars. 1. What this faith is which healeth and saveth? 2.Three particu∣lars unfolded. How this faith healeth and saveth? 3. Why this should be the onely way and means to heal and save? Briefly of each, it being not my purpose now to insist largely upon the Doctrine of Faith, which I reserve to another occasion. Quest.Quest. What saving faith is? 1. What is this Faith by which
wee obtaine salvation? by which wee draw this healing, saving vertue from Christ? Ans.Answ. Illustrated from the Types. To this I cannot answer more aptly, and clearly, then by having recourse to the Type, which most excellently shadowes out unto us the nature of that Faith whereby we are justified and saved, which is done by loo∣king up unto Christ; so looking up unto him, as the Israelites did to the Brasen Serpent. Q. Now how did they look up to the Bra∣sen Serpent? A. Therein we may take no∣tice of two things: 1. Their Action. 2. Their Affection. There beholding it, and the Affection wherewith they beheld it. 1. They beheld it, looked upon it, saw it made, and saw it lifted up: withall taking no∣tice for what end and purpose it was made and lift up. 2. As they thus saw it, so they looked unto it, viz. in an Affectionate way, with a twofold affection, 1 Of Desire. 2. Of Hope, or Trust: desiring to be cured; hoping and trusting to be cured by it. Thus did they look upon the Brasen Serpent; not onely seeing it,Numb. 21.9. , aspicic∣bat,  intu∣cri, quod majus est quàm , videre) unde , Expecta∣tio. but loo∣king upon it with desire and expectation of receiving benefit by it, (as the word in the Originall there properly signifieth.) And thus doth the true Believer look up unto Jesus Christ; Beholding him, and belie∣ving on him. You have them both together in that one verse, John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth
the Son, and beleeveth on him, may have ever∣lasting life. . 1. Beholding Christ.1. Faith, behol∣ding Christ. : viz. with the eye of his soule, rightly apprehending, and seriously considering him. For that the word ,Non de nihilo est quod  hic potius dixit, quàm . Vide 1 John 1.1. . H. Grotius. ad loc. Cicero. Tus∣cul. 5. Nec enim quis qui videt. . Beza G. Annot. Dr. Taylour's Brasen Serpent. properly signifieth (as Beza and Gro∣tius note upon it, Non quavis modo, sed cum attentione videre; not a bare and simple In∣tuition, a casting a glance upon a thing, but a serious and advised observing, and viewing of it; Studiosè perspicere (as Tully renders it,) studiously to view and consider a thing. This is properly . And thus doth the true believer behold Jesus Christ; considering him as made the Son of man, taking the nature of man upon him; then in that nature lift up: Lift up two wayes: Ratione ligni, ratione regni, (as some distinguish.) First, In his Passion upon the Crosse, there suffering: Then in his Session upon the Throne of his glory, there triumphing. Both these the Beleever taketh notice of, looking upon Christ in his twofold state, of Humilia∣tion, Exaltation. And here is the first act of this faith: it looketh upon Christ, as held forth in the word, apprehending and be∣leeving what is there revealed concerning him, touching his Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession: with∣all, taking notice to what end all this was done, viz. for the redeeming and saving of lost mankind: And here is the Ʋision of Faith.
2. The second thing is the Affection of it.2. Faith an affectionate looking up unto Christ. The beleever thus beholding Christ, he also looketh up unto him. Looking upon him, even as the lame man which lay in Solomons Porch, looked upon the Apostles, Peter and John, Act. 3. Look on us (say they) ver. 4. And so hee did, not onely casting his eye upon them, as he did upon other passengers, but he looked upon them wistly, affectionately, with desire and hope: He gave heed unto them, expecting to receive som∣thing from them, ver. 5. Thus doth the belee∣ver look upon Christ, not only beholding him by a bare and simple intuition, taking notice of what he was, what he hath done, what he hath suffered, and to what end, &c. all which the very divels themselves know and believe; but he looketh up unto him in an affectionate way. So saith the Prophet of the converted Israe∣lites, Isai. 17.7. At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy One of Israel. And the Prophet Zachary speaking of the Spirit of Grace, which God promised to poure out upon his people, saith, that then, They should looke upon him whom they have pierced, Zach. 12.10. viz. in an affe∣ctionate way. And thus doth the true beleever look upon Christ viz. with a double Affecti∣on, of Desire and Hope. 1. Desire.1. With De∣sire. Earnestly desiring to partake of the merits, and benefits of Christ; desiring to to be healed, saved by him. Which desire a∣riseth from the sense and apprehension of his own misery: from the sense of sin, and the
apprehension of Gods Wrath due unto it. Even as an Israelite feeling himselfe stung, and apprehending the eminent danger he was in, out of that apprehension he looketh up to the Brasen Serpent with desire of cure. Thus the soul of a beleeving sinner feeling it selfe mortally stung by sin, apprehending it selfe in a lost state and condition, it looketh up unto Jesus Christ, earnestly desiring pardon of sin, and eternall salvation by and through him. 2. Confidence2 And as it desireth it from him, so it hop∣eth for it by him, resting upon him for it, for the obtaining of what it desireth, and stand∣eth in need of; thus doth the Beleever look up unto Jesus Christ; even as the Psalmist saith,Psal. 123.2. the Eyes of servants look unto the hands of their Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden to the hand of her Mistris, viz. (as for direction, so) for Protection, and Provision, expecting to receive benefit by them: Even so doth the true beleever look up unto Christ, waiting, resting, depending, and relying up∣on him for what he standeth in need of, viz. the pardon of sins and eternall salvation. And herein lieth the principall act of that faith whereby we are justified and saved; viz. in this soul-recumbencie, this resting, and rely∣ing upon Christ for Justification and Salva∣tion. Beleeving [on] Christ importing,So much the phrase here in the Text imports; ; Not, Qui credit in ipso (as the Vulgar Latine renders it) but in Eum;
Hee that beleeveth on him: Wherein we have two things pointed out unto us: 1. The pro∣per Object: 2. The proper Act of faith as it justifieth and saveth. 1 The proper Object of faith as it justifieth and saveth, is Christ. True it is,1. The proper object of faith as it justifieth. that faith whereby we are justified and saved, it look∣eth at other things: It hath an eye at every truth revealed in the word, beleeving all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets (as Paul saith of himself;Act. 24. 14.) assent∣ing to every promise, every threatning; but as it justifieth and saveth, it looketh only at Christ. Even as the Israelites with the same eye wherewith they beheld the Brasen Serpent, they beheld other things also; but they were cured only by looking upon the Brasen Ser∣pent. Thus that faith which justifyeth look∣eth at other things; but as it justifieth, it look∣eth only at Christ, at Christ lifted up, cruci∣fied. Here is the proper Object of faith as it justifieth. 2. And what is the proper Act of this faith?2. The proper act of faith as it justifieth. Why, to beleeve in Christ, on Christ; that is, (as I have said) to look up unto him with hope, confidence, affiance, resting and relying up∣on him, and him alone for pardon of sins and eternall salvation; This is truly to beleeve on Christ; not only to beleeve Christ, that there is a Christ, that Jesus the son of Mary is that Christ, that he is an All-sufficient Sa∣viour, that he hath done and suffered all things requisite for our salvation: but to look
up unto him as our Saviour, applying the merit of his obedience unto our selves, resting and relying upon him as our Jesus, the alone means of our Justification and Salvation. And this is that true Faith which draweth this healing saving vertue from Christ by which a poor sinner cometh to obtain these great be∣nefits. Quest. How faith cometh to heal and save.A second Question followeth. How com∣eth this Faith thus to heal and save? To this I may answer, first Negatively, then Positively. Answ. 1. Negatively.1. Shewing you how it doth not Justifie and save; viz. Not as it is a work done by us, not as it is a Habit or Quality, a Gift or Grace inherent in us: Thus faith justifieth not, sa∣veth not, neither can it; being in it selfe im∣perfect and defective (as all other graces in regenerate persons are) it cannot justifie it selfe, much lesse the person in whom it is: there is no such vertue in Faith it selfe; no more then there was healing vertue in the eye of an Israelite. It was not the eye that healed them; neither is it Faith as faith, either as an Act or Habit that helpeth us. 2. Affirma∣tively, viz. as,How then? Why, Faith healeth and saveth these two wayes, 1. As a Condition; 2. As an Instrument. 1. A condition of the Cove∣nant.1. As it is a Condition of the New Covenant, the Covenant of Grace; a condition upon which God hath promised freely to justifie and save us. Even as looking was the condition of the Israelites cure: not touching, but looking:
So here the condition of the Covenant of Grace is, not Doing, but Beleeving: Not Fac hoc & vive, D this and live; but Crede & vive, Beleeve and live. Even as there it was, Vide & vive, See and live; so here Crede & vive, Beleeve and live: This is the con∣dition of this New Covenant, that which God requireth at our hands in order to our Justifi∣cation and Salvation. Even as the Apostles, Peter and John (in the place forenamed) bade that Cripple look upon them in order to his cure,Act. 3.5. not that there was any vertue in that act of his; but they required it as a condition, whereupon they would freely cure him. Thus are we cured and saved by looking up unto Christ, by beleeving on him; who upon our so doing, doth freely justifie and save us. 2. Faith healeth and saveth Instrumentally,2. An instru∣ment. viz. as it apprehendeth and applyeth Christ by whom we are healed and saved. Thus faith justifieth and saveth, not considered simply in it selfe, as having any vertue in it selfe more then other graces have. Other graces there are, which in their own nature are as excel∣lent, and in some respects more excellent then faith: Now abideth Faith, Hope, and Chari∣ty (saith the Apostle,1 Cor. 13. last:) but the chiefest of these is Charity. But it justifieth and saveth, as it is considered Relatively, with its Object: As it is an Instrument, an Eye, a Hand, to look up unto, and take hold of Jesus Christ, the me∣ritorious cause of our Justification and Salvati∣on. Thus did the Israelites looking heal them,
not simply in or by it selfe, but as directed to, and fixed upon the Brasen Serpent; that sana∣tive vertue was in the Object, not in the facul∣ty: In the Serpent that was seen, not in the eye which looked upon it Thus that heal∣ing and saving vertue whereby we are justifi∣ed and saved, it is properly in Christ, not in our faith that looketh up unto him. All that faith herein doth, is as an instrument to ap∣ply Christ, and so to convey that vertue from him unto the soul. Divines usually illustrate this by a familiar similitude of a Ring,Faith and Christ as the Ring and the Blood-stone. which hath in it a precious stone of some excellent quality, suppose a Blood-stone or the like: Such a Ring, we say, is good for such a pur∣pose, of soveraign use in such and such cases, as to stanch bleeding, &c. Now to speak pro∣perly, it is not the Ring, but the Stone in the Ring which doth this; there lieth all the ver∣tue: All that the Ring doth, is only to apply the stone to the body, or part affected. Thus standeth the case here, Faith is the Ring, Christ is the Precious Stone: All that faith doth, or can do, is to apply Christ, to bring him home with all his merits, and bene∣fits to the soul; In the mean time all the ver∣tue is in Christ; it is he that healeth, that ju∣stifieth, that saveth. Even as the Story tels us of the woman in the Gospel, who came and touched the hem of our Saviours garment,Mark 5.25. (touched it as with her finger, so with her faith) therupon she was presently cured of her bloo∣dy issue. But was the vertue in her finger, or in
her Faith? No, the Text tels us expressely whence that healing vertue came;ver. 30. Luk. 8.46. I perceive that vertue is gone out of me (saith our Savi∣our to his Disciples.) Her Faith in the mean time was only the instrument in drawing that vertue from Christ: And in that respect, our Saviour tels her,ver. 48. that her Faith had made her whole. And even so are we to understand those Texts of Scripture where it is said, that we are justified by faith, and saved by faith; viz. not Meritoriously, but Instrumentally; By grace ye are saved (saith the Apostle) through faith , not ;Eph. 2.8. Not Propter fidem; but Per fidem; Not [for] faith as the Meritorious cause, (which is only Christ) but [by] or [through] faith, as the Instrument conveying vertue from Christ unto our Ju∣stification and Salvation. You see the second Question resolved, and therein a resolution prepared, and in part given to the third, which is, Quest. Why this should be the only way and means to convey this benefit from Christ,Quest. 3. Why faith the only means. viz. to beleeve on him? Answ.Answ. 1. So God hath appointed it. To this I might return a sudden and yet satisfactory answer. It is enough, God hath appointed it so to be; even as he appointed looking to be the means of conveying that sa∣native vertue to the Israelites from that Bra∣sen Serpent; not but that he could (if he had pleased) have directed them to some other way, either to touch it, or to fall down be∣fore it, or the like: or else he could have
made it effectuall to them only by the bare presence of it in the Camp: But this is the way which he pitcheth upon, requiring them on∣ly to look up unto it. Thus God could (had he pleased) have appointed other wayes and means of conveying life and salvation to us: but hee hath been pleased in infinite wisdome and mercy to pitch upon this, requiring no more from us as the condition of the Cove∣nant of Grace, but only this, Beleeve on the Lord Jesus. 2. Faith onely applyeth Christ.2. But secondly, take a reason of this ap∣pointment. Faith is the Instrument of con∣veying this benefit from Christ, because Faith only applyeth Christ, bringeth home Christ: This is the proper work of faith; Every grace hath its own proper work which is peculiar to it: Even as every member of the body hath its proper office and work; the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Hand to take or receive a thing; so hath every grace its proper work; Remembring your work of faith,1 Thes. 1.3. and labour of love, and patience of hope (saith the Apostle to his Thessalonians.) Now what is the pro∣per work of faith? Why, to Receive Christ, (To as many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to as many as beleeve on his name, Joh. 1.12.) To apply Christ, to bring Christ home with his merits unto the soul: This doth faith; It bringeth home Christ, and bringing him home, it bringeth home his benefits, drawing from him that vertue that is in him; And this is
proper unto faith. And therefore is it that God hath appointed this to be the only way to convey benefit from Christ unto poor sinners for their Justification and Salvation. You see this third Question resolved: and so you have this third Conclusion opened: That which now remains hereof is the Application. Which shall be only a word of Direction and Exhortation to all penitent broken-hear∣ted sinners, such as feel the sting of sin,Applic. Seek cure in this way. and de∣sire to be healed, cured; for for such only is this Brasen Serpent erected, this means of cure provided. Being such, now bee you advi∣sed and excited to put your soules upon this way of cure to look up unto this Brasen Serpent, by faith to look up unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Let it not bee enough, that you have heard tidings of a Saviour, to hear that God hath given his Son, that Christ hath given himself for lost mankind; or yet to know who, and what this Christ was, what he hath done, what he hath suffered, and the like. Alas, what would this have avai∣led a poor Israelite, to have heard of the Brasen Serpent, that it was erected in the Camp, and that all that came to it were healed by it, whilst in the mean time himself lay close in his Tent, never looking out for any benefit by it? And what will this profit a poor sin∣ner, to hear what God hath done for o∣thers, in giving a Christ a Saviour for them, and to them, whilst in the mean time him∣selfe lyeth still sleeping in his sinnes,
not looking out for cure, for justification, and salvation by and through him? Better such a one had never heard these Gospell tidings: His contempt or neglect of so great a mercy will be no small aggravation to his sin and pu∣nishment. And therefore, as many of us as God hath in any measure made sensible of our miserable state and condition by reason of sin; as we desire deliverance out of that estate, ap∣ply we our selves to the right use of this reme∣dy. Look we up unto Jesus Christ. Looking up unto this Bra∣sen Serpent.Look up (I say.) Not looking too much downwards upon our selves, not poring too much upon our sins, the multitude, magnitude; number, nature; quantity, qua∣lity of them, how many, how great and grie∣vous they are. But look upwards, look up unto Jesus Christ, who is able to heale us, to save us. The Israelites which were stung with those fiery Serpents, if they onely looked up∣on their soars, and complained of their smart, and anguish, in the mean time neglecting or refusing to look up to the Brasen Serpent, they died for it. Such is the condition of a poor despairing soule, whose eye is all upon his sore, upon his sin and punishment, as Cain's and Judas's were;Gen. 4.13. My sin is greater then can be forgiven; or, my punishment is greater then I can bare;Mat. 27.3, 4. saith the one: I have sinned in betraying innocent blood, saith the other, complaining of the grievousnesse thereof: in the mean time never looking up to Christ for cure; by this means he perisheth, and dieth in
his sins. To all such then, and all others; who desire to have any benefit by Jesus Christ, let it be spoken, Look up to this Brasen Ser∣pent, look you up to the Lord Jesus, obeying and dying for your sakes; and look you up unto him as with desire, so with hope, with affiance and confidence of receiving benefit by him. To set on this Exhortation, what Argu∣ments shall I take up? Strange,Motives. there should be need of any! I suppose it was argument enough to an Israelite being stung, and fee∣ling himselfe so, to here that there was a Bra∣sen Serpent lift up for a present remedy to all that should looke up unto it; other motive he should need none to perswade him to fixe his eye upon it. And certainly, so would it be with poor sinners, did they but feel them∣selves stung by sin, were they but throughly convinced and made sensible of their wretched state and condition by reason of sin, it would be motive sufficient to them to hear of a Sa∣viour, whom God hath set forth with promise that upon their looking to him, beleeving on him, they shall be saved; they should need no other argument to perswade them to look up unto him. Yet to quicken our dull and dead hearts, doe but consider these four or five particulars. 1. This is God's Ordinance,1. This is Gods Ordi∣nance. the way and means which God himself in infinite wisdome and mercy hath appointed to bring his Elect to life and salvation by; viz. by faith in Christ;
and therefore submit unto it. 2. His Com∣mandment.2. As God himselfe hath laid out this way; so he requireth and commandeth us to put our selves upon this way. God having ordered the Brasen Serpent to be erected, he did not leave it as a thing arbitrary to the Israelites, whether they would make use of it or no, but he requires them to do it. So that passage may be read which we meet with, Num. 21.8. It shal come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shal live. So our Translation readeth it;Ainsworth, Annot. ad loc. but the Original hath it, , videbit & vivet, He shal see, (or look upon it) and he shal live. So implying both a Commandment, and a Promise, (as Mr Ainsworth well notes upon it.) Thus God having given his Son to bee crucified, he doth not leave it to our choice whether wee will beleeve on him, or no; but this he requireth, this he commandeth. This is his Commandment, that we should beleeve on the Name of his Son, 1 John 3.23. The great Commandment, the Commandment of the Gospel. In obedience to this Command, put our souls upon this way. 3. This God commandeth, and that under a penalty,3. A command under a penal∣ty. no lesse a penalty, then of eternall condemnation. The Israelite not looking up to the Brasen Serpent, died for it. The soule that looketh not up unto Christ, shall perish for it.John 3.18. Hee that beleeveth not, saith our Saviour, is condemned already: viz. by vertue of that ancient sentence, Gen. 2.17. Under that sentence doth every
unbeleever lie; being at the present in a state of death, and continuing in that state of unbeliefe, bound over unto eternall condemnation. 4. This God commandeth, and this is all he commandeth:4. All that he commandeth. Onely believe. Even as the Lord required no more from the Israelites, but onely Vide & vive; See, and live; so he requireth no more from us but onely Cre∣de & vive, Beleeve and live. This is, as I said, the condition of the new Covenant, upon which the promise of life and salvation is made. And doth the Lord require no more but this? and shall we not herein hearken to his Com∣mand? we know what Naamans servants said to their Master;2 King. 5.13. If the Prophet had commanded thee some great matter, wouldest thou not have done it? How much more when he saith, Only wash & be clean? Thus, had the Lord commanded us some great matter, had he required from us some hard or costly services, should wee not have yeelded to it for the saving of our souls? How much more then, when he saith unto us, as our Saviour did to the Ruler of the Synagogue, Mark. 5.36. Onely believe. Should the Lord have prescribed the Israelites some chargeable receipts for the curing of their bodies, would they not have taken them? How much more, when hee saith unto them, Onely looke up to the Brasen Serpent, and live? Wee see what idolatrous and superstitious persons will doe in a way of Wil-worship; They will refuse no labour, grudge no cost:
And shall not we obey so easie a command, as this command of the Gospel, to beleeve on the Lord Jesus. To these I might add two more; viz: the Necessity of our beleeving on Christ, and the Ʋtilitie of it. What need wee have of it, what benefit wee shall receive by it. 5. Nothing else can cure us5. For the former; consider that nothing else can cure us, can save us. Nothing but Christ, and nothing but faith in Christ: both excellently shadowed out in the Type. 1. Nothing but Christ:1. Nothing but Christ. The Israelites had many other things which were of great worth in themselves, and of great use to them; Not to speak of their earthly treasures, their silver and their gold, they had Mannah from Hea∣ven, they had Water out of the Rock, two ex∣traordinay Sacraments, supplying the present want of those which were ordinary; they had the Ark of the Covenant, wherein was the preciousest relick that ever the world was ow∣ner of, the Tables written with Gods own finger: But alas, none of these could cure them, help them! only the Brasen Serpent could do this. Thus Christians may have many other things, besides what they have common with Heathens (Riches and Honour. &c.) they may have the Word and Sacraments, with o∣ther Ordinances of God, in themselves preci∣ous, and to them usefull: But alas, none of these can heal them, can save them: That which the Prophet saith concerning the first
of these,Zeph. 1. last. Your silver and your gold shall not be able to deliver you in the day of the Lords fierce wrath; we may say of all the rest; It is not our hearing, receiving; hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments, nor yet our prayers or any other ordinance of God that can deli∣ver us, save us; only the Brasen Serpent can do this; only Christ. 2. And secondly, Christ looked upon. As nothing but Christ2. Nothing but faith in Christ can heal and save, so no∣thing but faith in Christ; The Brasen Serpent, how sufficient a remedy soever, yet not look∣ed upon, it cured not, though never so near to the person that was stung, yet not beheld by him it was of no vertue to him, Christ is in himself an Al-sufficient Saviour, yet none shall have benefit by him, but those who beleeve on him; It pleased God (saith the A∣postle) by the foolishnesse of preaching to save them that beleeve, 1 Cor. 1.1 Cor. 1.21. Foolishnesse of preaching, that is, the preaching of the Word; so called principally in regard of the subject matter of it, viz. Christ crucified, whom the Gospel holdeth forth as the means of our sal∣vation, then which nothing can be more ab∣surd and foolish to carnall wisdom;ver. 23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Grecians foolishnesse. Now by this means (saith the Apostle) it pleased God to save, whom? Them which beleeve. To them is Christ himselfe, and this Ordinance holding forth Christ, effectuall. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ (saith the same Apostle)Rom. 1.16.
for it is the power of God to salvation, What to all? No, only them that beleeve, To e∣very on that beleeveth; This it is that ma∣keth every Ordinance of God to be effe∣ctuall to a man for good. The Brasen Ser∣pent, an Ordinance of God of soveraign use; yet a Blind Israelite received no benefit by it; no more can a Faithlesse Heart from any Ordinance of God. The Word in it selfe an excellent Ordinance, yet meeting with such a heart, where it neither finds faith, nor work∣eth faith, it loseth the efficacy: So did it in the Israelites; To them was the Gospel preach∣ed (saith the Apostle) as well as to us,Heb. 4.2. the same Gospel, as truely, though not so clear∣ly; but , it profited them not; Why? Because it was not mixed with faith in them which heard it. The same may we say of the Sacraments, God's Sealing Ordinan∣ces; so they are to the Beleever, sealing up unto him his Interest in Christ and all his Benefits: but meeting with a Faithlesse heart, they are but like Seals to the Blank, assu∣ring nothing, conveying nothing. And what wee say of Word and Sacraments holding forth Christ, wee may say it of Christ himselfe: Him hath God the Father set forth to bee a Prince and a Saviour, in∣during him with vertue enough to heal and save the world of mankind; yet without Faith this vertue cannot reach, cannot ex∣tend to us: The vertue of the Brasen Serpent extended only to those who having eyes,
made use of them in looking upon it; as for those who either could not, or would not look upon it, they had no Benefit by it. There is in Jesus Christ an All-sufficiency of Merit and Vertue for the healing and saving of all poor lost sinners; but as for those who either cannot, or will not beleeve on him; that cannot as Pa∣gans and Paynims, who never so much as heard of the name of Christ;Rom. 10. (How shall they beleeve on him of whom they have not heard?) that will not, as profane and secure Christians, how should they have any benefit by him? How should that Vertue extend to them? this is the Office of Faith, to apply Christ. Now a Plaister, be it never so soveraign and sanative, yet if not applyed to the sore, it will do a man no good. No more will the Blood of Jesus Christ, if not applyed to the soul by faith. And therefore (to draw to a close of this Conclusion) whatever other gra∣ces we have or want, seek after Faith. Faith will do that to us which no other grace either will or can. Were it possible that all other Graces could bee severed from Faith, yet could they not advantage us in the great busi∣nesse of Justification and Salvation: In this case a weak faith will be of more use to us then any, then all other Graces. Even as a dim weak eye was of more use to an Israelite being stung, then any, then all the other members of his body: It was not a quick ear, an elo∣quent tongue, a strong arme, an active hand, a nimble foot, that could stand him in any
stead. It was his eye, (which next to the Bra∣sen Serpent) healed him. It is not knowledge, though Angelicall; it is not repentance, sor∣row for sin, though never so deep; aversion from sin, though never so serious; it is not patience, humility, not any inward qualificati∣on, or outward performance, that can justifie, can save us. Onely Faith, Faith looking up unto Jesus Christ: Here is the necessity of our beleeving. 6. To this (in the last place.) Adde the great utility, the great benefit accruing from6. The Bene∣fit accruing from it. this our believing on Christ. Faith, though in it selfe it may bee weak, yet great matters depend upon it; even as great estates are som∣times held by small acknowledgements; hun∣dreds a year by a pepper kernell. Upon this depends our eternall happinesse and salvation. Believing, wee shall not perish: Believing, wee shall have eternall life. So runs the insurance in the Text. The Son of man must be lift up, that whosoever beleeveth on him should not pe∣rish, but have eternall life. And so I am fallen upon the fourth and last Conclusi∣on, which I shall dispatch with all convenient brevity. Whosoever believeth on Jesus Christ, shall have full and perfect salvation by him;Conclus. 4. Whoso belee∣veth on Christ, shall have per∣fect salvation by him: where consider, he shall not perish, but have eternall life. For the o∣pening and prosecuting of this Conclusion, two things here may be taken notice of. 1. The benefit insured. And 2. The Extent of that benefit. The benefit it selfe is partly Privative,
partly Positive; Privative, deliverance from death; He shall not perish.] Positive, fruition of life, and that eternall life; He shall have eternall life.] The Extent of it, is Indefinite, Universall, to all that performe the condition. Whosoever beleeveth, &c.] Of each of these severally and briefly by way of Explicati∣on, Illustration, joyntly by way of Appli∣cation. The Benefit it selfe accruing to the true be∣leever, is, Hee shall not perish.1. The Bene∣fit it selfe: which is 1. Privative, They shall not perish. There is the privative part of it. , Non pereat, May not perish. The phrase alludeth to the Israelites, who being stung by the fiery Ser∣pents in the wildernesse, before the Brasen Serpent was set up, in an ordinary course, they perished. They were destroyed of the Serpents,1 Cor. 10.9. (saith the Apostle) , The word is the same with that in the Text: They perished by those Serpents: that is, they died upon their stinging. So the story maketh it out, Numb. 21.6. Much people of Israel died.] Quest. But what? do men then perish in death?Whether men do perish in death. Ans. I answer, properly they do not. To perish, properly it imports a cessation of be∣ing; when a thing ceaseth to be what it was, so as never to return to that state again. Thus the bruit creature perisheth:Psal. 49.12.20. The bruit beast that perisheth, (saith the Psalmist.) Being re∣solved into its principles, it ceaseth to be what it was, so as never to live, never to be againe. This is properly to perish; but thus men do
not perish, no not wicked men; they die in∣deed, but they perish not, well were it for them that they might do so; that death might put an end as to their Life, so to their Being; but this it shall not do. Their souls being immor∣tall, they cannot die, and their Bodies though they die, and bee turned to the dust from whence they came, yet they shall be raised up again at the last day;Joh. 5.28, 29. All that are in the graves shall come forth. Properly men do not perish in death. I, but they seem so to do: though they do not perish as the bruit Beasts, yet they seem so to perish; Man is become like the beast that perisheth; Like it, as in other things,Psal. 49. so in his perishing: That which befal∣leth the sons of men (saith the Preacher) be∣falleth beasts:Eccl. 3.19. even one thing befalleth them, as the one dieth, so dyeth the other, Eccles. 3.19. In the outward appearance there is no diffe∣rence between the one and the other;Ibid. They have all one breath, so that a man hath no prehe∣minence above a beast; much less a wicked man: as the bruit beast dieth, so dieth he; both dying without hope, without hope of a better life: Thus dyeth the bruit beast, and thus dyeth the Wicked man. As he lived without hope, so he dyeth without hope; Having no hope, Eph. 2.12. and so he perisheth, his Hopes perish; When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men perisheth, Pro. 11.7. I, and himselfe perisheth: Hee so dieth as never to live againe. True indeed, his dead body shall be raised up again, but not
to the Resurrection of Life. This is the porti∣on of Gods Saints;John. 5.29. They that have done good (saith our Saviour), shall come forth to the Re∣surrection of life; that is to a Resurrection that hath an eternall life following it; this is peculiar to them,Luke 14.14. thence called the Resurre∣ction of the Just, Luk. 14. As for wicked men, they have no share in it; they shall also come forth of the Graves, But how? Why, even as condemned malefactors are brought out of their Prisons and Dungeons to the place of Execution: So shall they come forth of their graves, not to the Resurrection of life, but of Condemnation (as it there followeth) They shall be raised up, not unto that blessed life, but unto death, even to that eternall death, which shall be to them a dying life, and a living death: And here is their perishing. But thus shal not the Beleever perish,The Beleever shall not perish Die he may, and die he must, & that as other men die, so seeming to perish; whence even righteous men are said to perish; The righteous perisheth, & no man layeth it to heart, Isai. 57.1. that is, he di∣eth, and that seemingly as others do: How dieth the wise man? even as the fool (saith the Preacher) Eccl. 2.16. in the outward appearance no diffe∣rence; as it is said of our Saviour, He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, Isai. 53.9. So fareth it with Gods Saints, they make their graves, lie down in the dust with wicked men; dying as they die; their souls both separated from their bodies and their bo∣dies to dust, and who shall distinguish betwixt
their ashes? in the outward appearance no difference between the one and the other; yet a grand difference there is; the one perisheth, not so the other. The one dying, dieth to die, dyeth Temporally, to die Eternally; The o∣ther dying, dyeth to live, dyeth a Temporal death, that he may live an eternall life: so it followeth in the next words, He shall not pe∣rish, but have Eternall life. 2. Possitive; E∣ternall life.Eternall life.] Here is the Positive part of the Benefit, wherein our Saviour explains what he meant by not perishing; viz. he shall not die, but live eternally. Behold here the Pre∣rogative of Gods Saints, even of all true Be∣leevers, wherein they differ from all others: Not only from the Bruit creature; the bruit Creature perisheth in death, so shall not they; But even from wicked men; Wicked men they do not properly perish in death, but they die to die, so as they shall never see life, this true life; They shall never see the face of God, never injoy his presence, in whose pre∣sence is life: Being Separated from the pre∣sence of his grace here, they shall be separated from the presence of his glory hereafter; and to this punishment of losse shall be added the punishment of sense, They shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 Thes. 1.9. Being confined to that place of horror and darknesse, they shall be subjected both in souls and bodies to endlesse and ease∣lesse, unsufferable, unspeakable, unconcei∣vable
torments; and so shall for ever be in a perishing condition. But as for God's Saints and faithfull ones; even all true Beleevers, they shall not only not perish as the bruit Creature doth, but they shall be possessed of that life which all unbelevers shall be excluded from, e∣ven Eternall life. Eternall Life.]Eternall life, what. Under these two words the Spirit of God in Scripture frequently sets forth unto us the state and condition of Gods Saints in Heaven; which being a most bles∣sed state, full of Glory and Happinesse, is therefore called by the name of Life, because of all things upon earth life is the most preci∣ous, most set by. And in as much as that state is immutable, unchangeable, therefore it is called Eternall Life, : continuing the same to all ages, to all Eternity. This blessed life the Beleever enters into upon earth when he first beginneth to beleeve on Christ, then is he translated from death to life; then is this blessed life estated upon him, and be∣gun in him; thence saith our Saviour, This is life eternall, to know thee the only true God, and him whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. To know God and Christ, to know God in Christ, this is life eternall. It is so, as in re∣gard of assurance, so in regard of Inchoation; being the beginning of that blessed life, which Gods Saints entering upon here in the kingdome of Grace, shall have the full fruition of hereafter in the kingdom of glory; He shall not perish, but have eternall life.
The Type fal∣ling short of the Truth.Eternall life.] Behold here the Truth in the Text advanced above, and beyond the Type. Those whom the Brasen Serpent cured, they afterwards died. Not so they who are cured and healed by Christ: If a man keep my saying (saith our Saviour) he shall not see death,Joh. 8.51. Joh. 8. They shall live Eternally, never seeing, ta∣sting of that second death; so laith our Savi∣our expresly unto Martha, Joh. 11. He that beleeveth on me,John 11.25. though he were dead, yet hee shall live; and he that liveth and beleveth on mee shall never die. Though he were dead: Dead Spiritually (saith Calvin) Dead in tres∣passes and sins (as all men naturally are) yet upon this beleeving he shall live; viz. live the life of grace here: and so living and belee∣ving, he shall never die, never die Eternally. Or if we take it (as Arctius and others ex∣pound it) of a Naturall, Temporall death; [Whosoever beleeveth, though he be dead,] that is, dead as Lazarus was; yet dying in the faith, he shall [live] he shall be raised up again to life. [And he that liveth and beleeveth on me, that is (say some) such as shall be found alive at the coming of Christ, they shall never die, only be changed: Or, He that liveth and be∣leeveth shall never die, that is eternally, so the words in the Originall may bee construed, ; Non morietur in aeternum; though he die Temporally, yet not eternally. And here is the Benefit it selfe which Beleevers have by beleeving on Christ.
The Extent of this Benefit followeth:2. The Exte. of the Benefit which is, (as I said) as large as may be, inde∣finite, universall, reaching to all those who performe the condition. So you have it in the first word, [Whosoever,] Of which but a word. The Benefit of Christs death extends to all true believers.Doct. To all belie∣vers. As onely to them, so to all, and every of them. Whether Christ died inten∣tionally for all men, as Arminians would have it, I shall not stand now to discusse it. Sure we are, he died for all those that believe on him: and to them, all and every of them, shall his death be made effectuall. Even as the Brasen Serpent was lift up for all those Israelites, which feeling themselves stung, looked up unto it; and to those who did so look upon it, it was effectuall and availeable for their cure; and that to all of them: Even thus was the Lord Jesus, lift up upon the crosse, for all those that shall believe on him: For them Christ prayed, I pray not for those alone, (saith our Saviour) that is, for his Apostles and Disciples onely, but for them also which shall believe on me, John 17.20. And for them he died: I lay down my life for my sheep, John 10.15. Such as being elected before time, are in time called to believe on him. And to all, and every of these, shall his death be made effectuall. Whosoever, &c.] Whosoever, , Omnis credens,Whosoever,] the term ex∣plained. all, and every one that believeth. Be they what they will, what for Nation; what for
Sex; what for Condition, outward, or in∣ward, &c. For Nation: whether Jew, or Gentile. Herein again, the Type falls short of the truth,The Type fal∣ling short of the Truth. and is out-stripped by it. The Bra∣sen Serpent was lift up for the benefit of the Israelites, one Nation onely; but Christ the true Brasen Serpent is lift up as well for the Gentile as for the Jew, as well for all Nations, as for one Nation. In that day (saith the Prophet Esay) there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensigne of the people: to it shall the Gentiles seek, Isai. 11.Isai. 11.10. This Root of Jesse is Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Jesse. (So the Apostle himselfe expounds it, Rom. 15.12.) He being lift up upon the Cross, is made an Ensign, a Standard to the people, and that not onely to Jews, but to Gentiles: In him shall the Gentiles trust, saith the Apostle. And so doing, both Jews and Gentiles, having a like interest in him, shall have a like benefit by him; So saith the same Apostle expresly, Rom. 1.16. where speaking of the Gospel, he tels us, that it is the power of God to salvati∣on to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian. To Jews and Gentiles, no difference betwixt Nation and Nation, no nor yet betwixt Condition and Condition, or Sex and Sex, Bond and free, rich and poor, noble, ignoble, male, female, all alike in Christ Jesus.Gal 3.28. So Paul tels his Galatians, There is neither Jew, nor Greek, neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Upon their coming to
him, and believing on him, all alike justified, and saved by him. Even as the Israelites coming and looking to the Brasen Serpent, they were all a like cured. Young and old, Ma∣sters and servants, Princes and Peasants; no difference betwixt the one and the other. E∣ven so is it with all that come unto Jesus Christ.Rom. 3.27. The righteousnesse of God which is by the faith of Jesus Christ is unto all, and upon all that believe, saith the same Apostle, for there is no difference.] Whosoever believeth on him, shall have alike benefit by him. But I must not dwell upon illustration. That which now remains for the closing up of this point, and this Text, is a word of Application: which I shall direct only two wayes. By way of Conso∣lation, Exhortation. 1. By way of Comfort and Encouragement to Ʋse 1. Comfort to penitent sin∣ners. all poor penitent sinners, such as feeling the sting of sin in their souls, and being made sensible of the need they have of Jesus Christ, desire to come and look up unto him, to believe on him. Let them know, and know it to their everlasting comfort, that for their sakes was this Brasen Serpent lift up; for their sakes was the Lord Jesus by his Fathers Ordination and appoint∣ment lift up upon the Crosse, so as they com∣ing unto him, shall not misse of benefit by him. It matters not what you have been, what you are; Onely believe. God who required no more at the Israelites hands, but to look up to the Brasen Serpent, requires no more from penitent sinners, but to look up unto Jesus
Christ by faith. So doing, whoever thou art, thou shalt not perish. And what a sweet in∣couragement is this? take it to your selves, you to whom it belongeth. Are you in the num∣ber of those whose eyes God hath opened, and whose hearts he hath inclined thus to look up unto the Lord Jesus, thus to believe on him? To you be it spoken, to all, and every of you; you shall not perish, but have everlasting life: Whosoever.] Gaude, hic me∣um, & tuum, & omnìum credentium nomen scriptum est:Scultetus Now, rejoyce and be glad, (saith one writing upon it) Here is my name, and thy name, and the name of every believer written. All written in this promise, and so in the Book of life. So saith Paul of his fellow-la∣bourers, naming some of them by name; Whose names are in the book of life, Phil. 4.3. And who is there but would be glad to read his name written there; no such ground of rejoycing as this?Luke 10.20. In this rejoyce not (saith our Saviour to his Disciples) that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoyce because your names are written in heaven. Now this may all true believers do. Do but evidence to thine own soule the truth of thy faith, and then here read thy name written, whosoever!] what is this generall, this universall, but as if God had said to every man and woman in particular, and by name, Believe thou, and thou shalt not perish; Believe thou, and thou shalt have everlasting life. Do wee but see to the condition, he that hath made it, will make good the promise.
Onely believe. Let that be the word of Ex∣hortation,Ʋse 2. Exhortation: Onely believe. which let me presse upon every soul which is in measure prepared for the re∣ceiving of it; I mean such as do feel the sting of sin, and desire to be cured; let them look up, let them raise up their hearts to beleeve on the Lord Jesus: And let nothing dis∣courage or dismay them from, or in so do∣ing. I know, discouragements there are many, which poor doubting soules will bee ready to take up, and make use of against themselves,Discourage∣ments answe∣red from the Type. either to keep them from be∣lieving on Christ, or at least from appre∣hending the comfort which belongeth to them upon their believing. Give me leave to meet with some of them, some of the most obvious: And therein I shall still have recourse to the Type, which (me∣thinks) gives a very apt and full resolution to the most of the scruples and objections which a sin-stung soule can take up, and make use of against it selfe in this way. Object. 1. O (in the first place) I am aObject 1. Unworthinesse of the person. sinner, a great sinner, one that lieth under a great deale of guilt; one that hath, pro∣voked God to poure out the vials of his everlasting wrath upon me, to make mee a spectacle of vengeance to Eternity. And is there any hope that God should exercise his grace and mercy upon so vile,Answ. None but sin∣ners can re∣ceive benefit by Christ. so wretched and unworthy a creature? Answ. A sinner? a great sinner? Alas,
wer't thou not such a one, what shouldest thou do with a Christ? what should a hayle Israelite do with the Brasen Serpent? Such might look upon it, but they could expect to receive no benefit by it: Onely they which were stung, they were they for whom the Brasen Serpent was set up: Onely sinners are such as shall be the better for Jesus Christ; This is a true saying,1 Tim. 1.15. Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Let not the appre∣hension of thine omn sinfulnesse discourage: Onely art thou sensible of it? and doest thou desire to be freed from it, as from the guilt, so from the power and dominion of it? If so, now know, and know it to thy comfort, it is not this that can hinder thee from benefit by Christ. Nay, on the other hand, it is this that disposeth thee for Christ, and maketh thee capable of benefit by him.Matth. 9.12. The whole need not the Physician, but the sick. Onely sick soules, such as are sick of sin, such as feel the distemper of sin in their soules, are fit patients for this heavenly Physician. Object. 2. Hainousness of sins.Object. 2. I, but my sins are sins of a hei∣nous nature, not common or ordinary sins, but crying sins, bloody sins, such as I am a∣shamed to name, and afraid to look upon. The very thought of them strikes terrour and horrour into my soul. An.Answ. The chiefe of sinners saved by Christ. Yet despaire not: Only believe. It mattered not how dangerously, how desperately, in what part of the body any of the Israelites were stung or bitten by those fiery Serpents, or how far
their stings or teeth had pierced into their bo∣dies, only looking up to the Brasen Serpent, they were cured as wel as those who had recei∣ved but a sleighter touch. It matters not what thy sins are for the nature of them, how heinous, how horrid soever, only beleeve, and thou shalt find it by comfortable experience that there is vertue enough in Jesus Christ to work a perfect cure upon thy soul. Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am chief. Object. 3.Object. 3. Multitude of sins. I, but my sins are many as well as great; were it only some one sin that I had fallen into, there might be some hope; but the multitude of my sins maketh a dreadfull addition to the magnitude of them: one sin being enough to sink my soul into the lowest hell, how shall I look up with any hopes of mercy from under the weight and burden of so many sins as lie upon me? Answ.Answ. Where sin a∣boundeth, grace super-aboundeth. Rom. 5.20. Yet let not this discourage neither: as it is not the magnitude, so neither shall it be the multitude of sins that can stop the course and current of Gods superabundant grace and mercy; Where sin abounded, there grace super∣abounded: Only beleeve on the Lord Jesus, by and through whom this grace is conveyed. To have recourse to the Type still; The Isra∣elites in the wildernesse they were infested with many Serpents, and that not only with one kind, but with divers, as viz. with Fie∣ry Serpents, and with Scorpions (so you may read it Deut. 8.15.) some stinging, others bi∣ting:
Yet see a true Catholicon, the Brasen Serpent was an effectuall Antidote against all of them: It mattered not how many of those Serpents had seized upon any of the Israelites, or in how many parts of the body they were stung by them, only looking up to the Bra∣sen Serpent, they found a present remedy a∣gainst all. Even such a Catholicon is the Lord Jesus: Behold the Lamb of God that ta∣keth away the sins of the world.John 1.29. It matters not how many, nor or how many kinds thy sins be; Originall, Actuall, in thought, word, deed, of omission, of commission, of ig∣norance, of presumption, against the first or second Table, put them all together, yet here is a cure for all. Our Blessed Saviour when he was upon earth,Matth. 4.24. he cured all Deseases; be∣ing now in Heaven he cureth all sins, Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases, Psal. 103.Psal. 103.3. Suppose it, that not only many, but all the Serpents in the Wil∣dernesse, had fastned their stings and teeth up∣on the body of one man; however his pain must needs have been great, and condition dangerous, yet looking up to the Brasen Ser∣pent, he should have found cure as well as a∣ny other. Suppose it, that all the sins of the world were charged upon the head of one man (as all the sins of Gods Elect were upon the man Christ) yet looking up to the Lord Jesus, he should find there were merit and ver∣tue enough in him to heal and save him. Let neither magnitude nor multitude of sins dis∣courage.
Object. 4.Object. 4. Inveterate sins I, but my sins are growne inve∣terate, of long continuance. They are not of yesterday, but sins which I have lived in, lien in, gone on in, and that against light and checks of conscience; notwithstanding I have been clearly convinced out of the word of the sin∣fulnesse of these wayes, yet I have walked in them; so as through continuance in sin and long custome, I fear my case is desperate and past cure. Answ.Answ. Not desperate. Not so neither: Only beleeve. The Israelites coming to the Brasen Serpent, it mat∣tered not how long before they had been stung, though through continuance the ve∣nome had spread it selfe over the whole body, infecting the blood and spirits, though their case was never so desperate, yet if they could lift up their eyes to the Brasen Serpent, they were cured. It matters not of what standing, of what continuance thy sins are, though now through long custome growne habituall unto thee, yet come unto Jesus Christ, and look up to him, and thou shalt find it is not too late: Serò Medicina paratur, &c. saith the Physician; It is too late to look out for Medicines when the Disease through long continuance is grown inveterate: Not so, saith the Divine. In soul Diseases, be they ne∣ver so inveterate, only come unto Jesus Christ, and beleeve on him.John 11.39. He that raised up Lazarus after he had lien four dayes in the grave puting life into that putrifying body is able to do as much for a dead putrified soul. The very
touch of the hem of his grrment wrought a pre∣sent cure upon that Haemorroisse,Mat. 9.20. the wo∣man which had had a flux of blood for twelve years. Object. 5.Object. 5. Relapses. I, but my case is yet more dan∣gerous, I am relapsed; I have fallen again and again into the same sin, and that not only after conviction, but after repentance, and after that my soul in my apprehension was cu∣red and healed. Is there yet any hope for me? Answ.Answ. The cure more difficult, not desperate. This I confesse maketh the case more dangerous, and the cure more difficult (I mean in our apprehensions) but yet not des∣perate. The Israelites, I suppose some of them, after they had been cured, might bee stung again and again, yet coming to the Brasen Serpent, they still found the same ver∣tue in it. It is possible (though not ordina∣ry) that a Child of God after full conviction, after repentance, and after pardon sued out and obtained, may fall again and again into the same grosse sin; the work of Mortification being here but imperfect and defective; yet in this case let none despair of mercy. He that caused the Brasen Serpent to be set up for a Toties Quoties, that as often as the Israelites repaired to it, they should be cured by it; he hath given his Son, that as often as poor sin∣ners come unto him, they should be cured and healed by him;Caveat against presumptuous adventures. A comfortable Doctrine! But let none abuse it to their own perdition, ta∣king advantage from hence to indulge them∣selves
in adventuring upon, or continuing in any known evils. What shall we say then?Rom. 6.1.2. (saith the Apostle) shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? , God forbid. Shall we therefore dare to reiterate the same sin, that Gods mercy may be renewed in the pardon of it? Far be it from any of us to draw so damnable a conclusion from such sweet and comfortable premises. True it was, the Isra∣elites had a Brasen Serpent to cure them as oft as they were stung; but shall we therefore think that any of them were so mad as to run amongst the Serpents on purpose to be stung by them, because there was a present remedy at hand? True it is, we have an All-suffici∣ent Saviour to look up unto upon all occasi∣ons, who is able to cure and heal all our re∣lapses: But what, shall we therefore take liber∣ty to run again and again into the same sin? Of all evidences of a man that shall never find any benefit by Christ, I do not know a more dangerous, a more dreadfull one then this, when men shall thus make him, as it were, a pandar to their base lusts; so turning the grace of God into wantonnesse. Let not any dare to make such use of what I have said, which I intend only for the staying and com∣forting of drooping and dejected souls, such as languish under the sad apprehension of some renewed sins, which they have againe fallen into through the weaknesse and infirmi∣ty of the flesh; not wittingly, not wilfully; If we sin wilfully (that is, with full consent of
will) after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins. But through weaknesse and infirmi∣ty; To them I say, not I, but the Lord: Let them renew their repentance and faith, loo∣king up unto Jesus Christ, and they shall find there is yet cure for them. Returne ye back-sliding children,Matth. 18.22. Luke 17.3, 4. and I will heale your back-slidings, Jer. 3.22. He that requireth us, if our brother offend us seventy seven times, yet up∣on his acknowledgement to forgive him; will not he do the like by his people upon their returning unto him? Have we relapsed then? yet return by renewed repentance and faith, looking up to this Brasen Serpent, we shall live and not dy. Object. 6.Object. 6. Want of strength a∣gainst corrup∣tion. I, but I cannot find strength a∣gainst my corruption: Could I but feele that weakened in me, then I should have some hope. But alas, I finde that still strong and prevalent; notwithstanding all my praying, and watching, and striving against it, yet I get little or no ground of it, or power a∣gainst it. Answ.Answ. Vertue in Christ for sub∣duing it. Yet despaire not. Onely come un∣to Jesus Christ. The Israelites looking upon the Brasen Serpent, they were thereby freed not only from the smart and anguish of their wounds, but also from the prevalency of the poison, so as it spread no further. The poor sinner looking up to Jesus Christ shall there find a sufficiency, as of merit, so of vertue, for the taking away not onely the guilt and
terrour, but the power and dominion of sin; And therefore do not say, if I could finde my corruption weakened, then I would go unto Christ; but therefore go unto him, that by faith thou mayest fetch vertue from him for the subduing of it. Object. 7.Object. 7. Weaknesse of faith. I, but in the last place, my faith is a weak faith: my wretched heart being full, (as of other lusts, so) of unbeliife. I can∣not glorifie God, as I desire to do, by resting upon his mercy in Christ with such a firme affiance, stedfast confidence, full perswasion, as some others do. Answ.Answ. Not the De∣gree, but the truth of faith, heals and saves. Let not this discourage neither; knowing that it is not the degree and measure, but the truth of faith which heals and saves. The reason whereof I have given you already, because faith doth not save by any vertue of it own; but onely instrumentally, by looking up unto Jesus Christ. Now this a weak faith may do, and that as truly as a strong; and so doing, it shall heale. The Type illustrates it well, An Israelite looking up to the Brasen Serpent, it mattered not how weak, how dim, how tender his eye was, yet hee was cured. Be thy faith never so weak, but as the grain of mustard-seed; but as the smoaking flax, rather a desire to believe, then any strength of faith? yet even this weak faith, being a true faith, shall save thee, shall heale thee. So saith the promise here in the Text; That whosoever believeth on him (though weak∣ly, yet truly) should not perish, &c.
And what is there now that shall stand be∣twixt Christ and a poor penitent sinner, to keep him from believing on him; or upon his believing, from receiving benefit by him? Not his sins, though great, though many, though of long continuance, though often repeated, and that after repentance; not the strength of corruption, or the weaknesse of faith. Onely believe.Onely believe. That is the sum of the Ex∣hortation, which let me presse again, and a∣gain; Upon this depends our eternall happi∣nesse and welfare. And therefore every of us be excited, above all graces to seek after this Mother-grace of Faith;Hab. 2 4. Gal. 2.20. And having it, set it awork, exercise it, live by it: daily stirring up our dead souls thus to look up unto Jesus Christ.Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Christ as the Israelites unto the Brasen Ser∣pent. Looking unto Jesus the authour and fi∣nisher of our faith. So looking up unto him as the wounded Israelites did to their Brasen Serpent. And to that end, 1. Labour to feel the sting of sin;1. Feele the sting of sin. to feele our soules wounded, and mortally wounded by reason of sin, that so we may be made sen∣sible of the need we have of Jesus Christ. Till the soule be brought to some sense, and appre∣hension hereof, it will never have recourse unto Christ for cure. This being done, then 2. Get an eye rightly affe∣cted.2. In the second place; Labour to get an eye rightly affected and disposed; as viz. 1. A discerning eye. 2. A mournfull eye. 3. A longing eye. 4. A stedfast eye. 1. A Discerning Eye.1. A Discer∣ning eye. Such must the Israe∣lites eye be, an eye that was able to behold
and discern the Brasen Serpent. And such an eye must they have who would have any be∣nefit by Christ; they must be able to behold Christ, to behold him as he is revealed in the word, they must have some degree and mea∣sure of distinct knowledge concerning Christ; as to know what he was, what he hath done, what he hath suffered, &c. withall taking no∣tice both of his ability and readinesse to cure all that come unto him. His ability, how mighty a Saviour,Heb. 7.25. how able perfectly (or for ever) to save those that come unto God by him. His willingnesse; how tender and compassio∣nate a Saviour, being himselfe stung to death, that he might know how to have compassion on them that are stung:Heb. 4.15. We have not an high Priest (saith the Apostle) which cannot bee touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are. How ready he is to receive all that come to him for cure. Come unto me ye that labour, &c.Matth. 11.28. John 6.37. I will give you rest, Matth. 11. Him that cometh unto me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6. All these truths being clearly revealed in the word concerning Jesus Christ, they must bee di∣stinctly apprehended, known and believed. Here is the first requisite to the right dis∣posing of the eye: It must be a discerning eye. 2. And (secondly) a mournfull eye.2. A mournful eye. With such eyes (I suppose) did many of the Israe∣lites look up unto their Brasen Serpent, not without tears in them. And with such eyes
look we up unto ours. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced,John 19.37. (saith the Prophet) and they shal mourn, Zach. 12.10. So did Ma∣ry Magdalene look upon her Saviour,Luke 7.38. looking, and weeping. And so look we upon him, mourning; And that both for our selves, and him: In as much as by our sins we have pier∣ced through both; pierced our selves, as Paul saith of covetous persons, They pierce them∣selves through with many sorrowes, 1 Tim. 6.10. So doth every sin more or lesse pierce the soule of the sinner. And piercing our selves, we have also pierced Christ, crucifying him by our sins. It is that which the Apostle saith of Apostates, They crucifie to themselves the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6.6. By them he is twice crucified, by others, once. None of us but have had hands in bringing him to the Crosse, who died for our sins. Great cause to look up unto him with a mournfull eye. 3. And (thirdly) with a longing eye:3. A Longing Eye. With such eyes did the Israelites look up to their Brasen Serpent, earnestly desiring to re∣ceive benefit by it. And with such eyes look we up unto ours; longing after Jesus Christ, that we may be made partakers of his saving benefits. I have longed for thy salvation, (saith David) Psal. 119.174. And thus let the soule of every poor penitent sinner go out after Je∣sus Christ, in longing desires after him, after union and communion with him, desiring nothing so much as this. This is the height
of Pauls desire, that he might know Jesus Christ,Phil. 3.10. and the vertue of his Resurrecti∣on; know him, not only Contemplatively, but Experimentally, and Practically, fee∣ling the power of his Resurection in rai∣sing him first from the Death of sin, to the Life of Grace; and after from the Death of Nature, to the Life of Glory: And let it bee so with us; let there be nothing so dear and precious in our eye as Christ; de∣sire we nothing so much as an Interest in him, and Communion with him. Look up un∣to him with a Longing eye. 4. And in the fourth place,4. A stedfast eye. with a Sted∣fast eye; so did the Israelites look up to their Brasen Serpent, fixing their eyes upon it till they were cured. And so look we up unto ours, fixing our eyes upon the Lord Jesus, stedfastly looking upon him untill we have obtained what we look for.Psal. 123.2. As the eyes of Servants look up unto the hands of their Ma∣sters, &c. So do our eyes wait upon the Lord untill hee have mercy upon us: So do wee look up to our Lord and Saviour, by faith resting and waiting upon him untill hee have mercy upon us, untill our souls, be cured, perfectly cured. Quest. But when will that be? Answ. Why not in this life, and there∣fore let us still be looking up unto him;Heb. 12.2. Let us run the Race set before us (saith the Apo∣stle) looking unto Jesus, Heb. 12. Whilst a
Christian is running his race, he must through∣out his whole course fix his eye upon Christ. The Israelites, as long as they were in the Wil∣dernesse, being continually subject to the stinging of those fiery Serpents, they had a continued use of the Brasen Serpent; and therefore was it carried along with them, and still lift up amongst them, that upon all oc∣casions they might look up unto it. Thus fa∣reth it with us, as long as we are in this wil∣derness here upon earth, we are stil subject to daily infirmities and sins, and consequently have still need of a Saviour, who by the daily application of his merit, and communication of his Spirit may work daily cures for us. And therefore in the sense of this continued need we have of Jesus Christ, let our eyes be still towards him, whom God in infinite good∣nesse and mercy is pleased still to hold forth unto us in the Word and Sacraments, there to be represented to us, and lift up before our eyes. Thus fixing our eyes upon him, wee shall find him to us a perfect Saviour, saving us from the guilt of sin, that it shall not be imputed to us; and delivering us from the power of sin, so as though it abide in us, yet it shall not rule and raign in us, but daily grow weaker and weaker, untill we come in the end to have a perfect cure wrought in us and upon us, in a perfect deliverance from sinne and death, with the full fruition of that blessed and glorious life, which shall
be the portion of all those who thus look up unto this true Brasen Serpent, who thus beleeve on the Lord Jesus. So was the Son of Man lift up, that whosoever beleeveth on him should not perish but, have Everlasting Life.
The Magneticall Vertue OF THE CROSSE OF JESUS CHRIST. JOHN 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me. I Have already spent some time in ope∣ning unto you the manner and end of our Saviours Death, both laid down in those two verses, ver. 14, 15 of the third Chapter of this Gospel, As Moses lift up the Brasen Ser∣pent in the Wildernesse, so must the Son of Man be lift up; That whosoever beleeveth on him
should not perish but have Eternall Life. Now taking hold of that phrase there redoubled (viz. Lifting up) I have singled out this por∣tion of Scripture, wherein our Saviour sets forth as the Manner, so the Fruit and Conse∣quent of his Death. The former fore-prophe∣sied, the later fore-promised, both by our Sa∣viour himselfe. The Manner of his death fore-prophesied [If I shall be lifted up] The Fruit of his Death fore-promised, [I wil draw all men unto me.] Upon the former of these I have insisted al∣ready, viz. the MannerThe manner of Christs death. of our Saviours death, set forth here again (as you see) by the same Periphrasis, the same expression, If I be lifted up;] Lifted up? how? Why, in his Passion upon the Crosse, where he was lif∣ted up from the earth; So the Evangelist ex∣plains the phrase in the verse following; This spake he,ver. 33. signifying what death he should die, viz. the death of the Crosse, where he was to be lifted up,Quest. The d ath of Christ not du∣bious. as the Brasen Serpent was in the wil∣dernesse. If I be lift up.] If? What, doth our Savi∣our make a doubt, a question of his Death? was it a thing contingent and uncer∣taine. Answ.Answ. Carthus. ad loc. Si exaltatus, &c. Hoc refertur ad illud quod supe∣rius ait; Si au∣tem mortuum fuerit granum, &c. August ad loc. Not so: The Particle [If] here must be understood and taken, non dubitativè, sed assertivè, & certitudinaliter (as Carthu∣sian well notes upon it) not by way of doub∣ting or questioning, but by way of asserting and supposing: even as in the 24 verse of this
Chapter, our Saviour speaking of the grain of wheat, or other Corn being cast into the ground;ver. 24. If it die (saith he) it bringeth forth much fruit: . If it dye, that is, Dying: being cast into the ground it dieth (seemeth so to do) and so dying, it fructifieth. So here; If I be lift up, , that is, being lift up, or when I shall be lift up, or after that I am lift up: so the Evangelist St. John elsewhere useth the word, Epist. 3. v. 10. writing to Gaius concerning Diotrephes, he tels him, If I come, I will remember his deeds, that is, when I come: so here, If I bee lift up (saith our Saviour) that is, when I shall be lift up; so the Syriack here renders it.Si exaltatus, h. e. Cum exal∣tatus fuero. Non enim dubitat futurum esse quod venit im∣plere. August. As for our Saviours death, it was not a thing con∣tingent and uncertain, whether in it selfe, or to him; His Father had determined it, him∣selfe had submitted to it, the Prophets had foretold it, his peoples necessities required it; in all which respects our Saviour himselfe lay∣eth it down in the Text last insisted upon, as a thing necessary, So must the Son of Man be lifted up. Not may, but must:Joh. 3.14. And after∣wards he inculcates the same upon his Disci∣ples, Mat. 16.21. where he sheweth them how he must go up to Jerusalem, and suffer many things, and be killed, &c. Neither his death, nor the manner of his death was a thing dubious and uncertain. The Son of Man must be lift up, and so lift up as the Bra∣sen Serpent was in the Wildernesse. That our Saviour saith here, If I be lifted up, he speaks
it not as doubting, but supposing what ere long was to come to passe. That being cleared The fruit of Christs death.Come we now to that which the Text chiefly looketh upon, viz. the Fruit of our Saviours death. A Blessed Fruit; never did tree bear better, viz. the drawing of the world to himself: When I shall be lift up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me.] Thus did the Brasen Serpent being lift up, it drew the eyes of the whole Camp to it selfe, specially such as felt themselves stung by those fiery Ser∣pents. And thus saith our Saviour, being lift up upon the Cross, he would draw the world to himself, to look unto him, to beleeve on him E∣ven as the Sun being risen above the earth, it at∣tracteth and draweth up from it those foggy vapours, which before were in or upon it; draweth them up towards it selfe: Even thus doth Christ the Son of Righteousnesse, being lift up from the earth, he attracts and draws up the world of mankind, those terrae filios, sons of the earth, who being cleaved to the earth, minding nothing but earthly things, he draweth up their Eyes, and Hearts to him∣self: this he fore promised that he would do; And wee shall see it accordingly accompli∣shed. But before we come to close with the words themselves, looking upon them afar off, take we notice of one thing in the generall, and that from the connexion of the parts of the Text, the Prophecie and the Promise; the putting
them together. If I be lifted up, I will draw all men, &c. See here how wonderfully the Scribes and Pharisees,A Generall Observation. and other enemies of Christ who plotted his death, were disappointed and de∣ceived in their intendments and expectations. Wherefore was it that they contrived this e∣vill against him, to bring him to the Crosse,The Enemies of Christ dis∣appointed. that shamefull and accursed death? Why, this they did that they might thereby not onely take him out of the way, but withall render him odious and infamous unto the world; so as from thenceforth none should ever look after him any more. This it was which gal∣led and vexed the Scribes and Pharisees, viz. the successe of his Ministery, that so many were taken with him, believed on him, fol∣lowed after him; and that notwithstanding whatever they could do to the contrary. So much we may learn from their own mouthes in the 19th verse of this Chapter, The Phari∣sees said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevaile nothing? Behold the world is gone af∣ter him. Many there were who hearing of the great miracles which hee had wrought, (specially that recorded in the fore going Chapter, the raising of Lazarus from the dead,) thereupon (as the 18th verse of this Chapter informes us) they flocked after him, and became his Disciples. Now this, to the Pharisees (who could not endure that any should be preferred before themselves) it was no small corrosive, it went to the heart of
them, they could not brook it: and there∣fore they plot against him. And (as it is the nature of envy, where once it is grown to an height) nothing will now content them but his blood. They resolve never to leave till they had brought him to the Crosse, taken him out of the way, hoping thereby to turne the stream of mens affections, either to deterre, or discourage any for ever looking after him more. This was their designe; but see how the successe falls out clean contrary to their expectation. By this means Christ cometh to draw more then ever. Even as Samson slew more at his death,Judg. 16.30. then in his life. Thus the Son of man (of whom Samson was a Type) he draweth more by, and after his death, then ever he did in his life; more, being lift up from the earth, then ever hee did being upon the earth. In his life he drew some, and many; which the Pharisees looking upon through the spectacle of envie, (a true multiplying or magnifying glasse, making things seem more, or greater then they are,) take for a world: The world is gone after him.] But in, and after his death, he draweth not onely some, and many, but all: If I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me.] Observ. The Counsels of the Ene∣mies of Christ wonderfully frustrated. 2 Sam. 15.31.Even thus doth God often elude and fru∣strate the counsell of his, and his Churches enemies, turning them into folly, as hee did the counsell of Achitophel. Oft-times bringing out of them clean contrary successes to what they intended. The Patriarchs, moved with en∣vy,
sell their brother Joseph into Egypt.Acts 7.9. But God turns that foule fact of theirs into great good both to him and them; making it the means of his preferment, and their preservati∣on: All the wayes and means they could have used, could not have procured so great ad∣vancement unto him; but no thanks to them. As for you (saith he to them) ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good,Gen. 50.20. even to save much people alive.] Judas in betray∣ing, the chiefe Priests in condemning, the Jews in crucifying the Lord of life; they all thought evill against him, intending to take him out of the way; that his very name might either be blotted out, or rendred infamous to all posterity. But God meant it unto great good, even to save much people alive; ma∣king use of this as the means to effect and bring to passe the Redemption and salvation of his Elect. Thus doth God make use of the wicked counsels and designes of his, and his Churches enemies, to bring about his own gracious pur∣poses; still over-reaching, being above his e∣nemies, how potent, or politick soever. So it is said of the Egyptians, Exod. 18.Exod. 18.11. In the thing wherein they dealt proudly God was above them.] And what was that thing? why, that designe of theirs against the Israelites, (of which you may read Chap. 1.Cap. 1. ver. 10.16.22.) Come, let us deale wisely, say they: They thought what by policy, and what by power, to have suppressed, and kept under the Israelites: But herein God was above them; frustrating their counsels, nay,
bringing out of them a clean contrary successe. Not only judging them in the very thing where∣in they thought to judge Israel,Vid. Ains∣worth, in Exod. 18.11. (as the Chaldee paraphrase glosseth upon that place,) drow∣ning them in the sea, who had designed to drown all the males of the children of Israel in the rivers; but making use of that bloody designe, as a means to bring about the delive∣rance of his oppressed people, as you may read it in the second Chapter of that Book.Exod. 2.3, 5. &c. Instances of like nature are obvious; Proud Haman designes the ruine not onely of Mor∣decai, (that was too sleight a revenge) but of the whole Nation of the Jews. But see how God was above him, turning it as to his ruine, and Mordecai's advancement, hanging him up upon the Gallowes which he had prepared for Mordecai,Hester 7.10. chap. 10. v. 3. chap. 8. v. 17. and setting up Mordecai in his place; so to their comfort and enlarge∣ment, causing light, and joy, and gladnesse to break forth unto his people out of that black cloud which threatned them with ruine and destruction. Reason. The power, wisdom, good∣nesse of God therein mani∣fested.This God hath done, and this hee daily doth; therin manifesting his power, wisdom, goodness; viz. in bringing one contrary out of another, light out of darknesse. It is the skill of the Physician to turn the rankest poi∣sons into soveraigne medicines, vipers into treacles. And it is the power, wisdom, good∣nesse of our God, thus to turne the counsels and intendments of his, and his Churches e∣nemies to great good, making use of them
for his owne glory, and the good of his Church. Applic. Let the meditation be usefull,Applic. and that both to the Churches Enemies, and Friends. 1. For her Enemies,1. To the Ene∣mies of Christ. Let them cease to meditate vain things. such as plot and con∣spire, and take counsell against God, against his truth, religion, cause, people, let them be advised to desist, and break off their vain un∣dertakings. Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?Psal. 2.1, 2. The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsell together against the Lord, and against his Anointed.] To plot, and conspire, and take counsell against God, and his Christ, against his truth, his people; it is but a vaine thing, they do herein but meditate vanity, (as the Originall there hath it.) It matters not how promising the designe be, how cunningly contrived, how closely carried, how potently prosecuted, yet all is in vain.ver. 4. He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn: be∣ing able to confound or over-rule all adverse counsels, so as either to bring them to nought, or else to bring good out of them. And this he will do; not but that for a time the Chur∣ches enemies may seem to prevaile. So did the Jews against our Saviour; they brought him to the Crosse: I, but yet they shall misse of their end. So did the Jews, in stead of blotting out the Name of Christ, they make it glorious. In stead of turning back a few from him, they draw the world after
him. And what happened to the head, shall also happen to the body. What ever wicked men, open or secret enemies, plot and contrive against the Church, shall tend to the good of it in the end: He that hath promised that All things shall work together for good,Rom. 8.28. &c. both can and will make the counsels and endeavors, the plots and practices of his enemies turn to the good of his people: Let wicked men then be perswaded to break off these vaine underta∣kings. Had the Scribes and Pharises, and the rest of that malignant crew, ever dreamed that this should have been the issue of their counsells, in crucifying the Lord of life, viz. that thereby the world should be drawn unto him, certainly they would never have done what they did. 2. For Gods own people,2. To God's own people. Comfort a∣gainst Adver∣saries. such as are friends to Christ, friends to his truth, his Church and Religion, let them make use of this Medita∣tion for the staying and comforting of their hearts against all the plottings and conspirings of the many and potent enemies of the Church: Many and Potent, so they are, some open, o∣thers close and secret, all setting themselves a∣gainst the truth, the Religion of God, by all means seeking the suppression of it. To which end they deal with Christs Religion and the Professours of it, even as the Jows dealt with Christ himself; they crucifie both, labouring by all means to make it and them as odious and infamous in the eye of the world as possi∣bly they can; and thence it is that they spit
upon the face of Religion, casting those terms of infamy and reproach upon the good wayes of God, and those that endeavour to walk closely in them; (I shall not need to name them, they are but too well known) all which are but as so many nails whereby they fasten the true Religion of Christ, the power of godlinesse, to the Crosse, wounding and pier∣cing it through; that so having rendred it infa∣mous, they may deter or discourage any from looking that way which lieth under such a cloud of reproach and disgrace. But let not all this dishearten: It was not the crucifi∣ing of Christ in his Naturall body that could turne the eyes of men from looking towards him, or their hearts from beleeving on him: It is not the crucifying of Christ in his Mysti∣call body, the crucifying of his Religion, or the Professours of it, that shall deter men from owning Christ and his waies. The ex∣perience of all ages hath made it good, that the malice, rage, and violence of the bitterest and bloodiest enemies of the Church, hath been but as bellowes to this fire, blowing up, spreading and dispersing that Religion, that truth of God, which they have sought and thought too have supprest and extinguished. Such was the issue of the rage of those. Heathe∣nish Tyrants in the infancy of the Church, the ten Primitive Persecutions, Sanguis Martyrum, The blood of those Martyrs proved the seed of the Chruch; This Vine having ever since been the more fruitfull for that blood which was pow∣red
at the root of it. And the same we may say of that Antichristian Tyranny which hath been excercised in suceeding ages, upon the true professours of the Gospel of Christ. Bloody Persecutours have thought by their Dracoes Lawes, lawes written in Blood, and the severe execution thereof, utterly to have supprest the truth of the Gospel, that none should have dared to own it. But see how it hath fallen out contrary to their expectation, every Martyr proving like a Phoenix, out of whose ashes not one, but many more have sprung up. Thus Jesus Christ where ever he hath been crucified in himself or members, still he hath drawen many to himself. No fear therefore that by this means by, crucifying of Christ, the enemies of the Church should prevail against it. Hereby they do but lift up Jesus Christ, that he may draw the more unto him, Quàm non sint formidanda impio∣rum consilia? (saith Musculus upon it.) Such little cause have we to fear the plots and counsells of wicked and ungodly men; being against Christ, they shall not prevail, their counsels shall be brought to nought and re∣turn upon their own heads;Psal. 7.16. This is one of the pri∣viledges and Prerogatives given unto Christ by his Father,Psal. 110.2. That he shall rule in the midst of his enemies; This he doth, he sits at the stern of their counsels, turning them this way or that way, making them, whilst they go about to do their owne wils, to effect his; as to clear his truth whilst they go about to darken and obscure it,
to promote and further the cause of his Gospel, whilst they go about to hinder it; so getting glory to himselfe, and good to his Church out of their most malicious and dan∣gerous intendments. Such was this of the Scribes and Pharisees, and Chief Priests a∣gainst our Saviour; They plot his death, ho∣ping that when they had brought him to the Crosse, not only his person, but his cause should have for ever been buried in silence and oblivion; but behold the success clean con∣trary; by this means the Son of Man being lift up, he comes to have a more vigorous influence upon the world then ever before: now he com∣eth to draw not a few, but many, not many, but all; If I be lift up, I will draw ll men unto me. Having taken up this in the generall, come we now to deal with the words more particu∣larly.Four particu∣lars. And therein for the more clear opening and distinct prosecuting of them, take we no∣tice of these four particulars. 1. Who draw∣eth: 2. Whom he draweth: 3. Whether he draweth them: 4. How he draweth them. In the first we have the Agent, the person drawing. In the second the Object, the things or persons drawn. In the third the Term of the Action, whither they are drawn. In the fourth, the Manner; how they are drawn; we shall find a resolution to each in the Text. Touch upon them severally and briefly by way of Explication. Q. 1. Who draweth? An. Christ himself;1. The person drawing. He it was that was lifted up, and being so, he draw∣eth; I will draw.
Obj. But is not this the Act of God the Fa∣ther,How God the Father draw∣eth. Joh. 6.14. to draw, to bring men home unto Christ? So saith our Saviour himself elsewhere, No man cometh unto me, except the Father draw him, how then saith he here, that when hee should be lift up, he would draw all men to himself? An. To this the Answer is obvious. The Fa∣ther draweth,Filio trahente pater trahit. Aquin. ex Chrys. ad loc. and the Son draweth; having one and the same essence, they have also the same will, and the same work; that which the one willeth, the other willeth, and that which the one worketh,Joh. 5.17. the other worketh; [My Fa∣ther worketh hitherto, and I worke,] both joy∣ning together, and co-operating in every work that is wrought in, for, or upon the creature; Opera Trinitatis ad extrà sunt indivisa. So was it in the first Creation, the Father created, and the Son created; the Father working by the Son. And so is it in the New Creation, the work of Regeneration, and Conversion, in bringing men home unto Christ; the Father draweth, and the Son draweth, the Father working by the Son through the Spirit. The Father draweth men to his Son, the Son draw∣eth them to the Father, and to himself. I will draw all men.] Qu. 2. The second Enquirie is about the Object2. The object, or things drawn. upon which this attractive power and vertue is exercised, whom Christ draweth. An. All men (saith the Text.) The Latine Translation hath it, All things,All things. Omnia. A read∣ing which Augustine retaineth, and conten∣deth
for. And Beza tells us, that he findes one Greek copy, and that an ancient one,Non dixit [omnes] sed [omnia.] Hoc utique non ad universitatem hominum retu∣lit, sed ad crea∣tura integrita∣tem, i. e. spiri∣tum & animam, & corpus, &c. August. Totos corpore & animo faci∣am mihi servi∣re. Aretius ad Text. Utrum{que} ad se trahit, ut salivt utrum∣que. Ferus ad loc. Phil. 2.6. All men. 1 Tim. 2.5. The word [All] explain∣ed. allow∣ing it, reading the word , all things: Shall we so take it? how shall we understand it? Why, Christ draweth all things, that is, (say some) not onely the souls, but the bodies of men, the one here, the other hereafter; drawing both to himselfe, the one in his King∣dome of Grace, the other in his Kingdome of Glory. Others more fully; Christ draweth all things to himselfe, not onely men, but other creatures. How? why in respect of that uni∣versall Authority and Soveraignty which he hath over them, being lift up, viz. from the Cross to the Crown, he hath all Power given unto him, and not onely over all Men, but o∣ver Angells, Devills, and all other creatures, all which how the knee to him, yeelding to him either a voluntary or involuntary subjection and obedience. But to let that pass. The Greek Copies generally read the word as our Translation renders it, not , but ; not All things, but All men, for their sakes it was that Christ took upon him the Office of Mediatorship, he is the Mediator betwixt God and Men, and upon them he ex∣cerciseth a spirituall government in drawing them to himselfe; and this power he exerciseth upon all, he draweth all men. Qu. What? are all men drawn by Christ unto Christ? An. For Answer. I find the word [All] here diversly expounded. Some (in the first
place) taking it universally for all men whate∣ver,All drawn to Christ, how. Potest hic tra∣ctus non solum de gratiâ quâ Electi trahun∣tur, sed etiam de potestate, quâ reprobi quoque velint nolint, coguntur Chri∣sto subesse. Om∣nes enim five boni, sive mali, ab ipso secun∣dum merita sua judicandi sunt, &c. Ferus ad loc. whether Elect or Reprobate, good or bad; both these are drawn by Christ unto Christ. The one by the cords of his grace and mercy, the other of his power and justice; the one drawn to him as to a Saviour, to believe on him, to be saved by him, the other drawn be∣fore him as a Judge, brought to his Tribunall, there to receive according to their demerits. Thus shall all wicked men be drawn by Christ, and to him. A truth, but I suppose, not here intended. The drawing here spoken of, is by way of grace and mercy; But how doth Christ thus draw all men? 2. Why this he doth (say others in the se∣cond place) by offering himself to all, offering grace and mercy, life and salvation to all upon the condition of believing.2. Christ offered to all. Omnes vocat, & omnibus sa∣lutem offert. Ferus. Mat. 23. True, such an of∣fer Christ maketh unto all, all those whom he sendeth the Gospell to. And so he may be said to draw all men, calling, inviting them to come unto him; so did he draw Jerusalem in the dayes of his flesh, O Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee? And thus he draweth all those that are within the pale of the Church, the sound of the Gospell.Muscul. ad loc. Ferus. ad loc. I dare not say with some, Quantum in se est, trahit, that as much as in him lieth, he draweth all men; no, I know that if Christ put forth his power, he can o∣verpower the soule of the most obstinate and rebellious sinner, and cause him to come in, and that willingly: Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy powers, Psal. 110.Psa. 110.3. When
Christ puts forth the arm of his power, ac∣companying his Word with his Spirit, (for that is the day of Christs power) then shall his call be effectuall, all that are so called shall come to him, and that willingly.Isa. 65.2. Pro omnibus in cruce pependit, & omnes quan∣tum in se est, expansis ad se brachiis veluti trahit. Musc ad loc. Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Thus Christ doth not draw all men; yet out∣wardly he doth, offering himselfe alike to all. So he did upon the Cross, where his arms were extended and spread abroad, as inviting all, willing and ready to receive and imbrace all that should come to him. There behold the Son of man lift up, and drawing all men unto him; this he doth more clearly in the preach∣ing of the Gospell, which he requireth to be published to all Nations, to every creature un∣der heaven. There he makes knowne himself, offers himselfe to all that will receive him, in∣viting, perswading them to come to him to believe on him. Thus he draweth all in re∣spect of an outward call; that this drawing proveth ineffectuall to some, to many, to the most, the fault is their own, in that they doe not hearken to this call, they will not follow him drawing, but draw back;Mat. 23.37. I would have ga∣thered you, but ye would not, saith our Saviour to Jerusalem. In the mean time, Christ draw∣eth them outwardly. Thus he draweth all; not that he intends to save all, but that by this means he may draw forth his Elect out of all, and bring them home to himself; even as the Fisherman (the similitude illustrates it well) in drawing of his net, his drag, he draweth all that cometh within the compass of it, not onely good
fish, but weeds, and stones, and mud; and wherefore doth he this? why, it is for the good fishes sake; that what is good he may save.Mat. 13.47. Even thus is it with Christ's Drag-net, the preaching of the Gospell; The Kingdome of Heaven is like unto a net (saith our Saviour) It draweth all that come within the reach and compasse of it, Christ offering grace and mer∣cy alike to all. But wherefore this? why, it is for the Elects sake: that Christ may save those which are his, by that means singling and drawing them out of the world, and bringing them effectually home to himselfe. He draweth all, that he may save some; draws all outwardly by his word, that by his Spirit accom∣panying his word, he may draw his Elect out of all, making that his drawing effectuall to them, to all of them. Thus Christ drawes all men, A truth, but not the whole truth here inten∣ded. The drawing which our Saviour here speaketh of, I look upon it as an inward and effectuall work, a drawing and bringing of men home unto himselfe, to believe on him. Enquire yet further then: How may Christ be said thus to draw all men? Why. (in the third place) thus Christ draw∣ethAll the Elect. all his Elect. So the the word [Quod omnes dicit, referendum est ad Dei filios, qui ex grege sunt. Calvin ad loc. 1 Tim. 2.6. All] is frequently to be understood and taken in Scrip∣ture: Christ gave himselfe a Ransome for all men, (saith the Apostle,) that is, for his E∣lect. And so very properly and fitly may the word here be restrained in the Text: I will draw all men.Siper [omnia] ipsi homines in∣telligendi sunt, omnis praedesti∣nata ad salutem pessumus dicere: August, ad loc. Praedestinatos scilicet ad salutem.
Such as God hath predestinated unto salvati∣on, them Christ draweth: Those whom God his Father hath given unto him, them Christ bringeth home to himselfe, drawing them, and that effectually, as I shall shew you hereafter. And thus he draweth, not some, but all of them: This is the Fathers will,John 6.39. that of all that be hath given me, I should lose nothing. 4. Or if you will (in the fourth place) by all men, here understand we all sorts of men,4. All sorts of men. August. ad loc. Omnia hominum genera; All kinds, and sorts of men, some out of all. So the word All is frequently used in Scripture. God will have all men to be saved, 1 Tim. 2.1 Tim. 2.4. God will have all men to come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.2 Pet. 3.9. that is, all sorts of men, some of all Nations, conditi∣ons. Even as it is said that our Saviour hee cured all diseases and sicknesses, Mat. 4.Matth. 4.23. , that is, (as our Tran∣slation renders it.) All manner of sicknesse, and all manner of disease. So all men, that is, all sorts and kinds of men.Omnes, intelli∣ge non Judaeos tantum, sed & alienigenas. Grotius ad loc. In hoc Chryso∣stomo assentior, qui particulâ u∣niversali Chri∣stum usum esse tradit, quia Gentibus pari∣ter & Judais colligenda est Ecclesia. Calv. ad loc. And so very congru∣ously and fitly may we understand the word here in the Text; I will draw all men: that is, all sorts of men; of all Ages, Sexes, De∣grees, Conditions, Nations, Jews and Gentiles, &c. So Chrysostome, and divers others here give the sense of the word; and that (as I conceive) very genuinely. Christ before his death he had drawn onely one Nation, the Nation of the Jews, to whom in an ordina∣ry way the offer of grace and mercy was con∣fined; but being lift up, lift up upon the
Crosse in his passion, now henceforth hee draweth not onely Jews, but Gentiles; the Gospel being from thenceforth to be publi∣shed to both; and the Church to be gathe∣red, and made up out of both; according to what our Saviour had fore-told a little before, Cap. 10. ver. 16. There shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd. And therefore saith he here, When I am lift up, I will draw all men unto me. Of these two later acceptions it matters not which we imbrace. Or if you will, put them both together. Christ being lifted up, he pro∣miseth to draw all men: that is, all his Elect people, being some of all sorts and conditions of men. Such are the Elect of God, a sele∣cted company, gathered out of all Nations, all ranks, ages, &c. and so specialis quadam universitas,Appellatur eti∣am mundus in bonis, qui fimi∣liter toto terra∣rum orbe diffusi sunt. Aug. in John 12.31. a kind of speciall universality, a world in the world, and so called here all men. Here then are the persons drawn; all Gods elect, being some of all Nations, &c. Quest. 3. But whither3. Whither Christ draweth men, viz. to himselfe. are they drawne? That is the third Enquiry. Answ: To which the Text makes answer, they are drawn unto Christ, ; I will draw them to my selfe.] So Christ draw∣eth his elect. Even as magneticall, or Electri∣call bodies, as the Loadstone, Jet, and Amber, &c. attract iron and strawes, &c. unto them∣selves. So doth Christ draw his elect unto him∣self, viz. to have union and communion with him; to believe on him, to be saved by him.
And thus he draweth all of them, effectually bringing them home to himself: All that the Father giveth to me shall come unto me, John 6.37. being given unto Christ before time, they shall be brought home to him in time; being given to him in election, they shall be brought to him by effectuall vocation; they shall come unto him, that is, believe on him. So our Sa∣viour expounds his own meaning, ver. 35. of that Chapter. He that cometh to me, shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me, shall never thirst. The later explains the former.Non enim ad Christum ambu∣lando currimus, sed credendo: nec motu corpo∣ris, sed volunta∣te cordis accedi∣mus: August. in John 6.44. To come unto Christ, is to believe on him. And thus all his Elect being given to him, they shal come un∣to him, Christ wil draw them, bring them home to himselfe, to have union and communion with him in his Kingdome of grace here, and glory hereafter. This is the Fathers will which hath sent me, that of all that he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, John 6.39. Quest: 4. The fourth and main question is yet behind; And that is how Christ draweth them?4. How Christ draweth. Ans. For answer to this at present, I shall onely look upon the word in the Text,The word [Drawing] explained. and the proper signification thereof, reserving the way and means, and manner of Christs drawing till afterwards. The word here is , traham, I will draw. Now to draw pro∣perly, we know what it is: viz. to force a a thing this way or that way contrary to its nature, or will. As to draw water, is to force it upwards contrary to the
ponderous nature of it. To draw a man, is to force him this way, or that way, contrary to his owne inclination and will; herein drawing differs from leading. In lead∣ing, one goes before, and directs the way, the other followes of his own accord: In draw∣ing, a man is forced, or over-powered, made to do what otherwise hee would not. And e∣ven thus doth Christ draw his Elect to himself; he not onely leadeth them, but draweth them, propoundeth himself to them, and not onely sheweth them the way to come, but over-pow∣ereth them: which he doth non violenter, sed amorosè, (as CarthusianCarthus. ad loc. Trahitur ani∣mus & amore. Aug. in Joh. 6.44. glosseth upon it) not violently, but sweetly; not bringing men to him against their wills, or yet forcing their wills, (which cannot be done) but sweetly over-powering them by the effectuall working of his Grace and Spirit, making them both wil∣ling, and able to come, who of themselves were neither. Drawing im∣ports two things.The word and phrase being thus opened, it giveth us to take notice of two things: 1. Mans naturall indisposition; and 2. Christs effectuall working: The indisposition of man to come unto Christ, the effectuall working of Christ in bringing man home to himself; the one ne∣cessarily implyed, the other clearly expressed, both in this phrase of drawing, both usefull Observations. I shall insist upon them se∣verally, beginning with mans naturall indis∣position. Obs.Doct. Men come not unto Christ unless they
be drawn. [I will draw them.] He doth not say,Men come not to Christ with∣out drawing. (saith Musculus upon it) Current ad me, when I am lifted up, all men shall run unto me; no, there is no such principle in Nature to car∣ry men unto Christ; but I will draw them, men must be drawn before they can come un∣unto Christ, otherwise they come not. Qu. And why do they not come of them∣selves? An. Take a double reason for it;Reason. they can∣not, they will not; They cannot if they would; they will not if they could; both these keep them from coming, impotency, reluctancy; They are unable to come of themselves, and not more unable then unwilling; see both made good. 1. Their impotency,1. Their impo∣tency. they cannot come, , saith our Saviour, No man can come to me, except my Father draw him. Joh. 6.44. Q. And why cannot men of themselves come unto Christ? A. See a double impediment,A double im∣pediment. the one in∣ward, the other outward; the one in and from themselves, the other from Satan. 1. In themselves they are both blind and lame:1. Inward in themselves, be∣ing Blind in their understandings, lame in their wills; both hindring them from coming unto Christ, from believing on him. 1. They are blind:1. Blind. Act. 26.18. Isai. 42.7. Paul was sent to the Gen∣tiles to open their eyes, their blind eyes; so it is said of Christ, that he was given for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes: Such is the
condition of all men by nature, they are born blinde,Eph. 4.18. having their understandings darkned through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindnesse of their heart, as Paul saith of the Gentiles,1 Sam. 11.2. having their right eye put out, (as Nahash would have dealt with the men of Jabesh Gilead) so as they do not, cannot see and know the things that belong to their peace: Naturall men know little of God, (onely so much as may serve to convince and condemne them) but nothing of Christ. Nature can tell a man somewhat of the one, but nothing of the other; now how shall any one come unto him, believe on him whom he knoweth not? How shall they believe on him,Rom: 10.14. of whom they have not heard? (saith the Apostle.) Men are naturally blind. 2. And not onely so, but lame;2. Lame. being born blind, they cannot come unto Christ whom they know not; but suppose their eyes were opened, so as they did know Christ, yet can they not come to him, they cannot incline their own wills to receive him, to believe on him. Faith in Christ, it is a supernaturall work, a gift of God,Eph. 2.10. By grace ye are saved through faith, It is the gift of God. It, as salvation it selfe, so that faith whereby we are saved, it is the gift of God. To believe is a thing which a man cannot do of himself, no, though Christ be revealed, and made known to him: So he is in the preaching of the Gospell not onely revealed, but offered and tendered to all that will receive him; but this men of themselves
cannot do. He that giveth Christ himself to us, must also give us the hand to receive that gift. He that offereth Christ to us and requireth us to beleeve on him, he must also work that in us which he requireth from us; No man can come unto me (saith our Saviour) except it be given him of my Father, Joh. 6.65. Man cannot beleeve of himself. Time was indeed, when man had power to have done what his Creator required of him: In state of innocency he could have performed the condition of the Law, much more of the Gospel, had it been propounded to him. He could then by himselfe have fulfilled the righteousnesse of the Law, much more could he have believed on another for righteousnesse, if God had re∣quired it of him. But now through the fall of Adam,Man lamed by the fall of A∣dam. we are all become like Mephibosheth, who by a fall from his Nurses armes, became lame of his feet. Such is our condition by na∣ture; how ever at first created sound and per∣fect, yet falling in the armes of our first parent, we are become lame and impotent, so as now we cannot of our selves come unto God, either by the way of the Law, or Gospel; either by doing, or believing: We cannot believe of our selves. This is the work of the Spirit of Christ, which as it must enlighten the understanding to the beholding of Christ, so it must bow and encline the will to receive him, rest upon him, believe on him: Thence it is called the Sp rit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. Neither the eye, nor hand, whereby we behold Christ, and take hold of him, are our own. Of our selves, we are both blind &
lame. And here is the impediment from within. 2. Outward impediment. Satan.2. Besides this, there is another from with∣out. Satan hinders men from coming unto Christ; even as Paul tels his Thessalonians concerning his own coming to them; Wee would (saith he) have come unto you once and again, but Satan hindred us, 1 Thes. 1.18. So doth Satan hinder men from coming unto Christ; how Satan hindred Paul in his jour∣ney is uncertain; probably by raising up a∣gainst him some stormes of trouble and per∣secution, at land, or else some tempest at sea, so stopping his passage to them: And by such waies and means Satan often hinders men from coming to Christ; when they begin to look towards him, he raiseth up storms and tem∣pests of persecution and trouble, casteth some stumbling blocks or other in their way, where∣by he disheartens and discourageth them from coming unto him; besides he holdeth them captive; so saith Paul of such as oppose them∣selves against the truth of the Gospel, They are in the snare of the divel, taken captive by him at his will, 2 Tim. 2.2 Tim. 2. last. ; Taken alive; as Captives taken in the wars, or as Beasts and Birds taken by Hunters and Fow∣lers in nets and snares, which are carried whi∣ther they please. Even so are wicked men taken by Satan; I, so are all men naturally, all ta∣ken captive, and held captive, and led cap∣tive by him; some captivated in their under∣standings by Erroneous and Hereticall Do∣ctrines; some in their Wills and affections, by vitious provocations and enticements; and
hereby he keepeth them off from coming to Christ. The Parable in the Gospel holdeth forth this truth; the Guests which were invi∣ted to the Marriage Supper,Luke 15.18. every one had something to keep him away, one a Wife, an∣other a Farm, &c. Thus it is with poor sin∣ners when they are invited to come unto Christ, to beleeve on him, to have commu∣nion with him, every one hath something or other to detain and keep him back, either the pleasures, or profits, or honours of the world, &c. and these are Satans snares wherein he ta∣keth and holdeth poor captivated souls, so as they cannot come unto Christ.Exod. 5.4, 5. Even as Pha∣raoh held the Israelites under their burdens, that they could not go forth to serve the Lord their God; So doth Satan hold men under some burdens or others, so as they cannot be brought unto Christ, unlesse they be brought to him by a strong hand; so were the Israe∣lites brought out of Egypt;Exod. 6.1. and so must poor sinners be brought unto Christ, they must be drawn to him, and that by a power greater then Satans:Luke 11.21. Where the strong man keepeth the house, he cannot be dispossessed but by a stronger: where Satan keepeth his hold (as he doth in every meer naturall man) he is not easily ejected; neither are his captives easily taken out of his hand: There must be an o∣verpowring power to rescue them, even the power of Jesus Christ, who unlesse he draw men, they can never come to him of them∣selves: As themselves are both blind and lame,
so Satan hinders them. They cannot come though they would. 2. Reluctancy. Men will not come unto Christ, either as,2. Nay (in the second place) that which ma∣keth the case the more desperate, they wil not though they could: There is in them natural∣ly not only an Impotency, but a Reluctancy: They will not come; so our Saviour chargeth it upon the Jewes, Yee will not come unto me, Joh. 5.40. Such a reluctancy there is naturally in the heart of man, not only an indisposition but an Opposition; so as though Christ be of∣fered and tendered unto men, yet they will not come to him: They will not come to him as to a Lord, no nor yet as a Saviour. 1. Not as unto a Lord.1. A Lord. Nolumus regnare, say those Rebellious ones, Luk 19.14. We will not have this man to raign over us; Such rebel∣lion there is in the heart of every man natural∣ly; men will not have Christ to raigne in them, over them. A Truth, whereof we have but too sad experience at this day, in re∣gard of the outward Government of Christ in his Church; How many are there who cannot endure to hear of it? no not of any Govern∣ment at all. It is much more true of his In∣ward Government; men naturally are averse hereunto; and why? because they are wedded to their own wils, to their own lust, which they are loah to part with: Hereupon they will not yeeld up themselves to Christ, to be governed by him. They will not come to him as to a Lord. 2. No nor yet as a Saviour.2. A Saviour. True it is,
those that hear of Christ, haply they could be content to be saved by him; I, but they will not come to him that they may be saved; Yee will not come to me that ye might have life: Men will not come to Christ as to a Saviour; they will not beleeve on him for life and salva∣tion. Qu. And why will they not?The reason of this Reluctan∣cy. An. Because they will not go out of them∣selves: neither do they feel the need they have of him. 1. Men are not willing to go out of them∣selvs.1. Men wil not go out of themselvs. Quisque sibi proximus. Naturally men are wedded to themselves, and so are loath to be divorced Self Deniall is a hard lesson, special∣ly for a man to deny and renounce his owne goodnesse, his own righteousnesse: now this a man must do before he come unto Christ: They who come unto him must come not like Peter,Joh. 21.7. Mark 10.50. who girt his coat about him to swim to Christ; but like Bartimaeus, who cast off his cloak to come to him; so must men cast a∣way the garment of their own righteousnesse in respect of any affiance or confidence in it, before they can come to Christ. Now this flesh and blood is loath to do: A little of a mans own is better then a great deal of ano∣ther bodies: A mans own righteousnesse is a pearle which nature is loath to part with; men are loath to go out of themselves. 2. Neither (in the second place) do they apprehend the need they have of Christ.2. They feel not the need of Christ. Na∣turally men, though sick in their souls, sick un∣to
the death, yet like men in an Apoplexie or Phrensie, they feel not their grief, they ap∣prehend not their danger: Now what hope that they should look out for a Physician? much more that they should go unto him? A very difficult thing it is throughly to convince men of the misery and danger of their naturall e∣state, and so of the need they have of Christ. And hence is it that they will not come unto him, though pressed & urged. They will not go upon a needless errand (as they suppose) nor yet go seek for that abroad, which they presume either they have, or may have at home; hence it is that men though invited, they will not come unto Christ unlesse he draw them, by in∣lightning their minds, and inclining their wils, of unwilling making them willing, And thus you see this first Observation cleared and made good, viz. That men come not unto Christ of themselves: What use shall we now make of it? Ʋse. 1. Mans naturall power and li∣berty of wil in the work of Conversion, decayed.Applic. Not to spend time in Controversie, which yet the Text giveth just occasion to, viz. touching the power of nature, and the liberty of mans will in the work of conversion, which is so much cryed up by Pelagians, Pa∣pists, Arminians, and other Sectaries of the times: A Doctrine how directly contrary to the sense and meaning of this expression here used by our Saviour in the Text? where he tels us, that being lift up, he will [Draw] all men unto himselfe. Now surely, were men of themselves able to come, and had they such a
command over their own wills (as they dream of) there should not need any such drawing, over-powring: there should not need any such sweet violence to be offered to the soul. Certainly drawing presupposeth either Impo∣tency or Reluctancy, one or both. As for that glosse upon this word which some would fa∣ther upon Chrysostome (whose soever it is) it is justly by Illiricus renounced as corrupt and erroneous, ;Philosopho. The ologi proferun Oraculum ex suo Chrysostomo &c. Glossahaec è diametro pug∣nat cùm voce, Traham. Flac. Iilic. Clavis. voc. Traham. Qui trahit, volentem trahit; He that draweth, draweth him that is willing to follow; not so, but the clean contrary; it is the difference (as I have told you) betwixt Drawing and Leading; a man that is willing is led, a man unwilling is drawn. And such are all men, before Christ comes to overpower their wills. So as Grotius might well have spared his gloss upon the Text: I will draw all men,Sed eos intellige qui non relu∣ctantur, Grot. Annot. in Text. that is (saith he) Eos qui non reluctantur, Such as are willing to follow; But where are they? I shall not dwell upon that. More usefully for our selves.Ʋse. 2. The glory of Conversion to be given to Christ. As many of us as have tasted of this grace of God in the great work of our Conversion, in bringing us home unto Christ, learn we hence whither to give the praise and glory of it: Not unto our selves, but unto Jesus Christ; not unto our willing, or running, but unto his drawing; It is not of him that willeth,Rom. 9.16. nor of him that run∣neth (saith the Apostle). Alas, of our selves we could neither run, nor yet will to run: before conversion, being dead in trespasses and
sins, we could not so much as move towards Heaven, no nor yet will to move, no more then a dead man can will his own resurrection; even this will is of God. It is God that work∣eth in you both to will, and to do, Phil. 2.13. Had not Christ drawn us, we had never come unto him. And therefore not unto us, not to the goodnesse of our natures, not to the tracta∣blenesse of our tempers, the ingenuity and se∣quaciousnesse of our dispositions, nor yet to the benefit of our education, or what ever else, but only to the free grace of God in Christ, bee all the praise and glory of this work. Ʋse. 3. Be convinced of natural Im∣potency and Reluctancy.For others who are as yet strangers to this work, who never yet felt this attractive pow∣er working upon their souls, let them be con∣vinced of the truth of what hath been now delivered; viz. that they cannot come unto Christ of themselves; they cannot come ex∣cept Christ himselfe draw them. Whence is it that many neglect seeking after Christ, and after faith in Christ? and put off the work of their conversion from day to day? why, there is a false principle in their hearts; They think that to beleeve is the easiest thing in the world; that they can come unto Christ when they list: Not so, except Christ himself draw thee, there is no coming unto him; It is not in man to bring himself; nay, it is not in all the Men and Angels in the world that can draw a soul to Christ; Except Christ himselfe put to his hand, it neither can nor will come to him. Be convinced of this.
And being convinced hereof, now take heed of drawing backƲse 4. Take heed of drawing back. when we feel Christ begin∣ning to draw. Our coming unto Christ de∣pends upon his drawing. And therefore, doth he beginne to draw? take heed how we hold off: How know we whether ever hee will draw again? which if he do not, wee are men without hope: But of this more hereafter in the next point, to which I now come. The second thing held forth to us in the Text, is, The effectuall working of Jesus Christ in bringing his Elect home to himselfe:Observ. 2. The effectuall work of Christ in bringing men home to himselfe. [I will draw them to me.] Those who in them∣selves are both unable and unwilling to come, Christ over-powreth, and causeth to come to himselfe. A truth excellently shadowed out in that known parable of the lost sheep,Luke 15.5. which the shepherd having found, he layeth it upon his shoulders, and bringeth it home. This Shepherd is Christ, the chiefe Shepherd, the Shepherd and Bishop of souls,1 Pet. 5.4. 1 Pet. 2.25. (as Saint Pe∣ter cals him.) The lost sheep are his Elect be∣fore conversion; who in regard of Gods Ele∣ction are sheep;Matth. 15.24. in regard of their naturall con∣dition are lost sheep, wandring in the pathes of sin and death, having no disposition of them∣selves to returne to the fold. These sheep this great Shepherd seeketh.Luke 19.10. [The Son of man is come to seeke that which was lost:] And seeking, he findeth them; and finding them, he bringeth them home, causing them to return to the Shepherd and Bishop of their soules.1 Pet. 2.25.
For the opening and illustratingIllustrat. of this usefull truth, viz. Christs drawing of poor sinners to himselfe, give me leave to pro∣pound and resolve these two or three Questions: 1. Whence they are drawn: 2. Whither they are drawn: 3. By what means Christ draweth them. For the two former more briefly, Whence, and Whither they are drawn. In drawing (as in every mo∣tion) there are two terms; A quo, and Ad quem; Whence and Whither; whatever is drawn, is drawn from one place, or thing, to a¦nother. Quest. Whence Christ draweth men.Qu 1. First then, Whence doth Christ draw his Elect? Answ. In generall, Out of the state of nature.An. To this we might answer in the general, Hee draweth them out of the state of nature, which is a state of sin and death: In this e∣state do all men naturally lie, in a state of sin; The whole world lieth in wickednesse, 1 Joh. 5.19. And consequently in a state of death, Death passed upon all, for that all have sinned, Rom. 5.12. Now out of this estate Christ draweth his Elect; as so many Lots out of Sodom, so many Lazaruses out of the grave; Bring∣ing them out of that state of sin and death, in∣to a state opposite to it, a state of righteous∣nesse and life. More particularly,More particu∣larly, Christ draweth men, 1. Out of Darknesse.1. Out of dark∣nesse. Jer. 38.9, 12, 13 Even as Jeremy was drawn by Ebedmelech out of the Dungeon where he was like to perish: So are poor sin∣ners drawn by Christ out of the Dungeon of
ignorance. In this Dungeon do all men natu∣rally ly. They all sit in darknesse,Luke 1.19. and in the shadow of death: being by nature no better then darkness it self: Ye were somtimes darkness,Ephes. 5.8. destitute of heavenly light, wholly ignorant of what belongs to their eternall peace and hap∣pinesse. Now out of this dungeon doth Christ draw his Elect, calling them out of darkness. That you should shew forth the vertues of him who hath called you out of darknesse, 1 Pet. 2.9. And this he doth by causing a light to shine forth unto them;Luke 1.79. Matth. 11.25. Giving light to them that sit in darknesse, revealing unto them those su∣pernaturall mysteries, which are hid from the wise and prudent of the world. 2. He draweth them from under the power of Satan.2. From the power of Sa∣tan. Acts 26.18. Under this power do all men natu∣rally lie, possessed, and held captive by Satan. Now from under this power Christ draweth his Elect; even as Moses a temporall Savi∣our, he brought the Israel of God from un∣der the power and tyranny of that Egyptian Pharaoh; So doth the Lord Jesus, the eternal Sa∣viour of his people; he bringeth his Elect out from under the power of this spiritual Pharaoh, challenging and vindicating his own right. His own right: So they are, both by a right of Do∣nation and Purchase; being given to him by God his Father, & purchased by his own blood. And thus being his, now he rescues them from the hands of his enemie, and theirs; even as David rescued his Lamb, (or Kid),1 Sam 17.34, 35. taking it out of the mouth of the Lion and Bear: So
doth Christ rescue his Elect, delivering them from the power of Satan; which cannot bee done without great force and power. And therefore he may well be said to draw them: Satan will not willingly yeild up his hold. He that contended so earnestly with Michael the Archangel,Jude 9. about the body of Moses, will much more contend about the souls of men. The stories in the Gospel informe us how un∣willingly Satan was ejected out of the one, how being compelled to leave them, he rent and tare them. Certainly, he will not willing∣ly leave what possession he hath in the other. Here is the power of Christ in drawing men from the power of Satan. 3. He draweth them out of the world:3. Out of the world. John 15.19. ha∣ving chosen them out of the world, he draw∣eth them out of it. To this end Christ gave himselfe; He gave himselfe for our sins, (saith the Apostle) that he might deliver us from this present evill world.Gal. 1.4. And this he doth, when he maketh an actuall application of the merit of his death unto his Elect people, he delivereth, draweth,, Eripret. plucketh them out, (as the word in the Originall properly signifieth) of this pre∣sent world. But how doth he do it? not in respect of place, but in respect of quality. I pray not (saith our Saviour, speaking of his Disciples) that thou shouldest take them out of the world,John 17.15. but that thou shouldest keep them from the evill. , from that evil one, viz. Satan; or from the evill that is in the world. And thus Christ delivers his peo∣ple,
viz. from the evill world;2 Pet. 2.20. severing them from the corruptions and pollutions which are in the world. In this mire the world generally sticks and lieth. Now in this respect Christ draweth his people out of the world, causing them to steer a new course, no longer, to walk according to the course of this world,Ephes. 2.2. as somtimes they did: but teaching them now to deny ungodlinesse, and worldly lusts.Tit. 2.12. What these worldly lusts are, I shall not need to tell you: Saint John hath reduced them to three heads, The lusts of the flesh; voluptuousnesse,1 John 2.16. sen∣suality: The lusts of the eyes, covetousnesse: The pride of life, ambition: These, and the like lusts the men of the world are given over to, so as they rule and reigne in them. But these Christ teacheth, and causeth his people to deny, renounce, abandon: which he doth by putting a new spirit into them, even a Spi∣rit of sanctification; changing them in the in∣ward, and outward man, so as they are no longer conformed unto this world, viz.Rom. 12.2. in the corrupt manners and customes of it. Thus are they severed from the world, and drawn out of it. And that not onely in regard of a renunciation of the sinfull lusts of it, but also a holy sequestration from it, Thus also doth Christ draw his people out of the world, so as though they live in it, yet they live like men of another world; not minding onely the things of this present world, but seeking after, and setting their affections upon the things that are above; where their chief trea∣sure is.
4. Thus drawing them out of the world, he draweth them also out of themselves.4. Out of themselves. This is a lesson which all Christs disciples must learn. If any man will come after me, let him deny himselfe, Mark 8.34. And this lesson Christ teacheth all that come to him; to deny themselves; viz. their owne carnall reason, perverse wils, corrupt affections: and not onely so, but he teacheth them to deny, to renounce their own righteousnesse; viz. in respect of any affiance and confidence in it. Not having mine own righteousnesse,Phil. 3 9. (saith Paul of himselfe.) And so he draweth them out of themselves. The case is ordinary, men when they are drawn out of the mire of this world, brought to renounce and abandon the grosse evils therein, and to walke, in regard of their outward conversation, regu∣larly, and blamelesly, yet now they stick in themselves, setting up their owne righteous∣nesse, (as the Pharisee did) as if that were sufficient to justifie and save them, by which means they are kept off from coming unto Christ. Now Christ drawing his Elect, hee draweth them out of themselves, causeth them to renounce all, to make loss of all, (as Paul saith of himselfe) What ever they have, have done, can do, merits, priviledges, vertues, performances; whatever is, or may be suppo∣sed to be theirs, Christ causeth them to re∣linquish all, so coming naked unto him. Thus doth he take them off from their owne bot∣toms, and draw them out of themselves. And
here are the things from whence Christ draw∣eth them. Qu. 2. But whither doth he then draw them?Qu. 2. Whither he draweth them. An.An. To himself. Here is the second Inquirie, to which the Text it self returns a generall answer; He drawes them to himself: even as the Loadstone draweth the iron to it self, so doth Christ draw his Elect people to himself, viz. to have union and communion with him, in grace here, and glory hereafter. More particularly, Christ draweth his Elect to himself, as being under a double relation: 1. As to a Saviour. 2. As to a Lord. Both these Christ (being lift up) is made. Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, Act. 5.31. and under both these relations doth Christ draw his people to himself. 1. As to a Saviour.1. As a Saviour. My spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour, (saith Mary) Luk. 1.47. even as the Brasen Serpent drew the eyes of the Israelites to it self, as the onely means of their temporall cure; so doth Christ draw the eyes and hearts of his Elect to himselfe, as to a Saviour, their Saviour, the onely meanes of their eternall salvation. Thus doe poor sinners come unto Christ, even as those woundrd Is∣raelites did to their Brasen Serpent, fixing their eyes upon him, looking up to him, and resting upon him for Justification and Salvation. Thus was the blessed Apostle drawne unto Christ, Christ being effectually revealed to him,Phil. 3.9. now he lets go all, maketh loss of all, renouncing
whatever he had formerly put any confidence in, wholly betaking himselfe unto Christ, de∣siring onely that he might win him, and bee found in him, not having his own righteousnesse, but that which is through the faith of Christ: Thus did the desires of his soule go out after Jesus Christ, seeking justification and salvation onely in, by, and through him; and thus doth Christ draw all his Elect unto himselfe, draw∣ing off their eyes from all other things, hee draweth them to himself, inclining their hearts to believe on him, to rest and rely upon him, as an alone alsufficient Saviour. 2. He draweth them to him as to a Lord:2. As a Lord. under this relation do all true Believers come unto Christ as unto a Saviour, so unto a Lord, every one taking and acknowledging him for their Lord:Job. 20.28. My Lord, and my God, (saith Tho∣mas.Hos. 8.5.) As their King; They shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King, (saith the Prophet;) that is, the Messias, Christ the Son of David, whom all true Believers seek as their King, willingly submitting themselves to his government, yeelding up themselves to be ordered by him;Act. 9.6. Lord, what wilt thou have me to do, (saith Paul;) even so do all believers come unto Christ, willingly putting their necks under his yoke, giving up themselves unto him, as Paul saith of his Corinthians, They gave themseves to the Lord;2 Cor. 8.5. that is, they wholly dedicated and consecrated themselves to the service of Christ: So do all true belie∣vers, being brought home to Christ, they
now look upon themselves as no longer their own,1 Cor. 6.19, 20. neither do they any longer desire to live to themselves, but unto Christ,Rom. 14.8. whom they acknowledge as their Soveraigne Lord: And thus are they drawn by Christ unto Christ, effectually perswaded to receive him in both these Relations; as a Saviour, as a Lord; as a Saviour believing on him, as a Lord submitting to him. Quest. 3. The third Question is yet behind, and that is, By what means Christ thus draw∣eth men,Quest. 3. By what means Christ thus draweth men. and bringeth them home unto him∣selfe, who of themselves are so unable and unwilling to come? Ans.Answ. To this we answer: The ordinary means whereby Christ effecteth this great work are his Word and Spirit. His Word being the Instrument, his Spirit the Principall Agent: By the one he draweth outwardly, by the o∣ther inwardly, by both together effectu∣ally. 1. Christ draweth men by his word,1. By his word, the Gospel. This is the ordinary Instrument, which Christ maketh use of in effecting this great work, his word: what word? The word of the Gospel, the Gospel preached and published. By this means Christ when he was upon earth he drew ma∣ny to himselfe. He went about preaching,Luke 8.1. shew∣ing the glad tidings of the Kingdome of God. And being lifted up from the earth, he still draweth his Elect by the same means, viz. by his word, his word in the mouthes of his messengers, his Ministers: They are the ser∣vants
whom the great King sendeth forth to bring in guesse to the marriage of his Son, bidding them compell them to come in;Luke 14.23. the Ministers of Christ, sent forth to bring men to have union and communion with Christ: which they are to do, not by any outward vi∣olence, but by preaching the Gospel to them. Their office is to draw men to Christ. And hence is it that sometimes they are called fi∣shers: I will make you fishers of men, (saith Christ to Peter and Andrew.) Mat. 4.19. Fi∣shers. But with what tew, what nets, what hooks, what baits are they furnished? why, onely Christ putteth his word, his Gospel into their mouthes,Mark 16.15. Go preach the Gospel to every creature.Matth. 13.47. This is the Net, The Kingdome of Heaven is like unto a net cast into the sea, (saith the Parable.) The Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is som∣times called the Kingdom of Heaven, because it is the means to bring men thither: This is Christs net, which he by his Ministers casts into the sea of this world; thereby drawing men to himselfe. The Baits which he maketh use of, are the sweet and gracious promises held forth in the Gospel; the chiefest of all which is Christ himselfe; Him the Gospel propoundeth, lifteth up, offering him with all his benefits; viz. life and salvation to all that will receive him. And hereby doth Christ draw men to himselfe. Ista Revelatio ipsa  Attractio, (saith Augustine.Augustinus in John 6.44.) This very Re∣velation of Christ is an Attraction: Ramun
viridem ostendis ovi, &c.Ramum viridem ostendis ovi, & trahis illam. Nuces puero demonstrantur, & trahitur, &c. Ibid. (So he goeth on.) Even as by the holding forth of a green bough to a sheep, it is drawn to and after it. Thus by holding forth of Christ in the Gospel, poor sinners are drawn to him, and after him. And thus (as I have in part already shewn you) Christ being lifted up, he draweth all men,Thus Christ being lifted up, he draweth all men. viz. by causing his Gospel to be prea∣ched, and published unto all, all Nations, not onely Jewes, but Gentiles. Before his lifting up, in an ordinary way the Gospel was preached onely to the Jew:John 4.22. Salvation was of the Jews, Christ was not sent save onely to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,Matth. 15.24. (so he tels the Cananitish woman.) And his Apostles are interdicted for preaching the Gospel to any but them. Goe not into the way of the Gen∣tiles, &c.Matth. 10.5, 6. but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But being lifted up, now the partition wall is broken down: Now the net which before was cast onely into a pond, as I may say, is cast into the sea. The Apostles have their Commission enlarged,Matth. 28. Mark 16. Go teach all Nations, preach the Gospel to every creature; that is, not onely to Jews, but Gentiles. Christ is now offered alike to all.Acts 2.39. The promise is unto you, and to your children, and to them which are afar off, &c. i. e. to the Gentiles as well as Jews,Ephes. 2.14. ver. 121 who before the death of Christ were afar off, strangers to the Covenant of grace. To them is the promise now tendred, Christ being without any difference held forth and
offered alike to all, so drawing all men. Christ draweth by a weak In∣strument.And here is the Instrument which Christ maketh use of for the drawing of his Elect to himselfe, the preaching, plain and simple preaching of the Gospel; Seemingly a weak and unlikely instrument, thence called the foolishnesse of preaching;1 Cor. 1.21. Yet by this weak means doth Christ effect this great work: Hereby drawing men out of Darknesse, from under the Power of Satan. Paul was sent to the Gentiles,Act. 26.18. to turn them from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan to God: But how was he to do it? Why, by preach∣ing of the Gospel, by bearing the name of Christ before them;Act. 9.15. Hereby drawing them out of the World, as fishes out of the sea; Hereby drawing them out of themselves, con∣vincing them of their insufficiencie, and Christs all sufficiencie; and so drawing them to him∣selfe; first as to a Saviour to beleeve on him, working faith in them by this means, Faith cometh by hearing,Rom. 10. hearing the word, the word of the Gospel: Then as to a Lord, to be go∣verned by him, which is also wrought by the same Instrument.2 Cor. 12.4, 5. Here is the outward means, but this often pro∣veth ineffectuall. Many there are who hear the word, and hear it powerfully dispenced, who yet, are never the better for it; so saith the Apostle of the Jewes, The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4.2. And so ineffe∣ctuall it often proves to many that sit under
the sound of it: They are not thereby brought home to Christ. Even as many of the Jewes saw Christ lift up, beheld him crucified, who yet beleeved not on him, nay therby they were hardned-against him. Even so it is now in the preaching of the Gospell:. Many there are be∣fore whose eyes Christ is lift up, crucified in the Word and Sacraments, who yet are not brought to beleeve on him, or submit unto him. 2. To this therefore (in the second place) is joyned the Spirit;2. The Spirit. The Spirit of Christ which he sendeth forth to accompany his word, and to make it effectuall in the hearts of his Elect; and by this means he draweth men effectually; even as the Load-stone draw∣eth Iron by a secret efflux and emission of sub∣tile and insensible spirits, thereby attracting that which of it selfe was unapt to move: So doth Christ draw men to himselfe by sending forth his Spirit;Act. 2. By this means did he draw so many at the day of Pentecost, viz. by send∣ing down his Spirit upon his Apostles, which accompanying the word preached by them, made it effectuall in them that heard it: There might we have seen the accomplishment of what our Saviour here in the Text foretells, and forepromiseth, When I am lift up, I will draw all men unto me; this he did at the day of Pentecost: Being lift up first upon the Crosse in his Passion, and then upon his Throne in his Exaltation, see how he draw∣eth all men, all sorts of men, some of all na∣tions
to himself; this he did by powring out his Spirit according as he had promised:Act. 2.17. Joel 2.23. I will powre out my Spirit upon all flesh, hereby multitudes were brought to beleeve on him; and hereby it is that Christ draweth poor sin∣ners unto himself at this day, viz. by sending his Spirit along with his word: The word in it selfe is but a dead letter,2 Cor. 3.6. it is the Spirit that quickneth it, that puteth life into it: The words which I speak are Spirit and Life (saith our Saviour to the Jews;John 6.63.) What ever effi∣cacie the word hath, it hath it from the Spirit. Qu,Qu. 2. What the Spi∣rit herein doth. Why, what doth the Spirit in this work? Answ.An. I answer. The work of the Spirit lieth principally in two things, in Enlight∣ning the Ʋnderstanding, and Inclining the Will. 1. It Enlightneth the Ʋnderstanding,1. It inlight∣neth the un∣derstanding. Gal. 1.16. let∣ting in a supernatural light into the soul, a light of knowledge, revealing Christ to it, and in it, discovering to it what need it hath of him, what an all-sufficiency it may find in him; convincing it of it own unrighteousnesse, and of a perfect righteousnesse to be found in Christ. This is the work of the Spirit: it is that which out Saviour maketh promise of to his Disciples, Joh. 16. that when he was departed from them,Joh. 16.7, 8. he would send the Comforter (the Spirit), And when he is come (saith he) hee shall convince the world of sin, and of Righteous∣nesse, &c. And this the Spirit doth; the Spi∣rit
accompanying the word, it convinceth men of sin, of their own sinfulnesse, the sin∣fulnesse of their natures, hearts, lives; and as of sin, so of righteousnesse; as of sin in them∣selves, so of a righteousnesse, which is to be sought, and may be found out of themselves, viz. in Christ, who is made Wisedome,1 Cor. 1.30. and Righteousnesse to all those who in the sense of their own righteousnesse go out of them∣selves unto him. This the Spirit with clear and convincing evidence revealeth unto the soul. And hereby Christ prepareth the hearts of his Elect whom he intendeth to draw unto himselfe. 2. Having thus inlightned the Understan∣ding, now (in the second place) he cometh to incline the Will,2. Inclineth the will. causing the soul to come unto himself. Quest. But how doth Christ bring off the soul hereunto? what, doth hee compell the Will? Answ. Not so: The will being in it own na∣ture free, it cannot be compelled; being compelled, it should cease to bee a will. How then? Why by a sweet and gentle o∣verpowring of it, working upon it in a way su∣table and agreeable to it own nature, effe∣ctually perswading, bowing and inclining it to yeeld to what with such clear and strong evidence is held forth unto it;Phil. 2.13. so drawing forth a consent from it, working in it a will, of unwilling making it willing to close with Christ offered and tendered to it. to receive
him as Saviour and Lord: Thus doth the Spirit work upon the spirit; the Spirit of God upon the spirit of man: And by this means Christ draweth men to himself: sending forth his Spirit together with his Word, he worketh effectually in the hearts of his chosen, causing them to come unto him, to believe on him, submit unto him. And thus have you the Doctrinal part of this useful Truth briefly opened unto you. Now bring we it home to our selves by way of Application. Applica. Examine whe∣ther we have been thus drawn to Christ.Ʋse 1. And that first by way of Ex∣amination and Triall, whether we have been thus drawn unto Christ or no: Drawn we have been outwardly all of us. None of us but have had Christ propounded, offered, held forth unto us in the Ministery of the Word, there crucified, lift up before our eyes. Haply some, and many of us have also felt an inward drawing, felt our hearts at some∣times somewhat moved and inclined to look towards Christ. We have at sometime found the Word exciting and stirring up some moti∣ons and breathings that way: But, are we drawn home unto Christ? Many there are who through a common work of the Spirit accom∣panying of the Word, are brought to look towards Christ, who never yet come at him.Acts 26.28. It was the case of Agrippa, whom (as himself acknowledgeth) Paul had almost perswaded to become a Christian. Let our en∣quiry be for this thorow work; whether we
have felt the effectuall power of Jesus Christ in drawing our hearts and souls, not onely towards, but to himself. This is the saving work, without which we can have no benefit by Christ. No Communion without Ʋnion. A man must first be brought home unto Christ, before he can be justified, and saved by him. Are we then thus drawn un∣to Christ? O that every of us here present could but make this good to our selves! But (alass!) how many are there who are meer strangers to this work?Evidences of persons not drawn. never felt any such power put forth in their souls, know not what it means, To finde out some of them, I beseech you go along with me, and deal impartially with your own souls, see whether you be not in the number. 1. Such (in the first place) are all ignorant persons;1. Ignorant persons. such as are not yet drawn out of the dungeon of spiritual darkness. Persons grossly ignorant: Such as live without the knowledge of Christ: Though living under the means of knowledge, where Christ is preached and published to them, yet they are wholly ignorant of the mystery of Christ, not knowing so much as what Christ was, what he hath done, what he hath suffered, what he hath merited, by what way or means they should have any benefit by him. Such there are, and that too many every where to be found. Now (alas,) against such the evi∣dence is too clear; They are not yet drawn, and brought home unto CHRIST.
Christ never draws men blindfold to himself. But that he may draw them,Acts 26.18. he first opens their eyes. Paul was sent to the Gentiles, first to open their eyes. to turne them from darknesse to light. And this Christ in measure doth in e∣very soule which he intendeth to draw to himselfe, he causeth a light to shine into it, revealing himselfe to it. By this means was Paul drawn to Christ, by an effectuall reve∣lation of Christ to him.Gal. 1.16. When it pleased God to reveale his Son to me, (or in me,) &c. Till Christ be thus revealed to the soule, the soul neither will, nor can come to him. Still in drawing, Christ worketh first upon the under∣standing, then upon the will; first inlightning the one, before he bow and incline the o∣ther. They who never yet found a work of illumination, and conviction in themselves, certainly it cannot be that as yet they should be drawn unto Christ. 2. A second sort against whom the evidence is clear, that they are not drawn unto Christ, are all profane,2. Profane per∣sons. wicked, and ungodly persons, such as are yet under the power of Satan, ha∣ving him ruling and reigning in them. Such as are not yet drawn out of the world, not having escaped the grosse pollutions of it.2 Pet. 2.20. Such as stick, and lie, and wallow in the mire of sinfull lusts,Ephes. 2.2. walking after the course of this world, according to the Prince that ruleth in the aire, (as Paul saith of his Ephesians be∣fore conversion,) giving over themselves to known and scandalous evils, Swearers, drun∣kards,
unclean, profane, licentious, unrigh∣teous persons, &c. Let not such deceive them∣selves; they are far from being drawn unto Christ.2 Cor. 6.15. What agreement hath Christ with Be∣lial? (saith the Apostle,) that is, with Satan that wicked one, or with wicked men, in whom Satan dwels and rules. Christ drawing men to himselfe, he draweth them from under the power of Satan, and he severeth them from the world, teaching them to deny un∣godlinesse and worldly lusts. Certainly, that soule that so imbraceth any one sinfull lust, as being convinced of the sinfulnesse of it, yet liveth and lieth in it, being resolved not to part with it; it never yet knew what this effectuall work of Christ meant in drawing men to himfelfe. 3. A third sort are all meer carnall men;3. Carnal per∣sons. Phil. 3.9. such whose hearts and affections are wholly set upon earth, and earthly things, minding earthly things. The profits, and pleasures, and honours of the world, with such other sensu∣all and carnall contentments, these are the things which they are wholly taken up with, In the mean time, as for heaven, and hea∣venly things, Grace and Glory, these are things which they do not trouble themselves about, neither have they any affection to them. These also we must conclude to be in the number of them who are not yet drawn unto Christ. Christ in drawing men to himselfe, he draw∣eth them from the earth, in measure wean∣ing them from the world; draweth them
above the earth, causing them to seek the things which are above,Col. 3.1, 2. and to seek them in the first place. Certainly, they whose hearts and affections are all upon earth, they can∣not yet be drawn to Christ, who is in Hea∣ven. 4. A fourth and last sort are meer Civil, or Pharisaicall Justiciaries:4. Pharisaicall Justiciaries. Such as are not drawn out of themselves; such as rest in their own righteousnesse, not feeling the need they have of Christ: such as bear themselves up∣on the innocency and harmlesnesse of their lives and conversations; they are no swearers, drunkards, unclean, unrighteous persons, but they are regular and orderly in their course; they (as near as they can) give both God and man their due; and here they rest, hoping and trusting to be justified and saved by their own righteousnesse. As for such, the evi∣dence is also cleare against them, notwith∣standing they may seem to be drawn out of the world, severed from it in respect of any scandalous evils, yet they stick in them∣selves, and consequently cannot be drawn unto Christ. Christ in drawing men unto himselfe, he drawes them out of the dunge∣on of ignorance, he draweth them from un∣der the power of Satan, he draweth them out of the world, and hee draweth them out of themselves. Whoever they are that stick in any of these, they are not yet drawn unto Christ. Quest.Quest. But how shall we know, and bee
assured that we are in the number of those that are truely drawn unto Christ?Evidences of men, drawn to Christ. Ans. For answer. 1. Reflect upon what hath been spoken:Ans. 1. Such as are drawn out of all the aforsaid particulars. Enquire we whether we find our selves drawn out of all these. Are we drawn out of our naturall darknesse, the darknesse of ignorance? Can we say that a su∣pernaturall light hath shined into our hearts, revealing unto us the mysterie of Christ? Are we freed and delivered from the power of Satan? so as we are not led captive by him, as sometime we were. Are we drawn out of the world? Have we received ano∣ther spirit, then the spirit of the world? a spirit teaching us to deny ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to mind the things which are above? Are wee drawn out of our selves, taught to deny our selves, and to renounce our own righteousnesse in re∣spect of any affiance, and confidence in it? If so, here are comfortable evidences that Christ hath begun to put forth an effectuall power in, and upon our soules. 2. But (secondly) Enquire how our hearts stand affected towards Jesus Christ.2. Enquire touching the affections of the heart to∣wards Jesus Christ. This is Christs drawing of men to himselfe; viz. the drawing of their hearts and affections to him: These are the feet of the soule? whereby a man cometh unto Christ, Non pedibus, sed affectibus. Now, are these drawn to Christ? How stand our hearts affected towards him? Make this enquiry in three or four particulars.
1. In respect of our affiance1. Affiance. in him. Can we say that we rest upon him, and him alone? Have we cast our souls upon him, as upon an alone all-sufficient Saviour? Have wee com∣mitted them to him?2 Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have be∣leeved (or trusted, saith Paul) and I am per∣swaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him: Thus stood Paul affe∣cted towards Jesus Christ, so as he durst trust him; nay he had trusted him, and that with his best Jewel, with his precious soul (or with his Crown) which he had committed to him deposited with him: And thus doth the soul that is truly drawn to Christ; it lets go all o∣ther things, and betakes it selfe wholly and alonely unto Jesus Christ as unto an alone Sa∣viour, leaning upon him; that is the Chur∣ches posture, Cant. 8.5. Who is this that com∣eth up from the wildernesse, leaning upon her be∣loved? Imbracing and resting upon him: Now are we thus drawn to Christ? Do wee find our souls thus coming out of the wilder∣nesse of this world, and clasping and imbra∣cing Jesus Christ? leaning and resting upon him, fixing all our affiance and confidence up∣on him, so as we can say that we have none other in heaven or earth but him? if so, cer∣tainly the heart which thus leaneth upon Christ is drawn to him. 2. In respect of Love.2. Love. Eph. 6. last. Can we say that we do unfainedly love the Lord Jesus? Love him in sincerity; so as our souls do cleave unto him: Thus will it be with the soul that if tru∣ly
drawn unto Christ, it will close with him, and be exceedingly affected with him: Thus was it with Peter; Peter, lovest thou me? Lord,Joh. 21.15. Luk. 7.47. thou knowest that I love thee: Thus was it with Mary Magdalene; She loved much, be∣cause much was forgiven her.Cant. 5.8. The Church in the Canticles, is sick of love. And thus will it be with the soul that is truly brought to Christ, it will be inamored with him. Appre∣hending the intire and infinite love of Christ towards it, it cannot but be inflamed with love towards him again; and this love it ex∣presseth by a high prising of him. 3. Which may serve for a third enquiry,3. Appretiation What price do we set upon Jesus Christ. The soul that is truly drawn to Christ, is drawn to an high estimation of him, so as it prefers him before all other things, accounting meanly and basely of all other things in comparison of him: I account all things loss and dung (saith Paul) so that I may win Christ, &c.Phil. 3.9 4.4. Willingness to part with al for Christ. And this estimation it expresseth by a willingnesse and readinesse to part with all for Christ, which may be a fourth Enquiry. Are we so taken with Jesus Christ, as rather then part with him, we are resolved to part with all? So was Paul affected towards him, hee accounts all dung, and he willingly maketh losse of all for Christ; and so will the soul do that is truly drawn to Christ, it will let go all, what ever it is that stands betwixt Christ and it, Riches, and Honours, and Pleasures, and
Ease, and Credit, and Life; Even as Peter and Andrew when Christ had called them, They straightway left their nets and followed him.Mat. 4.20. Thus, where Christ drawes the soul effectual∣ly, it leaves all, parts with all, viz. in pur∣pose and resolution. In case any thing comes to stand in competition with Christ, the reso∣lution of such a soul is, rather to part with it, then Christ. 5. And hereby it expresseth an earnest and Longing Desire after Christ,5. Longing de∣sires after Christ. which may yet be another Enquiry. Can we say, that our souls do go out in earnest desires after Jesus Christ? after nearer union and more full communion with him? Such affection the Spouse in the Canticles frequently expresseth towards her Well beloved; complaining of his estranging and withdrawing himselfe from her, how doth shee seek after him? earnestly desiring to en∣joy him and to be enjoyed of him: And truly so will it be with the soul that is truly drawn unto Christ, it will affectionately long after him, earnestly desiring to be more nearly u∣nited to him, to have a more full communion with him, to injoy the presence of his grace here, and glory hereafter; The Spirit and the Bride say,Rev. 22.17, 20 Come; Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. 6. To name but one more; in the sixth place, as touching our Submission to Jesus Christ. Can we say, that we have taken him as our Lord? that we have given up our souls unto him? and that we are not only conten∣ted,
but desirous to be ruled, and governed by him? that we are as willing to be ruled, as to be saved by him? If so, finding our hearts standing thus affe∣cted towards Jesus Christ, in respect of our affiance in him, love to him, High-prizing of him, readinesse to part withall for him, ear∣nest desires after him, willingnesse to be go∣verned by him, now may we conclude it to our comfort, that we are in the number of those who have felt the effectuall power of Jesus Christ put forth and exercised in and upon us, in drawing us to himselfe. Otherwise, having no such affections towards him, our hearts not resting upon him, not closing with him, preferring other, things (it may be every base lust) before him, not willing to part with any thing, much lesse with all for him, having no desires after him, not sub∣mitting unto him; certainly, wee never yet knew what this effectuall work meant. Upon this Triall thus made, two sorts ofƲse, 2. persons come now to be dealt with. 1.To such as are thus drawn. Such as shall find themselves thus in mea∣sure wrought upon. Let them, 1.1. Comfort from their inte∣rest in Christ. Take unto themselves the comfort of this blessed worke: Having by experience felt in themselves this fruit of Christs death, let them be assured that all the merits and be∣nefits of his death belong unto them. Those whom Christ thus draweth, he draweth not onely to union, but communion with himself: being thus drawn to Christ, to receive him,
believe on him, submit unto him; now all that is Christs, is theirs. The merit of his death is theirs, for their Justification: The vertue of his death and resurrection is theirs for their vivification, resurrection, first, and second. The benefit of his Intercession is theirs for their perseverance and continuance in grace, and for bringing them through grace to glory. Being drawn to Christ in his Kingdome of grace, they shall be drawn up to him in his Kingdome of glory, where they shall participate of that happinesse and blessednesse, which himselfe as their Redee∣mer hath merited for them, and as their Head hath already in their names taken and keepeth possession of. 2. Exhortation to seek to feele more of this attractive pow∣er.2. In the second place: Being thus drawn unto Christ, let them labour to find this effectuall working in them more and more. This let every of us do who have had any experience of this attractive power in our selves. Let our desire still be that we may be drawn nearer unto Christ. Whilest we are here below, still there will be a distance be∣twixt us and him. And therefore finding our hearts in measure drawn unto him, still seek after a nearer union; that we may be every day drawn more and more out of dark∣nesse, from under the power of Satan, and the dominion of all sinfull lusts, as also out of our selves, and so may be more incorporated into him. And being thus drawn unto him, let our desires be that we may also be drawn after him.
Draw me, and I will run after thee,Cant. 1.3. saith the Church. That we may follow him; which we are not able to doe without his continued drawing. Even as it is the same strength and force, which at the first sets a bowle, and after continueth it in its course. It runs not fur∣ther then the force of the Arme which threw it carries it: Even so fareth it in the course of new obedience: The same povver and strength which at the first puts a man into that way, must still carry him on in it; viz. the strength of Christ. I am able to do all things,Phil. 4.13. saith Paul; But how? Through Christ that strengtheneth me. A regenerate person, who hath a principle of new life put into his soul, he is made willing, and in some measure able, as to come unto Christ by faith, so to follow him in a way of obedience: but all by the power and strength of Christ.Gal. 2.20. It is Christ that liveth in him, and moveth in him; It is Christ that dravveth the soule to him, and after him. Both are wrought by the same povver; and there∣fore having felt the first grace in bringing us unto Christ; now seek vve after a second grace, even the continuance of the same grace. Ha∣ving felt a Prevenient, now seeke for a sub∣sequent grace; that being still dravvn nearer, and nearer unto Christ, vve may follow him throughout the whole course of our active and passive obedience, untill vve shall be dravvne up unto him to partake with him in his Glory. This for those who do find themselves in mea∣sure thus drawn unto Christ.
2. Such as are strangers to this work; let them not rest till they find Christ thus drawing them to himselfe.2. In the next place a word or two to those who are as yet strangers to this work, who never yet felt this effectuall working in them∣selves. Let them be exhorted never to give rest unto their soules, untill they find and feele Jesus Christ thus drawing them to himselfe. Beloved, upon this depends our comfort here, and salvation hereafter; viz. upon our union with Christ. By this may we be assured that we are within the compasse of Gods Election of grace; that we are in the number of those whom God hath not ordained unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. By this may we know and be assured, that we are given to Christ;John 6.37. All that the Father giveth me, shall come unto me. Those whom God the Father giveth to his Son before time in his Decree of Election, the Son drawes them to himselfe in time by an effectuall vocation; causing them to come unto him as unto a Saviour, as unto a Lord; to believe on him, to submit unto him. Let not any of us give rest to our soules till we find this blessed work begun in them. And here take heed of that common deceit, of resting our selves contented with an outward drawing;Rest not in an outward draw∣ing. viz. that Christ hath been revealed and offered to us in the word, that we have been invited to come unto him. The parable in the Gospel tels us of many guests that were in∣vited to the Marriage Supper,Matth. 22. who yet never ta∣sted of it. So fareth it with many, whom Christ by his Ministers invites to come, & partake in his merits, his benefits, offering himselfe to them,
who yet shall never be the better for him. Nay, better for them they had never known what any such offer or invitation meant: And therefore rest we not here; nor yet in that common work of the Spirit,Nor yet in a common work of the Spirit. in stirring up some velleities, some good motions and inclinations, drawing the soul towards Christ; but seek after a thorow work, to finde our hearts effectually perswaded to come out of the world, to come out of our selves, to come unto Jesus Christ, to receive him as Saviour and Lord. To this end for the furthering of this work,Means to fur∣ther this draw∣ing. 1. Submit to the drawing Ordinance. 1. Submit our selves to a conscionable at∣tendance upon the Ordinance of Christ, that Ordinance wherein, and whereby Christ ordi∣narily putteth forth this power for the effectu∣all drawing of men to himself, viz. the publike Ministery of the Word. Ever begging a blessing from God upon it, that through the secret work of his Spirit accompanying it, it may be made effectual to us for this blessed end and pur∣pose. 2. Submitting to this Ordinance (in the se∣cond place) take heed of making resistance a∣gainst Christ. When Christ begins to draw, take we heed of drawing back:2. Take heed of drawing back. Take heed of opposing, resisting, quenching any good moti∣ons kindled in our hearts by the Spirit through the Word. Such motions at sometime or other such as constantly sit under the Mini∣stery of the Word shall feel in themselves. And now, doth Christ begin to draw? Take we heed in this case of with-drawing, draw∣ing
back, which is a thing of dangerous con∣sequence.Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. There is a  in the phrase, where less is said, but more intend∣ed. My soul shall have no pleasure in such a one; that is, I will hate, I will abhorr him, set my self against him. Take we heed of all such rebellious and disloyall refusing to fol∣low Christ beginning to draw. Obj. Why, but (you may say,) what is our Resistance in this case? Is not Christ able by his Grace to over-power the soul, though never so rebellious, never so obstinate? Christ will not draw men against their wills. Matth. 23.37.Answ. True, he is able to do it, but he will not; where the offers of Grace are rejected, and slighted, Christ will not put forth this his effectual power: See the truth of it in Jerusa∣lem; Christ could have gathered them, and brought them under the wings of his Grace and Mercy, but they would not: therefore he leaveth off to draw them, giveth over the work. The soul that rejecteth the offers of Grace, and standeth it out against Christ, what can it ex∣pect but that Christ should desist from drawing it? Certainly, as Christ will never bring a man to himself against his will,Gen. 6.3. so his Spirit shall not ever strive with men: for a time it may, (which yet is wonderfull mercy; wonderful mercy it should knock at all, but much more that be∣ing repelled and resisted, it should continue knocking,) but it will not ever do it. To draw back is the next way to provoke Christ to give over drawing, then which, what can be more
pernicious and destructive to the soul? They who draw back, draw back to perdition. O take we heed that none of us be found in that number;Heb. 10. ult. We are not of them (saith the A∣postle) who draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul. Hap∣py, thrice happy we, may we be found such, such as are drawn by Christ to believe on him, submit unto him. Being thus drawn to him, we shall communicate with him in all his me∣rits, all his benefits, in Grace here, and Glory hereafter. FINIS.
THE SAINTS Joint-Membership, WITH The mutual Respects and Offices, which upon the account thereof they owe each to other. A Subject generally useful for all Christians, in special for such as are under a particular, and more Regular Church-Relation. As it was lately presented unto the Church of God at Great Yarmouth. By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there. 1 Joh. 3.18. My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith. 1653.
TO THE CHURCH, AND CHURCHES of CHRIST in Old ENGLAND; With all the Living Members of the same. Especially, Those in the Town of GREAT YARMOUTH, Grace and Peace. CHRISTIANS, LET not the first word in this Inscription of∣fend any of you: They who familiarly deno∣minate the Ocean from that Coast, which it lieth upon, and passeth by, calling it the Brittish or I∣rish
Sea, &c. shall not need to stumble at the like language being applyed to the Church: Nor yet that word, which you shall frequently meet with in the body of the Treatise, where I call the Church, under what-ever consideration looked upon, a Mysticall Body. I am not ignorant that that Phrase is commonly and properly gi∣ven to the Church as Invisible; but in as much as that Division of Visible and Invi∣sible is but of severall Affections and Modes belonging to the same Subject, and that the one of these is so involved and in∣wrapped within the other, as that they can∣not be actually severed, I have therefore indifferently (I hope without any just offence) applyed it to either. This Apologie being premised, let me now crave acceptance of what I here present to you; all of you, every of you; whom from my soul I wish, I could as easily joyn together in reall Affection, as here I have done in a ver∣ball compellation and Dedication; this it hitherto hath been, now is, and so long as I am, shall be my desire and endeavour: in order thereunto it is that I have heretofore adventured abroad some small Tracts, ten∣ding to the prevention or removall of what
might impede or obstruct such a conjuncti∣on. And upon the same errand I now send this after them; wherein I have endeavo∣red to mind all the Members of the Mysti∣call Body of such respects, Affections, and Offices, as by vertue of their Joint-Mem∣bership they owe each to other; a Subject generally usefull to all, who professe and would approve themselves Christians; more specially to such as are under a parti∣cular and more regular Church Relation. A priviledge which I cordially wish for all in this nation that want it: Truth is (what cannot be denyed, or excused) the stones in our Ecclesiasticall buildings, as they have done, so yet generally they lye too loose, not cemented as they ought to be; Not that I look upon the formality of an explicite Covenant as essentiall to a con∣stituted Church: I shall not dare upon so slight a ground to unchurch the Churches which have been and are in this Nation, and elsewhere; yet somewhat I conceive should be done for the distinguishing of the Members of one Congregation from ano∣ther, besides their bare habitation within the compasse of a perambulation line; or yet then an ordinary attendance upon Ordi∣nances
in such a place: Surely, besides du∣ties of Piety towards God, there are also duties of Charity, which Christians are bound to performe, as to all their Bre∣thren where-ever, so in speciall to those of the same particular Society with them. What these, and those are, and how to bee discharged, I have indeavoured here to set forth: Herein beginning (so Providence hath ordered it) where my Reverend Bro∣ther in a SermonMr. Marshal's Sermon at the Spittle, on Ea∣ster Munday, April 1652. lately preached and published upon the same Subject and Text, (which came to my hand the day before I finished this) left. What I here hold forth, I desire may not one∣ly bee read, but regarded, and practi∣sed. And that as by others, so in speciall by you, among whom Provi∣dence hath cast my lot: and to whom (under God) I have devoted and de∣dicated my selfe, and labours. To you (it cannot without great ingratitude bee either denyed, or concealed.) God hath beene good and gracious in the midst of all those late Changes, which have passed over the heads of this, and the Neighbour Nations: Not suffering the
sword to enter within your walls, (as it hath done many others) in an Ho∣stile way: not giving you wholly for a spoile, whether to Domestick plun∣derers, or forraigne Robbers; but yet reserving to you some competent re∣mainder of a Temporall Subsistence: And whilest he hath remembred the out∣ward man, he hath not beene unmind∣full of the inward; having vouchsafed to you the liberty and enjoyment of some Ordinances requisite to the well being of a Church, and comfortable subsi∣stence of a Christian, which many other Congregations in this Nation desire, but want. What remains then, but that you should now make some returnes, answera∣ble to these receipts; stirring up your selves to goe before others, as in duties of Piety towards that God who hath thus put a difference betwixt you and them, so in all offices of true Christian Love each to other. Of this later I have lately minded you by word; and now doe it againe by writing, that so you may bee able after my decease, (which how nigh it may bee, he above knoweth, in whose hand
my times are) to have these things alwayes in remembrance. Which that you may doe, I shall second my Counsels with my Prayers, resting Yours under God, ready to serve you in the Gos∣pell of his Sonne, JOHN BRINSLEY. July 1. 1652.
THE SAINTS Joint-Membership. ROM. 12.4, 5. For as we have many members in one Body, and all members have not the same Office; So we being many, are one Body in Christ, and [Every one Mem∣bers of another.] IN the verse foregoing we have a Charge;A generall charge pro∣pounded. a charge directed by this our Apostle to these his beleeving Romans, and in them to all o∣ther Christians: The sum whereof is, that they abandoning of Arrogancy and curiositie,
not overweening themselves, or intermedling with other folks businesses, they would quiet∣ly content themselves in the Stations where∣in God had set them, wisely improving the severall gifts bestowed upon them to com∣mon and mutuall Edification in all Christian Humility and Charity: For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himselfe more highly then he ought to think (or, to be over∣wise above what he ought to be wise) but to think soberly (or, to be wise unto sobriety) according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. This Charge, in the words I have now read, he prosecuteth and presseth; which he doth by an Argument taken à Comparatis, from a Comparison,Prosecuted by a comparison. a Comparison betwixt the Na∣turall and Mysticall body; in which (as in every Comparison) we may take notice of two things, two parts, the Protasis and A∣podasis; the Proposition, and the Reddition: The former we have in the fourth verse, For as we have many members in one Body,The parts of the compari∣son. &c. The later in the fifth verse, So we we being ma∣ny, are one body, &c. In the former of these (the Proposition1. The Propo∣sition.) the Apostle maketh observation of three paticu∣lars: 1. The Ʋnity of the body; [one body:] 2. The Plurality of members; [We have ma∣ny members in one body:] 3. The Diversity of Offices [And all member, have not the same Office.] So is it in the Natural body, the bo∣dy
of Man, or other living creature; The bo∣dy is one, one Totum integrale, one Integrall whole, made up of many members, which are distinct and differing the one from the other; Differing in site and place, some higher, o∣thers lower, as the head and the feet: Diffe∣ring in externall forme and fashion; some of one fashion, others of another: Differing in Order and Dignity, some more noble and principall, others more ignoble: Differing in their Offices and Operations; All have not the same Office (saith the Text) , the same Action, the same Operatoon: the eye hath one Office, the ear a second, the tongue a third, and so in the rest; Thus it is in the Naturall body. There is the Proposition. But that is but the shell or paring: The kernell and meat which our souls are to feed upon, we shall find it in the later part, the Reddition;2. The Reddi∣tion. which followeth: [So wee being many, are one body in Christ. Wee] Meaning the Church; in speciall that particular Church to which he directs this Epistle, the Church at Rome; in generall the whole Catholick Church, whereof that Church was a part, and Paul himself a member, which he was not properly of the Church at Rome, no more then of Corinth or Ephesus, or (for ought I know) of any other. And this Church he here calleth a Body,The Church called a Body. a term usually and familiarly given to any soci∣ety, or combination of men; Thus in the Camp; as the whole Army, so every Brigade,
every Company being ordered in a martiall way in ranks and files, they are called a Body; the Body of the Army, a body of Horse, a body of Pikes, &c. A Military Body; thus in the Civill State; as a whole Kingdome or Com∣monwealth, so every particular Society, every Corporation is a Body, a Politicall Body; and such is the Church. As the Church Ca∣tholick, so every particular Congregation is a Body; an Ecclesiasticall Body, so our Apo∣stle here calls it, as often elsewhere, 2 Cor. 12.12. Ephes. 4.4, 16. Colos. 3.15. Hebr. 13.3. And not unfitly may the Church be so cal∣led; and that in regard of those Resemblan∣ces which are betwixt it and the Naturall bo∣dy:Resemblances betwixt the naturall and Mystical body The chief and principle whereof our A∣postle here in this verse sets before us. I shall take them up in their order as I fall with them in the words. 1. The first which we meet with is the Plu∣rality of membersResembl. 1. Plurality of members, which are di∣verse, in [We being many] So is it in the naturall body, which is a compages of many members meeting and joyned together. And so it is in this Mysticall body of the Church [We being many] ; so the members of the Church may be said to be, and that in a double respect. 1. In regard of their Persons;1. Their Per∣sons. they are many: Such is the Church catholick, a Body made up of many Members. The Church Catholick Invisible, of the whole company of true Beleevers in all Ages and Places of the
world. The Church catholick visible, of the whole company of Professours; which under the Gospel, may well be called many: and such is a particular Church, a congregation, a body made up of a plurality, of many mem∣bers. How many there must be, or may be in such a Church, the Spirit of God in Scripture hath not precisely determined it; I know some others have done it, making the least number in a particular church to be se∣ven, without which number it cannot be a constituted organicall church: And the great∣er to be so many as may conveniently meet to∣gether in the same place to partake in all the ordinances of Christ. But for my part I shal not vouch either of these; contenting my selfe with what the Text holds forth; that a church is a Company, a Plurality, a Body made up of many members; Many for their Persons. 2. Many in regard of their Offices2. Offices. and gifts, which are various and diverse: So is it in the Naturall body (as the former verse tels us;) Many members, many offices [All members have not the same office.] And so it is in the Church; as the persons are many, so are their Offices and gifts diverse: So it followeth in the next verse, ver. 6. Having then gifts diffe∣ring, &c. Here is a first Resemblance. 2. A second is in the unity of this Body.Resembl. 2. Unity of the body. Many members, but one body; so is it in the naturall body, We have many members in one body (saith the Proposition;) So we being ma∣ny
are one Body (saith the Reddition): Such is every particular Church; where there is a company of visible Saints joyned together in the fellowship of the Gospel; united in the profession of the same faith and love; atten∣ding upon and submitting to the Ordinances of Christ; and performing mutuall offices each to other, this is one Body. And such is the Church catholick: consider it as we will, whether in the Invisible or vi∣sible state of it, it is on Body. The Church catholick invisible,The Church catholick invi∣sible, one Body Being made up of all true Beleevers, such as having a reall union with Christ, have also union and com∣munion one with another: These make up one Body; As the Body is one, &c. so also is Christ (saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.12. Christ mysticall, the Church, whereof Christ is the Head.) For by one Spirit we are all baptised into one Body, ver. 13. A mystery represented to our eye in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; where the Sacramentall Bread being made of many graines meeting together and making one loaf: and the Sacramentall Wine being the juice of many grapes meeting together in the same Cup, do excellently represent unto the receiver, the unity of the Church catholick; wherein all true beleevers being knit together by Faith unto Christ, and by love one to a∣nother, make up one mysticall Body; So our Apostle unvailes this mystery, 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many, are one bread, and one body. Such is the Church catholick invisible.
And such is the Church catholibk visible;The Church catholick visi∣ble one Body. Consisting of the whole company of visible Saints, such as professe the true faith of Christ with subjection to his Ordinances; professe Faith and Obedience. This also (as it is one Church, so called by the Apostle in that 1 Cor. 12.28. God hath set some in the church, first A∣postles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers &c. meaning thereby the Church catholick visible, to which those extrordinary and ca∣tholick officers were properly, and to which the other ordinary officers are primarily given; so it) is one body, so called by the same Apo∣stle, Ephes. 4.4. There is one body; meaning thereby the church catholick, to which belong∣eth that one baptisme, ver. 5. and to which those officers were given by Christ, spoken of ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, &c. These Christ gave to his Church catholick, as considered in the visi∣ble state of it: And so may we understand the Apostle here in the Text; We being many, are one body; not only that particular Church at Rome; but the church catholick visible, whereof Paul himselfe was a member; (as I before expounded it) This is One Bo∣die. Whether one Organicall body (as they call it) or no, is made a matter of great dispute in the present times; but I shall not trouble you with that notion; It is enough for my present purpose (that which I suppose in a morderate sense will be granted at all intelligent hands)
that there is such a Church catholick visible, and that Church also is one body, one essen∣tiall and integrall bodie, made up of many members, combined and knit together in the profession of the same faith. Thus the church, take, it as we will, still we find a unity in it (I mean in the notion; O that it were so also in the practice!) It is one body. And that under one head. There is a third Resemblance.Resembl. 3. Unity of the head, which is So is it in the Naturall body, there is one body under one head: A head there must be, and but one head; otherwise it would be a monstrous body, should it be either , without a head, or , ha∣ving more heads then one. And so is it in this Mysticall body; it is also one body, under one head, which head is Christ; so it followeth in the Text. Wee are one body in Christ.Christ. Sumus unum corpus in Chri∣sto, id est, per Christum, qui corporis istius compactor fuit. Grot. ad Text.] , that is not onely per Christum (as Grotius di∣lutely expounds it) By Christ, as being the Authour of this union, the gatherer and com∣pacter of his Elect people into one: True it is, this Christ doth; he being the great Shepherd, gathereth all his sheep into one fold; so much we may learn from that Suffragan High Priest, who spake more then himself understood (as too many at this day do) though not more thē the Spirit of God intended to speak by him, Joh. 11.51. where he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation: And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad; This
Christ in part hath done, and further wil do to the end of the world; gather together his Elect of Jewes and Gentiles, so making them one Body. This is a Truth; but not the whole truth. There is somewhat more in this phrase, [In Christ.] viz. as being the Common head of his Church. So Grotius himselfe rightly expounds that other place of the same Apo∣stle, Ephes. 1.10.Grotius Com. ad Ephes. 1.10. where hee setteth forth the mystery of Gods will and purpose, now revealed in the Gospel, viz. That in the dispensation of the fulnesse of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ.] Per Christum, tan∣quam caput, by Christ, as a Head. And so much the word there translated, [Gather together] may be conceived to import, , or , to bring under one Head. Such is Christ to his Church: Not onely a Head over all things to it, (as he is said to be, Ephes. 1.22.) but the Head of it. Oft times we find him expresly so called; The Head of the Body, the Church, Col. 1.18. Ephes. 5.23. Such a relation there is betwixt Christ and his Church, as betwixt the Head and the Bo∣dy. And thence it is that as he is called the Head of his Church, so the Church is called his Body, Ephes. 1. last. 1 Cor. 12.27. And well may they be so called: Christ the Head of the church, the Body.Christ the Head, the Church, the Body. It The Head participates in the same nature wih the Body. So doth Christ with his church. 2. The Head is above the Body, set over it, to rule and guide it; so is Christ over his Church. 3.
The Head looketh out for the Body, providing for it; and so doth Christ for his Church. 4. The Head giveth influence, communicateth animall spirits, giveth sense and motion to all the members of the Body; so doth Christ communicate his Spirit to all the members of this mysticall Body, whereby he giveth spiri∣tuall sense and motion to them. 5. The Members of the Body are all united to the Head by some common bands and ligaments, nerves and sinews, whereby they come to have union and communion with it. And so are all true believers unto Christ; united to him by his Spirit on his part, by Faith and Love on their part; whence they come to have union and communion with him. And hence is it that they are said to be one Body in Christ.] Being united unto him, as unto one common Head; all having interest in him: all having union and communion with him; viz. all true livingmembers. Here is the Head to this Bodie. And this Head is but one. So is it in the naturall; and so is it in the mysticall Body.The Head of the mysticall Body, but one. The Church hath but one Head; not one Principall Head, and another Ministeriall. So they of the Church of Rome would have it; who cry up their Pope to be Head of the Church, viz. subordinate under Christ. But what were this but to make the Church a monstrous Body; having a Head and a Head, one Head under another? Many other Argu∣ments I finde here taken up by Pareus and
some others writing upon this Text, to refute and nullifie this claime of the Popes Head∣ship. But I shall passe them by as needlesse; This being an Argument so trite and worne, as every one may see the thread of it. As for the Pope, well were it if he might once approve himselfe a sound member of this Bo∣dy; as for Head, he neither is, nor can be. This is Christs peculiar, not communicable either to Man, or Angel. The Church is one Body, under one Head. [Wee are one Body in Christ.] There is a third Resem∣blance. The fourth and last followeth: viz. The mutuall Relation betwixt these members:Resembl. 4. Mutuall Rela∣tion betwixt the members. which we fall within the last clause, [And every one members of another.] , (or ) singulatim, severally every one. [Members one of another.] , One anothers members. Invicem membra; mutuall Members, Com∣membres (a word somtimes used by Augustine, as EstiusEstius ad Text. notes it) Com-members, Joint-Fellow-members; so is it in the naturall Body. The Members thereof are Joint-members, having all a common relation to the same Head, they have a mutuall relation each to other. So is it in a Military Body; where all the souldiers are Commilitones, Fellow-souldiers. And so is it in Politicall Bodies: Those who are of the same Corporation, are Concives, Fellow-citizens, Fellow-burgers, Fellow-members, as it were members one of another. And so is it in the church; not onely in a particular congrega∣tion,
the members whereof have, or ought to have, a speciall relation each to other. But in the Chuch catholick; all the true members of the Church, are fellow-citizens. So called Eph. 2.19. , Fellow-citizens with the Saints. And Fellow-heirs: So you have it Ephes. 3.6. where the Apostle speaking of the believing Gentiles, he cals them Fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and joint-partakers of the promise.] Three words very emphaticall in ex∣pressing and setting forth this mysticall union and communion among Christians. They are , Joint-heirs, , Joint-members of the same body; , Joint-partners in the same promise. Among all expres∣sions looking that way, we shall find none more full then this in the Text, where the Apostle speaking of church-members, saith, they are , one anothers members. Thus have I, with what brevity and per∣spicuity I could, passed through the severals in the Text; wherein I have given you a suc∣cinct and short account of five Doctrinall Pro∣positions. 1. That the church is a body. 2. That in this Body there are many members. 3. That these many members make one Body. 4. That these many members are one Body in Christ. 5. That these members are members one of another. That which now remaines is the Applica∣tion;Application. where we shall find never a one of these Branches but is fruitfull. I shall onely give you a taste of the four first, intending to make a full meale of the fift, and last.
1. Is the Church a Body, a spirituall Society, a mysticall Corporation? Why then let all the members thereof seeke the good of the whole:Ʋse 1. All the mem∣bers of the Church ought to seek the good of the whole Body. not onely of that par∣ticular Society, that congregation whereof they are members in particular, (as our Translation renders that Text, 1 Cor. 12.27.) This indeed they ought to have a particular regard unto, but not so as to im∣propriate their respects unto it. Let them all seek the good of the whole, the Church ca∣tholick. Thus doe the members of the na∣turall Body; they all seeke to maintaine not onely that part of the Body to which they have a proximate adherence, but the whole Body. And thus is it in a military Body; every souldier seeketh the safety, not onely of his owne company or Regiment, but of the whole Armie. And thus it ei∣ther is, or ought to bee, in civill Societies, in Bodies politick, the members thereof should seek the welfare, not only of their own families, but of the whole Incorporation. And so let it be in this spirituall Incorporation of the church: Let all that professe themselves members thereof, seriously seek the good of the whole: Seek the peace of it, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psal. 122.6. Seek the pros∣perity of it, Peace be within thy wals, and prospe∣rity within thy palaces, v. 7. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the wals of Jerusa∣lem, Ps. 51.18. Seek to maintain the outward pri∣viledges of it. This the members of civil Incorpo∣rations,
upon their first admission into those So∣cieties are sworn to do (an Oath too little regar∣ded, as many other of like nature are) to main∣tain the Priviledges, Immmunities, Lawful usages, and Customes thereof. Let all Christians do the like in the behalf of the Church, the Church catholick, whereof they are made or acknow∣ledged to be members by their Baptisme: Let them seek to maintain the Spirituall priviled∣ges thereof; to hold up all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, that they may be dispenced with Liberty, Purity, Power. Every wayes seeking the good of this body. Ʋse 2. Every member ought to keep his place, and look to his of∣fice.Are there many members belonging to this Body, and these having severall offices, fun∣ctions, and gifts? why, then let every one rest himselfe contented with that degree, that station wherein God hath set him in the Church, not thrusting himselfe upon the offi∣ces and imployments of others. This is one thing (as I told you, and a principall one, which the Apostle here aimeth and drives at; This I say, (saith he) that no man think of him∣selfe above what he ought to think, but think so∣berly, according as God hath given to every man the measure of faith; Hee requireth every one to know his own place and his own gifts, and so move within his own sphear, contai∣ning himselfe within the bounds and limits of his Calling, not affecting to put his oar into other mens boats, his Plough into other mens fields, his sickle into other mens harvests, busily intermedling with what belonged not to
him: And this lesson he would have church∣members to learne from the members of the natural bodie; where the severall members have severall Offices, and severall faculties; the eye to see, the ear to hear, the tongue to speak, &c. And having so, each one holdeth to its particular function, no one member in∣croaching upon the office of another: even so would he have it for to be in the Mysticall Bodie of the church, and so let it be; There being therein a like plurality of members, and diversity of Offices, paralell and answerable to the former; the Ruler as the eye, the Teacher as the tongue; the Hearer as the ear; the Di∣stributer as the hand, &c. some having one function, others another; let every one look to his owne. Thus is it in the Military body, where there are Colonels, and Majors, and Captains, and Leiutenants, Sergeants, Officers and private Souldiers, every one intends his own imployment. And so is it in Politick Bodies, where there are Mayor, Bailiffs, She∣riffs, Justices, Constables, &c. every one looketh to his owne office, not interrupting, not disturbing one another: the inferior by no means intruding upon the place of the Supe∣ior: And so let it be in the Church. But I hasten, Is the church one Bodie? Then let all who professe themselves members thereof, seek to maintain the unity of it;Ʋse 3. Seek to main∣tain the Chur∣ches unity. not rending and tear∣ing it asunder by factions and schimes, unwar∣rantable Separations and Divisions; but labor
to keep the onenesse, the unity of this body: The unity, not only of those particular con∣gregations whereof they are Members (which Christians ought have a speciall regard unto, not withdrawing themselves upon every slight occasion, or making breaches in them) but al∣so of the church catholick. So as though it be divided into severall congregations, yet all they may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; as so many lines meeting in the same center; by their Associations and Combinati∣ons helping and strengthening each other: all endeavouring (as much as may be) a Religi∣ous uniformity, that they may all walk by the same Rule, as of Faith and Manners, so (if it might be) of Discipline; a thing much to be desired by all those who pray for the peace of Jerusalem: and without which they are not like to see what they long for. But I passe to the fourth. Is the church one body in Christ? Then let all the members thereof know and acknow∣ledge him for their Head:Ʋse 4. Know and ac∣knowledge our head. Holding fast to him; It is that which our Apostle chargeth upon some in his time, Colos. 2.19. They did not , Hold fast the head; They did not hold themselves to Christ alone, but they would be setting up other Mediators, other Intercessours with him and besides him (even as Romanists at this day do). For us, take we heed of the like; remember we that Christ is our Head, our Mediator, our Advocate; and therefore hold we to him, and him alone;
not admitting any other to any participation with him in his Headship: Submitting our selves unto him to be governed by his lawes: leaving him to the regulating and ordering of his Church; seeking after a nearer union, and a more free and ful communion with him. The members of the naturall body, the more free communion they have with the head, the more active and vigorous they are; whereas if that be intercepted and obstructed (as in some cases it is, as viz. in Palsies and Apo∣plexies, &c.) they prove useless and dead. The Christians life is bound up in Christ (whence it is that he is called their life, Col. 3.4.) And therefore holding fast this head, seek nearer union and further communion with him. But I promised to give you but a taste of these. Come we now to the fifth and last, up∣on which I have a speciall designe, as concei∣ving it to be a branch,Ʋse 5. A fruitfull Branch. The Saints Joint-mem∣bership, which may afford us a great deal of good fruit, such as will be well worth my shaking and your gathering; much matter which will be very usefull unto you, and to all Christians in reference to their church state. Where let me only premise one generall ca∣veat; what I shall speak of Church members,A Caveat con∣cerning the word [Church-members.] and their mutuall respects and duties, let it not be construed in too strict a sense, as in∣tended only to the members of particular con∣gregations, in reference unto that particular body whereof they are members. True it is, I will not deny (what I have already yealded)
that the Apostle here in my Text, in laying down the Doctrine, hath a speciall eye to such a particular Relation: And so shall I have in the Application. But, as he doth not, so nei∣ther shall I impale and confine what I am to say within so narrow a room. As for a parti∣cular Church, (as I said before) it is but a part, a member of the Church catholick visible; so much is by some collected from that Text fore∣cited, 1 Cor. 12.27. where out Apostle telleth his Corinthians, that they were the Body of Christ, and members in particular,] The Originall hath it word for word, Members of a part, . So the vulgar Latine (as also Ambrose) there renders it; Membra de (or ex) membro, (possibly, by the change of a let∣ter, &c. Chrysost. ad loc. Aliquatenùs. Nam omnes Ec∣clesiae per orbem dispersae diversa sunt unius corpo∣ris membra. Beza Annot. Vide Calvin. Con. ad locum. (as Beza conjectures, and Heinsius ap∣proves it,) reading it, .) members of a member: that is, (as Chrysostome and Beza gives the sense of it) members of that Church of Corinth, which was but a part, a member of the catholick christian Church: but that I will not stand upon, conceiving that it may admit of another construction, more apposite and agreeable to the scope of that place, (to which Calvine directs me.) Neither need I, seeing it is a truth clearly held forth by the Spirit of God in the very language of the Scrip∣ture: which speaking of the church catholick, calleth it [the church,] without any other addition, or modification; As in the ver. there fore-going, ver. 28. God hath set some in the church, &c.] so often else-where. But speak∣ing
of particular Congregations, calls them churches: [Here what the Spirit saith to the churches, Revel. 2, 3. &c.] Or the church at such a place, and such a place, clearly im∣porting that the one is a totum Integrale, the whole Body, the other parts and members of it. And being so, parts of an Homogeneall Bo∣dy; what I say of, or concerning the one, let it be conceived as intended also to the other. This generall caution being premised, (which as my selfe shall, so I shall desire you to carry a long with you) now come wee to particu∣lars. Are the members of the Church Joint-mem∣bers,Vsefull Instru∣ctions from the conside∣ration of the Saints Joint-Membership. 1. Negative Instructions. members one of another? from hence we may take up many usefull Instructions: use∣full to all the members of this mysticall Body; which I shall divide into two ranks: Nega∣tive, and Positive. The former shewing what Christians should not do; the other what they ought to do. Begin with the former. What church-members should not do. Let them not envy one another;1. Church-members not to envy one another. an evill which all men by nature are prone and subject to. The spirit that dwelleth in us, lusteth to envy, (saith Saint James,) Jam. 4.5. The spirit of Satan, or the spirit of a man, so far forth as he is unregenerate, being depraved and cor∣rupted, among other lusts, it enclines and puts him on to envy. Thus we read of the Patri∣archs, that being moved with envy, they sold their brother Joseph into Egypt, Acts 7.9. Thus even christians are too apt to envy their Bre∣thren.
But thus let it not be: Let not Inferi∣ours in the Church envy their Superiours. Those who have lesser either gifts or estates, envy those that have greater. Let not private christians envy publick officers: Those who are under Government envy those who are set over them in the Lord. To that end let them remember (what they should never forget) that they are members one of another; so as what the one receiveth, is for the benefit and advantage of the other.Livius Hist. Lib. 2o. It was the argument which Menenius Agrippa in the Romane story is said to have made use of (a story taken up and made use of by divers Expositors writing upon the Text) for the quieting of a mutiny among the Plebeians,P. Mar∣tyr Pareus Grotius ad Text. the common people in Rome, who envying the wealth, honour, and pomp of their Senators, were ready to have made a defection from them. Thereupon he tels the fable of the Members and the Belly; how that they fell foul with it, complaining that they were faine to labour and take pains to maintaine that, whilest that onely spent what they got; whereupon they withdrew their wonted allowance; which having done, in conclusion by pining it, they starved them∣selves. And by this argument taken from the communion betwixt the members of the na∣turall Body, hee appeased that tumult, and reduced them to due subjection; let the like argument be usefull unto Christians in a like way. Is it so, that others have gifts and offices in the Church, (for that I have now properly
to deale with) above themselves, let them not envie them, repine and murmure at them. So did the Israelites at Moses and Aaron; of whom the Psalmist tels us, Psal 116.16. They envied Moses in the camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. This did Corah and his confederates, (as you may read it, Numb. 16.2.) They envied Moses as a Magistrate, and Aaron as a Minister, one set apart for the Priesthood: And how many are there, who (as if they had taken a pattern by them) do the very like at this day? They envy Mo∣ses and Aaron, the Magistrate, and the Mi∣nister. And why? because they are, the one in the common-wealth, the other in the church, advanced above themselves. But this let not any of you do: no reason you should. What they have is for your good. He is the Minister of God to thee for good, (saith Paul of the Magistrate) Rom. 13 4. And it is no lesse true of the Minister, you and they are members of the same Body; and being so, ye are members one of another: and therefore no reason you should envy one another. So the Apostle himselfe maketh use of this very Ar∣gument in that Text, which I have, and shall have the frequenter recourse unto, in as much as (as Pareus saith of it) it may serve as a com∣mentary upon this I have now in hand, 1 Cor. 12. where having to deale with some, who envying the Offices or Gifts of some others, were ready thereupon through discontent to fall off, and seperate from the Church; hee
tels them, ver. 14, The Body is not one member, but many. If the foot shall say, because I am not the hand, I am not of the body, is it there∣fore not of the body? And if the ear shall say, because I am not the eye, therefore I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the Body? &c. And so he goeth on; willing every one to con∣tent himselfe in the station wherein God had set him; not being discontent with others who were preferred before themselves: This being a thing not onely of conveniency, but of necessity, that there should be such a disparity and difference among the members (as of the naturall, so) of the mysticall Body. So it followeth, ver. 17, 18, 19. For if the whole Bo∣dy were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But now hath God set the members, every one of them in the Body, as it pleased him. And if they were all one member, where were the Body? Let the consideration hereof for ever lay this evill Spirit of envy. Church-members being members of the same Body, they are mem∣bers one of another. And being so, what any one hath, is usefull to the rest: and therefore let them not envy one another. There is a first Instruction. 2. Whilest they do not envy, let them not disdaine one another.2. Not dis∣daine one ano∣ther. A usefull and needfull lesson for Superiours; such as God hath pre∣ferred and advanced above their brethren, be∣trusting them with offices, honouring them with gifts, or with successe in their labours,
or in any other way above their brethren, let not them disdaine Inferiours, despising them, insulting over them, thinking meanly of them, looking overly upon them. Thus (as the Hi∣story tels us) that matchlesse Philistine looked upon David, when he saw him, being but a youth, a stripling, a childe in comparison of him, he disdained him, saith the Text, 1 Sam. 17.42. And truely thus Superiours, both in Church and State, are subject to look upon their Inferiours: men of greater estates, are subject to despise their poor brethren, (though richer in faith then themselves.) So Saint James chargeth it upon some in his time, Jam. 2.6. Ye have despised the poor. Thus aged persons are sometimes apt to despise young ones (though it may be their seniours in grace.) Thereupon was Pauls advice to Timothy, that he should carry himselfe the more warily, That no man might despise his youth, 1 Tim. 4.12. And wri∣ting to his Corinthians concerning him, he gi∣veth them charge that no man should despise him, 1 Cor. 16.11. And thus the strong Chri∣stian is apt to despise the weak: whereupon the Apostle giveth that caveat to these his Ro∣mans, Rom. 14.3. Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not: He that knoweth his li∣berty, despise his weaker brother. This take you heed of. This is a thing which the members of the naturall Body will not do. The more princi∣pall and noble parts will not despise the lesse principall or ignoble; the eye or hand will
not disdaine the foot; but own it as a mem∣ber, an usefull and needfull member; I, and as one of their members. The like let the members of the mysticall Body do, and that upon this ground. So the Apostle presseth it in the sequel of that Chapter, 1 Cor. 12.20, 21. &c. Now are they many members, yet but one body: And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you: nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to bee more feeble, are necessary, &c. So is it in the naturall, and so is it in the mysticall Body. The most noble members in this body, they are but , (as the Apostle hath it in that verse fore-cited,Membra ex par∣te sunt, ficut cuique attributa est sua portio, & fiuitum officium, Calvin. ad loc. ver. 27.) Membra ex parte, that is, members each one for his part, and in his place, (as Calvine most genuinely expounds it.) And the meanest members are needfull to the whole, and may be usefull to any other member. They are members one of another, And therefore let them not disdaine or despise one another. There is a second. Thirdly, Let them not offend one another:3. The third Negative In∣struction. Not offend one another. This will not the members of the naturall Bo∣dy do, being members one of another, they will not willingly offend, or any wayes hurt one another: let not the members of the my∣sticall Body do it. This Paul telleth his Co∣rinthians, that for his own part, he was very shie of, Giving none offence, saith he of him∣selfe, 2 Cor. 6.3. And he would have them to be the like, to be , Inoffensive;
and that towards all. So runs his charge, 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.] Three words under which he comprehends all sorts of persons then in being; who were either Jewes, or Pagans, or Christians. Chri∣stians should not willingly offend any of these, especially the last. Church-members being their members, let them not offend them. Which may be done divers wayes;Which is done three wayes. 1. By example. 2. By word. 3. By deed. By exam∣ple, scandalizing of them; by word, defa∣ming them; by deed, wronging and inju∣ring of them. Let Church-members take heed of each. 1. Of offending one another by example,1. By Exam∣ple, scandali∣zing one ano∣ther. scandalizing their Fellow-members; this will not the members of the naturall Body wil∣lingly do. The hand will not put a mote into the eye, or lay a stumbling block before the foot. Let not the members of this mysticall Body do it: let them take heed of being either causes or occasions of stumbling to others: Let no man put a stumbling block, or an occa∣sion to fall in his brothers way, Rom. 14.13. . 1. Whether it be by the abuse of their chri∣stian liberty.1. By abusing Christian Li∣berty. Concerning this speaketh the Apostle there, It is not good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, or any thing, whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weake, ver. 21. Three words (the two later whereof, are not to be found in the Syriack,
nor yer in all Greek copies, as Grotius notes it, importing for substance one and the same thing. Some indeed have indeavon∣red to distinguish them, and put different sen∣ses upon them. But they may rather seeme to be Synonymaes, a Congeries, an heap of di∣vers words signifying one and the same thing: which yet is not without an ob∣servable Emphasis: Thereby the Apostle insinuates the great heed, care, and cir∣cumspection that Christians should take, lest any wayes, by the use of things indiffe∣rent, they should bee so much as in occasion of offence in any degree to their weak bre∣thren. The like care the same Apostle presseth upon his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 8. where, in the 12th verse he tels them, When ye so sin a∣gainst the brethren, (viz. offending them by the abuse of your Christian liberty, which he had spoken of before) and wound their con∣science, ye sin against Christ.] This do they who willingly, or heedlesly offend their weak brethren; they sinne against Christ, whose members they are, and whose work is there∣by interrupted, and hindred in them. Upon this account Paul willeth them to take heed of it. Neither doth he therein (Pharisee like) lay a burden upon other mens shoulders, put a yoke upon their necks, which himselfe was not willing to touch or bear. No, in the ve∣ry next verse he tels them what his own Reso∣lution was: Wherefore if meat make my brother
to offend (or offend my brother, ,) I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, ver. 13. A truely Heroicall and imitable resoluti∣on; for Christians, rather then bee occasions of scandalizing, hindering the salvation of any, to abridge themselves in the use of their christian liberty: not to do what o∣therwise they lawfully might do. 2. Much lesse (in the second place) to doe what they ought not to do: and so to offend, whether grieving or indangering others by their scandalous examples, by their inordinate walking.2. Scandalous and inordinate walking. Thus did the Sons of Eli, by their leud and debauched carriage, they made the people to abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Sam. 2.17. This did the Priests in Malachies time, By their departing out of the way, they caused many to stumble at the Law, Mal. 2.8. By their evill examples, they seduced some, and gave occasion to others to disdaine the wor∣ship and service of God. O christians! take heed that the like never may be charged upon any of you, that by your examples you should cause any of your brethren to stumble and fall: That by your walking unanswerably to your profession, you should make any of those who begin to looke Sion-ward, and Heaven-ward to turn aside, and to be out of love and liking with the good wayes, and Ordinances of God; and so to fall off from their follow∣ing after him: that your unchristian courses should be as a nipping frost to these hopefull buds and blossomes, and cause them to fall off
from the tree. O this is a matter which will turn to a sad account another day. So our Saviour himselfe hath cast it up, Matth. 18 6. Who so shall offend one of these little ones that believeth in me, it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the bottome of the sea.] Of such high consequence is it for a man by his evill example, or otherwise, so to scandalize a weak brother, as to be an occasion of his hal∣ting, or falling off from his profession; better that such a one should suffer the greatest pu∣nishment in his body, then that he should thus ruine, or indanger the soule of his brother. Take heed of thus offending your fellow-members by your example. Or (in the second and third place) by word or deed. Concerning both these (as Grotius looketh upon it) our Apostle giveth a joint∣caveat to his Galatians, Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and devoure one another; take heed ye be not consumed one of another.] Bite one another in words, Devour one another by deeds. Both these let Christians take heed of. Of Biting one another, offending one a∣nother in words.2. By Word, defaming one another. This will not the members of the naturall Body do. The teeth will not bite the hand, nor the hand scratch the face: Let not the members of the mysticall Body do it, by speaking evill one of another. It is one of those lessons which Paul willeth Titus to teach the Christians of his time, that they should speak evill of no man, Tit. 3.2.
And I wish that Christians in these times, would have a greater regard to it; To blas∣pheme no man, speak evill of no man; by back-biting, slandering, defaming of them. Every of which is a kind of blasphemy,, q. . a hurting the good name of another, (which the word pro∣perly signifieth;) an evill speaking, not onely censured by the Spirit of God in Scripture, but condemned by the very light of nature. Let Christians take heed of it, of thus speaking evill of any; specially of their brethren, fellow-members, members of the same mysticall Body. Quest. But may not men speak the evill which they know by others? Ans. I answer, not alwayes; no,Christians may not alwayes speak the evill which they know by their Brethren. though it be a truth, and a truth which they are assured of. Doeg, when he spake unto Saul concerning David and Abimeleck, he spake nothing but what was the truth, and what himselfe was an eye-witnesse of (as he tels Sauls, 1 Sam. 22.9.10.) yet David cals him a false tongue, in that Psalm, which the Contents in your Bibles will tell you is to be understood of him, Psal. 120.3. True things may be spoken evilly and falsely; viz. when they are spoken out of rancour or malice, or without any just call or reason; and so tend onely to the defamation of the person of whom they are spoken; this is an evill which I shall desire you to take heed of. And the rather, be∣cause it is now grown so Epidemicall, more rife then ever. Is it so that you know any com∣mendable good concerning your Brethren, as occasion is offered, speak it, and speak it freely.
I know no danger in it, where there can be no suspicion of flattery. But for evill, look about you; Examine it, before you utter it. Quid de quoque viro, &c. Examine not onely whe∣ther it be true which is spoken, but whether it be fit to be spoken to such a person, at such a time, in such a place, and to what end it is spoken; and what good may come of it. If it tend onely to the defaming of another, now suppresse it. It is an ill Principle, which ma∣keth men tongue-tied in the deserved praises of others, whilest they are open-mouthed in what may tend to their disgrace. Such measure let not Christians offer to any, least of all to their Brethren, their Fellow-members. Christians not to blaze the in∣firmities of Brethren.Not blazing their weaknesses, their infirmi∣ties. It is Chams brand, which no time will ever wear out the infamy of, that espying his Fathers nakednesse, he went and told his two brethren without, calling them in to see it, and laugh at it, Gen. 9.22. Let not Christians doe the like to their brethren. Is it so that they oc∣casionally espy the nakednesse, the failings, the infirmities one of another, let them not pre∣sently tell it to others. To themselves they may, and ought in a Christian way; advising, ad∣monishing, reproving them, that so what is out of joynt, may be set again, what is amisse, may be healed, reformed. But now to others, specially such as are without: Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, 1 Sam. 1.20. As for Fellow-members in Church-society, our Saviours rule and direction is,
that, where private admonition taketh not place with an offending brother, they should take one or two more with them, Matth. 18.16. And if that availe not, then (as it followes ver. 17.) Tell it to the Church, not to the whole Congregation, (that, to make the best of it, were but a preposterous course); but to the Church-Officers, the Church Representative. All which ought to be done with all christian tendernesse and wisdom. But for others, who are strangers, if not enemies to the Church, let them (as much as may be) be strangers to the infirmities of the members thereof. A Lesson which the members of the mysti∣call may learn from the members of the na∣turall body, where if one member have a se∣cret ailment, a soar, the tongue will not pre∣sently blab it, speak of it, or the hand open it to every passenger But if it do open it, or speak of it, it shall be to a friend, or to a Surgeon, some that may probably contribute somewhat towards the cure of it. Thus let Christians deale by the infirmities of their brethren, not in opening them, but in order to a cure. Thus take heed of offending by word, by speaking evill one of another. And (thirdly) of evill doing one to another, of wronging, injuring one another:3. By Deed, wronging and injuring one another. not biting, let them much lesse devoure one another. This will not the members of the naturall body do. The hand will not buffet the head, or wound the foot. Let not the members of the mystical Body offer such measure one to another, to
hurt one another, as not in their Reputations, so in their Bodies, or Estates, or any other way. Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man, (it is Pauls Apologie for himselfe, and his Fellow-Ministers, to his Corinthians,) 2 Cor. 7.2. All these had the false Apostles, his Competitours, done to them, (as he there se∣cretly insinuates.) They had wronged, corrup∣ted, defrauded them; wronged them by their examples, corrupted them by their doctrines, defrauded them by their wiles, their covetous∣nesse. But this had not Paul done, nor any of his Colleagues. This let not any Christian do. Do it not to any, no not to Heathens; much lesse to Brethren. This is that which Paul chargeth as no small aggravation upon some of his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.8. Yee do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren. To doe injury to any is a crime, much more to a bro∣ther. For one member to wrong another is un∣naturall; and for Christians to wrong one a∣nother is unchristian. Here is the third nega∣tive Instruction, which I take up from the Joint-membership of Christians: Being mem∣bers one of another, let them not offend one another, by Example, by Word, by Deed. To which let me subjoyne a fourth: Not offending one another, let them not be offended one with another.4. The fourth negative In∣struction. Be not offen∣ded one with another. Scandals are of two sorts; Data, & Accepta: Active and Passive: Gi∣ven and taken. Now Christians should e∣qually
decline both: As not giving offence to, so not taking it from their brethren. A thing which corrupt nature is very prone to do (be∣ing like tindar, or gun-powder, which is ready to fire upon every spark that falls upon it,) to take offence; and that oft-times before it is given: not unlike a shie horsé, which is ready to start at every shadow. So did the Pharisees at our Saviours warrantable practices. Now this, (being rather the making then the taking of an offence) let all Christians beware of it, remembring that they are mutuall members; members one of another. Members of the na∣turall body are not apt to be offended one with another: let not the members of the mystical Body be so. To which end let them not be too quick-sighted in espying one anothers faults. Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy bro∣thers eye? (saith our Saviour) Matth. 7.3. meaning that Christians should not bee too sharp-sighted in espying their brethrens infir∣mities, (especially when they indulge the like, or greater evils in themselves.) It is observed, that the most ravenous birds, birds of prey, (as Eagles and Hawks) are most quick-sighted. And so is it among men; They which are most wicked themselves, are most ready to find faults with others; especially to espy the infir∣mities of Saints. Again, I say, let Christians beware of it; not looking through false glas∣ses, not readily giving entertainment to fly∣ing reports, not harbouring of groundlesse suspicions: But rather judging the best, ex∣pounding
doubtfull matters in the better part, where there may be any probability of a can∣did construction; as the story tels us Jacob did the dreams and death of his son Joseph; Gen. 37.11.33. It is one property of true Chri∣stian charity, it thinketh not evill, 1 Cor. 13.5. and another, it hopeth all things, ver. 7. still making the best Construction of what is dubious. Christians should not rea∣dily take offen∣ces, though really given.But suppose it be an offence really given, yet let not Christians bee ready to take it. Be it 1. An offence offered to themselves. It is the wisdome of a man, (much more of a Chri∣stian) to passe by many such offences; either not taking notice of them, or not being over affected with them. However, not meditating revenge for them. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, (saith our Apostle,) ver. 19. of this Chapter, Rom. 12. And Recompence to no man evill for evil, ver. 17. much lesse to Brethren. If the one foot by interfering, hurt the other, the other will not doe the like to it again. Let not the members of the mysticall Body returne such unkind, and unchristian requitalls each to other. But (secondly) suppose it be an offence a∣gainst God, yet let not Christians be offended; I mean so as to stumble at it. It is that which David saith of godly men, Psalm 119.165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them..] There is no stum∣bling block to them, (saith the Originall,) No∣thing
so offends them, as to make them out of love and liking with the good wayes of God, so as to recede, or turne aside from the path of his Commandements; but still they go on: Whatever stumbling-blocks are cast in their way, they step over them, holding on their course. Thus do we; whatever offences, scandalls, stumbling-blocks, we meet with (among which, it cannot be denyed, the scandalous courses of Professours are none of the least) yet be we not so offended at them, as to think ever the worse of the wayes by God, or the Ordinan∣ces of God, or the people of God; but still hold on our way. If the one foot chance to tread awry, trip or stumble, yet the other holdeth on its way. And so let it be with the mem∣bers of this mysticall Body: Let them not be offended one with, or by another. To this I shall adde one more, and but one. Are the members of the Church members one of another, then let them not lye one to another.5. The fifth Negative In∣struction. Lye not one to another. This I take from the Apostle, Eph. 4.25. where he requireth from his Ephesians that they should put away lying, and that upon this account, For we are members one of another, . Laying aside deceit, falshood, lying. Whether it be, 1. In speech. Or 2. In opinion. Or 3. In fact. Or 4. In life and conversation. All these wayes may Christians, Church-members, deceive and lye one to another. Let each be taken heed of: 1. Lying in speech.1. In speech, deceiving one another. That is one of the Laws which God giveth to his people, Levit. 19.11.
Ye shall not steale, neither deale falsely, nor lye one to another: This God requireth from the Jewes. And the same our Apostle requi∣reth from Christians, Col. 3.9. Lye not one to another.] This Christians may not do to any. It is one of the Characters of those that are without (without the Kingdome of Grace here, and Glory hereafter; and such as ought to be, and shall be shut out of the Church, when Discipline cometh to be duely executed; as in the last and purest Church it shall bee,) [Whosoever loveth and maketh a lye, Rev. 22.15. & 21.27. least of all to their Brethren: Being all children of that God, who is the God of truth, and truth it selfe, let them not de∣ceive one another by lying in speech. 2. Or (secondly) in opinion: Seducing one another.2. In opinion, seducing one another. It is an ill office when the eye seduceth, mis-guideth the hand or foot: which willingly it will not doe. And it is an ill office when the members of the mysti∣call Body shall seduce one another: as Ahabs Prophets did him, whom by their perswasi∣ons they seduced, that he might go and fall at Ramoth Gilead, 1 King. 22.22. So did those ly∣ing Prophets, whom the Lord complaines of, Ezek. 13.10. They seduced his people, saying, Peace, when there was no peace. So did that New-Testament Jezabel, of whom we read, Revel. 2.20. (some wicked woman, either Jezabel by name, or Jezabel by condition, re∣sembling that former Beldame, one or both,) being a member of the Church of Thyatira,
and calling her selfe a Prophetesse, (boasting of some divine and speciall Revelations) she taught and seduced the servants of God. Such seducers there have been some or other in all ages of the Church, (surely never more then in this Nation at this day,) who taking upon them to teach, & pretending to some more then ordinary Inspiration, seduce others, drawing them into dangerous and pernicious errours. And no wonder; Should the foot usurp the office of the eye, and take upon it to direct and lead the rest of the members, what could be expected but that which our Saviour tels us is to be looked for when the blind lead the blind, Matth. 15.14. (a blind teacher, a blind people) that both should fall into the ditch? The worst office that one member can do to another. And therefore let Christians be∣ware of it; and upon that account taking heed of usurping that office which belongs not to them. 3. There is a lying in fact,3. In fact, defrauding one another. when the mem∣bers of the Church shall hide themselves one from another. A thing expresly prohibited, Isai. 58.7. Thou shalt not hide thy self from thine own flesh.] i. e. turne away thy face from thy bro∣ther in his need, as taking no notice of him, and his condition; This should not Christi∣ans do from any, they being of one flesh with themselves: much lesse from their Brethren, such as are knit unto them in spirituall Rela∣tions; such was Peters deniall of his Master, whom at his Arraignment first he would not
own, and afterwards for-sware, Matth. 26.70, 72, 74. And such was the dealing of Pauls friends and companions with him, of whom he complaines, that at his appearing before Nero, None stood by him, all forsook him, 2 Tim. 4.16. Even as Davids friends dealt by him, of whom hee complaines, Psalm 38.11. My lovers and my friends stand aloofe from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off. This is a deceiving, a kind of lying one to ano∣ther. Church-Bene∣volence not to be with-held.And so is it when Christians shall defraud one another, by with-holding one from another that which is their due. Thus Paul would not have Husband and wife to defraud one ano∣ther, 1 Cor. 7.5. viz. by withholding one from another a due Conjugall Benevolence. Let not Christians do the like, by with-hol∣ding one from another a due Church-Benevo∣lence. Thus did Ananias and Sapphira lye un∣to God, and man, (as Peter chargeth it upon them, Acts 5.4.) when they kept back part of the price of their possession, which they pre∣tended to come and lay down at the Apostles feet for the Churches use. And truely little better do they, to whom God having given a larger portion of this worlds goods, yet doe not communicate unto their poor brethren in some measure proportionably. It was Pauls order to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.2. that upon the first day of the week (the Lords Day,) every one should lay by somewhat in store (for the poor) as God hath prospered them. Now should any
herein have dissembled, either laying by no∣thing, or nothing proportionable to what God had blessed them with, this had been a kind of lying both to God, and to their Bre∣thren. And so is it when men pretending to contribute to the necessities of the poor in a publick Congregation, shall choose out the worst of their Coyne, (clipt or counterfeit,) not regarding what it be for quantity or quality, so it will but ring in the Bason. What is this but for Christians to lye one to another? Now surely, were it to give an almes to Pri∣soners in the Grate, or Dungeon (the worst of malefactours,) either give what is good and sweet, or give not at all. How much more to Fellow-members. Surely the members of the naturall Body would not so deale one by another. Should a portion of bread or meat be put into the hand, it would not with-hold it from the craving mouth, and hungry belly. And why? because they are members one of another. And so are Christians; being Church-members, they are members one of another. And there∣fore let them not defraud one another of what in this way is their due, a due Church-Benevolence. Nor yet deceiving the trust reposed each in other: Like false friends,Trust, not to be deceived. which prove like staves of Reed to those that trust in them, (as the Prophet compares Egypt, Isai. 36.6.) Or as Brooks in the Summer. It is Jobs compari∣son, Job 6.15. My brethren have dealt deceit∣fully as a brook, and as the stream of Brooks
they passe away. Job hoped to have had some comfort from his kindred and friends, (whom there he calleth his Brethren,) in the time of his adversity, (a brother is born for adversity, Prov. 17.17.) but then they failed him, (like brooks in the Summer) when he had most need of them; so deceiving whatever trust or confidence hee had reposed in them: let not Christians so deale one by another. The members of the naturall Body will not do it. The legs will not willingly deceive the body which rests upon them. But I hasten. 4. And Lastly, There is a lying in life and conversation,4. In life and conversation; Hypocriticall Dissembling. which in one word, is Hypocri∣sie. When men shall onely act a part in the Church; seeming to others to be what they are not. This will not Gods people do, They are children that will not lie, Isai. 63.8. They will not play the grosse hypocrites. But so do many in the visible Church, who are no bet∣ter then as glassen eyes, and wooden legs and armes to the naturall Body; which are onely tied on by some outward bonds and ligaments, having no life in them. Such are there many, who out of some by and sinister respects cleave unto the body, hold communion with the people of God; but they are nothing lesse in truth, then in appearance. They are among them, but not of them, (as Saint John maketh the distinction, 1 John 2.19.) Such were the Scribes and Pharisees in the Jewish Church: and such ever have been, and will be in the
Christian Church. Though persons openly profane, may be, and shall be shut out, Rev. 21.27. yet Hypocrites, some or other, will keep in. Such as have a form of Godlinesse, but no power, no life, no truth of piety in them; such as deceive themselves; nay such as knowing themselves, yet deceive others, grosse Hypo∣crites; such as joyn themselves to the Church, putting on a vizard of publick Profession, meer∣ly for private advantage. Now what is this but for the members of this Body to lie one to another? which, being members one of a∣nother, their reciprocall Relation forbids them to do. Thus have you seen some few (of many) negative Instructions, which may be by way of inference deduced from this consideration of the Saints Joint-membership: wherein you have seen what Christians should not doe. Come we now to the later sort, to positive Instructions, to see what they ought to do. Are Church-members thus members one of another?Positive In∣structions. Then let them be admonished and exhorted to give such mutuall respectsMutuall re∣spects to be gi∣ven by Church-Members each to other. one to another as are due upon the account of this Reciprocall Relation. These I shall referre to two heads. They are Inward, or outward; Affections, or Offices expressing those affecti∣ons. Let Christians bear the one, and perform the other, and that in a mutuall way, as be∣ing members one of another. Begin we with the former, Inward respects,1. Inward Respects.
Affections, which ought to bee mutuall and reciprocall betwixt these joynt-members. This is that which the Apostle meaneth, where he presseth it upon his Philippians, that they should stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, Phil. 1.27. And again in the next Chapter, ver. 2. Fulfill ye my joy (saith he) that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one ac∣cord, of one mind.  (the same with , before) Concordes, of one heart, one soule. Thus was it anciently said of two entire friends, , There was one soule in two bodies. Thus should it bee with Beleevers; though they be distinct persons, and divided into severall societies, yet they should have but one soul, be all of one heart. Sois it in the naturall Body, there are many mem∣bers, but one heart. Thus should it be with the members of the mystical Body, (O that it were so!) they should have but one heart. So is it pro∣mised to the Church under the Gospel in those known Texts, Jer. 32.39. Ezek. 11.19. I will give them one heart.] And accordingly it was per∣formed in the Proto-primitive times, as you shall find it, Acts 4.32. The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soule.] Ʋnanimous in their judgments, & united in their affections. O that it were so in these, & might be so in all times. All of us pray for it, strive after it. 1. That we may be of the same mind, the same judgement.1. Onenesse of judgement to be desired. This our Apostle begs for; and from his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgement. (A Text which I have heretofore handled in this place, and given a publick account to the world.) And this let all of us beg for our selves, and for all the Churches of Christ, in this Nation, and elsewhere, that we and they may all bee in this sense like-minded, thinking and speaking the same thing. Thus is it with the members of the naturall body; many members, but one Tongue. Thus should it be with the members of the mysticall Body, they should all speak the same thing: all looking the same way. In the naturall body there are two eyes, and two legs, but they both look and go one and the same way. Crosse eyes, and splay-feet, where the one looketh one way, and another ano∣ther, are no small blemish and deformity to the natural body. And so are Crosse-Christians to the mysticall Body, such as are crosse in their judg∣ments, singular in their opinions, & affect to be so. 2. Much more they who are crosse in affe∣ctions. It is that which I now more directly and principally aime at, and I wish I may hit the mark. Christians,2. Christians should be of one heart, like affe∣cted towards each other. though they cannot al∣wayes be of the same mind, yet should they be of the same heart. Though they cannot bee like minded towards some controverted points of lesser concernment, yet they should be like minded one towards another. So our Apostle presseth it upon these Romanes, ver. 16. of
this chapter, Be of the same mind one towards a∣nother; : Be like affectioned one towards another; A consectary fitly following upon this conclusion in the Text, Christians being members one of another, let them be like affected one towards another, 1 Loving one another:1. Loving one another. Be ye like minded, having the same love (saith the Apostle in that place forenamed) Phi. 2.2. Love, as it is the bond of all Christian vertues, so it is the bond of all Christian Societies; In both which respects it is called the bond of perfectnesse, Col. 3.14. : The most perfect bond, ty∣ing hearts together, which no other bond can do: And being so, it must in the first place, be put on by all those who would join themselves to the mysticall body:  (saith the Apo∣stle there) Above all, put on charity, which is the bond of perfectnesse. This our Saviour layeth down for a character whereby his Disciples may be known; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another; Joh. 13 35. As malice is Satan's brand which he sets upon his Goats, so Love, true Christian love, brotherly love (as the Apostle calleth it Heb. 13.1. ) it is the mark of Christs sheep: All of us then who professe such a Relation to Christ and his Mysticall body, see that this affection dwel in us; that wee do unfainedly love all out fellow members: So our Apostle presseth it in the 9. verse after the Text; Let love be without dissimulation; ; a usefull and needfull qualification. There is
a great deale of seeming, but little sincere love in the world. Scarce is there a man but maketh some shew of love, or friendship to his neigh∣bour; yet how many in the mean time have their hearts brim full of rancour and malice? Let Christians seek after sincerity, as in all graces, so in this of love; that they may imbrace each other with mutuall and cordiall affection. So the Apostle there prosecutes his Charge in the verse following, ver. 10. Be kindly affectioned one towards another with brotherly-love,] (or in the love of the Brethren.) A very emphati∣call expression; Christians must not onely be , lovers of the brethren; but they must also be , kindly affectioned in that love. The word properly signifieth a Pa∣rentall love, such as is betwixt Parents and their children; a natural love. Such should the love of Christans be towards their brethren: where∣in they ought to abound each to other. That is Pauls prayer for his Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 3.12. The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one towards another, and towards all men. Thus was Paul affected towards them, as it there fol∣loweth; [Even as we do towards you.] And thus would he have them affected towards their brethren, with an exundant love, so as it might over-flow even to others also, to all that came in the way of it. And it shall be my prayer for you, all of you of this Congregation, and parti∣cularly for you who have given up your names and selves anew unto Christ, to wait upon him, and submit unto him in all his holy ordinances.
And not for you onely, but for all the true Churches of Christ, and all the members thereof, (as elsewhere, so specially) in this Nation; Now the Lord make you to abound in love one towards another. A low Ebbe of Brotherly-Love in this Nation.A Prayer (I think) never more needfull since Christ had a Church upon earth, then it is at this day amongst us in this Nation: wherein what a sad and low ebbe of this affection may we see every where. Divided heads have made divided hearts; Division in judgement hath bred division in affection: so as the love of many is now waxed cold. So it was foretold by our Saviour, Matth. 24.11, 12. Many false Prophets shal arise, and shal deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.] And surely, never was it more truly and sadly verified, then in this Age, this Nation; wherein through the seduction of false teachers, every where sowing the tares of their erroneous doctrines, and the aboun∣ding of all kind of iniquity; the love of many, (many professours) their love to God, and love to their Brethren, is now grown cold, not shewing it selfe as heretofore in the offices and exercises of true piety, and charity. O that that God who causeth the sea, when it is at the lowest ebbe, to flow againe, would also cause a returne of this Affection unto his Church and people in this Nation! That those, who being members of the mysticall Body, are also members one of another, might be truly and cordially affected each to other.
which, were there no other argument to per∣swade, yet (me thinks) this alone which I have now in hand, being duely considered, should bee abundantly sufficient. What? members of the same Body, and mutuall mem∣bers, members one of another? and shall wee not own one another? shall we not imbrace one another? be cordially affected each to other? Now the good Lord, who can, and will make dry bones to live, revive this affecti∣on where it is dead, or dying; and confirme it where it yet continues; that being thus members one of another, we may fulfill the great and everlasting Commandement, which as it hath been taught from the beginning of the world, (as Saint John tels us, 1 John 3.11.) so is it to be practised to the end of it, yea, to eternity. That we love one another. And that not impaling and confining this Affection within the narrow bounds of that particular Society, to which we have a speciall Relation, (love so appropriated may well bee suspected,) but extending it to all the true Churches of Christ, and all the true members of those Churches, as being all members of the same Body. To this grand and primary respect, I may now subjoyne some other, which are but as off-sets to this maine Root, daughters and hand-maids to this Mother, and Mistresse-Affection; as viz. 2. In the second place:2. Sympathi∣zing one with another. Christians upon the account of their Joint-membership, thus
loving one another, let them also sympathize one with another. This doe the members of the naturall Bodie; being joint-members, they sympathize, have a fellow-feeling each with other. So much (did we not know it by ex∣perience) we might learn from our Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.26. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoyce with it. So should it be with the members of the mysticall Body; being fellow-members, let them thus sympathize one with another. So Saint Peter presseth it, 1 Pet. 3.8. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another: , Sympathizing, having a fellow-feeling of each others condition. Thus should Chri∣stians be like affected with their Brethren, re∣joycing with them, sorrowing with them. So our Apostle here presseth it upon these his Ro∣mans, bringing it in upon the account of this their Joint-membership, ver. 15. of this Chap∣ter, Rejoyce with them that rejoyce, and weep with them that weep.H. Grotius. Drusius ex Rab∣bi Jud. ad loc. An allusion (as some con∣ceive of it) to the two Gates in Solomons Tem∣ple; the one of which was the marrying door, the other the Penitents door; and so those who entered in at the one were merry and joyfull; those who came in, or went out at the other, were sad and sorrowfull; to both which the Levites applied themselves in their speech and demeanour sutable to their condi∣tions, speaking chearfully to the one, mourn∣fully to the other. Thus ought Christians to
sympathize with their brethren, being like affected with them both in regard of joy and sorrow. 1. Rejoycing with them that rejoice;1. Having mu∣tuall joyes. Rejoy∣cing in the welfare of their brethren. In their Temporall welfare, not envying it nor repining at it, but rejoicing in it: So did Elizabeths Neighbours and Friends (as the story tels us Luk. 1.58.) When they heard that the Lord had shewed great mercy unto her (viz. in giving her a son) they rejoyced with her. But specially in their Spirituall welfare; Are there any en∣tred or entring in at the Marrying door, com∣ing in, giving up themselves to be married to Jesus Christ, here is a matter of rejoicing; It is so with the Angels in Heaven; There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that repenteth, Luk. 15.10. And so let it be to the Saints upon earth: Do we see any who were before alienated, brought home unto God, either in their first conversion, of returning after their defection and departing from him, herein rejoice. It was meet that we should make merry and be glad (saith the father of the Prodigall to his malecontented son) for this thy brother was dead, and is alive a∣gain; was lost, and is found, Luk. 15.32. And so where we see any standing fast in the faith, walking in the truth, herein rejoice: So did John on the behalfe of the children of that E∣lect (honoured) Lady (as he calls her, and tels her, 2 Joh. v. 1, 4.) I rejoice greatly that I found of thy children walking in the truth. The
like he tels Gaius in the following Epistle, ver. 3, 4. And so was this our Apostle affected for these his Romans; Hearing of the fame of their obedience, I am glad therefore (saith he) on your behalfe, Rom. 16.19. Thus should my∣sticall fellow-members rejoice one with ano∣ther. 2.2. Mutuall sor∣rows. And so mourn one with another; ha∣ving a fellow feeling of each others sorrowes and sufferings. Such a Sympathie there is betwixt the Head and members of this mystical Body; We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, (saith the Apostle, Hebr. 4.15.) . Christ being the head of his Church, is sensi∣ble of the ailements of his meanest members, Sympathizing with them; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? (saith the voice from hea∣ven, Act. 9.) The foot was trodden on upon earth, and the Head feels it in heaven; And such a Sympathy there should be betwixt the members of this body; and that both in their Spirituall distempers, and Temporall Suffe∣rings. An Instance of the former we have in the Apostle himselfe, 2 Cor. 11 29. Who is weak (saith he) and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? Thus did he take to heart the Distempers,In Spirituall distempers. Infirmities, Scandals of any weak member of the Church. The like should all Christians do; not insult over the fals of their Brethren, but mourne over them. Is it, so, that any are coming in at the Penitents door, being
fallen under the censures of the Church, of Suspension or Excommunication, or by any scandall giving just cause for them? here is matter of Humiliation and Grief to their fel∣low members who take notice of it: Paul chargeth it as no small crime upon his Corin∣thians, that taking notice of a scandalous member, the Incestuous person, They were puffed up, and did not rather mourn, 1 Cor. 5.2. And so in Temporall Sufferings.In temporall sufferings: Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body, Heb. 13.3. Thus did the Primitive Christians sympathize with their brethren in their bonds: so they did with the Apostle, Heb. 10.34. Ye had compassion of mee in my bonds, ; They sympathized, were as fellow sufferers with him; and as with him, so with other of their brethren, as hee tells them in the verse foregoing; Ye became companions of them that were so used (meaning the Martyrs of those times): And as in suffe∣rings for Christ, so in any other losses or cros∣ses, or ailements, Christians should have a fellow-feeling with their fellow-members, con∣doling with them; not rejoycing at them; no, such an , rejoycing over the miseries of others, is not only unchristian, but inhumane and unnaturall; but lamenting o∣ver them: Thus did David sympathize even with his enemies (as himself tels us Psal. 35.12, 13. Such as rewarded him evill for good, to the
spoiling of his soul (as he saith, even to the ta∣king away of his life, had it lien in their power) Yet (saith he) as for me, when they were sick, my cloathing was sackcloth, I hum∣bled my soul with fasting, &c. And did hee this for his enemies? how much more should Christians do it for their Brethren, their fel∣low-members? Truly, not to be affected with the sufferings of Saints, is a shrewd evidence of one that is no true member of the body; or if he be, he is under some sad and dangerous obstruction. To this let mee add: As these mutuall members should have mutuall joyes and sor∣rowes, so mutuall Desires, and mutuall Cares, and mutuall Fears; I will but touch upon each. Mutuall Desires or Well-wishes3 Mutual wel-wishes. each to o∣ther. Well-wishes for their Temporall, much more for their Spirituall welfare: Such were the wishes of the beloved Disciple to his well-beloved Gaius, 3 Joh. ver. 2. Beloved, I wish above all things that thou maist prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth: Be in health in his body, and prosper in his soul. These were the two things which the Heathens (according to the light which they had) were wont above all things to wish to their friends, (Orandum est ut sit mens sana, in corpore sano) that they might have sound minds in haile bo∣dies;Juvenal. and I know not what Christians can better wish one for another, then sound bodies, and sanctified souls: Thus the members of the na∣turall
body, by a secret instinct they do, as it were, seek and desire the welfare each of o∣ther; let the members of the mysticall Body do the like; Let no man seek his own, but e∣very man anothers wealth (so our Apostle in∣structs his Corinthians 1 Cor. 10.24.) Not but that Christians both may, and ought to seek their own wealth, their own Spiritual and Tem∣porall welfare, and that in the first place, therein preferring themselves before others: So runs the rule, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe, Mat. 19.19. Now, Regula est prior Re∣gulato, The rule must be in order before that which is regulated by it: Christians must first love themselves, otherwise they cannot love their neighbours as themselves: But they may not impropriate these wel wishes to themselves, but extend them to others, to their neighbours, brethren, as being a part of themselves: So the same Apostle expounds his own meaning, Phil. 2.4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others; . Also: The desires and well wishes of Christians, being fellow-members, must be mutuall. And so should their Cares be:4. Mutuall c res. So the Apo∣stle presseth it, 1 Cor. 12.25. The members should have the same care one of another: So have the members of the naturall body, they have a mutuall care for the preservation and welfare each of other. And so should the members of the Mysticall body; they should have such a mutuall care specially for the Spi∣rituall
welfare each of other. It is the com∣mendation which Paul giveth of Timothy, that he did , naturally care for the state of his Philippians, Philip. 2.20. Those things which concerned the salvation of their souls, and the welfare of their Church. Such is the care of the natural, and such should be the care of the mysticall members; a na∣turall, cordiall, sincere, affectionate care each for other. And so again for their fears; they should also be mutuall.5. Mutuall feares and jea∣lousies. Christians should bee afraid of each other, where there is just cause of feare. So was Paul of his Galathians, when he took notice of their haltings; I am afraid of you (saith he) lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vaine. Thus Christians may and ought in some cases to have a kind of an holy jealousie one over another: Jealousie is an af∣fection which flowes from love. And how∣ever, being inordinate, it groweth to great and sinfull inconvenience betwixt the nearest Re∣lations, (Jealousie is the rage of a man, Prov. 6.34) yet being well ordered, it is an usefull passion. Thus was Paul affected towards his Corinthians, (as he tels them) 2 Cor. 11.2. I am jealous over you with a godly jealousie. And thus Christians both may, and ought to be affected each to other. When they shall see their brethren begin to warp, and turne aside from any of their principles, and to suck in any dangerous errours, (which was the case of those Corinthians,) or to fall from their
first love, to abate of their zeale and for∣wardnesse in the practise of Piety, now they not onely may, but ought to be jealous over them. Only let it be with a Godly jealousie,A Godly Jea∣lousie. , (saith the Apostle) with the jealousie of God: not out of any light and ungrounded suspicion and surmise; not out of any by and sinister respect; but with an eye to God, to his glory, and their brethrens good. And that Christians both may and ought to be jealous over one another. As it is with the members of the Body, if one of them have a tumour, a sore breeding, the rest are jealous of it, fearing what it may come to. The like Christians may and ought to be over one a∣nother in a like case; that so they may per∣forme those offices each to other, which their mutuall relation in that case calleth for. Which what they are, I shall now come (in the se∣cond place) to shew you. Christians being Fellow-members,2. Outward Respects. and so bearing mutuall Affections one to another, they are also to expresse their affections by performing mutuall offices each to other. So do the members of the naturall Body, Manus fricat, manum lavat. Adag. Manus manum, one hand rubbeth and washeth the other. All the members of the body are offici∣ous, ready to serve one another: the like should the members of the mysticall Body be. So the Apostle requireth it from them, Gal. 5.13. By love serve one another. This let Christians do; and not in word onely (as the mode of
the times is, which hath turned this to a comple∣ment, (and for the most part it is no more,) Your Servant, Sir; Thus we hear men spea∣king sometimes, whose hearts yet in the mean time would disdaine and scorne to performe what their mouth professeth, and promiseth,) but in truth; being ready to approve them∣selves servants to their fellow-servants, by performing all Christian offices of love to them. Of these offices there are many, very ma∣ny. I shall onely single out some chiefe and principall and such as are most obvious: which I shall desire you, all of you, and in speciall you who are joyned in Sacramentall Communion in this place, to take notice of, and make use of respectively. A first shall bee that which our Apostle himselfe doth here in this place properly and principally aime and drive at, viz. that Chri∣stians should make improvement of their offices or gifts to mutuall Edification.1. Make im∣provement of offices and to mutuall E∣dification, whether Thus do the members of the naturall Body; having their severall offices and faculties, they improve and exercise them for the mutuall good and bene∣fit each of other. The eye seeth, the ear hea∣reth, the tongue speaketh, the hand worketh, the foot walketh, all for the good one of ano∣ther; being mutually helpfull each to other. And so let it be with Church-members. Let them make the like improvement of their offi∣ces and gifts.
1. This are Publick Officers1. Publick of∣ficers. to do (in the first place.) Of them, and to them properly speaketh Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4.11. As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God. If any man minister, (viz. in any other Church admini∣stration) let him do it as of the ability which God giveth, &c.] And of them speaks our Apostle in the verses after the Text. Having then gifts differing one from another, according to the grace that is given us; whether prophecie, let us prophesie according to the proportion of faith; Or mini∣stery, let us wait on our ministering, &c. And so he goeth on, reckoning up such gifts and offices as were then usuall in the Church: All which he requireth those on whom they were conferred, to exercise and make use of accordingly, to the common edification and benefit of the Church. This are publick Offi∣cers to do; Pastours, Teachers, Elders, Dea∣cons, being as Eyes, Tongues, Eares, Hands to the Ecclesiasticall Body, they are to discharge these offices carefully and faithfully for the good and benefit of their fellow-mem∣bers. And as Publick Officers, so also private Christians.2. Private Christians. They being also members of the Body, they ought also in their places and sta∣tions to do the like to their Fellow-members, Edifying one another. So the Apostle presseth
it upon these his Romanes, Chap. 14.9. Let us follow after the things which make for peace, and wherewith one may edifie another.] And the like upon his Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 5.11. Wherefore edifie one another, even as ye do. Thus are private Christians, not onely to build up themselves; which Saint Jude requireth they should do: Edifie (or build up) your selves in your most holy faith, Jude ver. 20. This are they to look to in the first place; having laid a right foundation, they are in the use of all holy means to confirme and advance them∣selves in their spirituall estate. But not onely to this: Building up themselves, they are also to help to build up others. It was our Saviours direction unto Peter, Luke 22.32. When thou are converted, (viz. from his approaching miscarriage) strengthen thy brethren. And the like are all private Christians to do, having tasted of the mercy and goodnesse of God, in bringing them home unto himselfe, they are now in their places to be helpfull unto o∣thers, in confirming and building up their brethren. Q. Why, what shall private Christians do in this way? Private Chri∣stians to edifie one another in a private way.Ans. To this I answer in the generall, that what they do in this way, being private per∣sons, they are ordinarily to do it in a private way. As for the publick and ordinary teach∣ing of private persons, unlesse it be in a case of necessity, I know no ground, no warrant for it. What private persons do to their bre∣thren,
must be in a way sutable to that state and degree wherein God hath set them. O∣therwise they cannot in an ordinary way be freed from that which the Apostle in the verse fore-going prohibits, of thinking of themselves above what they ought to think. What they do regularly, must be in a private way. And thus they both may and ought. 1. Teach and instruct one another.1. Teaching one another. So runs the Apostles direction to his Colossians, chap. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdome, teaching one another.] Which is to bee understood not of publick teaching, (which belongs to the Pastorall Function,) but of private Instruction. Thus are more know∣ing Christians to lend and communicate their light to their weaker and more ignorant bre∣thren. So did Aquila, (and possibly Priscilla too, who is joyned with her husband, but whether as a partner in the work, or onely a wel-willer to it, is uncertaine,) teach and in∣struct that eloquent Apollos, Acts 18.26. Ha∣ving heard him preaching in the Synagogue, being then but a novice in Christianity, they tooke him home unto them, and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly. Mark it; They took him home to them: not indoctri∣nating him in the Synagogue; not disputing or reasoning with him in that open and pub∣lick Assembly. No, that was not for Priscilla to do, being a woman, and so not allowed to speak in the Church; neither did her hus∣band do it: but they take him home, being
private persons, they instruct him in a private way. A commendable office for one Christi∣an to performe to another, thus to teach and instruct one another, by communicating their own knowledge, or experience; or by rea∣ding of good books, or repeating of Sermons, or the like. Thus edifie one another by way of Instruction. 1. Admonish∣ing one ano∣ther.2. And so (in the second place) by way of Admonition. So it there followeth. Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing one another, &c.] As Christians are (as God offers them oppor∣tunity,) to teach the ignorant, so to admonish their remisse and carelesse brethren. Where they see any thing amisse in them, in a gentle and Christian way to reprove them. That is one of the Lawes which God of old gave unto his people, Levit. 19.17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shalt in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him. A Law which is obliging to us Christians, no lesse then it was to the Jews; the ground of it being piety towards God, and charity to∣wards our neighbour. And being so, be we not wanting in it: it being an office of grea∣test and truest love. So David looked upon it. Let the righteous smite me, (saith he) and it shall be a kindnesse: And let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oyle, which shall not break my head. As precious oile is to the head, so is seasonable, wise, gentle, faithfull reproof, to the heart; soaking into it, it may do much good, no hurt. Let Christians look upon
this, not onely as their liberty, but as their duty; I mean to their Brethren. As for others, persons openly profane, Pearls are not to bee heedlesly cast before such swine. Reprove not a scorner, (saith the wise man) lest he hate thee, Prov. 9 8. But mark what followeth; Reprove a wise man, and he will love you. This Christi∣ans may do; this they must do to their bre∣thren, that so they may not be accessory to their sins, which by their silent connivence they may make themselves. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darknesse, but rather reprove them, (saith the Apostle) Ephes. 5.11. , Convince them, as by a Godly and exemplary life, so by seasonable admoni∣tions, and reprehensions. 3. Admonishing, they are also to exhort one another.3. Exhorting one another. Exhort one another while it is called to day, (saith the Apostle to his He∣brewes) Heb. 3.18. And again, Cap. 10.25. Exhor∣ting one another, This are Christians to do, ta∣king all advantages to put one another on to duty. So the former ver. there explains it, v. 24. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and good works. Thus are Christians to keep an holy watch over each other; prudently observing one anothers dispositions and de∣meanours, graces and infirmities, that so they may take all advantage to excite and quicken each other to all duties of piety and charity. , (saith the Originall,) to the sharpening of love. A metaphor taken from edge-tooles, which are sharpened by
whetting one against another. Thus are Chri∣stians to whet and sharpen each other. So the Wise-man explaines the Metaphor, Prov. 27.17. Iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend. Iron sharpeneth iron by mutuall attrition; and thus Christians may and ought to sharpen one another by mutuall Exhortation; whetting one anothers spirits, exciting and quickning each other to holy duties. Thus when the hands are cold or benummed, by rubbing each other they come to their naturall warmth and vigour. And thus Christians come to recover and keep their spirituall warmth, their zeal and fervour by mutuall incitations, exhortations. 4. Comfor∣ting one ano∣ther.4. Exhorting one another, they are to com∣fort one another. Comfort your selves together; so our Translation rendereth that (and the word will bear it) 1 Thes. 5.11. , Comfort one another. Thus are Christi∣ans to do each to other in times of publick ca∣lamity:In publick ca∣lamities. Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another, (saith the Prophet Mala∣chy) Mal. 3.16. In those calamitous times, when the Church say under many sad temp∣tations, [When the proud were called happy,] (as you have it in the verse fore-going) proud and presumptuous sinners prospered and flou∣rished; they carried the flag in the main-top, they were the only men: [They which wrought wickednesse were set up; yea, they which temp∣ted God, were even delivered.] Daring and desperate sinners, they were preserved, and pro∣tected,
and delivered from eminent dangers, as if they had been Gods speciall Favourites; whilest in the mean time, it went sadly with those which feared God: A sad temptation! So it was to David; When he saw the prospe∣rity of the wicked, how they were not in trouble like other men, but their eyes stood out with fat∣nesse; whilest in the mean time, waters of a full cup, (a cup of affliction) were wrung out to Gods own people; the one drank wine, and the other water; and that of the waters of Marah, bitter waters; This when David saw, he tels us, his feet were almost gone, his steps had well nigh slipt, Psal. 73. ver. 2.3 5, 7, 10. And surely so it was with the Church at that time. When they saw such crosse-providences, Gods own people brought low, his and their ene∣mies raised to the height of temporall prospe∣rity. Now, in this time, They that feared the Lord, spake one to another, and that often. As they were much in speaking to God in prayer, (calamitous times are praying times) so they were frequent in speaking each to other, for the animating & incouraging each of other to faith, patience, constancy in obedience. The like are Christians to do each to other in the like times. And as in publick calamities, so in private af∣flictions.In private af∣flictions. Herein Christians should be comfor∣table each to other. Thus if there be a tumour in the leg or other part, the hand is ready to anoint it, to asswage the pain of it. Thus should Christians in their painfull sufferings, supple each other with seasonable consolations. Which
they are to do both in outward crosses, & inward conflicts, in the sufferings both of the outward & inward man. Of both these may we understand the Apostle, 1 Thes. 5.14. Where among other Offices of love which brethren should perform one to another, he willeth them to comfort the feeble minded, and support the weak; i. e. comfort such as were ready to sink under their crosses, and support such as were ready to faint under their Tentations. Let Christians have a regard to both. 1. Outward crosses: where∣in they are to comfort each other;1. For comforting their fellow members in their outward crosses: In the losse of Husband, Wives, Children, Friends, Estate, in sick∣nesse, and the like. In these cases Christians are to comfort one another: Which they are to do, 1. By words,1. By words. speaking comfort; Wherefore comfort one another with these words (saith the Apostle to his Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 4.18. speaking of such as were in heavinesse for their deceased friends, whom he would have their brethren to comfort by minding them of what he had said touching the Doctrine of the Resurrection.) Such comfort Job expected from his friends when they came to him in his distresse, that they should have spoke com∣fortably to him, whom being deceived in his expectation, he calleth miserable comforters, Job 16.2. And such Comforters David in his distresse looked for (as he tels us) but he found none, Psal. 69.20. Christians! let not your brethren take up the like complaint against a∣ny
of you: This is one of Gods Attributes; He is a God that comforteth those which are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. And it is one of the best Of∣fices that one man can performe unto another. Job speaking of himself in the time of his pro∣sperity, and what respect he then had from the people, he saith, he was as one that com∣forteth the mourners, Job 29. last. Let not Christians herein, according to their power, be wanting to their brethren. Blessed bee God (saith the Apostle) who comforteth us in all our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4. Thus do God's Patients receive heavenly Cordials from the hand of their great Physician, not only for their own sakes, but that they may be able (as occasion is offered) to minister to others of their brethren; com∣forting them by words. 2. But not by words only;2 In deed. When need requi∣reth; they are to minister unto them reall com∣forts: Such a Comforter was Job in the time of his prosperity to the afflicted & distressed: The blessing of them which were ready to perish came upon me (saith he, ver. 13. of that 29. chapter) and I caused the widowes heart to sing for joy: And such comforters God expects Christians should be to their brethren in their distresses and wants: Not only giving them a few good words and nothing else; there is but cold comfort in such an almes; If a Brother or Si∣ster be naked and destitute of daily bread (saith
Saint James to such comforters) and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye war∣med and filled, notwithstanding ye give him not those things which are needfull for the body, what doth it profit? James 2.15, 16. For the hand only to stroak the foot being in pain, is to little purpose, unlesse it also apply some∣what to asswage the pain. Words being but wind, though they may refresh the spirit, yet they will not cloath the back, or fill the belly. Christians, where God giveth them ability, must be real as well as verball comforters to their brethren in their outward distres∣ses. 2. And so in their inward conflicts,2. Inward con∣flicts. Soul-Afflictions: When the spirits of brethren are dejected and cast down in the apprehension of sin or wrath,How to deal with penitent offenders. , &c. Castigario illa quae à Presby∣terio fieri solet, more Judaico. Grot. ad loc. A pluribus] Sic distingui∣tur haec in Presbyterio fa∣cta increpatio, tùm à privata, tùm à publica coram universae Ecclesiae coetu, quod factum fuisset necessa∣riò, si fuisset Sa∣tanae traditus. now is a time to minister com∣fort to them. Thus the Apostle willeth his Corinthians to deal by that their scandalous brother, the incestuous person, who being for a time under an Ecclesiasticall censure, was brought to deep humiliation and sorrow for his sin, he willeth them not to deal too ri∣gorously with him, but rather to comfort him. Sufficient to such a man (saith he, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7 is this punishment (or censure, ) which was inflicted by many. (viz. by the Presbytery of that Church, as Beza and Grotius, and ma∣ny other rightly expound it): So that contra∣riwise you ought rather to forgive him and com∣fort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swal∣lowed up with overmuch sorrow. So it was (as
Beza Gr. Ann. ad loc.Beza most probably conceives of it) that this brother having been sharply reproved by the Church Officers, and being under a suspen∣sion or abstension from communion with the Church, some there were, who having been before taxed by the Apostle for their too great remissnesse and carelessnesse, now they would have him further proceeded against, to be de∣livered up unto Satan by the sentence of a more full and formall Excommunication, which was to be done in the presence, and with the consent of the whole Congregation. But Paul understanding of his deep humilia∣tion and repentance, willeth them to forbear that rigour, not to proceed any further against him (which had he been already excommuni∣cated, they could not have done) but rather to forgive (to gratifie him, as the word  properly signifieth, viz. by granting some indulgence to him, remitting somewhat of that summum jus, that extremity of the highest censure which he had deserved) and to comfort him, receiving him into communi∣on with them again, that so he might not be swallowed up in the gulfe of despaire. A notable and famous president,Locus diligen∣ter observan∣dus: Donec e∣nim quâ aequi∣tate & clemen∣tiâ temperan∣da sit disciplina Ecclesiae, ne ri∣gor modum ex∣cedat. Calv. ad loc. teaching Christians, such as are under a regular Church relation, how they are to deal with their lapsed brethren, in whom they see tokens of humi∣liation and repentance: In this case they ought not to be rigorous in seeking extremities against them, for casting, or keeping them out of Church communion; but receive them
comfort them, renewing and confirming their love towards them (as it there followeth, ver. 8) So tenderly should Christians handle their fel∣low members, as the members of the naturall body would do theirs: So the Apostle di∣rects his Galatians, chapt. 6. ver. 1, 2. Bre∣thren, if any man be overtaken in a fault, yee which are spirituall, restore such a one (, set him in joynt again) in the spirit of meek∣nesse, &c. Bear ye one anothers burdens, &c. Thus are Christians to deal by their penitent brethren; not overloading burdened souls, but supporting, comforting them. But I see the thread of my discourse is already drawn forth beyond the staple which at the first I in∣tended it. I shall be brief in that which remains. 2. Forbear one another.Thus edifying one another, let them also for∣bear one another, and forgive one another: I put them together, because I find the Apostle so do∣ing, Col. 3.31. Forbearing one another; . A duty pressed by our Apostle upon his Ephesians, ch. 4.2. With all lowlinesse and meek∣nesse, with long suffering forbearing one another in love. Christians must make account some∣times to meet with provocations, and that from brethren: So it is among naturall bre∣thren; differences sometimes happen among them, and those not easily reconciled: A bro∣ther offended (saith Solomon, Prov. 18.19) is harder to be won then a strong city; and their con∣tentions are like the bars of a castle (which be∣ing strong will neither bow nor yeild.) And thus it sometimes happen to mystical brethren:
Differences fall in betwixt them (as did betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15.39.) which rise to some height. But thus it should not be, and thus it would not be, had Christians but learn'd this lesson, to bear with one anothers infirmi∣ties, to forbear one another; the strong Christi∣an to bear with the weak, &c. And forbearing,3. Forgive one another. let them also forgive one another: So the same Apostle presseth it in the last verse of the same chapter. Eph. 4.32. Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christs sake hath for∣given you: In which one verse there are three words worth the taking notice of, being of great concernment unto Christians; I wish they were ingraven upon every heart that hears them, Christians should be, 1. Kind, , ready to gratifie one another, yeelding each to other, wherein they may, as Abraham did to Lot, Gen. 13.8. 2. Tender-hearted, , a word peculiar to the Scriptures; and it signifieth to be pitifull: (so you have it rendred, 1 Pet. 3.8.) to be inwardly and inti∣mately moved with pity and compassion; to have the bowels easily and affectionately stir∣red and moved at the misery of another. The 3d. is Forgiving, , freely par∣doning and passing by the offences each of o∣ther; thus doth God forgive us (as it there followeth in the next words) freely for his Son Christ's sake; and thus do we forgive our bre∣thren; both forgiving and forgetting wrongs and injuries done to our selves.
4. Defend one another.And thus forgiving, in the next place defend one another. This will the members of the naturall body do; if a blow be made at the head, or a thrust at the body, the hand is ready to ward it off, to put it by: The like Office are Christians to do one to another; Defending (as the lives, and estates, and li∣berties one of another, so far as they are able and lawfully may (for which they have A∣braham for a Precedent, who made an adven∣turous attempt in the rescue of his kinsman Lot, when he was taken and carried away prisoner by the five Kings, Gen. 14.14.) so al∣so of their good names; this is a thing which Christians should be very tender of; as of their own good names, so of their brethren (inas∣much as the Gospel whereof they make pro∣fession, and the Church whereof they are members are interested in it) vindicating and maintaining of their reputations against unjust slanders and calumnies, giving (as occasion is offered) a free and just testimony each to o∣ther. So did John to our Saviour, Joh. 1.34. and so did our Saviour to him again, Mat. 11.11 But I hasten. 5. Communi∣cate each with other.Again, thus defending each other, let them also communicate each with other: So do the members of the naturall body; and so let the members of the mysticall body. Quest. But wherein communicate? Not in what is evill.Answ. I answer, first Negatively; not in any thing that is evill, Simeon and Levi were brethren in evill, Gen. 49.5. That was their
brand, let it not bee ours. 1. Here (in the first place) abandoned and abominated be that unclean and beasticall com∣munion,Abandoning, 1. Unclean & beastiall com∣munion. which upon this very ground was maintained and practised by that impure pri∣mitive sect of the Nicolaitans, of whose Do∣ctrine and deeds you may read, Rev. 2.6, 15. and is said (I fear with too much truth) to be both maintained and practised by some, and many of their followers, Familists and Ranters at this day, viz. communion of bodies; which being a sin not to be named among Christians (not being so much as named among moralized Heathens, as the Apostle saith of it, 1 Cor. 5.1.) I shall passe it by. 2. Abandoned be all uncivill and sensuall communion,2. Uncivill and sensuall com∣munion. such as that which the world cal∣leth good fellowship. Herein let not Christians bear a part: As not in chambering and wan∣tonnesse, so not in rioting and drunkenness: So the Apostle puts them together, giving a joint inhibition concerning them to these his Romans Rom. 13.13. and S. Peter the like, 1 Pet. 4.3. These are among those unfruitfull works of darkness, wherewith Christians may have no fellowship, Eph. 5.11. But they both may and ought to have a Christian Communion and fellowship,Imbrace Chri∣stian commu∣nion. and that both Sacred and Civill: I will begin with the later, because I principally intend the former. 1. Civill communion Christians both may and ought to have, and that in Counsels, Purses,1. Civill. Tables.
1. In Counsels1. In Counsels; Such a communion there was betwixt David and his friends (probably Achitophel, as the Chaldee nameth him (being one of his Peers, his equalls (as he calleth him) his guide and acquaintance, they took sweet counsel together (as he tels us) Psal. 55.13.14. Thus are Christians in their straits and doubts to ask counsel of, to give counsel to, to take counsel each from other. Oyntment and perfume rejoice the heart (saith the Wise man): so doth the sweetnesse of a mans friend by hearty counsel, Prov. 27.9. 2. Purses.2. Where need is they are to communicate Purses, Estates: So did some of the Primi∣tive Christians in an extraordinary way, suta∣ble to the exigencies of those times; Act. 2.44.45. All that beleeved were together, and had all things common; And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need: Thus did they at Jerusalem; which being peculiar to that time and that place (for in other Churches we read not of the like) is not to be made a standing precedent for after times; Paul writing to his Corinthians, he ordereth them touching a Collection for the poor, that every one should lay by somewhat, as God had prospered him, 1 Cor. 16.1: But this he needed not have done, had there been such an absolute communitie amongst Chri∣stians (as Anabaptists dream of.) No, Chri∣stians have a proprietie in their Estates, and that both by a civil and divine right. It is Pauls or∣der concerning some Church-members, who
thinking to live upon the Churches alms, were negligent in their callings, Them that are such (saith he) we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietnesse they work and eat their own bread, 2 Thes. 3.12. , their own bread, not other mens; clearly importing that Christians have a propriety in their estates: And having a propriety in them, they are in the first place to have a regard to themselves and families: If any provide not for his owne, (saith our Apostle, 1 Tim. 5.8.) (his near Kindred) and especially for those of his own house (Parents, Wife, Chil∣dren) he hath denyed the faith, (though not in word, yet in deed) and is worse then an Infidel, having cast away not only religion, but hu∣manity. Thus Christians in the first place both may and ought to have a regard to themselves and theirs. But so in the mean time they forget not o∣thers of their brethren, to whose necessities they are to communicate according as God hath given to them: a duty not to bee forgotten: To do good and to communicate for∣get not for with such sacrifices God is wel pleased, Heb. 13.16. A lesson generally for all to whom God hath given any competent portion of this worlds goods; they who of their super∣fluity cannot, yet even out of their penurie are to cast in their Mite into the Chur∣ches Treasury. But more especially for rich men: Charge them that be rich in this world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate, (so Paul directs Timothy,) 1 Tim. 6.17, 18. Thus are Christians to bee communicative to all; whose pressing necessities call for it, as God inables them, reaching forth somewhat to their reliefe. This the Preacher calls casting of bread upon the waters. Eccles. 11.1. But specially to Saints. As we have opportu∣nity, let us do good unto all men, specially to them who are of the houshold of faith, Gal. 6.10. Such as through the communion of faith, are made true members of the mysticall Body, and so joint-members with their brethren; these chal∣lenge a larger share in the Christians liberality. And I might add, amongst them, such as under a practical Church-Relation ought to be looked upon by the members of that Society in the first place. It is in Churches, as in Families, where the , the Domesticks are first to be provided for. But I am drawing to a con∣clusion. 3. Communicate Tables.3. Tables. So did the Pri∣mitive Christians, of whom we read, Acts 2.46. That they brake bread from house to house,] which I understand not of a Sacramentall, (for that was mentioned before, as I shall shew you anon) but a Civill Communion. So the Syri∣ack explaines it, (as our new Annotation taketh notice,) Domi frangebant portionem, they in∣vited each other home, and eat together. The like is not only lawfull, but laudable for Chri∣stians to do, so as it be in a sober, and mode∣rate way, sutable to their condition. As for
profuse and lavish feasting, I have no warrant for it. In such wayes mens tables become snares, both to themselves, and others; and that more wayes then one; snares to their estates, snares to their bodies, and snares to their soules; exhausting the first, surfetting and distempering the second, de∣stroying the third. And therefore, if Christi∣ans upon speciall occasions do make more li∣berall and bountifull provisions, (which I dare not in some cases prohibit) let them do it with fear. St Jude sets it as a brand upon some in his time, These are spots in your feasts of cha∣rity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear, Jude 11. Even those sacred feasts, those love-feasts, which were annexed to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and intended for maintaining the Communion of Saints, e∣ven they became a snare to some; they be∣came occasions of sinfull inconveniences, whereupon they were justly left off in after times. How much more may other feasting do the like, where there is no such bridle up∣on the appetites of men as there was. But sober, moderate feasting, this becometh Chri∣stians. Such were those Primitive meetings, (which the Greek Scholiaes, (how solidly, I will not say) collect from that phrase, of brea∣king of bread,) they were frugall and sober: such feasts best become Christians. To which, according to our Saviours direction, they are to invite not only their richer friends, but also their poorer brethren, (as you have it) Luke 14
12, 13, 14. Here is the Christians civil Communion. 2. Religious Communion.But there is another Communion, which is of an higher import. And that is sacred, Reli∣gious Communion; which may be divided into Publick, and Private. 1. Publick.1. Publick: Christians as joynt-members of the same Body, are to have communion and fellowship in publick Ordinances, as viz. in the Word, Sacrament, and Prayer. You meet them altogether in that one verse, Acts 2.42. where the Apostle speaking of the primitive believers, members of the Church at Jerusalem, he saith, They continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. So he describeth their Church-Com∣munion; which was, 1. In hearing the word;1. In hearing the word. They continued in the Apostles doctrin, that is, in hearing them preach. To which end they frequently repaired to the Temple, (as you have it, ver. 46.) They continued with one accord daily in the Temple; viz. to hear the word, as occasion was offered. And hearing the word together, they had fellowship and communion in those two other Ordinances, wherein Church-Communion may be conceived more properly and immediatly to consist; viz. the Sacrament, and Prayer. Which are there brought in, (as some not amisse look upon them,Vide Bezam. Gr. Annot.) as two species of that Genus. So the vulgar Latine following the Syriack, and some other copies expresseth it, reading the words.Et communica∣tione fractionis panis, & orati∣onibus. V. L. [They continued in the Apostles do∣ctrine, and in the fellowship of breaking bread, and in prayers.
2.2. Receiving the Sacrament. Vide Bez. ad loc. Gr. Annot. By the former of which I there understand the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (so the Sy∣riack there explains it, rendring it fractione Eucharistiae, the breaking of the Eucharist.) Which is there, as also elsewhere (though not often) called Breaking of bread: So cal∣led, not properly from the Sacramentall action of breaking the bread in the Sacrament (as I suppose it is vulgarly looked upon) but rather with reference to their Love Feasts, whereof the Sacrament was one and the principall part (as Beza and Grotius observe):Bez. & Grot. in Act. 2.42. & 20.7. Thus did they, (having a respect to the language of the He∣brews, who were wont to call their whole Diet by the name of bread) they called those (as o∣ther feasts) by the name of breaking of bread: And from thence it was translated to the Sa∣crament, as being the chief part of those chief∣est feasts; upon which account (by the way) I conceive that that phrase (being used in a civil as wel as in a sacred sense, & primarily in the for∣mer) is not to be affected by us above others wch we meet with in Scripture; which as they are more common, so do they more properly express and set forth the nature of that Sacrament. Now herein (to return from whence I have a little occasionally deviated) those Primitive Christians had frequent Communion; and so ought their successors to have; frequently meeting together at the Lords Table, partici∣pating in that Sacrament of the Supper; which as it represents and sealeth up their union and communion with Christ, so it mindeth them of
that union and communion, which they have and ought to have one with another. In both which respects it is called by the Apostle (in a language which I am sure cannot mis-become a Christians mouth,) The Communion, 1 Cor. 10.16. 3. And so (thirdly) in Prayer.3. Prayer. Herein Chri∣stians are to joyne together in the publick Congregation;Coimus ad De∣um, quasi manu factâ precatio∣nibus ambia∣mus. Tertul. Apolog. surrounding, and as it were, beseeching the Throne of Grace, by their Joint-supplications, (as the Father saith the Christi∣ans in his time did.) Haec vis Deo grata, (saith he.) Nothing more acceptable unto God then such a sacred and humble violence, wherein they are to joyne not onely hands, and eyes in lifting up them; or yet tongues, in saying Amen to the publick prayers, (which was wont to be practised in the ancient Church, where the whole Congregation was wont to sound out Amen,Hieron. in Prolog. in E∣pist. ad Galat. In veteri Eccle∣siâ Episcopo aut alio quovis De∣um precante vel laudante, plebs accinebat, Amē; unde illud, Et resonaturis fecit aethera voci∣bus, Amen. Grot. in 1 Cor. 14.16. Calvin. Beza, &c. with so loud a voice, as that it did instar tonitrui reboare, (as Jerome speakes of it,) made the Church to ring again; and a practice not altogether without precedent and warrant from the Apostolicall Churches, where the manner was, for every one to say Amen to the publick prayers, as is not im∣probably collected from that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4 16. But withall, and above all, to joyn hearts together, Come let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the Heavens, (saith the Church) Lam. 3.41. To which let me subjoyne (what ought not to be severed, it being a part of prayer,) the
joint-praysing of God by singing of Psalms. Which being a divine Institution, so much cried up in the Old Testament; and once and again recom∣mended by the Apostle under the New, Eph. 5.19. Col. 3.16. ought not to be abrogated, or laid aside; but conscienciously practised, as being an Ordinance tending (as to the Glory of God, which it doth directly and immediate∣ly, so) to the mutual edification and com∣fort of Christians. But I hasten. Here is the Christians publick Church-Communion. 2. Besides which, there is also a private Communion,2. Private, reli∣gious Commu∣nion. which being of great use, is not to be neglected: and that both in conferences, and prayers. 1. In Conference.1. In Confe∣rence. Thus did Saint Paul up∣on his coming to Jerusalem communicate with the rest of the Apostles, and others, whom he found there, as himselfe setteth it down, Galat. 2.2. The like are Christians to do, as occasion is offered; communicating their knowledge, opening their doubts, and seeking resolution from such as are able and faithfull; being ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them to every one that shall ask it, (as Saint Peter requires it) 1 Pet. 3.15. 2. And lastly, in their Prayers.2. Prayers, praying for one another. In private praying for, and as occasion is offered, one with another. So did our blessed Saviour for, and with his Apostles: I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, saith he to Peter, Luke 22.32. And being to leave the world, he com∣mands him, and the rest unto God by prayer,
as you may see it in that most effectuall pray∣er of his, Joh. 17. Where first praying for him∣self, then he prayeth for his Apostles, and then for all other that should beleeve on him to the end of the world: Therein setting a pattern for us, teaching us in our prayers not to be mindfull of our selves alone, but of o∣thers; as of those who are more nearly rela∣ted unto us, (as the Apostles were unto Christ) so of all other Beleevers: So Paul directs his Ephesians, chap. 6.18, 19. Praying alwayes with all prayer and supplication for all Saints, and for me: This did Paul for them, and for the rest of the Churches; in his private devo∣tions he still made mention of them: So he tels these his Romans, Rom. 1.9. so his Ephesians, chap. 1.16. his Colossians, chap. 1.3. & 4.3. his Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 1.2. & 5.25. And the like he requires them to do for him and the rest of the brethren; Col. 4 3. 1 Thes. 5.25. A mutuall office which Christians should not be unmindfull of, thus to pray one for ano∣ther. Which as they are to do at all times, so specially when their necessities call for it af∣ter any speciall manner. Thus when Peter was in prison, many of the Saints went to prayer for him, Act. 12.12. Thus are Chri∣stians to remember them that are in bonds, pray∣ing for them. With one an∣other.And as they are to pray one for another, so one with another; as in Publick (of which I have spoken already) so, as occasion is of∣fered
in private. Thus did Paul, being to take his leave of the Elders at Miletum, his last act was to pray with them: When he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all, Acts 20.36. The like parting had he, and the Disciples at Tyre, when they had accom∣panied him to the sea side, where he was to take shipping, they kneeled down on the shoar, and prayed, Acts 21.5. The like are Christians to do as they have occasion. And that not on∣ly to get their Ministers to pray with them, which occasionally they are to do. It is Saint James his direction to sick persons, that as they should pray for themselves, (Is any a∣mong you afflicted, let him pray, Jam. 5.13.) so they should send for the Elders of the Church, (the Ministers) that they might pray over them, ver. 14. An office which Paul performed to the father of Publius; being sick, Paul entered in, and prayed with him, Acts 28.8. And the Ministers of the Gospel are still occasionally to do the like, However they cannot lay hands on the sick, and so heale them as Paul there did him, (that miraculous power, together with the signe of it, (Anointing) being now ceased, having been peculiar to those primi∣tive times) yet they are to lift up their hands for them; which they are to do ex officio spe∣ciali, as a duty belonging to them after a spe∣ciall manner, by vertue of their office: but not onely to them. This are other private Christians also to do ex officio charitatis, as an office of charity. So it there followeth in that
place of Saint James, ver. 16. Confesse your sins one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may he healed. Thus have I briefly pointed at some amongst many of those respects and offices, which Chri∣stians upon the account of their Joint-mem∣bership owe each to other. Now what remains, but that (by way of conclusion) as a Minister of Christ, in his Name I beseech, and require you, all of you, and in speciall you who are joyned in Sacramentall Communion in this place; that you would have a regard to every of these; that knowing what is your duty, you would seriously apply your selves to a care∣full and consciencious discharge of it. Truly Christians! shall you and I examine our selves for the time past, none of us but shall finde just cause of humbling for our failings in some, in many of these. In the sense thereof, beg∣ging pardon for what is past, stir we up the grace of God for the future; that whilest we performe duties of piety towards God, we may not be wanting in duties of charity to∣wards our Brethren. Now consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understan∣ding in all things. FINIS.
