B5984 E813_4 99866387 167943
ANSVVERS TO SEVERALL QUERIES Put forth to the despised people called QUAKERS, by Philip Bennett, who cals himself a Minister of Christ, but is found a Deceiver; Answered by them to whom they were directed. ALSO, ANSVVERS To Severall other subtil QVERIES Put forth by one Iohn Reeve, who lives in the City of LONDON, who cals himself the last Messenger and witnesse unto the true God, but is found a false witnesse, and a lyar, and a perverter of the right way of God. Answered by Edward Burrough, and Francis Howgill, who are Witnesses unto the Truth against this subtil serpent∣like generation. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black-spread-Eagle, at
ANSWERS to severall QUERIES put forth to the diepised People called Quakers. We having received a Paper which was directed to Rich. Roper, and to his quaking friend, which words comes from the dark carnall mind, quaking and trembling, which the Saints and holy men of God wit∣nessed, we own and witnesse; therefore do we deny thee and all thy dark Divinations. WHereas thou Philip Benett, in thy Note which thou hast writen to Roper, in Answer to a Letter which he wrote to thee, wherein he charges thee to be a Lyar, and a false accuser, and charges thee to bring any man to witnesse what thou hast spoken by them, whom, thou sayes, denyed that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, and who they were that denyed that Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, or else acknowledge thy self to be a slande∣rer, and in thy Paper, thou gives no Answer at all to these words, but sayes, thou called the Congregation to witnesse, but doth not mention one in all the Congregation that will witnesse it, whereupon the lye rests upon thy head, and thou found to be the lyar, and the slan∣derer, and the false accuser. And whereas thou sayes, thou hast sent Queries concerning that matter, thy Queries makes thee manifest what thou art, many of thy own Tribe and generati∣on, if they saw thy Queries, would be ashamed both of thee and of thy Queries; for hundereds there are in the world that knowes nothing of the true and living God, and yet would see thee and thy Queries not to be worth answering, yet lest thou should boast in thy filthy ignorance and darknesse, and for clearing of the Truth to the simple: Something in answer to them. 1 Quer. Whether was the VVord made flesh, or the Son of God made of a Woman more or oftner then once? Answ. In this first Querie thou hast manifested what thou art to all the children of Light, and where thou art, and what Spirit thou art of, a reprobate, a child of darknesse thou art; thou might have spared the other nineteen Queries, for in this Querie thy spirit is tryed, and in the eternall Light seen and known: Thou askes whether the Word was made flesh any more or oftner then once, which makes it plainly manifest, that thou knowes not what thou askes, and that thou dost not know nor cannot witnesse the Word to be made flesh once, but art one of the An∣tichrists and deceivers which John speakes of, that are entered into the world, which
cannot confesse Jesus Christ come in the flesh, and therefore thou queries whether the Word was made flesh any more or oftner than once, which Querie comes from thy dark polluted minde, who is out of the Light, and a stranger to the life, and without God in the world, amongst the false Prophets, Antichrists and deceivers which are in the world, and in the Light of Christ, which condemnes the world, yea, are all seen, known, and made manifest, and are turned away from by these who dwell in the Light, which Light condemnes thee and all thy generation eternally; and the Word made flesh we witnesse which dwells amongst us, and we behold his glo∣ry as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, according to the Scripture, whereby we witnesse thee and all thy generation to be in the sorcery, and in the witchcraft, de∣ceiving and betraying the souls of the simple, the Light of Christ in thy conscience will tell thee so, for that thou must be obedient to, and witnesse before thou witnesse the Word to be made flesh once, for thou art darknesse it self, and the light in thy con∣science, if thou would let it rise, will be thy condemnation, and when thou can wit∣nesse the Word to be made flesh once, then thou wilt know whether the Son of God was made of a Woman any more or oftner than once: But thou art the Dragon that would devour the Manchild which the Woman hath brought forth, who shall rule all Nations with a rod of iron, and her child is caught up to God and to his Throne, thou, the Dragon, and thy Angels is cast out into the earth; and therefore dost thou persecute the Woman which hath brought forth the Manchild, but thou art over∣come by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of his Testimony; and for thy other nineteen Queries, thou hast conjured them up in thy black Art out of the bottom∣lesse pit, which is to be turned into perdition, if thou had an ear thou might hear, or an eye thou might read, but thou art blind. 2 Quer. Whether did the Man Christ Jesus the Son of God, slain, (in respect of Gods Decree and Efficacie of his death) from the foundation of the world really and in∣deed suffer death or dissolution of soul and body, as upon the Crosse at Jerusalem, more or oftner than once. Answ. Here in this Querie thou Diviner is found adding to the Scripture thy divinations of thy own brain, whereupon the plagues of God is to be added unto thee, and poured upon thee, for as thou sayes, the Man Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, slain (in respect of Gods Decree and efficacie of his Death) from the foundation of the world. Oh thou lyar, let all people see where there is such a Scripture that speakes as thou speakes here, but in the sight of Christ thou art seen, and in the life comprehended, and art for condemnation. The man Christ Jesus we own and witness, and the Lambs book of life, which was slain from the foundation of the world we witnesse, the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, we witnesse ac∣cording to the Scripture; praises, praises, eternal praises, be to the Lord God for ever, and thee to be the beast that makes war with the Lamb we witnesse, and thou Anti-Christ which looks at Christs death at Jerusalem alone, and cannot confesse him no otherwise but without thee, here thou art but equall with the Pope of Rome, for he confesses Christ dyed at Jerusalem as well as thou; so let all thy Congregation see what they hold up that followes thee. 3 Querie Whether did the man Christ ever really and indeed suffer in his own per∣son, for that end and after that manner which he did once upon the Crosse at Jerusalem, before the time, or since the time? Answ. Here thou full of all subtilty hath made manifest thy Poison and enmity, but with the Light of Christ thou art seen, and known, and with it condemned for ever; Christ Jesus in his own Person doth, and ever did, suffer by thee, and such as
thou art, and by thy Generation he did suffer at Jerusalem, and doth suffer where he is made manifest by you, after the same manner, and thou blind Pharisee and blasphemer, would thou have Christ to have more ends in suffering than one? 4 Quer. Whether was not that death which the man Christ suffered once, and but once, upon the Crosse at Jerusalem so satisfactory for all the sins of the Elect, as that the Justice of God, did not, doth not since require any suffering or working upon that account, either from sinner or from Saint. Ans. Here thou Jesuite art pleading again for a Christ farre off thee, according as thy father doth at Rome, That Christ that dyed at Jerusalem did not satisfie for thee who art an enemy to him, and doth not abide in his Doctrine, but acts con∣trary to his Commands, and art under the wo, which he cryed against them that were in the same stops where thou art, and from that wo thou shalt never fly; The death of the man Christ Jesus which suffered at Jerusalem we own and witnesse; the same Christ that suffered at Jerusalem we witnesse made manifest, and the one God and the one Mediator we witnesse and know; betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, according to the Scripture: And here thou lyar art made manifest to all thy Congregation to be a lyar, who said amongst them, that we denyed that Christ that died at Jerusalem, so let them all be witnesses of thy lyes, & let thy mouth be stopt thou lyer, who art for the lake; and whereas thou queries whether the justice of God be not satisfied for the sins of the Elect, here let2 Tim. 2. 10. Tit. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 13. shame strike thee in the face, that ever thou should take upon thee to speak to any people, and knowes not the Scripture; where dost thou read in all the Scripture, that God doth require satisfaction for the sins of the Elect, or laid any thing to their charge, let all people try thee here by the Scripture, and see whether thou be not a blind ignorant Sott, who doth not know what the justice of God requires, neither from sinner nor from Saint, Isa. 42. 1. Isa. 65. 9. 22. Luk. 18. 7. Rom. 8. 33. 5 Quer. Whether you be reconciled to God by any other obedience, than that parti∣cular obedience which Christ performed in his own Person, and is mentioned in the Scrip∣ture, or by any other suffering or death, than that which Christ once suffered upon the Crosse at Jerusalem? Ans. Silence flesh: would thou, (who art an enemy to God, and a child of dis∣obedience, in whom the Prince of the air rules) know how we are reconciled to God, and by what obedience, first own the Light in thy conscience which con∣demnes thee, and be obedient to that, and then thou shalt know by what obedience it is that reconciles to God, for yet thou knowes no obedience, nor the death which Christ suffered upon the Crosse, thou dost not know, but art an enemy to the Cross of Christ, and in the mistery of iniquity, and in the dark power and man of sin; what hast thou to do to talk of obedience, who art reconciled to thy lust, and sin reigns in thee, and thou art blind in the broad way that leads to death, as thy fruits makes it manifest, who lives in strife and envy. 6 Quer. Whether did not the Man Christ suffer as a publick Person in the Elects stead, or in their behalf, and for that end that none who believed in him might dye eternally? Ans. There thou blinde guide makes many replyes, but still one and the same thing, but thou makes it manifest, that thou dost not know the man Christ at all, nor his sufferings, for death reigns in thee yet, that hath passed over all men that askes this Querie; for a publick Person Christ is not to ee, but a mistery which
thou knowes nothing of, and for the redeeming of the Elect from under such mouths as thine, did and doth Christ suffer; and those that are brought to believe denyes such dumb Idoll shepherds as thee, who as yet doth not believe, and therefore shall dye eternally. 7 Quer. Whether the sufferings of Christ now in his Saints, be all the satisfaction that is made to, or which the justice of God looks for, for sins past, present and to come? Ans. There thou blasphemer askes thou knowes not wha; is not Christ the same now as ever, and is not the sufferings of Christ satisfactory where ever? What wilt thou have to satisfie, if the sufferings of Christ do not satisfie, let all people take no∣tice what a blasphemer thou art, or what they can learn of such a one as thee, who knowes neither the justice of God, nor the sufferings of Christ in his Saints. 8 Quer. Whether was not that body of Jesus which consisted of flesh, blood and bone, and which was offered upon the Crosse at Jerusalem, the one and onely sacrifice for sin God accepted, and to which alone exclusively the Saints before under the Law, and the Saints since under the Gospel, did and do look to be justified by, without any other works. Answ. Here again thou art replying thy former sottish Queries, which rises out of thy dark mind, concerning the body of Jesus, as the devill did about the body of Moses; let thy mouth be stopt here, for the body of Jesus thou knowes not, nor what it consists on; and the offering of it up thou knowes nothing of, but what thou knowes and heares by the outward Letter, that it was offered up at Jerusalem; and the sacrifice for sin thou knowes not, and thou art none of the Saints, neither un∣der the Law, nor under the Gospell, but art without in the world, in the broad way, blind leading the blind into the ditch; and for thee the body of Christ is no satisfaction; and thou Reprobate, what hast thou to do to talk of believing, for that is the condition of the Saints, they do believe and are justified, and their works thou knowes not, thou disobedient one, upon whom God will render vengeance in flam∣ing fire. 9 Quer. Whether there be not another righteousness by which the Saints are justified in the sight of God, than that which Christ works in them and by them? Answ. There thou accursed art made manifest, who preaches another Gospell, and would have another righteousnesse than that of Christ, here thou beast to whom the plagues of God is due, and upon whom his wrath must be accomplished, here thou hast made thy self manifest, thou who would have another righteousnesse than the righteousnesse of Christ, which he works in the Saints and by them, and so thou would be justified and live in thy sin, but thou art shut out from God for ever; and we witnesse justification by faith, and the just shall live by his Faith. 10 Quer. Whether doth sanctification or justification in order antecede holinesse of life or justification by faith go before, or whether dth not God love man, ere man lov∣ed God? Answ. Here thou dark blinde hypocrite hath shut thy self out from the knowledge of God in any measure, oh that ever people should be so blinde as to look for to learn any thing at such a one as thee but sin and filthinesse; and what hast thou been teaching them all this while, that neither knowes sanctification nor justification yet, but art querying whether goes before, let all people judge if thou be not a teacher of lasciviousnesse, sin and uncleannesse, and how darest thou mention a holy life, or justification by faith? which knowes neither justification nor sanctification. And thee, man, which art Cain, God doth not love nor accept thee nor thy sacrifice, and for justification by faith thou knowes nothing of it, which we own and witnesse,  doth not love God▪
11 Quer. Whether the justice of God be not fully satisfied for all the sins of the Elect, re Christ appear to their souls, or holinesse appear in their lives? Ans. Here hou full of all subtily at comprehended, and with the Light of Christ thou art seen, and with the life judged and condemned, who would say sin to the charge of the Elect, when the Scripture saith, VVho shall ay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifieth, who shall condemn? The soul that sin∣neth shall die. Thou sorcerer, doth the Elect of God in? Shall the Elect dye? To that in thy conscience I speak? 12 Quer. VVhether the holy lives, or holy works of the Saints be not excluded from the Act of justification, from the guilt of sin? Ans. Thou dead beast hath made it manifest, that thou art a stranger from the life of God, and is excluded from the holy life of the Saints and their works, who art queying whether this be not excluded from justification: Oh that ever thou should open thy mouth, or take upon thee to speak of the Scripture; doth not the Apostle say, 1 Pet. 1. 18. For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, who verily was ordained before the foundation of the world was, but was manifest in these last times for you, who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead? Now let all people read this Chapter, and try thee, who knowes nothing of Jesus Christ, but as thou hast heard of him, that he was crucified at Ierusalem, and so thou art unredeemed from thy vain conversation, and so art not justified before God, nor never shall be, but those that can witnesse Redemption by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as all the Saints of God do, are justified; and by the same that they are justified thou art condemned into the lake for ever. 13 Quer. VVhether is that righteousness which is wrought by the Saints every way answerable to the justice of God? Ans. There again thy blindnesse is made manifest; is there any righteousness but that of Jesus Christ, and is not that every way answerable to the justice of God▪ but such polluted filthy beasts as thou would have another righteousnesse, as thou▪ speaks plainly in thy ninth Querie, but all thy righteousnesse we deny, and the righte∣ousnesse of Jesus Christ we own and witnesse, whose righteousnesse shall be revealed upon thee in flames of fire. 14 Quer. VVhether none be accounted righteous in Gods sight, in whom there is any corruption, or failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of justice? Ans. Here thou polluted beast hath made it manifest what thou hast been driving at all this while in thy queries, which is, that thou would have corruption and filthines to be accounted righteous in Gods sight, that so thou might lye and wallow in thy sins & filthinesse, but Iohn saith, that he that commits sin is of the divell: for the divell sin∣neth from the beginning, and for this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, that he might destroy the works of the divell, and thou man of sin would have it to stand, but those that loves God keeps his Commandements, and they are not grie∣vous; and God doth not accept any where there is any failing, or who do not ful∣fill the Law, and answer every demand of justice, and he doth reserve the unjust unto the day of judgement to be punished, 2 Pet. 2 9. and chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleannesse, and there thou art. 15 Quer. VVhether a soul be justified before God by the non-imputation of sin, and the imputation of the righteousness of the Person of Christ to his Faith, or by a righteous∣ness wrought by Christ in the Person justified or to be justified.
Ans. Here stop thy mouth thou sorcerer, which art gathering up here a heap of confusion, which is fit for nothing but to be turned with thee into the bottomlesse pit, from whence it comes, wherein thou talkes of imputation and non-imputa∣tion, and of a person justified, and to be justified; thy language is of Aegyt, and in the mystery of iniquity, thou speaks it, which is condemned into the lake of per∣dition by the Light of Christ, and in the light thou and it art seen and comprehen∣ded; and as I told thee before, I own no righteousnesse but what is of Christ, and wrought by thee, which Righteousnesse shall confound thee and all thy unrigh∣teousnesse and conjuration, and the same that justifies us shall condemn thee eternally. 16 Quer. VVhether Christ be in his Saints in respect of that nature wherein he suffered at Jerusalem? Ans. Here thou enemy of Christ would know how the Saints injoy Christ here, the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, the light shines in darknesse, and darknesse comprehends it not, when thou comes to own thy condemnation, the light in thy con∣science it will let thee see thy evill deeds, it will lead thee up to Christ from whence it comes, and then thou wilt know that nature that he suffered in; but now thou art in that nature that Iudas was in that betrayed him, and that they were in that crucified him. 17 Quer. How, and after what manner Christ, who in respect of his Divine na∣ture is infinite and in all places, may be said to be in a Saint, and not in Reprobate? Ans. What hast thou to do to Qurie after the Divine Nature, who art the na∣turall man, that knowes nothing of God, but what thou knowes naturally as a bruite beast, and knowes not the things that be of God, because they are spiritually dis∣cerned▪ and the manner of Christs Divine nature, which is infinite, is hid from thy eyes, for of that eye that thou should see that with thou art blinde, and the manner of his being in a Saint thou knowes not, who art a Reprobate, and thou shalt find him to be thine eternall condemnation. 18 Quer. VVhether doth Christ now in these dayes assume or take upon him the form of a servant, and the seed of Abraham, that is our flesh: And whether doth not this assumption cause such a perfection of the Godhead and the Manhood, as that both of them are united together into one person? Ans. O thou dark beast and conjurer, who art querying with thy conjured words, that which thou knowes nothing of, and which is out of thy reach and comprehensi∣on; thou blasphemer, dost thou limit Christ to dayes, in taking upon him the form of a Servant, and the seed of Abraham? Is not he the same now as ever he was? And for the union of the God-head and Manhood, as thou calls it, let thy mouth be stopt, for with thee God nor none of his children hath any union, for God hah put an utter enmity, betwixt thy seed, thou serpent, and the seed of the woman, and the perfect union with Christ we witnesse, who is the same to day, yesterday and for ever, and therefore are we separate from thee and thy generation. 19 Quer. VVhether is Christ now conversant upon earth, amongst men, since his as∣cension, as he was before, and in those times wherein the Apostles lived? Ans. In thy Queries thy speech bewrayes thee, thy language is the language of Aegypt, for in it thou makes it clearly manifest, that thou knowes not Christ at all, not in the least measure, for where the first Principle of Truth is made manifest, it is the same that ever was, and never changes; and thou askes whether Christ be now conversant upon earth amongst men since his Ascension, as he was in the A∣postles time▪ Dost thou know what thou askes? Did he not appear to the Apostles
since his Ascension, in the most glorious manner that ever thou read; and is he not the same now as he was then? What would thou make of him, thou dark sottish beast) such a one as thy self, who would be pleading for darknesse and ignorance of God, but praise and glory to him who hath discovered thee and all such deceiv∣vers as thou art. 20 Quer. VVhether did not Christ dwell among his Saints, after another and more visible manner than now he dwels in his Saints? Ans. There again thou hast shewed thy ignorance of the Scripture, and for thy word visible, he is not, nor never was visible to thee, nor to thy generation, for those that did professe the Scriptures, as thou and thy Generation doth, crucified him, and said he was of the devill, as thou, and such as thou art doth now; thou blasphemer, where hast thou a Scripture that saith, that Christ would dwell in his Saints after another manner? Did he not say, It is expedient for you that I go away, and I go and prepare a place for you, and I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am there you may be also; and ye have heard how I have said I go away and come again unto you, and if ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go unto the Father; and Christ Jesus saith in the 14. Iohn 12. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believeth on me, the works that I do, he shall do also, and greater works than these, because I go to the Father: But all these Scriptures is hid from thy eyes, and thou art one of those that Isaiah Prophesied on; and that Scripture is fulfilled on thee which saith, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts: Now blessed be the Lord that hath discovered thee, and such blind guides as thou art. So we have Answered thy Queries in the eternall Light and life of God, and we have given judgement upon thee and them, which thou shalt eternally witnesse, without roving or wan∣dring, but thou who art out of the Light art roving, and wandring and stumbling in darknesse, who hath put forth these stumbling▪ Queries, which we have Answered lovingly and plainly, and in the Scripture Language and Termes, and with the eternall Light and Life of God, set thee in thy own place, which thou shalt eternally witnesse. These are matters of great concernment, and if you refuse to answer them in writing, spare your tongues and spare your Papers, for I will henceforth neither hear the one, nor read the other. Ans. Thou saith, these are matters of great concernment; We see that that which makes thee manifest, and such as thou art, and which layes thee open to poor ignorant people, which is deceived by thee and led into the ditch, and their souls kept in death by thee, to make this manifest is of great concernment, as these dark black stumbling Queries, and thy conjured words hath done▪ which thou hast no Scripture for, as ambiguity, efficacy, exclusively, antecede, and non-imputation, assume, and assumption: Now let all people read and consider what they do that holds such as thee up, who is shut out from God, and shut out from the Saints life and lan∣guage, and art shut out of the Scriptures, though thou makes a trade of them for mony, and deceives poor people, but thou knowes nothing of the life and power that gave them forth; So thou art to be condemned with the Light, and with the Life which gave forth the Scripture. Let all people read Deuteronomie 18. from the 9. verse to the 15. There the Priests and the Levites which was ordained of God; was to have no inheritance among the people, but the Lord was their Inheritance, and they were to have it of that which was offered up to the Lord, and this is a figure of the everlasting Priesthood, which ministers out of the everlasting Treasure; and the
Lord God commanded Israel, that not to do as they did when they came into the land, nor to go after their abominations, as you may see, but gave Israel their land to possesse, that did hearken unto such as the Lord had not sent, which was a∣bomination to him, and the Lord saith to Israel, Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God, and in the 15. verse the Lord thy God will raise unto thee a Pro∣phet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren like unto me, unto him shall ye hear∣ken; And so to the end of the Chapter, he that hath an eye may see, and the Lord is the same that he was, and he will not suffer the abominations that is committed in this Land, but is discovering the abomination of it; A horrible and a filthy thing is committed, which Ieremiah cryed against, covetous men preach, drunkards preach, swearers preach, lyars preach, strikers preach, and proud men preach: Oh, wonderfull, where is your eyes? Try your Priests by the Scriptures, see if they be not found in the same Generation that all the false Prophets and the deceivers were in which the true Prophets of God cryed against, and discovered, and in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisees, that Christ cryed w against; and see if they be not the Antichrists and the Deceivers which are entered into the world, which Iohn speaks of, which cannot confesse Christ come in the flesh; but transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, so hath not God, neither knowes him; but preaches for sin, and against perfection, and denyes the Light which enlightens every one that comes into the world, and so keeps people in blindnesse and ignorance, and out of the knowledge of God, and never any that followes them shall ever come to the knowledge of the true and living God, therefore all people see where you are, and minde the light in your consciences, which is pure, and which testifieth against all sin, and it will let you see all your blinde guides which deceives you, to be in sin, and ignorant of God; for they deny that which should make him manifest, there∣fore beware what you hold up, and give over going after them, to that in your con∣sciences I speak, which shall witnesse me eternally to speak the truth, if you obey it, and shall condemn you eternally, if you disobey it. These blind guides that are in this Land, denies the Prophets which Moses wrote of, which is the substance of the Priesthood, which was before, and here they are found in the same generation, in the sorcery and in the witchcraft, which the Lord commanded should be put out of the land, where the children of Israel went to possesse.
Answers to several other subtil Queries put forth by one Iohn Reeve who lives in the City of LONDON, who cals him∣self the last Messenger and Witnesse unto the true God, but is found a lyar, and a perverter of the right way of GOD. A Certain Writing is come to our hand, called an Epistle from the Mighty JEHOVAH, or Jesus the onely LORD, and God of the Elect Israelites, from one, whose name is subscribed Iohn Reeve Pilgrim, who cals himself the last Messenger, and Witnesse unto the true God, unto which, for the sake of the simple, we, (as one Spirit) are moved of the Lord of heaven and earth to write something in answer, that so his folly may be made manifest, and his ig∣norance and blasphemy laid open, unto the simple hearted, who have been long de∣ceived by such through their false voice, lo here, and lo there; Friend, to thee, who hath subscribed this Writing, who cals thy self the last Messenger, and witnesse unto the true God, I Answer, The Lord of hosts, and God of the Elect Israelites, doth not accept thy testimony and witnesse; for thy spirit is made manifest not to be the Spirit which came from God, and which dwels with God, which bears true witnesse unto God, but the spirit which is driven out from the presence of God into the creation, and into the visible world, and that is the living spirit, and bears not true witnesse unto the true God, but is a spirit which beares witnesse to the ima∣ginations of thy own heart, which looks upon, and declares the living God, as if he were carnall, and a creature-like substance; and here the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, thou thinks he is altogether such a one as thy self; and for the true God thou art no Messenger, nor hast received any Message from him, for thy spirit is known, and he never delivered his Message unto it in any generation, but kept his secret sealed up from it; and friend, here I charge thee in the presence of the true spiritual God, that thou be-lies the Lord of hosts, who sayes thy Epistle is from him, thou uses thy tongue, and saith, the Lord saith, When, saith the Lord? I have not spoken unto thee; & of that generation thou art which Ieremiah cryed against; and therefore let all flesh be silent before the Lord, and call not thy own imaginations his Word, but thou who hast a dream, tell thy dream for a dream, and he that hath the Word of the Lord, let him speak it faithfully; and though thou call thy self the last Messenger, and witnesse unto the true God, yet I say unto thee, verily the Lord hath a Witness which was before thee, which hath been slain in the streets of the great City, which the Lord will bring forth after thee, which will bear true witnesse of the true God, & against thee, and thou who hast been alive, shall be judged by him which hath laid slain, & he will eternally condemn thy testimony and message; Friend in the light of Christ, which hath lightened every one that comes into the world, thou art com∣prehended,
and seen, thy beginning, thy time, and thy end, and with it thy testi∣mony and Message is denyed, for thy testimony is such, and if thou swear the Lord lives, thou swore falsly, and further, thou sayes, by inspiration of the holy Spirit thou was moved to present this Epistle: I answer, the language of the holy Spirit is like it self, pure and spirituall, but thy language is carnall and sensuall, and so is thy spirit; the Saints which spake by the inspiration and moving of the Spirit, curs∣ed not that which God had blessed, as thou dost, neither did they say the Elect was defiled as thou dost, neither did they speak of God as a carnall substance, as thou dost, but said that God was a Spirit, and here be thou a witnesse against thy self, that thou speaks not by the inspiration and moving of the holy Spirit, but speaks thy imaginations, and lies in the Name of the Lord; and whereas thou sayest in this confused age, there hath appeared variety of Spirits pretending to be sent by the everlasting God, yet they are at war with all their power to overthrow one another, that their own opinions may bear rule; I answer, Among the many pretenders thou speaks of, thou art one; and it is true, you are at war with all your power en∣deavouring to overthrow one another, that your own opinions may bear rule, and though there be among you variety of opinions, yet by one Spirit you act, for the kingdome of the Devil is but one, and yet divided, and it is at war with it self, and therefore it cannot stand, and you cannot overthrow one another, but one is ap∣pearing to overthrow you all, and all your opinions, for all you pretenders are made manifest by your fruits, and thereby men may try you, for nothing is to be gathered from you but opinions and ayery imaginations, some of you speaking of a God, and Christ afarre off, to believe in, others of you speaking of a God and of a Christ within, and afarre off to believe in, thus you feed people by your own imagina∣tions, and some of you pretends Revelation, others of you denying Revelation, and thus you strive to set up your own opinion, but you live all in one nature, and are of one generation, and he that walks in the light sees you all, and comprehends you all, and judges all your opinions, and are redeemed out of all your vain imdgina∣tion into the life of God, acting and speaking as the Spirit acts and speaks, and seeks to exalt Christ, and him to bear rule, that all opinions may be by him thrown down, and that by him people may be brought out of a confused age, into the land of rst, and peace, and righteousnesse to serve the true Spiritual God, in the Spirit, and by the Spirit of his own Son; and further, thou sayes, some there are takes upon them to speak of a God, and of a Christ in the invisible heavens, above the starres; but are uncapable to demonstrate how Christ by his spirituall Word lives in mens hearts, and how he reigneth visibly in glory with his Elect Angels: I answer, there are not some but many, which lives in, and speaks forth their own imagina∣tions, upon God and Christ, and one of them thou art, thy spirit is tryed, God who is a Spirit, dwels in the Spirit of his Son, even in the high and holy place, and with him also who is of a contrite Spirit, and trembleth at his Word; but this by thy vulterous eye is not seen, neither can any demonstrate how Christ dwels in the heart▪ but he who witnesseth it through death, and where he reigns his glory is with him, and his Elect Angels, this I witnesse, but to thy carnall eye it is invisible, and by thy carnall wisdome he can never be known, Christ and his spirituall word is not to be divided, though thy sensuall spirit would divide them, but by the flam∣ing sword thou that speaks art divided from both, and shalt know neither but to thy condemnation; and further thou sayest, others there are which speaks of an eter∣nall Spirit, or Christ onely in the consciences of men, as if there were no Creator  Christ at all visibly reigning upon his Throne of immortall glory; I answer,
They who talke of an eternal Spirit, or Christ in the conscience by hear say, o  other mens words, without (as thou dost) and doth not in life and power wit∣nesse it, from the Father within, made manifest, such are denyed by them who witnesse the eternall Spirit dwelling with the contrite heart, which Spirit is the Creator which dwels also in the high and holy place, and reigns upon his Throne for ever, and who do in power witnesse this, sees and judges all yur carnall ima∣ginations, and conceptions of the living God in your carnall minds, where he dwels shall no unclean thing enter, but is without to be troden in the wine-presse of his wrath for ever and ever, and by him shall thy carnall conceptions be consumed, even by the breath of his mouth, for he is eternall, and his Throne is eternall, and by the carnall eye shall never be seen; and further thou sayest, there are, who through unbelief that ever any living creature had a beginning, they affirm there is no God or Christ at all, but perishing nature, of this sort are innumerable, witnesse the lives and conversations of people every where; I answer, All who do witnesse the eternall Spirit made manifest, to rule and guide all such, doth deny and declare a∣against, for nothing was without beginning but the eternall Word, which was the beginning of all things, and which will be the end of all things, even the destructi∣on of the wicked, and the salvation of them that believe, who are born of the im∣mortall seed, and redeemed out of the perishing nature into the image of God, and such do set to seal there is a God, who will reward every one according to his works, and beares witnesse against them, who in their lives and conversations denies God, as all do who do not witnesse the eternall Spirit of Christ ruling in the consciences, but talkes of a God in imagination at a distance, and such are innumerable, and saith in their heart, there is no God, and such are the fools the Scripture speaks of, and whereas thou beseeches to consider of these ensuing particulars; I answer, They are considered, and by them thy ignorance is made manifest, and thy folly disclosed, and thy blasphemy, who cals thy self the last witnesse. 1 Quer. In thy first particular thou queries, Whether these men were sort forth by the eternall Spirit to preach, which in the least cannot demonstrate what the onely true God is in himself; and how he is a distinct being from all living creatures, and how he reigns in the Elect by a created Word, voice of spirituall motion onely. Answ. Those men were not sent forth by the eternall Spirit to preach, who have not received it, and such knowes not God, what he is, no where he is, but in their imaginations imagines him to be like a creature, by being i a creature by place or habitation, God is a Spirit, and he is not distinct from living creatures, for in him living creatures lives, moves, and hath their beings, and he is not far from them, nor distinct from them as he spake, who was sent by the eternall Spirit to preach, he reigns in the Elect not by a created word, voice, or a created spirituall motion, for the Word which lives in the Elect, from which voice and motion pro∣ceeds, is not created, but is uncreated, even as God is uncreated, for God is that Word, and here thy ignorance appears, by calling the Word which lives in the Elect a created Word, or voice, or motions, and here be a witnesse against thy self that thou speaks from darknesse, and not from light, which darknesse cannot comprehend the shining of the light, and this discovers thee more to be a false witnesse, and not the true witnesse of God, and therefore thy portion must be portion of false wit∣nesses, read what it is. 2. Quer. In thy second particular thou queries, Is not this an infallible demonstra∣tion
to men, that a man is sent forth by the eternall Spirit, if he have received a gift from the holy Ghost, to demonstrate what the true Creator was in his own distinct Essences, Nature and glory, from all eternity in time, and to all eternity, and wherein Elect men and Angels differ in their natures, and glory, distinct from their Creator in their Persons. Answ. He that hath not received a gift from the holy Ghost in some measure, is not sent forth by the eternall Spirit, or God of all truth, this is infallible, and such knowes not what the Creator is, but by imagination, and carnall conceptions of him, and such in the Light of Christ is seen, and by it judged, and among such thou art, to that in thy conscience I speak, which will witnesse me, he that hath re∣ceived the holy Ghost, turnes people from the power of Satan to the power of God, and knowes the Creator, and the dwelling of him in the heart, for as the Scripture saith, the word is nigh, but let all flesh be silent, he who is in time, knowes not him which was before time, and shall be when time shall be no more; he who knows the Creator which inhabiteth eternity, is redeemed out of time, into the Habi∣tation of the Almighty, but this to thy dark minde and spirit is unknown, if ever thou know it, it must be through death, the nature and glory of the Elect differs not from the Nature and glory of the Creator, for the Elect are one with the Crea∣tor, in his nature enjoying his glory, which was from eternity unto eternity, he that reads let him understand, thy word distinct Essence, I deny, for the Elect is not distinct from the Creator, but lives by the dwelling of the Son in him, and with the Son the Father dwels also, if thou hast an ear, thou mayest hear. 3 Quer. In thy third particular thou queries, What that angelicall serpent was in his creation, which the Scripture speaks of, and how he came to be cast out of his glo∣ry, and how he overcame innocent Eve, and how he entered into her wombe, and changed her pure seed into his nature of unclean reason? And thou askes, What think you, Was not that man Cain the first murdering, lying devill that ever was? And is there any devill but proud, vain-glorions, unmercifull men and women? Ans. That same which speaks in thee is that same serpent which the Scripture speaks of, and if thou have the spirit of Moses, thou knowes what he was in the crea∣tion; for Moses saw his creation by that spirit which was before he was, and if thou know his creation in thy self, then thou may know him without thee, but yet he lies under his vail deceiving thee, and is not deceived by thee; and by the same which thou lives in he was cast out of his glory, even disobedience, and he overcame ino∣cent Eve even as he overcomes thee, by promising what he fulfilled not, and by presenting that which was visible, and so her minde was led out, as thine is, and by her consenting, he entered and got power, and set up his habitation, which is now standing in thee, and so she became the likenesse of himself, her minde and lust stayed into the visibles, out from the Creator who is invisible, and spirituall, and she now lives under the curse, and brings forth cursed children, such as thou art who puts forth these queries, and this child was begotten by him who deceived her, and he is the father and prince of all you, who are wells without water, clouds with∣out rain, and wandering starres having no habitations in the heavens, the blackness of darknesse is reserved unto you for ever, ye who speaks great swelling words of va∣nity (that ye are the last witnesses and Messengers, &c.) but you your selves are servants of corruption, and to the last part of thy querie: I answer, before Cain who is a lying devill was a child, he was a father, and if thou hast an ear, thou mayest hear, the proud, vain-glorious, unmercifull men and women, who bears his image
must with him be tormented in the lake which burneth (by the kindling of the breath of the Almighty) for ever and ever; and here thou art answered, though not to the feeding of thy wisdome, but in the light by which thou art comprehended, which light will eternally condemn thee who hates it. 4 Quer. Thou queries What condition Adam was formed in, and how he came to fall from his estate, and what sin it was they committed (Adam and Eve) and where∣by the Elect and Reprobate are defiled. Ans. Adam was created in the image of God, and God breathed into him the breath of life, and he became a living soul, but eating of the tree of the knowledge of good and evill, therein he turned from the Command of God and did dye, if thou hast an ear thou mayest hear, and thou that queries hast eaten of that tree, and thou shalt never know in what condition he was created in, but through the death: for a sword is set at Edens gate to keep the tree of life, which will cut thee down, before ever thou know or can witnesse his estate, and as for the Elect being de∣filed, here thou makest thy self manifest, that thou never knew what the Elect was, for the Elect is born of God, and he that is born of God sins not, and the promises of God are to the Elect, and election obtains it, and the Elect was never defiled: if thou hast an ear thou mayest hear, that which is defiled shall not enter into the holy City, and here thou hast manifest thy ignorance, and art that reprobate thou speaks, which is ordained of old for condemnation, which is the transgresser which is cast out, thou hast no communion with the Elect, for thou art defiled and art without the gate, to be trodden in the wine-presse. 5 Quer. What that heavenly glory is, and where it is that the Elect wheat of Christ shall eternally enjoy, who are the seed of Adam, and not of Cain? Answ. What that glory which the Elect which thou spoke of in thy fourth querie shal inherit which was and is defiled, it is to be in hell, in utter darknesse for ever and ever, where all the unclean are, and thou would know where it is, it is without the gate of the City, among the dogs and whoremongers, and lyars, and deceivers, and whatsoever is defiled shall be trodden in the wine-presse of the wrath of God for ever and ever, where is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. But as for the Elect wheat of Christ, which thou sayest is the children of Adam, thou speakest thou knowes not what, the first man is of the earth earthly, and he begate his image, and that which is earthly shall never inherit, but are to have their portion with Cain, where thou art that hath uncovered thy nakednesse, but the Elect and the wheat shall be gathered in∣to the barn, and they are not, nor ever were they defiled, but shall reign with the Lamb in the new Jerusalem for ever and ever, where no unclean thing can enter, nor nothing that destroyes or defiles in that holy mountain of the Lord, if thou have an ear thou may hear. 6 Quer. VVhat that painfull and shamefull death in utter darknesse, and where it is, that is reserved for the reprobate, who are the seed of Cain, and not of Adam, or blessed Abrham. Answ. Thou that queries shalt surely know, it is Tophet, prepared of old even for the King, the burning of it is as fire, the breath of the Lord doth kindle it, it shall be destruction for ever and ever, to that which hath given forth these queries, and it is to be separated from God for ever among all idolaters, and adulterers, and liars, the unbelieving, the abominable, and the fearful, in the lake of fire▪ where the worm di∣eth not, nor the fire goeth not out; as for Adam thou knows nothing of him; the first birth that he begate was Cain, who slew his brother, who hath his portion with Cain, and not with Abraham, the promise was not to the transgresser, nor to Adam who
eat of the tree of knowledge, the promise came upon; in the day thou eatest thou shalt dye, he was driven from the presence of the Lord into the earth in the curse, the promise was to Abraham, in Isaack is the blessing, not in Ishmael; and here thou shws thy ignorance, but it is but like the former, when thou joynes the Elect and reprobate together, light and darknesse, and in Babylon thou art, but in that which was before Babylon was, thou art seen, and as for those dark spirits thou peaks of, who minde nothing but their lusts, condemning the glorious things of eter∣nity, because their carnall reason cannot comprehend them: see at home, for in the light of Christ thou art seen, that thou knowes nothing of eternity, but by thy dark imaginations, and naturally as a bruite, to the light of Christ in thy conscience I speak, which will let thee see it is so. 7 Quer. Are there not deceived persons, and utterly ignorant of the true God, who judge men and women in darknesse, if they ak them Questions about the needfull things of eternity: is it not because they went before they were sent, and so are of a bitter spirit for want of spirituall light to satisfie the ender Christian querier. Ans. All who dwell not in this light, which is pure and eternall, are ignorant of God, and never knew God, such judging shall be judged, and by the light which sees and comprehends all darknesse thou art seen, but the spirituall man judgeth all things, and he is judged of none, and all judgement is committed to the Son, and where he imade manifest he speaks, and judgeth righteously, and those men and women who would be asking questions of eternity, and never came to the first prin∣ciple to be guided by it, the light which leads to eternity, all such men and women are in darknesse, and that minde which is in the earth and in the naturals shall never know; and therefore they are judged to be in darknesse, and darknesse cannot comprehend the light, Christ and his Disciples answered and judged that spirit which would have had a sign; and called them adulterers, and which spirit we witnesse to the praise of God; and to thee that put forth the queries, I speak to thee in the pre∣sence of God, whether thou put them forth in simplicity and art ignorant, or would know, or in the pride of thy heart, and subtilty to tempt, the light of Christ will let thee see, but thou art rich and full, therefore thou must be sent empty away, all who queries from that nature that would know, but never come to obedience, that is to be judged, & judgment must thou witness, and for a bitter spirit of envy that shall stand for thy self, and that thou wants spiritual light is made manifest, which curses that which God hath blessed, as I have seen under thy own hand, far remote from this City, and that thou hast cursed them soul and body to all eternity, which thou never heard nor saw, let shame strike thee in the face, and stop thy mouth, for thou cannot put a difference betwixt the precious and the vile, but curses thou knows not what, and speaks to that thou knows not: But as for them who have a desire to know the way to the Father, we are ready to give an answer, and to impart of the gift we have received, and doth not break a bruised reed, but the fat we fed with judgement, and there thou art answered. 8 Quer. It is not an infallible demonstration unto them who have a discerning spirit, that tha man hath no commission from the true Spirit to preach or speak to a people, when for fear of his ignorance being discovered, or for fear of losing his hearers, he shall coun∣sell them to strike close to the Word of God, or to hearken to the light within them in their consciences, without what that is in the conscience, or what will be the issue of it, if men be obedient to it, or disobedient to it: and to beware of false Prophets, and not think∣ing in the least himself to be that false prophet, and thus borrowing Scripture language which we are the true Messengers of the Gospel, doth he not in his power hinder his hear∣ers
from reading the glorious things revealed unto, the two last witnesses, and so thou saith, it is clear that the Spirit is not in them which was in Paul, who gave them leave to try all. Ans. Here thy infallible demonstration is made manifest to be fallible and lying, when thou laies that down to be a sign of them that have no commission from the Spi∣rit, and not to have the Spirit, because they exhort them to cleave close to the Word of God, and to minde the light which shines into the conscience of every man, which is the light of Christ; here thy Spirit is tryed, that thou hast not the same commission as they had, who spoke forth the Scripture, and so thou Preaches ano∣ther Gospel, for the Word of God endures for ever, and by the Word which is eternall, and which was in the beginning, who tryes all things, who searches all things, comprehends all things, and judges all things, he that cleaves not close unto, that builds upon another foundation; and by the Word which endures for ever, thou art seen, not to have that word, neither knowes what, nor where it is, neither hath cleaved to it, and so art raced out from the life, from the foundation, and the Apostle who had his Commission not from man, nor by man, he exhorted those he had preached to and wrote to, to take heed to the sure word of Prophesie, as unto a light that shined in a dark place, and to wait in it, till the day did dawn, and the day Star did arise; and for distinguishing of that in the conscience what it is, he that is not separate from the darknesse knows not how to do it. But this I say unto thee, as we declare unto all, the Light which shines into the conscience is the light of Christ which he hath enlightned every one withall, and it is spirituall like himself, and eternall, and it leads out of sin, and declares against all iniquity, and he that comes to own it, and to be guided by it, it leads out of sin to know the Crosse of Christ, which is a Mistery to thee, and it leads to the eternall Word, which was in the beginning before sin was, and it will judge all thy imagi∣nations and vain conceivings, and it leads to the inheritance incorruptible out of corruptible; if thou have an ear to hear, thou may hear, it is that which will let thee see thy vain frothy imaginations, which thou hath of God, and will condemn all thy vain imaginations, and hating it, it will be thy condemnation, and there is the issue of it, and all such as steals other mens words, and the true Prophets words, and never knew the life that was in them, all such we deny, and shut them up within utter darknesse, where they, thou and both are, and for the glorious things that thou and thy partner, which call your selves the two last witnesses, it is manifest that your mysteries are as in thy book, and thy queries, where thou puts Elect and repro∣bate together, and as for tryall of spirits, we give liberty and exhort all that may try, and we direct them to that to try by, which is is infallible and eternall, where∣by they may see and comprehend thee and all who have not the Spirit. But that they should try, who hath nothing to try with, let all such be silent for ever, for none understands the Spirit but the Spirit with which we see thee, and all who stands in their imaginations ignorant of, therefore stop thy mouth in the dust, and be silent. 9 Quer. Doth not they that speak to a people that declares against all appearances, which are contrary to his way, discover himself unto a true discerning Spirit, not to be of the Lord, unlesse they can demonstrate a spirituall Commission that he hath received from heaven, by voice of words through the glorious mouth of the Lord, so that no mortall man can disprove him, though few for want of understanding receive him. Ans. The way that leads to the Father is but one, which is Christ, and he that de∣clares from him, made manifest in him, declares against all Sects, and Opinions, and that which thou cals appearances, and the way is one, and the Truh one, where
there is no rent nor division, and he that dwels in the life hath discerning, and he that witnesses the annointing discernes, he is able to judge and discern, and in that thou art seen, who would sit on the throne, but thou must come down and lick the dust, dust is the serpents meat, and they who had their Commission from God, and hath their Commission from God, now they were made manifest to every mans consci∣ence in the sight of God, and this we witnesse, this the Scripture witnesseth, and he that believes hath the witnesse in himself, and the father bears witnesse, and they witnesse the voice of the Lord, which is spirituall speaking to them, and they declare from that which is spirituall to the consciences of gainsayers, and this is witnessed; but thy voice of words is carnal, and is denyed, and who art thou made manifest unto, that which is mortal cannot discern and disprove thee, but that which is immortal can, and they who are guided by the immortall denies thee, and will receive none of thy testimony, because it is not the same which the holy men of God witnessed, and doth now witnesse, which voice shakes the wildernesse, and rents the rocks, and makes the earth to reel to and fro, but to thee this is a mystery and sealed. 10 Quer. Again he that speaketh of an invisible spirituall God, or Christ living in the consciences or spirit of men, thou sayeth, he questions the truth of all the Scripture re∣cords concerning the life, death, and resurrection, and aseension of the blessed body of Christ into the throne of his immortall glory; and dth he not queion whether the consciences of the Saints being sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, which died without the ges of Je∣rusalem, are purified from the pollution of the flesh and Spirit, doth he not question the resurrection of the souls and bodies out of the eath at the last day. Ans. Here again, thou hast made thy shae and thy ignorance manifest and knows not so much as the Letter of he Scripture, Paul in Apostle of Jesus Chist, notby the will of man, and Minister of the everlasting God, he witnessed the Son of God revealed in him, and he i, knw ye  Christ s in you, or else you are repates, and hit is no divided, and he tha is joyned to the Lord is e Spirit, and  my Father are one, d we Christ dwells the Father dwells, and if thou have  e to hear hou may h, and if the e Spirit be not in you that raised Christ  he d, you are , and he that declared these things speak of a spiiual Christ, and an invi God, and who all ascend up to heaven, the word is nigh, in thy mot and  heart, and this is the same Christ that suffered without the gae at Jerusalem, and no other whh Paul travel∣led till he was born in them, if thou have an ear thu may hear, and the Apost did not question the Scripture records, for they spoke it and recorded it, and thy wit∣nessed the life of Christ, and his death, and resurection, and acnsion, and witnes∣sed him ascended above thrones, and dominions, and to sit at the right hand of the Father, and witnesse the same Christ made manifest in us, and his resurrection, not because Paul said so, we have seen it, and are witnesses of it, the same that ever was, the same that did ascend, the same did ascend; this is a riddle unto thee, and seven seals is upon it, and thou that queries shall never see them opened, and they who had Christ in them, and the Father, the Son supping with them, they had their consci∣ence sprinkled, and none else for his bloud thou knows not, and so I say unto thee, thou art not sprinkled, nor thy conscience purified from dead works, and they who know Christ in them, and no more after the flesh come to know his resurrection, he is the resurrection, he is the first and the last, who knows him risen, and have seen him witnesse the first day and the last, what speaks thou of a last day, that never came to the beginning, and so thy soul lies in death, and in chains, and in utter darknesse and therefore lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and see where thou t,
and the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures thou cannot witnesse. 11 Quer. If after death there is no bodily resurrection, for the spirits of men to pos∣sesse an immortall glory to eternity, or to suffer an eternall devill like shame, according to their deeds, whether good or evill. Is it not one of the vainest things in the world▪ to discourse of God, righteousnesse, unlesse it be for earthly gain amongst men. Ans. There is a resurrection both of the just and of the unjust, the just into everlasting life, and the unjust into everlasting shame and contempt, and every one shall receive according to his works, whether they be good or evill, but this a mystery hid, for none knowes it, but through death, but what knowes thou who art yet alive in sin, what shall be in the resurrection which is after death, which whoever comes to know the resurrection, knowes the ed of all things; therefore it is not taking their words, nor thy own imaginations, that is faith, nor if thou know Christ no nearer than Jerusalem, nor no nearer than above the starres, thou knowes not where, but through thy dark imaginations, this is not to Christ risen from the dead, see therefore what hast thou seen in thy self: But thou art dead whiles thou lives in that nature, and at the resurrection contempt and shame will be thy portion, and turn in thy minde to that which shews thee sin, and witnesse the body and sin destroy∣ed within, and then, and not till then, shalt thou know how it is in the resurrection. 12 Quer. Thou raises a question from Pauls words to the Athenians, thou was be∣fore condemning them that stole other mens words, and here thou hast stolen a Query, and thou askest what think you did that spiritual Creator, dwell and live in the Athenians consci∣ences or did his glorious person visibly appear in the highest heavens. Ans. The Athenians to whom Paul spoke worshipped the work of their own hands, as his generation doth their own imaginations, and that God whom ignorantly they worshipped at a distance, which God lived in Pauls conscience, Paul declared unto them, and they looked as thou dost carnally, thinking God to be carnal and at a distance, but he aid he, was not at a distance from every one of them, for in him they lived, moved, and had their being, and this was the God which Paul preached of, which Creator, we witnesse, lives in the high and holy place, and with him also that is of a humble and a contrie spirit, and trembleth at his Word. 13 Quer. And thou sayest, what think you, can there e any living Spirit without a bo∣dy, or person to display its life, in, or from, and must not the Creator of necessity be a glorious personall substance, and thou sayest doth not these men that worship an ininite Spirit with∣out any bodily frm, living in mens consciences, onely glry in a God of their own ima∣ginations, instead of honouring the onely Lord of all life, the man Jesus, yesterday, to day, and for ever? Ans. That which is not possible with men is possible with God, which God is a Spirit as Jesus Christ saith, and a spirit hath not flesh and bone, nor a created body, but displays it self as it pleases, contrary to thy will, and the will of all men; and thou who would by thy reason y the Creator with a necessiy to a personal being, are void of the knowledge of God, and led by thy corrupt reason, which shall never know God, and all those who worships God in spirit, worships an infinite Spirit, which Spirit inhabiteth eternity, and lives in the consciences of the Saints, and this is not to glo∣ry in an imagination, but a witnessing of the same eternall Truth, which he Saints witnessed which spake forth the Scripture, for they witnessed Christ dweled in them, and the same God they wrshipped, whose temple they were, and not another, and we the same witnesse, and this to the honour of the Man Jesus, who was yesterday, to day, and for ever. 14 Quer. The eternall Spirit, Creator, and alone everlasting Father, which dwels
essentially in the glorified body, as our Lord Jesus his eternall Son, and virtually reign in all the Saints, Elect men and Angels, be record between me and you world without d, whether this Epistle shall not be sent to you, and all the chosen that shall peruse it, principally for the establishing of your tender spirits upon that eternall spirituall Rock Jesus Christ God and Man in one distinct body, or person glorified, and ly ho∣noured with all spirituall praises from Elect men and Angels when this world is consu∣med into ashes, and all time or times is swallowed up into eternity or eternities. Ans. The eternall Spirit, which is the everlasting Father, which thou saith is es∣sentially in the Son, thy word essentially I deny, and thy voice, yet Christ and the Father is one, and the same Spirit that dwels in the Son dwels in the Father which is one, I and my Father is one, the same dwels in the Saints, thy word vir∣tuall I deny, the same that dwels in the Father and in the Son, the same dwels in the Saints, not distinct nor divided, for he that hath seen the Father hath seen the Son, and he that hath the Son hath the Father also, and Christ is divided, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfect in one, and he that is joyned to Christ is one spi∣rit, and not distinct nor separate: if thou have an ear thou may hear, and that eter∣nall Spirit, which is the Father and the Son, which dwels in the Saints, is judge of thee, and by that Spirit I judge thee, that this Epistle came not from him to none of the chosen, for they who are chosen deny thy voice, and what dost thou speak of E∣lect and Angels, with whom God dwels, when in thy fourth Querie thou said, they were defiled, and the holy Ghost saith, he dwels with no uncleannesse, and so speaks confusion and Babylons language, which is the land of thy nativity, from whence all these things have been spoken by thee, and all that shall ever be established with thy declaring, or thy Epistles, shall be thrown down, for the Rock shall beat thy image to pieces, and therefore leave off thy speaking of him, and of thy distinct body, and of his glory, for when he shall appear in his glory, instead of thy praises, thou shalt howl and lament, and wish the mountains to cover thee, and he who is out of time shall consume thee to ashes, who stands in time and in the airie philosophy and imagination, and thy great words eternity and eternities shall stand thee in no stead; for that which is eternall was before thou was, and shall be when thou art brought down to the pit with all thy imaginations: And so that thou might not glory any more in thy shame, we have answered thy Queries, and for the simple ones sake, that they might not be stumbled by thy stumbling Queries, who dwels not in the Light. FINIS.
