C6743A E407_34 99864122 160523
PAPERS OF THE TREATIE, AT A great Meeting of the Generall Officers of the Army, at the Head-quarters at Putney, in behalf of the whole Kingdome of England, and concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty. With the severall speeches at the Councell-Table, and His Majesties Resolution concerning the Protestant Professi∣on, and Liberty of Conscience. depiction of a male figure with long hair and armour (or Thomas Fairfax?) Die 20. Septemb. 1647. Printed for R. V. and are to be sold neer Temple Barre, 1647.
THE KINGS MAJESTIES RESOLUTION Concerning the Army under command of his Excel∣lency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and how far He de∣cIares himselfe for them. Sent from Hampton-Court, Septemb. 18. 1647. Worthy Sir, THe Kings Majesty doth very much approve of the proceedings and actions of the Army, and doth confide and adhere to their Propo∣sals, thinking them to be the readiest way (in order to Peace) for setling of this poor languishing Kingdome, and hath also declared his gracious will and pleasure concerning the said Proposals, expressing his Resolu∣tion concerning the same, & his earnest desire to give full satisfaction unto all his Loyal Subjects, through∣out his Majesties Realmes and Dominions, both con∣cerning
the setling of the Protestant Profession, and liberty to tender Consciences; as appeares more ful∣ly by the ensuing Proposals, viz. His Majesties last Proposals, intimatting his resolution and desires touching the Army. His Majesty propounds (as the best way in His judgment in order to Peace) that his two Houses would instantly take into consideration those Pro∣posals upon which there may be a personall treaty with his Majesty, and upon such other Proposalls as his Majesty shall make, hoping that the said Propo∣sals may be so moderated in the said treaty, as to ren∣der them the more capable of his Majesties full con∣cessions, wherein hee resolves to give full satisfaction to his People for whatsoever shall concerne the set∣ling of the Protestant Profession, with liberty to ten∣der Consciences, and the securing of the Lawes, Li∣berties, and properties of all his Subjects, and the just priviledges of Parliament for the future. The Proposals of the Army have given great satis∣faction to his Majesty; insomuch, that he hath decla∣red, that he conceives, they much more conduce to the satisfaction of all interests, and may be a fitter foundation for a lasting peace, then the Propositions, sent from both Houses of Parliament, to his Majesty. Therefore his Majesty desires, that the said Propo∣sals may be forthwith treated upon, &c. We desire much to hear of the comming downe of the Commissioners, that so the Treaty may goe on more effectually, and all differences brought to a speedy composure.
Neverthelesse, the Generall, and the Offi∣cers of the Army, leaves no meanes unattem∣pted for the effect of the great worke of the Kingdome, viz. to settle peace, but embraces all opportunities, as is evidently manifested by the enclosed paper. For his Excellency gave order, that notice should bee given to the Officers of each respective Regiment in these parts, to give their attendance, and bee ready at the Head-quarters, upon Thursday last, being the 16. of this instant, there to consult, treat, and debate, upon the speedy settlement of the affaires of this Kingdome, and better regulating and ordering of such things which are destructive to this Nation, at which summons, most of the Officers in generall met at the place appointed, where they began to treat upon the things before specified; the result of some particulars, I shall here insert, as appeares mere fully by the enclosed papers.
The proceedings of the Generall Officers of the Army at the treaty at Putney, touching the setling of a firme peace, within his Maiesties Realmes and Dominions. UPon Thursday last, being the 16. of this instant, his Exccllency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, and the generall Officers of the army, had a great meeting at Putney, where they spent much time, in debating upon the present af∣faires of the Kingdom, and upon many great and weighty matters, exceedingly materiall towards the setling of a firme peace and u∣nion. During which time of consultation, in debate thereof, many worthy and excel∣lent speeches were made at the Councell ta∣ble, in the presence of the Generall, Lieute∣nant Generall, and the rest of the Officers as∣sembled together, by certain Colonels of the Army, which was to this effect, viz. That they desired nothing so much, in respect of their own particulars, as to see this languish∣ing
and tottering Kingdome, restored to a happy and flourishing condition, that so the pure light of the Gospell may shine forth in abundance, and appeare in its full lustre throughout all darke and obscure corners of the Kingdom, and that the joyfull newes of Peace may have its full Eccho and tryumphant sound througbout all his Maie∣sties Realmes and Dominions, and that the hearts both of King and People may be firmly knit and united together, &c. With many other worthy expressions and protestations, touching the setling of a firme peace. Much time were spent, touching divers weighty businesses in behalfe of the whole Kingdome, concerning the peace, and future safety; as also some things debated upon in reference to the Proposalls, that after the Rights, Liberties, Peace and safety of the Kingdome being provided for, the Kings Majesties Royall person, his Gonsort the Queena, their Highnesses, Charles Prince of Wales, James Duke of Yorke, and the rest of the Royall Issue, may be restored to a condi∣tion of safety, honour, and freedome in this Nation, without diminution to their perso∣nall
Rights, or further limitation to the ex∣ercise of the Regall power, &c. No wayes are left unassayed, for the ob∣taining of a speedy settlement of the King∣dome, and establishing of his Maiesty and his Royall posterity in their full Rights & Freedomes, so that there is great hopes of a happy and mutuall concurrence, betwixt the King and his great Councell. The Generall Councell goes on unanimously in all their Undertakings, and not so much as one dis∣senting Member amongst them; and that they may still prosper in all their Debates and oonsultations, is the prayers, of Your devoted servant, Peter Cradock, Dated at Hampton-Court the 18. of this in∣stant, 1647. FINIS.
