e2156 e172_10 99860294 112412
THE PETITION AND ARTICLES Exhibited in Parliament against IOHN POCKLINGTON, Doctor in Divinity, Parson of Yelden, in Bedford, hire, Anno 1641. Jer. 23. v. 15. Therefore thus saith the ord of Hosts, concerning the Pro∣phes; behold I will feed them with wormwood, and make thens drne the water of gall; for from the Prophets of Ierusalem is prophnenesse gon forth into all the Land. Imprinted at London, 1641.
ARTICLE, J. HEE hath within these few yeares, in his Church of Yelden turned the Com∣munion Table Altarwise. ARTICLE, II. He bowes to or before this Altar, very low; as often as either he passeth by it, or makes his ap∣proach thereunto. ARTICLE, III. He shewes more outward reverence to the Altar, then to the name of God: for one time in the Church protesting before GOD, and his holy Altar, when he made mention of the Altar, he turned himselfe towards it, and made low obey sance before it, but at the name of God he shewed no such respect. ARTICLE, IV. He hath placed a Crosse in a Cloth behind the As∣tar, called the Altar-cloth. ARTICLE, V. He useth much to magnifie the Crosse; and once in his Sermon speaking of Moses his prayer against Ama∣lecke, he said, that Moses spread forth his armes in the
forme of a Crosse, and that that posture of his was more availeable with God then his prayer. ARTICLE, VI. He hath caused a Bell to be hung up in his Chan∣cell, called a Sacring Bell, which the Clarke alwayes rings at the gong up to Seond Service, which he per∣formes with variety of postures, sometimes turning his fae towards the South sometimes towards the East, and sometimes towards the West. ARTICLE, VII. He hath cansed two clothes to be made, which He cals Corporals; and these be useth to lay over the Bread in the Sacrament; and each of these hn five. Grosses on it, one at each corner, and one in the middle. ARTICLE, VIII. That he refused to give the Sacrament on Easter∣day, Anno 1638. to 12. or 14. of his Parishioners, tho they had acquainted him before, that they intended to receive on that day, according to their usuall custome; and though at the time of the administration of the sa∣crament, even from the beginning thereof to the end, they kneeled at the railes (for otherwise he would not administer it to them at any time) yet He still passed them by, and sent them away without it, to their great reproach and discomfort; having no just cause so to do. ARTICLE, IX. He hath also composed and published two books of Pamphets, the one intituted Sunday no Sabbath, the o∣ther
Altare Christianum, wherin he justifies and defends all those Innovations in Religion that have bin unhap∣pily introduced into this Church, which also he practi∣ses by himself; and besides in those bookes he asserts and maintaines divers wicked, Popish & Antichrishian points, to the great danger & dammage of this Church and state, justifies; sundry Popish canonied Sains for true Saints & Martyrs of God and censures our owne English Martyrs (mentioned in M. Foxes Calender, before his booke of Acts and Monuments, set forth by publique Authority, and ap∣proved by the whole Convocation, Anno 1579.) for Tray∣tors Murderers, Rebels, and Hereticks. ARTICLE, 10. He affirmes and maintaines the dedication and con∣secration of curches by Prayers and tht (as he saith) from the Doctrine and Decrees of Popes of the first and best times, and confirmed by the Doctrine and practice of the holy Catholike Churh. And he censures the Cen∣turists for bold and impious, because they condemn & brand such kind of Popish Consecration of wood and stones, for the Mystery of iniquity, Alt. Chr. ca 10. page 52. ARTICLE, XI. He teaches and affirmes, that the distinction of pl∣ces in the Church  antient and observed even from the Apostles  verall places in the Church were appoed or the egy, and for the Lai∣ty, Alt. Chr. c. 8. p. 43, 44. And these severall places had severall degrees of holine. And it orium was the place for the Laity, and that was lesse holy; but Presbyterium was the place for the Clergy and this was more holy. And in the holy place namely the Chancell or Presby∣tery, there was a Throne or Chaire placed.
ARTICLE, XII. But He bethinks himself, and saith, that this Chaire was not in all Churches, but onely in the Churches of Bishops; and that such a Chaire was in the Church of Ie∣rusalem and Rome: and then after affirms, that the Suc∣cession of Bishops in such a Chaire, was one thing that kept St. Augustine from departing out of the bosome of the Catholick Church; for he brings him in, saying thus, The succession of Priests from St. Peter, keepes mee of right in the Church: the name of this Catholick See (that is, of Rome) keepes me in, Alt. Chr. p. 47.
The Copy of the Petition. To the right Honourable, the Lords of the upper House of Parliament, The humble Petition of I. H. of Cardington in the County of Bedford, Gentleman. Humbly sheweth, THAT Ioh Pocklington Doctor of Divinity, Rector of the Parish Church of Yelden in the County of Bedford, Vicar of Waresly in the County of Huntington, Prebend of Lincolne, Peterborough, and Windsore, hath bin a chiefe Author and Ring-leader in all those Innovations which have of late flowed into the Church of England. May it therefore please this Honourable House, to take the premises into your just and pious consideration, and to convent the said D. Pocklington before you, to answer the same, that so he may receive such condigne and exemplary punishment, as may deter all others from the like dangerous Attempts, and I innovations: and your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c. FINIS.
