e3003a 99896794 136929
ENGLAND'S New VVonders OR Four Strange and Amazing Relations That have lately come to pass in England. I. A strange and Wonderull Account of one Mary Blackstone, near Hull in York-shire, who after ten Years Barrenness, was with Child of a Mnstrous Birth, and de∣ivered after wo Years going of it, it hving 3 Heads, each n Eye in the Frehead, Serpents twiing about each Neck, 4 Arms, and 4 Legs, each 10 Fingers and Tos on the Hnds and Feet; the Privities of Male and Female. With the Examination of the Mother by the Miister, what answer she ve, her prayer and Advice to all Women▪ Not to wish for hing God sees not Convenin to gve, least fearfull punishment vertake them, With the Tx sh chos for her Funeral Ser∣mon, befor she dyed, nd th substance of the Sermon. By D. Bose; I. An Accnt of a mighty Tempest, and the ppearing of a errible Fiery Serpent, at Laightown Buzd  Bedordshire II An ccount of a mighty Storm of Hail, ear Staford in Northampton shire, which destroy'd, many Cattle d Fowl woudd diver ope cause great nundation, that oyed several Mils much Corn and other matters, some of th ns being 9 or 10 inches in Compass V. An Account of two rmies fighting in the , in Briany in France. All very terrible and wonderful. Licensed according to Order. ONDON, Printed for J. Blare at the Loking Glass on Londn-Bridg: and Reprinted at ABERDEEN by IOHN FORBES, Anno DOM. 1697.
CHAP. I. A Strange and Wonderfull Account of a Monste∣rous Child with. 3 Heads, 4 Arms 4 Leggs, and Eyes in its Forehead, ten Fingers and as many Toes on each Hand and Foot, born near Hull in York-shire. Of the Mothers Confession, Prayer and Funerall Sermon, &c. STrange and wonderfull are many things we frequently see and hear of, to the asto∣nishment and amazing of Mankind: Yet if we rightly consider, why GOD sends, or suffers such things in the world, they may turn to our advantag, to warn us from going on in sinfull ways, and flee from the wrath that is to come. Where strnge Prodigies or Portants are ma∣nifested, they are taken usually for Fore-run∣ners of strange Events, and stranger then what I am about to relate, that have wery lately happened, & are attested (for a credible truth) by persons of known integrity I may presume, have been hardly heard of in any of the Mo∣dern ages of the world, but to come near to my purpose, and in order, the First that I shall present you with, is a strange and amazing Ac∣count,
of a Prodigeous Monsterous Birth, which is well attested and communicated to us, in the following manner. One Mary Blackstour, being married to a Person, at a place near Hull, in Yorkshire▪ not being past Child-bearing, but in youth∣full brisk years, was passionately desirous to have a Child, but God with-held from her the fruit of the Womb, which made her angry, and often use unbecoming expressions; envy∣ing those that had Children: and so she con∣tinued about ten Years, though her husband was an active man, and likely enough for the bussiness of Generation. At the end of which time, having taken some provocatives, and o∣ther supposed helps, her belly began to rise, but sometimes again would sink all on a sud∣den▪ Yet nevertheless, she had a strong con∣ceit she was with Child, and would not be perswaded from the belief, by judicious grave Matrons, who took it for a windy, spugy, or watry mole; which sometimes happens, and is called a false Conception: Yet the usual time of Womens going being expired, and no sign or Labour, of Delivery appear∣ing, she began to grow somewhat ashamed of her oastings; and imprudently uttered rash
wishes or Vows, as she afterward confessed, to the giving God a just offnce, to inflict some judgement on her. Yet her belly continued to grow big; and she felt strange pains, un∣usual sweats and faintings, and so it continu∣ed near two Years, so that she facied she had got a Tinpany, or was so believed by others, when indeed it was no otherwise, for at the end of two Years, from the beginning of her first disorder and fancying she was with child, she fell into heavy pains as a Women in travel, but greater and more unusual: this continued some time without any apprent hopes of delivery, till the 4th, o May last 1696. On this day, several Women being with her, she was with extraordinary pains and labour delivered of a monsterous Child to the affrightment of all that were present, hav∣ing three Heads, wonderously mishappen, each having one Eye standing in the fore-head, and a small twisting thing in the form of a Serpent about each neck: It had four distinct Arms and Hands, and on the hands each ten Fingers: though not quite so open or distinct, some being less in proportion then usual to others, It had also four Legs, and four Feet, and tho but one body, yet there appeared seams in
it as if two or more wer joined, or were incorporated into one, the Feet had a pro∣portion of Toes to the Fingers upon the Hands: It had likeways the privy Members of Male and Female, and was exposed to the view of many Eminent persons, who came divers Miles to see it: It was heard to cry from all the Heads at one and the same time, and many other Observations were taken of it. The Mther by the hard pains of her Travel, and this Affrightment, Sorrow and some other concurrents, fell into a weak Condition, so that her uprising being dispair∣ed of, she desired a Minister might be sent for (which accordingly was done) to pray with her, and to give her Spiritual Conso∣lation which was done. And divers Ques∣tions was asked her, as, whether she was any ways sensible how she might offend GOD, that might cause him thus for to afflict her with so Monsterous an Issue? She replyed unto this with a faint languishing Voice, that she believed she had provoked the Divine-Goodness, because that she had been too passionatly desirous of Children, and now like Rachel, had brought forth a Benoani, the child of her sorrow: For she had often de∣sired
that she might have a Child though she were made an Example, or suffered never so much upon that account: Which she believed now had fallen justly upon her. And thereupon she fell instantly into this PRAYER. O Lord God of infinit Mercies, forgive the sins of my rashness and vain desires, blot out my iniquities, and lay not my sins unto my charge, but give me patience in all my sufferings: And grant me, O Lord, if it shall be thy good pleasure, for to restore me to my former Health, that I may live Vprightly; Soberlie, and in a sincere Godlie Life, more then heretofore I have done. But O Lord, however it shall please thee to deal with me, either in Life or Death, I do freely and chearfullie resign up my Soul and Body to thy most Mercifull Disposall, and through the Mercies and Mediation of thy onely Son, Iesus Christ, my ever blessed Lord and Saviour, Amen. Then she Exhorted all that came to visite her, especially Women, to be contented with what GOD was pleased to send, or bestow on them: Not to be too vehement in their de∣sires after any thing this world can afford, but keep all their wishes and desires within bounds
that they may be pleasing to Almighty God, who knows best what to give, and what to restrain from us: And not like Rachell, to cry our (when God restrains the fruit of the Womb) give me Children or I die: which in some measure, was now her cse. And she beieved, proceeded from her rash wishes and vehement desire after some Children, de∣siring for what had happened after death, for that er almost▪ only failing, and what else had happened, calling God to witness she had lived chastly and honestly all her lifetime, as well sigl as in he Marriage. And then finding death approaching, she desired a Sermon might be preached at her Funeral, for to exhort all to be carefull how they spend their days in Pride, Luxury and Wantonness, least they too sadly repent it in the end: Appointing it from the Words of our Saviour, Luke 15.18.19 I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him: Father I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants. From these words it was inferred, that it is a great sin to fly from God, (as the Prodigal Son did from his Father) on presumption,
and hopes to live ryotously always: But when this is done, and we see we are straightned and brought to misery under Heavens afflict∣ing Hand, and that our strength and beautie fades, then it is not too late: For the Pro∣digal Son, after this was received, and that not without Rejoicing. That we ought not to be, however, too confident in any thing as thinking there is any worth in us, that GOD should have so much regard to us, as to tke us into his Favour in our greatest need and necessity: When we have squandred away the Prime o our days, and in serving our own Lusts: But that we should seek him early that he may be found of us, and foresake all things for the Love of Christ: that when we come to dye, we may live with him Eternally. He exhorted the good Women present not so much to desire Children, as to consider when they have them, to bring them up in the fear of the Lord: Rachel was passionat, when she found hé bare no Children to Iacob, and so, for that she said, Give me Children or I dye. And indeed she had her last Son Benjamin, to her sorrow, for in her Child bed she dyed: And thus it might be the case of this woman now departed. And so conclud all with good
and sober Advice, to leave off our sins and follies, and turn to God with all speed, that he may receive us into the Everlasting Arms of Love, Amen. CHAP. II. An Account of a Terrible Tempest near Laigh¦ton-Buzard, in Bdfordshire, May 13, And a strange Fire in the shap of a Serpent, that drew up the Water out of Shipton brook. AT sundry timer, strange firie Meteors have happened in the Air, and very near the Earth: But I think not in this manner, as I have heard of in any story, and therefore take of it the following Relation. On the 12th of May, a great Tempest happened, accompanied with prodigious Rain, Thunder and Lightning, more terrible then has been known for many years before, which occasion∣ed the next day violent floods of Water, by com∣ing down the Hills, and overflowing the Brooks and Rivers; But that which is most remarkable▪ is, that after a prodigeous clap of Thunder about Noon, there broke out (as from a cloud) a long stream of Fire, which appeared greater as it came nearer to the Earth, forming it self into the shape of a prodigeous Firie Serpent that appeared, the Tail dragging on the ground, making a noise like a Whirl-wind sindging the Grass in its way,
but that which formed the Head and upper part, was elevated as high as the highest Trees, or Laigh∣town Steeple, and in the body of the firie Serpent, something oculd be seen and plainly discerned, working as if so be it had been cased up in a glass, whilst a very terrible smoak ascended, and still it moved on, to the great terour and amazement of the people, till it came unto Shipton Brook, where the Tail dragging on the Water caused a terrible hissing, and spouted up the Water a great height, dividing as it were, the Brook in its passage over, and the evaporated water fell down in small Rain a great compass, and immediatly it Thundered and a terrible Storm ensued, in which this body of fire dissipated and vanished. This is arrested by divers, who say they were Eye-witnesses of i, and much terrified at so dreadfull a sight, which had it ap∣peared in the night time, it would have been far more dreadfull and amazing. CHAP. III. An account of a terrible Storm of Hail, the Stones as big as Goose Eggs near Stanford, in Nor∣thamptoun-shire, killing divers Cattle and wounding many People. With a mighty Flood making very great dammage. ON the 16th of May, prodigeous black Clouds began to gather, which over
the greater part of this, and other Countries adjacent caused a darkness, that had it not been seen at that time a day, so that people were apprehensive of a violent Storm ap∣proaching, and happy it was for many that they had such Notice, for immediatly the Thunder began to bellow and the lightning to rend the Clouds, and with prodigeous flashes enlighten the Air, and run along the Ground, when immediatly some great drops of Rain fell, which was followed by pro∣digeous Hail-stones which wounded divers that were hasting for shelter, killed a great many Fowls, and many small Cattle; Some of these stones being nine or ten inches in compass, of divers forms, some ragged, some four squair, some oval, long or round, and some again in the shapes of divers instruments falling so violently, that they beat divers young Trees in pieces, greatly damnadging the Corn, Pease, &c. and cut off branches of long standing Trees, thicker than ones finger, lying in such prodigeous Quantities in the ways, for a great many hours after∣ward unmelted, so that the Horse-Carts, Coaches, and Waggons, especially in the narrow ways, could not pass without great
defficultie. The Storm continued about an hou▪ and damnified a great many Buildings, by beating off the Tiles and Thatch, some scores of Pigeons, Rooks, Daws. &c. have been found dead in the fields▪ killed by the fall of the Stones and many Horses, Cows and Oxen, were so bruised and wounded that many of them are expected not to live, as also several people who were too far from substantial shelter, or took no timely Warning to get to it. And no sooner were these prodigeous Stones melted, for the Sun shined out hot a little after but the Water came pouring down from the Hills into the Valleys and Plains, so prodigeously, that many Sheep, Swine, and other Cattle were swept away and driven violently by the Torrent into Meadows, Rivers and other Dpths, and there perished: Several Mills were trown down, that stood on Rivulets, and some people is said to be drowned in them, and for a time there was a fearfull Inundation, which has done much harm to the Grass and Corn the like for suddenness and Violence not having happened in these parts for many Ages.
CHAP. IV. A dreadfull Account of two Armies seen fighting in the Air, near Nantz in Britany, or France. STrange and amazing things in this nature, have been seen in Coun∣tries, near some Change and Catas∣trophy to warn them to a timely Re∣pentance of their sins, when the Judgements are hanging over their heads before the destruction of Jerusa∣lem, Armies (with great blasts of thun∣der and lightning) were seen coming towards it, and men on horseback (as we find in the Macchabees) runing on each other with firie spears & launces & many other histories are full of such prodigies, such a thing happened in Enland, before the unnatural Civil wars broke out in 1641, and in Ger∣manie it has often happened, and fore∣run some great calamity.
But now it seems it is come into France, near to the place afoeesaid. As Letters from the Marquess D' Laverden and others sent to the French Court, testifie, viz. That two Armies were seen fighting over the Heath of Pontive whilst a great Body of reserved men stood still: That the Ingagement lasted two hours, to the great Terror and astonishment of the Spectators, and then vanished away: and it was observed the Colours of the one appeared all white, the other of a bloody colour, that former had the Sun in its colours, which vanished first▪ and the Truth of the Story being very well attested, it furnishes abundance of matter of Speculation to all: and there bing an account of it printed in France upon the peopls Conjectures that the vanishing of the Colours with the Sun, In it signified the defeat of Lewis his great Undertakings; for the Invsion of England and further concluding▪ that the end of the War would be fatal to their Nation, the thing was surpressed, and the Printer im∣prisoned, but that stopt not the murmour and fears of the Vulgar who being weary of oppression by Taxes, Long for a Peace, FINIS.
seven-headed dragon
