h1419 e476_41 99864879 117111
CERTAIN QVAERIES TOUCHING The Rise and Observation OF CHRISTMAS; Propounded to the consideration of all such as are zealously (but blindly) affected towards the Ob∣servation of it. To which an answer is desired and expected BY JOSEPH HEMING. LONDON Printed, Ann: Dom: 1648.
Certaine Quaeries touching the rise and observation of Christmas, &c. Quaere I. WHether such religious customes as are binding to all the Churches of Iesus Christ, ought not to have sure footing upon the Word of God, or Apostolicall practice? II. Whether you can substantially prove that Christ was borne on the 25 of December? and what your proofes are? III. Whether the celebration of that day (grant he was borne on it) can be clearely warranted by you from Scripture? and what your Scrip∣tures are?
IV. Whether you can cleare it by sound conse∣quence from the New Testament, though not set downe there in totidein verbis? V. Whether you can do it by universall tradi∣tion? VI. Whether (in case it can be evidenced by none of these, viz. plaine Text, sollid Inference, uni∣versall Tradition) it be not a moere humane in∣vention, and so Will-worship? And how you will one day acquit your selves before God, for placing, and crying up mens Inventions, in∣stead of the Institutions of Iefus Christ? And whether it were not faithfull dealing with poore simple people to tell them that you have neither of these to warrant it? VII. (Since daies and times commanded by God himselfe to be observed under the Law, were and are unlawfull under the Gospell) Whether daies and times commanded by men, and not
by God, under the Gospell, are not lesse law∣full. VIII. Whether the true and genuine Interpretati∣on of Christmas be Christ man? And whether to perswade people tis so, be not to abuse and de∣lude them? And whether we may not as well interpret Candlemas Candleman, Michaelmas Michaelman, as Christmas Christman? IX. Whether the Saints are bound to rejoice in the birth of Christ on that day men superstiti∣ously call Christmas, more then at other times? And whether the Lords day be not [the] day appointed for them to rejoice on? X. Whether Christmas day ought in any respect to be esteemed above another of the Weeke daies? And whether people may not without offence to God follow their lawfull vocations on that day? XI. Whether you thinke the Parliament and Assemblie have erred and played the fooles in
condemning and rasing out Holy-daies not warranted in the Word? And whether to ob∣serve them be not highly to dislike, and flatly to contradict (in point of practice at least) their proceedings in order to a Reformation? XII. Whether (since most men and women in England do blindlie and superstitiouslie beleeve Christ was borne on that day) preaching on it doth not nourish and strengthen them in that beleefe? XIII. Whether this Feast had not its rise and growth from Christians conformitie to the mad Feasts Saturnalia (kept in December to Sa∣turne the Father of Gods) in which there was a Sheafe offered to Ceres Goddesse of Corne; a hymne in her praise called or ? And whe∣ther those Christians by name, to cloake it, did not afterwards call it Yule; and Christmas (as though it were for Christs honour?) And whe∣ther it be not yet by some (more ancient then truelie or knowinglie religious) called Yule, and
the mad plaies or sports (wherewith tis celebra∣ted, like those Saturnalia) Yule-games? And whether from the offering of that Sheafe to Ce∣res; from that song in her praise; from those gifts the Heathens gave their friends in the Ca∣lends of Ianuarie, ominis gratia; did not arise or spring our blazes; Christmas Kariles, and New-yeares gifts? XIV. Whether conformitie to, and retention of heathenish Customes be commendable in Chri∣stains, sutable or agreeable with Gospell princi∣ples, though under pretext of Christ Honour and Worship? XV. Whether you are not bound to prove your practice for the conviction and satisfaction of your Brethren, whose duty it is to walke with you in things agreeable to the mind of Christ? And in case you cannot; Whether you ought not to acknowledge your errour, lay downe your practice (as others have done theirs) no longer befooling and misleading the People committed to your charge?
XVI. Whether in case you returne no answer to these Quaeries, I have not ground sufficient to conclude you utterly unable to give any ratio∣nall account of your practice, now put upon it? From my Study in Vttoxeter. 1648. FINIS
