H1740 E100_13 99872890 155862
Theeves, Theeves: OR, A RELATION OF Sir IOHN GELL'S proceedings in Darbyshire, in gathering up the Rents of the Lords and Gentlemen of that County by pretended authority from the two Houses of PARLIAMENT. Printed in the Yeare M.DC.XLIII.
THEEVES THEEVES: OR, A Relation of Sir John Gell's proceed∣ings in Derbyshire, in gathering up the Rents of the Lords and Gentlemen of that County. IT was most happily observed by His Sacred Majestie, upon occasion of the Ordinance for the Twentieth part, that The same power which robbed His Subjects of the Twentieth part of their estates, had by that made a claime, and in∣tituled it selfe to the other nineteene, when it should be thought fit to hasten the generall ruine: in which His Majestie hath proved but too true a Prophet. For when these great Assertors of the publique Li∣bertie, had found some possible hopes to prevaile in that, amongst the wretched and infatuated people of the Citie of London, they forthwith flattered themselves into a beliefe, that they should finde as much obedience, and as pernitious instruments to effect their ends in the Country also. They practiced first upon the Citie, as anciently unskilfull Empericks did on their slaves and servants; not doubting if they thrived and prospered in that experiment, but the whole Kingdome shortly would become their Patient. And there∣to they would goe no further at the first attempt then a twentieth part, which was conceived to be no pressing imposition: know∣ing full well, that if the Subject could be brought to submit unto it, they did immediately devest themselves of that right and property, which by the wisedome and justice of former Parliaments was pro∣vided for them; and that it would be no hard matter for the next new Ordinance to take all at once. He that is once so skilled in the
Art of gaming, as to play at Pluck-penny, will quickly come to Sweep-stake: and so it proved in the event. For what did follow hereupon but loane upon loane, and leavy after leavy, untill the summe of the executions amounted to two millions of money, as hath beene openly affirmed in the House of Commons: and after such a vast effusion of the Treasure of the Kingdome, a loane of 6000l to be raised at once upon that Citie; a leavy of 4000l a mo∣neth to be raised for ever, if they sit so long; 8000l a moneth im∣posed to fortifie the Towne against their Soveraigne; collections under severall stiles to the same ill ends; and on refusall of the twentieth part so unjustly called for, the whole estate of many a rich and wealthy Citizen, forcibly taken from him, against Law and Ju∣stice, under pretence of a distresse; and he himselfe committed to some common Goale, at Colchester, Yarmouth, Harwich, Rochester, or wheresoever else these offended powers, those laesa numina (for they are more then Kings already) have been pleased to send them. And at this instant a designe to lay an Excise on all the Wine and To∣bacco to be sold in London, for speeding of the which, their Generall is expected to come shortly thither; that by the terrour of his Armes it may passe the easier: which if it take effect upon those commo∣dities, and in the Citie of London onely for the present time, will quickly be extended to all kindes of Victuals; and finally obtruded upon all the Kingdome. This tryall made upon the Citie, though they found more relu∣ctance and resistance in it, then they had promised to themselves; their next designe is to attempt the like invasion on the whole bo∣dy of the Realme. Accordingly an Ordinance is made by the Lords and Commons, for the speedy raising and levying of money, (that is to say, 150000l per mensem) for the maintaining of their Armies, to be assessed upon the Cities of London and Westminster, and every Coun∣ty and Citie of the Kingdome of England and Dominion of Wales; Commissioners appointed to impose and collect the same, after the formes of severall Acts of Parliament made this present Session, proportions predetermined of for all the Counties and chiefe Townes, according to the platforme (never knowne before) of raising the 400000l to discharge their debts; severall penalties en∣joyned, and diverse extraordinary Acts of force and violence autho∣rized thereby, to compell the Subject to yeild to so unreasonable
and unjust a Taxe; and pretty slights devised to betray those men into their power, whom they could neither terrifie by threats, nor compell by force. Of this last kinde one of the finest Artifices was to make themselves the generall Lardlords of the Common-wealth, and bring the Tenants, Bayliffes, and other Officers of the English Gentry, to be responsall unto them for their Rents and Duties: it being declared in the said Ordinance, That the Collectors of this Taxe should have power respectively to enquire of any summe or summes of money due, or to be due to any person so assessed, (which shall refuse to pay the said monethly rates) from any person or persons, for any Rents, Tithes, Goods, or Debts, or any other thing or cause whatso∣ever; and to compound for any of the said Rents, Tithes, Goods, Debts, due to the person so assessed, respectively as afore-said, with any person or persons, by whom the said Rents, Tithes, Goods, Debts, or other things due unto the said person so assessed, respectively ought to be paid and accompted for; as also to give full discharge for the money by them so received, upon composition or otherwise; which discharge shall be good and effectuall to all intents and purposes. So farre the Letter of the Ordinance. And to say truth, it stood with Reason and with Justice both that it should be so, that they who had released themselves of all subjecti∣on to their Soveraigne Lord, seized on His Revenues, prohibited the serving in of His accustomed Provisions, applied the ordinary Cu∣stomes imposed on Merchandize to their owne proper use, and stop∣ped all wayes, as much at least as in them was, by which His Maje∣stie might subsist in the condition of a private Gentleman, should al∣so free and manumit inferiour persons from all manner of service to their Lords, appropriate unto themselves the whole Revenue of the Kingdome, and in conclusion breake in sunder as well the bonds of Oeconomicall as of Politicall obedience. For though it was concei∣ved at first by some moderate men, who would faine nourish confi∣dence where there was no hope; that this was onely done to content the Citizens in making them believe that all the rest of the King∣dome should beare the burden of the Warre as well as they; and that it was not to be put in execution, but where the people were already inured to bondage: yet this was but a sickmans hope, which usually layeth hold on any thing that comes next to hand; it being
resolved from the beginning to exercise this prodigie of Arbitrary power and tyranny (as it is called most justly by His sacred Majesty) in all parts and places, where either their partie was so servill as wil∣lingly to yeeld unto it, or their authoritie so strong as to force obe∣dience, which being perceived by His Majesty he caused a Procla∣mation to be published, dated March the 8. forbidding all assessing, collections, and paying of the twentieth part, and of all weekly taxes by colour of any Orders or Ordinance of one or both Houses of Parlia∣ment, under such severall paines and penalties to the Assessors, Colle∣ctors, and such as shall assist therein, as are there expressed. His Majestie had good reason to expect of the English Subjects, who have beene anciently so zealous of their native Liberties, that wil∣lingly they would not helpe to betray each other to a shamefull ser∣vitude: especially when as His Majesty appeared so visibly in de∣fence thereof, not onely by his Declarations and Proclamations which might be valued as a cheape and easie favour, but by adven∣turing his owne life and fortunes to preserve their Priviledges. But notwithstanding all his care of his sacred Majesty to Pro∣tect his Subjects, & the presumptions that he had to find His people answerably mindefull of their native property: there want not many in most Counties, (in all Counties some) who feare not to bee looked upon as the betrayers of the Lawes and Liberties they were born unto, so they may bring about those ungodly ends, for which they have engaged both their faith, and fortunes. And amongst these I meete with none more practicall then Gell of Darbyshire, who being notoriously guilty of high Treason against His Majesty, and publikely proscribed by Proclamation, is come at last to that condition, that he hath little reason to hope for better, or feare to fall into a worse estate, then he now is under. In this regard, he with the rest of his Accomplices, Pretending or having a Commission from both the Houses of Parliament, hath undertaken to discharge this dreadfull Ordinance, in all those parts and places where he hath authority, or can procure authority by his power and Armes: especially on those well-affected Gentlemen and others of more eminent note, who have the courage not to yeeld to so wilde a Ty∣ranny; or so much loyalty and common prudence, as to assist their Soveraigne in their owne defence. And to this end he sends out
warrants unto the Constables of each hundred within the veirge of his Commission, with notice to the Tenants of all such persons, whose names he anexed in a schedule, to appeare before him and his Associates at a place appointed; and to compound with them for their rents, promising to abate the fourth part, and give acquittance for the whole; and with these subtle Acts and promises, mingling such powerfull threates and terrours, as were conceived to have most influence upon Vulgar spirits. One of which warrants com∣ing by good luck to my hands, I have here transcribed, that all the Subjects of this Kingdome may perceive at last (if willfully they have not put out their owne eyes) how neare they are to that gene∣rall ruine of their Rights and Liberties, to which they have betray∣ed themselves by their blinde obedience, To the Constable of Ackmanton. Whereas these unnaturall warres at this present, are fomented & maintained by Papists and Malignants, to the utter undoing of ma∣ny honest men, and the ruine of the whole common-wealth: for the better preventing of which miserie, and to do the best wee can to put a speedy end to these destractions, according to the trust reposed in us by the Ordinance of Parliament, we thinke fit and do command you that presently upon receipt hereof, you give notice to all the Tenants within your Constablerie, if any of the Persons named in a Schedule herewith sent you, that henceforward they pay all their rents due to any of those persons or to any other that contribute, or beare Armes against the Par∣liament, to the Committee here at Darby, or to such other Person or Persons as the said Committee shall nominate. And we all pro∣mise that such of those Tenants that shew their forwardnesse to bring in their Rents to the Committee at Darby by our Lady-day next, or within four dayes afterwards, shall have a discharge a∣gainst their Landlords of the whole rent, and shall have a fourth part abated them; And those Tenants that are refractorie and come not willingly to us, shall not onely be forced to pay their whole rents, but also shall be proceeded against as Malignant Persons, and such as endeavour the continuance of these troubles. Given under our hands, March. 1642.
Post-script. You may let such of these Tenants know that if they cannot procure the whole rents so soone as is appointed, yet if they bring part to the Committee at Darby at that time, then they shall have further time for the residue, and such abatement as the Committee and they shall agree of. signed. Iohn Gell. Tho. Gell. Iohn Gresley. Matt. Hallowes. Nor were the Persons whose estates were thus disposed of, of any ordinarie ranke and quality, such upon whom experiments of this dangerous nature, might be tried most safely: but the most choyse and eminent men both of Nobilitie and Gentry in all that County, as you intelligent reader, may perceive by their very name, being these that follow in the schedule. The Earle of Newcastle. The Earle of Devonshire. The Lord Maltravers. Sr. Andrew Kniveton. Sr Wil. Savil. Sr. Ioh. Harper of Caulk. Sr. Io. Fitz. Herb. of Tissington. Mr. Barnesly. Mr. Iohn Bullock. Mr. Rowland Eyre. Mr. Poole of Spinkehill. Mr. Pusey. Mr. Humlock. Mr. Will. Millard. Mr. Hen. Gilbert. Mr. Iohn Cuffe. Mr. Francis Cavendish. Mr. Iackson. The Earle of Shrewsbury. The Earle of Chesterfield. Mr. Henry Hastings. Sr. Edward Moseley. Sr. Ioh. Harper of Swarstone. Sr. Io. Fitz-Herbert of Norbury. Mr. Hen. Merry. Mr. Iohn Merry. Mr. Powtherell. Mr: Iohn Fretchwell. Mr. Iohn Shawcrosse. Mr. Iohn Byram. Mr. Stanford. Mr. Aston Cockaine. Mr. Edw. Loe. Mr. Will. Stanhope. Mr. Eltoft. Mr. Burridge.
Mr. Christopher Eoe. Mr. Howson. Mr. Savill of Backwell. Mr. Th. Bagshaw of Ridge. Mr. Nic. Brown of marsh. Mr. Richard Cooke. Mr. Sidenham. Mr. Iohn Pale. Mr. Boden of Boden. Mr, Rich. Carrier. He must be needs abused to an infinite dulnesse, who findes not sensibly how utterly destructive these proceedings are of the rights and Liberties of the English Subject; when once the Tenant is se∣duced to deceive his Landlord, to play the knave by the authority of Parliament, and to be tempted to it by so faire a baite, as the a∣baitement of his rent in so large a measure; which doubtlesse is prevailing Oratorie with most country people: needs must he be extremely stuped, who seeth not what poore and groundlesse hopes the lower shrubs may have to avoyd the blowe; when once the Axe is laid unto the Root of these goodly Cedars. For howso∣ever most if not all of these whose names we meet with in that sche∣dule, may be comprehended in the stile of malignants and delin∣quents (termes of no signification in the Lawes of England) as they are most commonly; yet who sees not, how easily that man may be called malignant, or Voted up for a delinquent, whose large reve∣nues may invite them so to stile the owner, in hope to benefit them∣selves by the confiscation. Do we not see, that to be an honest man is to be a Malignant, when those who guided by the rules of com∣mon honesty, make conscience of paying their Rents unto any other then their rightfull Landlords, are presently declared to be Malig∣nants, and threatned in Gell's Warrant produced before, to be pro∣ceeded against as Malignant Persons? And if that common honesty be thought sufficient (as it seemes to be) to make men Malignants; thinke we that loyaltie, being a duty of more excellent and more publike nature, will not as easily be found sufficient to make men Delinquents? If so, as so assuredly it is, then let us seriously consi∣der to what degree of tamenesse we have brought our selves, when persons of such desperate fortunes (as those who are imployed most commonly in these guilty offices) are furnished with a power to re∣ceive our Rents, compound for our Debts, dispose of our Estates, and fell our Goods: and finally to undoe those poore honest men,
who shall not readily betray their Masters, or put a cheat upon their Landlords. Quid Domini facient, audent cum talia Fures? If Gell and such as he have this power upon us, 'tis time to give up all to these awfull hands, the little finger of the which is grown heavier to us, then the loynes of all the Kings that have reigned in England, were on our Progenitors. And yet so tender would they faine be thought of the Subjects liberties, that when their Generall had sent out a warrant for raising 52 l. out of the Towne of Richmond, to∣ward the payment of his Souldiers quartered thereabouts; it was complained of, and condemned in the House of Commons, as being destructive of the peoples propertie, by which it seemes to be a∣gainst the Priviledge of Parliament, that any but themselves should contribute to the ruine of the Common-Wealth. Nor let them thinke, who hitherto have beene the instruments of this wretched servitude, or have beene wrought upon so farre as to contribute Armes and Money to their owne undoing; that they live in Goshen, and that not one of all the Plagues which afflict their neighbours, shall come neare their dwellings. The frequent plunde∣rings of their friends, as well as of such others as affect them not; and Master Pyms defence of Long on the like occasion, that many things are to borne with, if they conduce unto the great and necessary affaires of the Common-wealth; shewes evidently what their friends must looke for, when they have served their turne upon their enemies. And that will prove in fine such a churlish curtesie, as Polyphemus promised to his loved Ʋlysses; which was to keepe him till the last, and not to eate him till he had devoured all his fellowes. With how much better hopes of successe and fortune, may they permit themselves to be disabused, resume the use of their owne sences, and not give up their intellectuals, nay their very soules, to the lusts of those, who all this while have held them captive, and shortly mean to make them follow their triumphant chariots. With how much fairer possibility to enjoy their rights, may they unite both hearts & hands to defend His Majesty, considering that by so doing they de∣fend themselves: and rather choose to give his Majesty nineteen parts to preserve the twentieth, though tis our hope that we shall never be reduced unto those extremities; then by so giving up the twentieth part, or indeed any part at all to loose all the rest, which of
all likelyhood will follow after, if not timely remedied. I ad no more, but that if these considerations and examples prevaile not on us, and that we do not somewhat speedily to assert our liberties, the blessing of Issachar will fall heavy like a curse upon us, and we of this brave free-borne nation, which heretofore hath beene the won∣der, as it was the envy of the Christian world, will come to be the strong Asse which the Scriptures speak of, crowching between two bur∣thens: strong onely in our patience of induring pressures, and crow∣ching to so poore a degree of slavery, as to be brought to kisse the rod, wherewith all the scourge us. Which as it is the greatest infamie, the severest bondage that can be possibly imposed on men borne to servitude; so is it farre more odious and unsufferable to men of judgements and courage, then the sharpest death. FINIS.
