H336 E859_1 99862763 114939
GODS APPEARING For the TRIBE of LEVI: IMPROVED In a Sermon Preached at St. Pauls, Nov. 8. To the Sons of Ministers, then solemnly ASSEMBLED. By GEO: HALL, Minister at St. Botolph Aldersgate. Rom. 8.31. ; LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lyon in Pauls Church Yard, 1655.
TO THE READER. Reader, I Can hardly satisfie my selfe, and thee much lesse, who dost wonder to finde me in Print, My comming forth into this open light, who have rejoyced in my close retyrednesse; is, as if the Batt should stare the Sun in the face, at noon day. I de∣sire thee to know, that, as the service fell un∣expectedly upon me by Lot, so the perfor∣mance no lesse unexpectedly ingageth me, to
be thus publicke: I was not a little tempted, to decline the employment, and even ready to say in some discouraging Considerations, O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the hand of him, whom thou wilt send: And see, how my Experience justifieth my Fears; the Re∣port is come to me, of one (an unknowne Hearer) who hardly refrained himselfe in the Congregation, from clamouring against me, as a Preacher of false Doctrine: Ser∣pents will bite the heels; I am in this some∣what concerned, to submit to common cen∣sure what was delivered; let the false Do∣ctrine be pointed at, I desire no mercy, and shall justifie every syllable: The adventure was (in my owne apprehension) great, while (as St. Paul in that time of his greatest perill, when the Ship was falne into a place, where two Seas met) so was I ingaged, betweene opposite Parties, which I was to speake unto; the rigid Punctilio-men, both of the right hand, and of the left; unto whom, to speake of any thing tending to Moderation, is the same thing, as to bring severall swelling
mountaines together, to grow into one even ground: But, as they do not finde me so for Communion with dissenting Brethren, as to buy it upon the unfit termes of yeelding up my owne sure Principles; so I wish them to sit downe, and calmely consider, whether (as Christians) we are not bound to make all faire offers for it we may, and to lay downe all our Animosities, of which the Mischeif is so sadly visible. Now, that I may be sure not to disappoint thee, I promise little i this Sermon, but the Subject, the extraordinary occasion, the Orthodoxy, the plaine, open Honesty, and Zeale, without intemperate heat: If thou finde something, which may be of good use, and (for the temper) proper and seasonable (as some would perswade me) I repent not my well meant few dayes labour, most glad∣ly would I bestow, and bee bestowed, If in the least I may be profitable. I never cared (as all who have known me, can witnesse) to wrap up, and hood my self, as shy of discovering what I am, and now it
will appear, I am no Changeling, though one, who would sacrifice himselfe for the Unity or Gods Church. I would give thee a little further advertise∣ment; For that Generation of men, who are haters of Ministers Toto genere, who are for a , nothing lesse then utter extirpation of us; and who, if they were Basilisks (as they are Serpents) would look us dead; These I do either roughly treat, or slightingly passe by: Disingenuity, is th  Vis plastica; And what can Ingenuity, or reasoning prevail upon such? As for the other sort, who face us, and with the mustered Forces of their pretended Gifts, do invade our Pulpits, and pull away the Cushion from us: We stand and admire not them, but the infinite patience of God, who plucketh not his right hand out of his bosome, to consume, such uncommissioned underta∣kers; He judge between them, and us (whom he hath been pleased to seperate, and call neer unto himself) Whether their taking our Cen∣sers, and holding forth, be upon any warrant, or no; I am sure it will be hard for them to
plead, what We can. I am vvilling to suppose thee a sober Well-wisher to a fixed Ministry, and I hope, one who dost solicite God, in thy Prayers, for us who are beset with so many, and those unreasonable Adversaries; In lieu of those Prayers, take our blessing with thee, that God would give thee such Wisdome, as is most needfull to guide, and direct thee, in the worst, and most perilous times, that thou mayest steer an even, safe course, without dan∣ger of making Ship-wrack of thy Faith and good Conscience, till thou arrive in thy wish∣ed Haven, In sinu Abrahae, out of all the still new threatning Stormes, of this tempestuous evill World.
Gods appearing for the Tribe of LEVI. NUMB. 17.8. And it came to passe, that on the Morrow Moses went into the Tabernacle of witnesse, And behold the Rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth Budds, and bloomed Blossoms, and yeelded Al∣monds. A Good day, and happy design of our solemn Meeting, a Meeting not of Vanity but Piety, not , to make a shew of our selves, to number our Tribe, that it may be spoken how many of the Lords people, are Sons of the Prophets; but in sin∣glenesse of heart, to present and dedicate our selves
unto the God of our Fathers: We are come up hi∣ther,Psal. 122.4. as the Tribes to the Temple at Jerusalem, Even the tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord: And blessed be his Name, who taketh pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants, and hath given us this occasion of a free and solemne Convention. Micha 3.11.People in this Age, love to talke of Gods appear∣ings for them, Fondly leaning upon him, and saying, Is not the Lord amongst us? But let the House of Levi now say, The Lord hath appeared for us of a truth; and,Ps. 62.24. It is well seen O God, how thou goest, how thou our God, and King, goest in the Sanctuary: He hath appear∣ed, I say, both for his Priesthood, under the Law, and for his Ministers under the Gospel; and this have I prepared to entertaine you with (which the Lord hath brought suddenly to me) and I hope it will prove savoury meat, that a blessing may follow it; How God did manifest his especiall favour to the House of Levi, in the Signall Election of Aaron, the Head, and Prince of the Tribe. The Text points us to look back to what had pas∣sed before,Rom. 8.7. and there we find, that as Sin took occasion by the Law to work evill in the Apostle, so here Mercy took occasion by wickednesse and rebellion to work good, to magnifie and exalt it self. A Mutiny was kindled, by some hot headed men, levelling Spirits, and Pretenders to Giftednesse, against their Gover∣nours, Moses and Aaron; they put themselves for∣ward in a pretended zeal, to give a check to the in∣croachment of the Priest upon them, in an assumed peculiarity of Office, in setting up a Pale, where all
(as they thought) should be Common: Corah the Ring-leader, gets many Complices to second him, no lesse then two hundred and fifty Captains of Israel, they together, take stomack, roundly to tell their Leaders, that they took too much upon them, that they acknowledged no such difference to be made between them and others: If they were annointed, yet the people also had an Unction of Holinesse, and would allow no such discrimination, as their arro∣gance made: Thus early did the humour of striving with the Priest begin, that we may not wonder at it now; no small discouragement was this to Aaron, especially, when he considered who they were that maligned him, even of his own Tribe, of Levi, for so I find them to have been, associated with some Reube∣nites, indeed the Levites did rise against Aaron, and the Reubenites against Moses. The Quarrel grew hot, and the Issue was easily foreseen to be the worst confusi∣on, and reasoning the matter with unreasonable men, would not compose and end it, some extraordinary Expedient was necessary to stop the Train, before it went far: It was time for Moses to consult God, yea, for God also, to lay to his hand, to arise and shew himself, when thus his Priesthood was invaded; and such an Issue is devised, to which the matter should be put, as the Mutiniers could not but confess just & reasonable, and should find most convictive of their Insolency, Censers to be taken by both, and so the Controversie to be decided from Heaven, by a Glory resting upon that part, which God should owne, so it was. But the conviction of such Wretches, was not enough, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? It
was fit, that the Honour of God which now suffer∣ed, should be magnified in their exemplary punish∣ment, and that by his immediate hand, a discrimina∣tion should be made, between those whom he had called neer unto himself, and others, who would not own any: And behold, that the World might take notice, they were judg'd un worthy to tread upon Gods earth, who had no more regard to his Sacred Institution, the earth cleaves under them, becomes an open Sepulcher, and swallowes them up alive, with no intention to cover their Fault, when it cove∣red their persons. Their personall punishment was not enough nei∣ther, after-times might forget any such judgment, or mis-report it. Corahs Spirit might rise again in o∣thers, and raise new disturbances; to prevent that danger, God would give the people a visible, and la∣sting sign, in what particular Tribe, the Priesthood should rest, a Rod must be brought for every Tribe, and the name of the chief of every Tribe written up∣on it: and that Rod of the twelve (all being layd up together in the Tabernacle) which should be found to blossome, and flourish, that should give a cleer evidence, and put it out of all dispute, for suc∣ceeding times, out of which Tribe, and what parti∣cular man was designed, and pitched upon by God, for his Priest: It was done accordingly, and then the Text comes in, And it came to passe, &c. Now that this Text may be to us, according to the subject of it, a Rod budding and bringing forth, not Blossoms only, but Fruit also, let us make the best improvement of it we may, and let your thoughts be
exercised upon the History the Mystery of it. The History, what more remarkable passages are in that? The Mystery, how usefull, pertinent, and applica∣ble with us? What then are the more remarkable things of the Story? 1. Aarons Rod budds, consider the several Rods, when layd up, they were all alike, one as little pro∣mising as another, the Characters as fairly written, of the names of the rest, as of Aarons, and yet behold, as visible a difference appears between them, as be∣tween a living, growing, Fruitfull Branch, and a bundle of dry sear sticks: Do we look into nature for a reason of this, that was quite non-plust: It could not work beyond the Sphear of its activity, and did as much forbid one Rod to flourish, as ano∣ther. Can a Rush grow without Mire?Iob 11. Iohn 5. A Branch that is cut off grow, except it abide in the Vine? In the natu∣rall imposibility of this, lies the strength of our Savi∣ours Argument, and Application. But we easily over-look nature in this, that God, who at first made all things to have a being out of nothing, could well make this Rod to budd, without earth, Or moisture, or other helps, and advantages: It is not now so ingenious to ask, How could this thing be? As why? and that is as easily answered; All Isra∣el were representatively in these twelve Rods, and it was necessary, a difference should be made, the other twelve Princes standing in competition, and think∣ing themselves as well qualified for the Priesthood,
as he who was invested with it; Now surely those Princes believed the Priesthood to be the greatest honour, who made this the height of their emulous ambition, and were in good hopes they should have carried it, they would not else have had their names put into this Divine Lottery, written in severall Rods. And necessary it was in that juncture of time, that some one Rod should keep life in it self, and how vainly should they be Competitors any longer, against whom God did thus manifestly appear. 2. Aarons Rod doth not only bud, but blossome, putting forth it self, and giving proof of its germina∣tion; Nature is slow, and leasurely in its producti∣ons, the most lively branches which continue in the Tree, cannot make Buds and Blossomes at once, how much lesse a twig cut off from the sap that nourish∣ed it; We must therfore conclude, the finger of God was here, there was something more then ordinary in Aarons Blossoming Rod: It was of an Almond Tree, according to that in the Prophet Jeremies Vision, I see the Rod of an Almond Tree;Ier. 1.11. The Originall word comes from  Vigilare and Festinare, to a wake, and to make hast, because the Almond Tree is the first in the Spring, that awakes and hastens to put forth it self: And most elegantly doth the Royall Preacher set forth the gray haires of venerable old Age, by the Blossomes of the Almond Tree,Eccl. 5.12. The Almond Tree shall flourish, the Blossomes of that being white, and com∣ing out soonest: But the Story here shewes us a pro∣duction too quick for the Almond Tree also, though the quickest of all, justly marvelous in our eyes, Buds and Blossomes in one night, what a quick Spring was
this? Here I would give a hint to our suddainly gifted and illuminated Bretheren, if they would be pleased to take it; Though Aarons Rod did bud and blossome in a night, his Qualifications for his Office did not come so suddenly, both his inward acquired and not infused Abilities,Exod. 29.35. and his outward Calling and solemn Annointing and Consecration for seven daies together, do all shew, too much hast may be made into the Priesthood: And what can I say to those Novices, against whose admittance the Apostle entred his Caveat, who will needs be in Aarons Office before their Buds be come forth. 3. Aarons Rod, did not onely bloom Blossoms, but also yeilded Almonds, not onely gave hopes, and promises, and Earnest of Fruit, but the fruit expe∣cted, and that not overhastned, but kindly, and come to due maturation: This was the height of the wonder, Buds, Blossomes, ripe Fruits, and all with∣in so little a time, as a night; who sees not in these severall productions, both satisfaction given, to that present age, in the Fruit, a sure proofe of Aarons Calling to the Priesthood, and security given to Posterity, for constant succession, in the Buds and Blossoms, which did tell what fruit should come in after times, from the same Stock. Of these Almonds much good use may be made, many wayes; we con∣tent our selves now with this; There is no such good, and sure proofe, of the calling of God, as Fruitfulnesse. Some more weak and scrupulous sheep of Christs Flock, do stand looking upon their Pastor, and que∣stion his Calling, to take the care of them when
they should be feeding; they scruple whether their Ministers be lawfully called to the oversight of them, though never so duly ordained, when they might find it by their owne Improvement; let that scruple cease: If with right Ordination (and the continued practice of the Church determines what that is) there be fruitfulnesse in their Ministry, if there be on their part laboriousnesse, watchfulnesse, desire to approve themselves to the consciences of men, endeavour to gaine soules unto God; if they be Doctrinall men (as Doctor Donns word was) , Living Lawes, their lives, sound Com∣mentaries upon their Doctrine, these be evidences enough, here be Almonds upon Aarons Rod. And in this will we make our free appeals to God, to judge between us, the legally ordained Ministers of the Church of England, and whosoever our op∣posers; If we have not fruit to shew of our Callings, which Gifted pretenders shall vainely boast of, if there be not, in all places where we have been setled, some seals of our Ministry, Epistles, and Letters of Commendation of it to be produced; if men have not thrived happily, under our labours, and been fit∣ted for Heaven, if Christs Kingdom be not more ad∣vanced by us, then it can be by any of those Invaders of our Ministry, then let Heaven and Earth be wit∣nesses against us, let us be razed out of the land of the living; yea, we may boldly make the impreca∣tion, Let the earth do by us, as it did by Corah, Da∣than, and Abiram, even swallow us up quick. But stay, Fruits so extempore, so soon ripe, as these Almonds on Aarons Rod, might perhaps as soon wi∣ther;
not so, they were kindly, and lasting, by this good token, That for perpetuall memory, both the Rod and Fruit, were kept in the Arke of God: And in this (if it be fit to make comparisons between them) saith a Reverend Auther; This Rod of Aaron, had the pre-eminence above that of Moses, though that did very great Miracles, yet the wonders which it did, passed away: But this carried still the Miracle in it self, and so was a most precious Relique: And that the Fruit should continue upon it, and that be conti∣nued in the Ark, was also most necessary, for a signe of the perpetually succession of the Priesthood. By the way, If we had then lived, and should have seen the Ark rifled, the Buds, Blossoms, and Almonds (all the good Ornaments of the Rod) pluckt off, and the Rod it self broken, would we not have shaked our heads at it? If any of Levi especially should have been accessary to the mis∣chief, would we not have cryed shame upon them? It is well considered by a Master of Contemplation, who spends good thoughts upon this Subject, what comfort Aaron must needs take, to see his Rod among all the rest, thus flourishing, and fruitful, what a good Assurance he saw in this, of Gods gracious Election, and Approbation of him; And what a satisfaction is it, to us also, whom God hath called neerer to him∣self, to knows, what ample Testimony he hath given to our sacred Calling. And who shall make my Glorying vaine. If I now take a fit occasion, ,Rom. 11.13. (as the Apostle) to magnifie and speak big words of our holy Office: After so much Dirt, and Contempt, as hath been cast upon our Coat, let none call, what I
shall bring for the honour of it, swelling words of va∣nity, but a just vindication, and Apology. To the stopping of the mouthes of all our Vilifiers and Contemners; We will plead the high dignity of our Office, and to the Conviction of all such, as do suggest our uselesnesse, the high necessity and impor∣tance of it. 1. For the Dignity of it first, who can deny, that in the beginning of the World, for many hundreds of years, the Kingdome and Priesthood did concur in the same person, and when they were severed, were divided between two brethren, Moses and Aaron. To Minister before the Lord, was the Prerogative of the First-born: And how observable is it, that the Spi∣rit of God supposes Royalty annexed unto the Priesthood,Exod 19.6. Yee are a Royall Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. ( and so the Sept. renders that, Ex∣od. 19.6. Yee shall be unto me, a Kingdome of Priests: As if to be Royall without the Priesthood, were not Dignity enough, , &c. To Raigne as a Monarch, and to Officiate as a Priest, these are properly inherent in the same person,Arist. pol. 10. saith Ari∣stotle. And that even among Heathens, the Priests were in the highest Esteem, and Veneration, is a State Truth. Among the Egyptians,  Grace with tne precious Crown of Priest∣hood,Isid. petu∣fiot. 2. lib. ep. 291. Is Isid. pelusiots of them; And that they were , Next to the Prince, in dignity, and Authority, Di. Si∣culus assures us,Diod. siculus. That they were so among the Greeks
known, by the several names, of , their Authors give us full account. In what high strains the Greek Fathers speake of this Function, is obvious to all that read them,  the excelling Priesthood, is St. Chry∣sostomes language of it, , the grea∣test of all Ornaments, Nazianzen calls it, , is S Cyrills, a thing honourable and great in Gods esteem; And those, who are in this Office,Concil sar∣dic. Can. 20. to be  venerable, and to be lookt upon with most respect; nay, a Counsell gives it this Elogy, , The name of Priesthood to be Divine, and in the first place, to be reverenced. Hath our Profession been set so high, and have we lived to see it, in a Christian reformed Nation, scorn'd, and layd as low as the dust? The name of Priest, cast as a re∣proach? this is not more the Atheisme, then the Fol∣ly, and weaknesse of men, to make that a terme of scorne, which we have reason to bind as a Crown to us. I would faine know, how, or when, the name of Priest (though we do not affect it under the Gospel, with judicious Hooker,Christus sacerdos quoad , in Terris quoad  in Celis, At∣tingius, we acknowledge it antiqua∣ted, and improper now) when (I say) this name of Priest, fell so low, as to become most vile and con∣temptible? What? was it, when our Lord and Sa∣viour himself was pleased to owne it? A Priest for e∣ver; They are deceived, that think to put us out of Countenance, with giving us a name of greatest ho∣nour; we will beare this after Christ, not as out Crosse, our Burthens, our shame, but our best Eusigne of Honour: We all wil joyn with the Apostle, ,
,Rom. 1.16. I am not ashamed of my Office; And in that word of his, Minus dicitur, plus intelligitur, the Apo∣stle meant more, then he exprest, I am not ashamed, was, not onely, I blush not for the Gospel, I account not my imployment in it, no disparagement, but, Vehementer glorior,Rom. 15.20. I exceedingly glory in it, accord∣ing to that in another place, , In which is implyed, this was his Ambition, this he would contend for, as for a Preferment, as an honour from God; When God commanded his people to be numbred in every Tribe, he appointed all the o∣ther Tribes, to be numbred from twenty years up∣wards as you find.Num. 1.3. But of the Tribe of Levi, the numeration to be from a month upwards, When they were in Fasciis,Oleaster. and lay in their Cradles. One askes the reason of this, and answers, Agnosce Sacerdos, quanti te Deus fecerit, See, O thou, who out of that Tribe art called to the Priests Office, how much thou art beholding to God, above others. I must change the Note Agnosce Sacerdos, quantilli te vulgus fece∣rit. What esteem God hath of us (of our office at least) I wish, people would consider from hence, how he takes the Allitude of mens wickednesse from their Offences against us; This is reckoned as the great aggravation against his people, and brought as a signe of their imminent ruine: This people are as they that strive with the Priest,Hos. 4.4. Or rebuke the Priests; Nay not reverencing their persons was guilt enough, They reverenced not the person of the Priests, slandering them, is made to be a kind of blasphemy () Is the Apostles word:Lam. 4.16. Rom. 3.8. And he that despiseth you, de∣spiseth me, saith our Lord and Master; And how ill
the Affronts, and Indignities offered to Priests and Prophets have sped, and prospered,On John. The Obser∣vation is offered to us, by Reverend Mr. Hildersham, and exemplyfied in foure Kings of Judah, not far one from another, who in the beginning of their Raigns were excellent Princs, and prosperous:2 Chron. 16. 12. 24. 21. 25. 27. 26. 19. But after the violences, ad dishonours they did unto such, they never prospered, but came to ill ends; The in∣stances are, Asa, Joash. Amaziah, Ʋzzia. I must refer you to their Story, and I take my self off, from insi∣sting any longer upon the Dignity of our Office, in which I may quite lose my self. 2. The second thing was the Importance of it, how high that is, of what use we are, let the Apostle be our Speaker, Let a man so account of us,1 Cor. 4.1. as of the Mi∣nisters of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. () as Stewards, without which, such a Family as Gods is, cannot be well administred;Occomonos sociosque Dei. 2 Cor. 5.20. And so Ignatius calls us , Elsewhere, We are Ambassadors for Christ. That is an employment, not of more honour, then use, In reference to which it was said, that we do Causam a∣gere generis humani, We are Agents with God, for men. Our blessed Saviour gives us the name of ,Matth. 5.14. The light of the World, and so S. Chrysostome, , like the light of Heaven, enlight∣ning the Universe: What do they then, that quench this light, that put us under Eushels? In the Verse be∣fore, he called us the Saelt of the Earth; That,V. 13. which seasons all, What have they done, who have cast so many of us out upon the Dunghill? He saith, that we are, as a City on a Hill, in open view; sure then we
are not so obscure, and inconsiderable, as we are made: yea, indeed, as Beacons on a Hil; so we are stil wher we stand weather-beaten, the Winds from every quarter blowing hard upon us; Nazianzen gives us the names of ,Heb. 1.14. Ministring persons, as the Angels are Ministring Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation: Another Greek Father, that we are , Gods Interpreters, and , Procuratores magni Regis, so Valens and Valentinian did call Ministers.Theodoret. Now in which of these names is it, that we are supposed to be uselesse supernumerary Creatures? that may well be spared, and men have no need of us? let people consider us in all changes of times. 1. In times of peace, when all things are quiet, we are , Shepheards, To lead Gods Flock in∣to the green Pastures, and by the still waters: And can the Sheep well want their Shepheards? 2. In times of danger, we are Watch-men, to stand upon the Watch-tower of the Lord, to give warning of evils coming,Isa. 62.6. To tell what of the night. I heve set Watch-men upon thy Walls O Jerusalem: And is there any safety and true security, where no Watch is kept? 3. In times of War, of the greatest use, Charriots and Horse-men: Indeed, some of us have been but too serviceable this way, God forgive their active∣nesse. 4. In times of Seduction, Guides, Reducers of them, who are too easily whistled away, Hunters of the lit∣tle Foxes, Jesuites, Sectaries: And I appeal to every ones experience, did they dare to look abroad, to fo∣rage
and play about, as they do, while our Ministry was in its due power? And here to all Antiministeriall Spirits (perhaps some may be within hearing) unto whom we are such eye-sores, and who would insinuate us, to be such Cyphers, I offer this to be chew'd upon: Wheras they would carry the face, & name of men of Godliness, whether they can shew us, any truly godly persons, that ever appeared against a fixed Ministry? Whereas they would seem to be men of Prudence, and Reason, whether they can shew us, any rationall sober persons that have opposed it? I am sure the Apostle sets forth the Opposers of it, by such Chara∣cters, as they have no reason to be proud of: 1 To be , And let them take their choice of the signification of that, either, wicked, and vicious, or troublesome: 2. To be , Absurd men, of no Topicks; And 3. , men of no Logick, not to be reasoned, or disputed with (and who ever gain∣ed any thing, by entring into the Lists with them) and from such, the Apostle begs the prayers of his Thessalonians, to be delivered, & so do we; Nay,2 Thes. 3.2. he hath another terme for them, if they like it, , Men of sick braines, as well as of corrupt minds.2 Tim. 3.8. And that We, or our Fathers, should be opposed or set against, made , as a signe to be spoken against; We have no reason either to wonder, or complain, when we consider, 1. How much our betters have the same lot with us; when I read that sad place, He poureth contempt upon Princes, My hand is upon my mouth,Psal. 107.40. it may wel be so with us: Nay, when we look higher to the
Prince of peace, that Divine Preacher (who spake as never man spake) and consider,Heb. 12.3. what contradictions of sinners he endured against himselfe. 2. When we consider what our enemies are, such as we heartily pity, wishing unto them, Sanam nemtem. 3. When we consider, what our work and Office is, Predicare nihil aliudest, quam derivaere in se furorem mundi, saith Luther: To Preach, is nothing else, but to chafe, and bait the World; and we may expect no other, but it will turne against us: Our worke is, , as Nazianzen excellently; To snatch away as much as we can from the World, and to give it to God. And because I see, there are , ma∣ny Adversaries, our Ministry is hard beset, by Pa∣pists on one hand, and Sectaries on the other, I can∣not but borrow a few Sands of my houre, to Apologize. The Romanist first, clamours upon our Ministry, as polluted, because marryed, and they look up∣on us, a Solecisme, an absurdity in nature, Sons of Ministers, are as so many Injussa gramina, unbid∣den, illegitimate births, even as bad as Pope Joanes issue: We are therefore most neerly concerned, to take off this blot from our Fathers, and our selves; Indeed, it we could not till now, justifie our Births to be lawfull, it would be somewhat too late to plead it; if we be Weeds, We are overgrown weeds in his Garden of Gods Church: But if (after such able Advocates, as we have, had to plead our Case) we have not enough to justifie a marryed Clergy, let us be used as Bastards, cast out, and denyed
entrance into the Congregation of the LORD. Deut. 23 2. That under the Law, the Fathers were marryed, no question is made, they were onely too much proofs, in their Poligamy; under the Gospell also, there was a universall, unrestrained lawfulnesse of marriage, else the Apostle would never have called the interdiction of this common liberty,1 Tim. 4.1. A doctrine of Devils, as he doth, That place doth not one∣ly warrant our liberty, but sticks a black Brand of Diabolicalnesse upon them, who will not allow it, let them claw it off as well as they can. The Apostle was also  indeed,Acts. 17.18. (as the E∣picureans and Stoicks called him) a Trifler, a Sower of words to little purpose, when he gave that Cau∣tion, That a Bishop should be the Husband of one Wife; If he was not allowed any,1 Tim. 3. That he should have his Chil∣dren in due subjection: If their Marriages were Tres∣passes, and their Children —spuria vitulamina. Strangely, and most unadvisedly,Heb. 13.4. did he proclaim Marriage to be honourable in all, without any Restricti∣ons; If to Ministers it were unclean, what would he bring them into a snare? Will holy precedents add any more authority, and license of marrying to us? The Apostles were most of them (if not all) married men, Peter, Phillip, yea, Paul also; If besides hints to this purpose in Scrip∣ture, which makes it not improbable:1 Cor. 9.5. ad Phil∣lad. Clemens A∣lex and Ignatius be of credit. Will the course of Antiquity from the Apostles carry it? We provoke our Adversaries to disprove us, that till the Counsell of Nice, the liberty of Mar∣riage did continue, inviolable: By this Token, that
when some of the Fathers there, proposed, to have a binding decree of Continency,Socrates, lib. 1. ocap. 80. Socrates calls it a new Law, which they would bring into the Church; And Paphnutius, eminent for his Piety (one who suf∣fered the pulling out of one of his eyes in persecuti∣on, and was so honoured by Constantine, that he kissed the empty place, where his eye had been) who was no married man neither, and therfore the fitter to be heard in this case, cried out with vehe∣mency, that they ought not, to lay that heavy yoak upon men of the Church; And his zealous denying the Proposition, prevailed to stop it. An. 860.Yea, this liberty (though shaken) continued in suspence, under Nicholas 1. witnesse that famous E∣pistle of Huldericus, Bishop of Auspurg, to him, reason∣ing the case strongly with him, unto which the Ad∣versaries are referred, by the Irrefragable Apologist for our married Clergy. An. 1080. Hunting∣don Hist. edit salit, p. 378. Caietan Opusc. Tom. 1. And that Anselme was the first, who in a Synod here in London, forbad marriages in England, to Ec∣clesiasticall persons, we refer to cleer account of Sto∣ry. But we content not our selves with this nei∣ther, we have the ingenious acknowledgments of their own best Champions against them, Noc ratione, nec authoritate probatur? quod absolute loquendo, Saecerdos peccet contrahendo matrimonium. Panormit. de clero conjug. cap. cum Olim. But Panormitan their Lawyer, and a Cardinal also, speaks more fully and honestly, Credo pro b ono, & sa∣lute animarum esset, ut volentes possint matrimonium con∣trahere: And the shuffling of them among themselves, they being no way agreed upon their Verdict; Some saying, that the marriage of Clergy men is forbidden,
Jure divino, Bellermine thinks that too high: Others, Apostolico: Gratean, sees not that neither; Others, Positivo, & mero humano: This division makes their report lesse valued, by any indifferent Judge. And what need we any further prescription to beare out our Clergy Marriages, when we have so many Fa∣mous holy Bishops both in the Eastern and Western Churches, that were married, I shall seem vain in na∣ming them, I onely take notice of Nazianzen,Naz in carmini∣bus de ciia sua. who witnesseth, that he was born of a Bishop: Nay, Eoni∣facius, a Bishop of Rome, Patrem habut presbyterum, saith Platina, I could easily forgive the zeal of these good men, in their declarations against marriage, if I did not find them more loose,Citat. a Rev. Ep. Davenan∣tio in De∣term. and favourable to Fornication, if it had not been said by Pighius and Costerus, Toleravilius est in Saceradote, si fornicationem admittat, quam si ducat Ʋxorem: In their Court of Conscience, Fornication is a veniall sin, but marri∣age a mortall; Indeed not so deadly, but his holiness may dispence with it: And here is the mystery of in∣iquity, the Popes assumed this power of forbidding Clergy Marriages,Ibid. ex A∣quinate. Ʋt dispensare possent de voto Celiba∣tus. But why do we look so farr abroad as Rome, for Adversaries, when vve have so many at home, and even in the middest of us: our Ministry may say With David, They came about me like Bees,Ps. 118.12. Exod. 11.7. O that we could add, And are extinct: Against any of the Chil∣dren of Israel shall not a Dog move hit tongue, or bark; Against us in our vvhole Ecclesiasticall Order, there hath been continuall barking, Martin Mar-prelate, and Mar-Priest also, is still alive; let me familiarly
expresse our Condition, Since the time of our not peevish, and voluntary, but inforced drawing off from Rome, in our Reformation, much like Hagars departure from Sarah, driven away by her impe∣ciousnesse: The Seperatists, and Papists, have been playing at Tennis, and our Hierarchy, and Ministry, are the Balls they tosse; The Seperatist aimes to strike us into the Popes Hazzard, calling us Anti∣christian; and look, how many Bishops we have had, so many Popes; (It is well Pope Cranmer, Pope Latimer, Pope Ridley come in to the number.) The Papist, vvith vehemence Rackets us back a∣gaine, as Schismaticall, and Hereticall, and ill is it with us, which soever vvins the Game: Our Brother Anabaptist (St. Francis was so mannerly, that he used to call every Beast Brother, as our Quakers now, are pleased to call us Fellow-Crea∣tures) And vve pity both the one and the other, saying, Lord have mercy on him for he is Lunatick: the Anabaptist (I say) shoots out his forked Arrows against us (those are his Arguments) bitter words: but shall I Apologize? Nay, let him alone, let him empty his Quiver, without our harme; And let not this day be clouded, vvith any complaints, or passionate reflexions, though I might turne about, and say, Is then not a cause? A better improvement vvill be made, of the little remainder of Time, in some safe, and seasonable vvords of Counsell; and six vvords vvill comprise what I vvould commend to you, as I do to my selfe. Be Thankfull. Be Regular.
Be Circumspect. Be Stedfast. Be Moderate. Be Charitable. 1. Be thankfull, Seemeth it a small matter, sayd Moses to those Mutenous Levites in the Context,Numb. 16.9. That God hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you neer to himself? So, is it a small matter, that, God hath made us Apostolici seminis Frutices, in Tertullians Language, Branches of and Apostolicall ho∣ly Stock? That we have had the Advantages both of stricter Education and better Example? 2. Is it a small matter, that in us,Gen. 27.27. (whose smell is as the smell of a Feild which the Lord hath blessed) not a little of that reproach, is this day taken off, which hath lain upon the Issue, and Posterity of Mi∣nisters, as forlorn, unblest, and destitute, exposed, and left like the Ostriches Eggs in the earth,Iob 39.14. for the dust to warm them, and to passe all hard adventures, that the foot may crush them, or that the wild Beast may break them: We shall be most ungrateful, and unwor∣thy, if we acknowledge not a particular providence over us, yea, if we deny, that our Parents leave us rich Heirs, when they leave us Heirs of Gods Bles∣sing: The Blessing of the Lord, it is that which maketh rich:Pro. 10.12. Who accounts not Jacob the richer, and more blest,Gen. 32. 10. because he began with so little: With my Staff, came I over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands. How many now present may say so? and (I am confident) they do with hearts lifted up unto God, with such a small stock, yea, with nothing did I be∣gin, and now am I become Wealthy. Those, who
cannot go so high, have a competency proportiona∣ble to the way of Trade they are in, and may say, I have enough my Brother, and he who hath enough is rich: Let both sorts give God his due Glory. Thus the rich mans Wealth will be kept from melting, and thus the meaner Estate will grow, and multi∣ply. My second words is, Be regular, answerable to the Extraction. Thucydid. lib. 4., walk worthy of this honourable City, whereof you are Members, and vvorthy of the Parents from whom you descended: Think it not enough to say, We have Abraham to our Fa∣ther: Our Fathers were good men, faithfull in all Gods House, of Worth and Reputation, shining in their Orbs, as Stars of a faire Magnitude; , having their bright Lamps of good practice burning, and their sil∣ver Trumpets of good Doctrine sounding: What is this to us? What, to be the Issue of them who are the light of our Israel, if we walk not as Children of light? What for Hophni and Phineas, to be the Sons good Eli the high Priest, if they be lewd, and gracelesse, and scandalous, making men not onely to loath the Offering of the Lord, but even all then who offer also,Malo sa∣cerdotatem virum Syd. A. pollin. supposed to be as bad as themselves: We know the change laid upon our Parents, To rule their owne house well, to have their Children in subjection with all gra∣vity. Doth it not then lye upon us, to approve our selves so, should vve not all be, Viri sacerdotales; Cle∣rical men, having the Graces of our Fathers, to shine in us, as those precious Stones did on Aarons Breast∣plate:
Next to a debaucht scandalous Minister, which I acknowledge to be the greatest eye-soare in the World; The light which he holds forth, being like a burning Taper in the hand of a Ghost, of a De∣vill, making him look but so much the more gastly, and affrighting: His filthy Conversation is like the steam of a Dunghill, so much more noisome, and of∣fensive, by how much it is more gilded with the beames of the Sun upon it: Next to this I say, is the scandalous Son of a good Minister, he throwes dirt in his Fathers Face, if he be alive, and abuses his Ashes if he be dead; To be the Son of a Religious Mini∣ster, and of Belial too,2 Calab. this is —, I hope I need not presse this any further, J would much rather say with the Apostle, I joy in be∣holding your Order: And—, May no irregular dissolute persons, be reckoned of our Tribe. 3. Be wise and circumspect, Brethren,2 Tim. 3. . 1. we are cast to live in the dregs of time, , In the last daies; Not perhaps, so at the very bottome, That J should undertake to tell you, the end of the World is falling upon us, this next yeare J cannot see that in the Stars, nor by any Apocalypticall Calculations, though some (who are more sagacious) think they do: But in times so neer the last, that they are visi∣bly vvorse, and more Apostaticall then the former worse? J mean, more perilous, and more vvicked. Both do inforce our circumspect walkings; If not to make the daies better (which we should aime to do) yet, that they may not make us worse; Evill times do call for double Prudence, that we may neither be taken in to the Whirpools of danger, nor carried
down the stream of ungodlinesse; certainly never was there such need of the Serpents wisdome and the Doves Innocency, to keep Integrity and Indemnity together, To resolve —, I will be honest and righteous, and discharge a good consci∣ence,Eccles. 7.16. and yet not righteous over-much neither, so hotly and indiscreetly, and peevishly, as to be doing mis∣chief, to tempt, trouble, Why should I destroy my self? , live close, and retired, so as to keep neerest Communion with God, and to have least to do with the World: This I do magnifie, and account, the Apex, the top of wisdome. 4. Be stedfast, not Giddy, and Virtiginous, This Age hath beene taken with an unhappy Vertigo, which hath made men not keep the ground they first stood upon; shall I add inoffensively (while I speak inter nos, and onely of our selves) There hath been a wanton delight, to be meddling, trying ex∣periments, and ringing of Changes — Quieta movere merces magna videbat,Salust. yea, so distemperd have some been, that like the intoxicated man, who (the liquor being busie in his braine) fancyed himselfe at Sea,Athenaeus. in a great Storme, in present danger of Ship∣wrack, and thought there was a necessity of light∣ning the Ship, and throwing some of the lading o∣ver board, and so threw the Goods of the House out at the Windows; So, I say, have some fancyed a present necessity, of abolishing, and throwing a∣way, what they would have done better to have kept; But the worst sicklenesse, and novelty hath been, Growing weary of old Truths (as well as old Establishments) and espousing new fond opi∣nions,
Forsaking the ancient paths,Ier. 18.15. wherein the Pro∣phet adviseth us to walk, and choosing to go in paths not cast up, yea, good God! how many wayes have many been lost? Some proving Apostates to God, and Religion, rellishing the Cup of Romes in∣chantment, and making themselves drunk with it, so that that Scarlet Whore, can openly brag of the numerous Lyst of her new Proselites, and Servants, though they are such indeed, for the most part, that we could well spare them, and care not to Lure them back againe. Others crumbling away into Conventicles,Jer. 12.9. ready to joyne with every frantick Sect, and so making Gods Israel to become a speckled Bird of severall Colours, of all varieties of Religions: O what Rivers can wash off that deep scandall, which sticks upon this late glorious, and most Uni∣form, but now miserably deformed, and even Antick Church, for which we may thank the Giddinesse of men; well, but while others have gone away after strange delusions: Believe you, J beseech you, that you heare Christ calling to us especially vvho are the Sons of his Teachers in Israel, Will yee also go away? Of all, it will be most to our shame, and to the shame of our Fathers house, if while they were strong Pillars in the house of God, vve prove our selves Weather-cocks, turned about vvith every wind. If vve vvho are Branches of the firm Cedars, shall shew our selves, as the soft bending Willowes, of no strength, or Consistency; O let us remember, the best Inheritance our Fathers could leave us, were
their Principles, and let us not (upon any termes) part with our Inheritance. 2 Tim 1.5.The Apostle well insinuates with his young Timo∣thy, telling him, he was perswaded that the same Faith which dwelt in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eu∣nice, was in him also, I do not press this that we should all be of the same Religion, that our Grandmothers were of, because, it was their Religion; but our inhe∣ritance of sound Faith from our Fathers, is the same that his was, from his Mother and Grandmo∣ther, whosoever then be fickle and warping, let us hold our own, and let our word be, ,Eph. 3.17. rooted and grounded in Faith. 5. Be Moderate, and Peaceable; after those un∣happy divisions, for which there hath been and yet is such thought, such bleeding of heart, so many prayers and teares poured out by good men, and wch have cost so much precious blood, what can be more seasonable and needfull, then cementing Coun∣sell?Ier. 32. That all Gods Building (O when wee shall see it) may be raised up, as of one stone; By having Cor unum, & viam unam, one heart, and one way: It is true, Christs Coat hath been miserably rent, in the whole cloath, as well as in the fringe: Do not so much as ask, who made the Rent? let the world judge of that. Do not suppose it hard to be drawne up, and made entire again: Down with whatsoe∣ver Animosities, and study of parties, and pertinacy to keep up, what hath been set up, which have al∣ready given to growing Sectaries such advan∣tage, and to the Devill such occasion, to laugh and
triumph: Let those ill invented differential Termes, whereby we have been distinguished from each o∣ther, be buried and swallowed up, in that name vvhich vvill lead us all hand in hand to Heaven, the name of Christians, J know, here are many of diffe∣rent perswasion from me: But is there any here, vvhom J vvould not gladly accompany, and zea∣lously further towards Heaven? Why then should we not be friends in the way? If my stomack, or any of yours, do rise against the name of Brotherly Com∣munion, which may consist with our severall princi∣ples retained, not differing in Substantials; God take down that Stomack, and make us to see how much we are concerned, to keep the unity of the Spirit in bond of Peace,Phil. 4.5. to make our moderation known unto all men, because the Lord is at hand. Moderation, in what we may: And let me ask in one particular; Why should some in the height of their zeal, for Liturgy, supposeth there can be no Service of God, but where that is entirely used? Why should others againe, think their piety con∣cerned, and trespassed, if I do prefer, and in some considerations, think sit to use a set form? There must be Abatements and allowances of each other, a coming down from our Punctilio's, or we shall never give up a good account unto God. My last word is, Be Charitable; And a good close shall I make, if I maybe heard effectually in this, which is indeed the grand motive and induce∣ment of our summoning one another this day; Not to feast our selves, who are full, but to feed others,
who are hungry and empty; We would this day pay our Vowes of thanksgiving in the great Congre∣gation, for Gods visible blessing upon us, for his goodnesse in letting our Lot fall in so faire ground, and so encreasing our Store. But if we would appear thankful,Exod. 23.15. where is our thank-offering? No man should appear before the Lord empty: What Present do we bring to shew our readinesse, of honouring the Lord with our Substance? How can we but be damped in our enjoyment of the good things we have? To see be∣fore our eyes, so many sad, and only too fit Objects of our Commiseration? Venerable Wanderers, who ill become their condition; And the Relicts of worthy Servants of God (sufferers for a good con∣science) Eating Ashes as bread, and mingling their drink, (if they have any) with weeping; Their very Blessings, adding now to the burthen of their unhappinesse, their Children in worse case then the young Ravens, which God feedeth when they call upon him:Psal. 147.9. And were they the Apostles, or are they not described Mini∣sters, their mournful Widows, and unprovided Chil∣dren, that say to you, the wealthier Citizens, here,1 Cor. 4.8. Now yee are full, now you are rich, we are weak, but yee are strong, yee are honourable, but we are despised, even to this houre, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and have no certain dwelling place. As for me (and I think others are no lesse affected) It is my greatest heart-aking, in the midst of all in∣couragements, which I desire to blesse God for, and it turnes my Bowells within me, to have my Eares daily pierced, with the cries and complaints of the
poor and oppressed, the Widowes and Orphans: Those cries do peirce the Heavens, and if they can∣not move us, what are we made of? My Exhortation is, That those who have yet had none, would from this day put on Bowels of Mercies: And those,Col. 3.12. who find their Bowels troubled within them, would give case unto themselves, by giving relief unto those, whose af∣fliction, sympathy hath made their own; And may the rich blessing God follow them, and theirs, who have had it in their heart and designe, to make this a good day unto the Distressed, now if there were need, I should provoke Charity; I would tell you, 1. While so many are in extream Indigency, your Purses are not your owne, you are but Stewards and Almoners, not proprietors: And next unto drink∣ing up the Teares of Widowes and Orphans, is, not drying them up, when it is in your power to do it. 2. I would urge, it is the Infamy of this age, to have been all in the Ablative case, good at taking a∣way and making Beggers: It is high time vve should turn it into the Dative. 3. J would tell you, in moving for others, J do but exhort you to be good unto yourselves, and yours, that you would encrease your store, by this most beneficiall vvay of holy Usury; Indeed, vvhen accounts shall be cast up, it will be found that the poor are Benefactors unto the rich; You know how the poor Widows little Meale and Oyle encreased in the spending, because spent (in a vvay of charity) upon a Prophet. We shall do vvell to try the Expe∣riment,
vvhether our giving out, not unto one Pro∣phet, but many, Faithfull, Conscionable, Exemplary, unto the Widows of such, or their unprovided Chil∣dren (for these are the intended Objects of our compassion) and strict care vvill be taken of the choice of these, and of the cleane disposall of your charity, that nothing may stick by the vvay in cor∣corrupt fingers) Wee shall do vvell, J say, to make the experiment, vvhether our giving out unto such, vvill not bring more in? It is J confesse, a casting our Bread upon the waters,Eccl. 11.1. vvhere vve vvould think it quite carried away, and lost; But vve need not mi∣strust, After many daies we shall find it, vvith the great∣est advantage: And some of you (J am confident) do already find comfort of your Charity, privately exercised; For, as other duties, so this especially, carries meat in its mouth, as vve say, the very work is a reward: J see in your Countenances, a cheerfull forwardnesse to the good motion, such as becomes you; yea, J am vvilling to believe, that our zeal hath provoked some othrs also, vvho are not strictly of our Fraternity; If so, as their free-will Offerings, vvill, J doubt not, come up as a Memorial before God, so they shall not want the help and advantage vvhich our Prayers can give, that they may ascend and be ac∣cepted, and return to their happy account. I now vvind up all, as you desire the Rod of Aa∣ron should flourish and beare Fruit, that God should appear for his own Tribe, for a fixed Ministry; Ap∣pear you (in your severall capacities) for God: And let your thankfulnesse, your Regular and Ex∣emplary
strictnesse of Conversation, your wise cir∣cumspection, your grounded stedfastnesse, your free Charity, have their perfect work; And as many, as thus resolve to do, Peace be on them and Mercy, and upon the Israel of GOD. FINIS.
