I160 e401_31 R201800 99862294 160429
The Infamous HISTORY OF Sir SIMON SYNOD, And his Sonne Sir JOHN PRESBYTER. Describing The Acts of their Youth, Au∣tumne, and Old Age. With the nature and desperatenesse of the Dis∣ease, whereof they both lye now sick. With the Desires of Sir Iohn Presbyter. Written with his owne hand, and dedicated to his deare BRETHREN, likely to survive him. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
The Infamous History of Sir Si∣mon Synod, and his Sonne Iohn Presbyter. SIr Simon Synod was the son of Sir Lau∣rence Lewd Church, and during his mi∣nority was fostered at Geneva, but af∣ter he came to maturity, Andrew Mel∣vil and Peter Carmichael brought him into Scotland, where he begat a Sonne, called, Pres∣bytery; who after he grew tall of stature, like a tray∣terous subject, not onely denyed to obey, but op∣posed even theK. Jamest King himselfe; and knowing that the Kings ordinary Apothegme was, No Bishop, no King, hee therefore wisely incited the Seditious Commons to pull downe the Bishops first, so to make him way to dis-inthrone the King: which bu∣sinesse hee effected, to the infinite trouble of the Kingdome, and the unspeakable griefe of the King, who now of a glorious Prince was made a poore vaaile, and his Walkes that before were furnished with sweet Cedars, were now planted with stinking Elders, so that the said King was made a weary of his life, while expectants (a kinde of Saplins thri∣ving under the shade of an Elder, and no where else) beardlesse boyes, durst to revile him to his face (as
the said King complaineth) but after in processe of time it hapned the said King was elected King of England also, then hee left Sir Iohn Presbyter, for a Knight hee was, Plto had made him one of his own Knights of the Ferry, and dipt him in Stix, to make him formidable to rule the roast with the ruling whuling Elders; his sonne King Charles comming to the Crowne, Sir Simon Synod, and his sonne Iack Presbyter devised how they might get superiority in England, and for that end they began to consult with the reverend copper-nos'd Hypocrite the L. S. and hee began to speake to those of his Faction, till in the end they agreed with pittifull Case, doughty Hambden, and hee that bearing the Law and Gospel betwixt his two hands (as Moses once the two Ta∣bles of the Law) and like him hath broken them to pieces, whom of all the vessels of clay wee cannot properly tearme a pitcher, and yet his harvest eares will heare more then is true against the Army, and his lying pen divug that which ll Romances in the world cnnot paralel, and the credulous, easie-per∣swaded Pebyterins acct it  part of their Creed; countenanc'd by these bold bean-stalkes, up comes Sir Simon Syon, and his sonne Iack Psbyter to London, bearing an infallible spirit about them (no doubt as Ulysses once the winds) in a bag, and then hey for my gud Lord Lowdens spere; then Sir Simon Synod in his Chaire of Sate, devisth by what meanes he may advnce his sonne resbyter ack in England, to transforme our English Hats in∣to Bew Bonnets, and our Brittish Cloakes-into Scotish Jackets; O brave Iockey, and now O for
the sacred Ordinance for Tythes, which Sir E. A. will maintaine to be Jure Divino, in regard himselfe loveth to tythe his Neighbours wives, beating them down by dozens as Edw. the 3. the French by scores. Now the fat Presbyterian Priests sweare to eate Pigs both roasted and bak't, but their Parishioners tell them they take a wrong Sow by the care, if they thinke their idlenesse and letchery shall be so dain∣tily pampered; at which Sir Simon Synod being angry, call'd his sonne Jack Presbyter unto him, and willed him to pluck downe all their Apple Trees, and to graft in the room of each of them the sacred Tree whereon holy Iudas hang'd himselfe; but it greatly puzled the holy crew, how and where they should finde Susanna's, a competent number, to sit under the shade of these Elders, when Doctor La∣mapha (he that got three Maids with child at once, and was therefore convicted and arraigned, entred into obligation, that hee would furnish them with as many as they did then, or should afterward stand in need of; ha, ha, ha, when Pigs were tything, Elders were ruling, Case and Cawdrey were whuling, and that Presbyterian Hercules hewing downe all the godly, whom his vencrable Ignorant ship in his hodge-podg'd Gangrena termes Hereticks, Sectaries, and Schismaticks, in comes a Messenger, bringing Letters, on the Frontispiece whereof were writ∣ten, THE DESIRES OF THE ARMY: Sir. Si∣mon Synod, and his Sonne Presbyter Iacke were smitten with great feare and dread at the view∣ing thereof, and on a sudden became very dan∣gerously sicke, and were carried home in a Sedan:
Doctor Bastwick, that voluminous Heretrodox, im∣mediately sent for, who casting their waters, found them too dangerously and desperately sick, and their Disease incurble, for that Sir Simon Synod lay alreadie speechlesse, and that the Army had by their late desires so clasht together the C L. Asses, quasi the hundred & fifie — that they would never be able to walke the Round; had by their particu∣lar Charge pull'd up the new-planted Elders by the rootes, and for ever so maymed and disabled Iack Presbyter, that he would never be able to arise from the Bed whereon he lay, untill he were borne from thence, and transported into Scotland, there to be buried in a Ditch. Sir Iohn Presbyter then percei∣ving his houre of Death drew nigh (for as the Ar∣mie encreased, his faculties were weakened) calling for Pen, Inke, and Paper, wrote these his Desires, o be observed by his deare Brethren, the Presbyterian Priests and Laytie. Sir IOHN PRESBYTER his Desires to his deare Brethren. DEare Brethren, you know right well, how even till the day of my Death I invented all wayes and meanes to advance you to fat and greasie Bene∣fices, (I speake first to you of the Clergie, for with you I have beene most intimate) how I have sought all wayes to furnish your Houses with Plundred Goods, your Studies with Plundred Bookes; have
joyned with my deare Father, Sir Simon Synod, in bespeaking for you all Funerall Sermons, that you with the rest, when a rich fat Presbyterian Hog dyed, might have a Chine of him; that you might have Annuities out of the Bishops Lands, whereby with the rest of your super abundant Commings in, you might be enabled to put out yet vaster Summes to Use, to maintaine your Wives with their Tayles hemm'd round with Silver and Gold Lace, to hang your Roomes with Arras, and (with the rich Glut∣ton) to be Clothed delicately, and fare deliciously every day. Thus have I done for you, my deare Brethren of the Clergie: but for you, my deare Brethren of the Laytie, I have little to say, onely some matter of thanks for your Nocturnall studies, and indefatigable cares, in seeking to enslave your selves under a worse then Spanish Inquisition; and I entreat you out of pitie, considering with my selfe the deplorable Condition wherein I shall leave you, that since you cannot attaine your jure Divino, that you would still preserve your selves jure Hu∣mane: And now to you all in generall, I desire you when I am dead, to defend my Corps from being devoured of Dogs, and let me be buried decently, without Musick (I meane, the Ringing of Bells) while all my well-willers, standing round in a Ring about my Grave, to a very dolefull Tune chaunt this Elegie: ALack, Alack, and well-aday, Jack Presbyter is dead, And all our hopes with griefe we say, are wrapt with him in Lead.
He well could prate in Church or House, could rayse Dissentions many; Therefore his Corps in teares we sonse, for like him ne'r was any. He bound himselfe by solemne Oath, to ruinate his King, For to rebell he pledd his Troth most serious, Jack Pudding. He chang'd the Prayr his aviour made, for new ones of his own, Extempore e all things said, for which to Hell hee's gone. Alack, Alack, and well aday, Jack Presbyter is dead, And all our hopes with griefe we say, are wrapt with him in Lead. FINIS.
