I80 e451_41 R205302 99864714 116946
AN IMPARTIALL and true RELATION OF THE Great Victory obtained through the blessing of God, after a very sharpe dis∣pute, by the conjoyned Forces OF Lincolne, Nottingham, Lecester, Derby, and Rutland, under the command of Col. EDW. ROSSETER. VVith a List of the names and number of Pri∣soners, Colours, Armes, and Carriages taken on Tuesday Iuly 5. 1648. Die Sabbathi, 8 Iuly 1648. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament that this Narrative of the fight in Willoughby fields in the County of Nottingham, between the Parliament Forcei under the command of Col. Edward Rosseter, and the Forces under the command of Sir Philip Mounkton on Wednesday July 5. 1648. be forthwith printed and pub∣lished. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed by Edw. Griffin, Iuly 11. 1648.
ON Fryday the 30 of June, about 400. horse from Pom∣fret Castle, most of them gentlemen of severall Coun∣tyes, and Reformade Officers, and 200 foot ferryed over Trent, and made incursion into Lincolne-shire, marching forthwith to the City of Line; whereafter they had by warrant under the hand of Sir Philip Monkton their Generall, re∣leased all the prisoners in the Castle for Debt, Murther, Felony, and other crimes, (who took up Armes presently with them.) They went to the Bishops Pallace, wherein lay severall Armes, and some moneyes of the Countryes: which place Capt. Bee, a wollen Draper of that City with 30 men had taken possession of and defended for 3 houres, untill the Cavaliers had fired one part of the house. In which Capt. Bee resolved, and so told them he would be consumed, unlesse he might surrender upon conditi∣ons propounded by him,) amongst which the protection of his person and estate) the which they agreed too; no sooner was the Pallace deliverd but all conditions broke, the Capt. seized and carryed away prisoner, untill released in the field at the follow∣ing fight. All his wares and goods put in Carts, with which and the Armes and mony found in the Pallace, together with the plunder, and persons of other honest men of the Towne, they marched on Saturday night to Gainsborough 12 miles off. This Alarum coming that Friday night to Belvoyer Castle to Col. Rossiter (who was there upon some occasions of the Country) he forthwith gave the Alarum to Northampton, Leicester, Notting∣ham, Derby, and Rutland, and desired them to spare what horse they could, to joyne with a Troop of horse lately raised by him, by authority of Parliament for the security of that county; and he would therewith endevour to drive the enemy out of the Countrey againe. The which forces being conjoyned on Sabbath Evening, to the number of 550. (all of them newly raised men) and then understanding by a Letter, received from Sir Henry Cholmely, that 600 Yorkeshire horse with some Dragoones were on the Northside Trent about Gainsborrow, who would interrupt their retreating over Trent to Pomfret againe, or fight with them if they came over; Col. Rossiter marched on Munday morning towards Gainsborow: In the midway thither, there met and
joyned with him, a Troop of horse from Lyn, which the Gene∣rall had put under the command of Capt. Taylor, who together re∣freshed that night in and about Waddington fields 3 miles South of Lincolne. On Tuesday morning by three a Clock, they march∣ed through Lincolne towards Gainsborow, and understanding by a Lincolne man (who had been taken away prisoner by the Cava∣liers, and had escaped them that night,) that the enemy were all drawn off from Gainsborow, at 10. of the clock on Munday Even∣ing and were marched towards Newark; Col. Rossiter forth∣with pursued 18 miles that night, refreshed his horse 4 or 5 hours in the night in a meadow, a mile from Newark, where he received intelligence, that the enemy quartered about Bingham 6 miles before him; to this place came in to Rossiters further assistance about 150 horse, the one halfe from Derby and Rutland, the other halfe were Gentlemen and Freeholders of Lincolne, and Leicester∣shire, who voluntarily would adventure their lives for their Countryes freedome. On Wednesday morning Rossiter com∣manded out a forlorne-hope 150 of the ablest horse, under the command of Capt. Champion of Nottingham-shire, to pursue at a fast Rate, and so by falling on the enemies Reere, to enforce them to a stand or halt, till he with the body of horse could come up to them: They after 7 miles advance over tooke the Reere of them, whom skirmishing with, made their body of horse and foot, con∣sisting of 7 or 800 at least, to draw up in a large Beane field be∣longing to Willoughby 7 miles from Nottingham, of which Rossiter being informed from the commander of the forlorn, by march∣ing at a full Trot (having no Dragoones or foot with him) with∣in a short time brought his horse into the field, himselfe com∣manding the right wing wherein he resolved to charge, But ob∣serving that the enemies strength were placed in their body, con∣sisting of a party of foot, winged with horse, and those horse flanked with Musketeers, and that with them the men of best quallity (as appeared by their outward Garbes) seemed to be mounted; he resolved to Charge the Battaile, assigning his right wing, to be commanded by Col. White, and the left wing by Col, Hacker, placing 2 reserves of horse in the Reere, being suddaine∣ly
thus ordered, the enemies word (Jesus) and Rossiters (Faire∣fax) he advanced to the charge, who was received with much re∣solution. The bodies and reserves through eagernesse close in together; whereby the encounter proved very sharpe, both sides falling presently to Swords point, and so continued in close fight neither party giving ground for some space, till by the fircenesse of each party both were put into disorder, being so intermixt, doing execution each on other, the dispute continued a while doubtfull, at last it pleased God to give a full and absolute victo∣ry to Rossiters forces, as may appeare by the quallity and number of prisoners taken; all their Colours, Armes, and Carriages. A∣bout 200. that were best horsed (whereof divers Papists) got off in small parties, severall of them wounded, but at least one hun∣dred of them, were that night and next morning taken in their flight by Leicester, Belvoier, Burly, and other honest Country-men, amongst whom was Sir Philip Mounkton their Generall disarmed and brought into Nottingham by Mr. Boyer, a high Constable of that County, who deservedly now weares his Sword. In the first charge Col. Rossiter lost his head-peece, received a shot through the right thigh, and some other painfull wounds with a Musket Bullet, notwithstanding which he kept the field fighting till he saw the battaile wholly wonne, not discovering his wounding to any person, for feare it might prove a discou∣rage to the Souldiers: after which being ready to fall through losse of blood, he rode to Nottingham where he lyeth Capable of recovery, through the blessing of God upon the meanes used for that end. In this service, Col. Hacker (commander of the Leicester horse) who is wounded, and Col. White (commander of the Nottingham horse, having onely his horse cut) merrited much honour for their expressed valour. And no lesse is deserved by all the Cap∣taines, Officers and Souldiers, who being all newly raised men, and mounted upon new bought horses (saving Capt. Taylors Troope, and 40 of Belvoier horse commanded by Lievt. Deane, who likewise is slightly wounded,) yet not one of them, nor the country-men, who were strangers to such hard service, was ob∣served
to turne his backe, during the whole brunt. And as it is confessed by the prisoners taken, That the advantage they ap∣prehended they had against Rossiters men by reason of their new listing, gave them as great encouragement to encounter them (had they been double their number) as confidence to have beaten and ruined them; so the victory is solely to be ascribed to the power and goodnesse of God; who therein hath fulfilled in part, that which is foretold by the Prophet, concerning the great things which his people shall performe in the distruction of his and their enemies. That the feeble shall be come as David, and the stronge shall become as an Angel of God in Heroick Actions. Not above 30 of Rossiters men slaine upon the place, the Cor∣net to his own Troop being the highest Officer, at whose fall his colours were lost and for a while in the enemies hands, untill Cornet Ridgeley, a reformade in the same Troop recovered them; Captain Greenwood, who commanded Derby Troop dangerously wounded, and so are many other common Souldiers. About an houre after the fight, there came in two gallant Troopes of horse from Northampton, who had been in sooner but the crosse marching of the enemy, impeaded their finding us sooner, who presently advanced in pursuit of them. Sir Henry Cholmely also with 600 Yorke-shire horse, came then up to us over Nottingham Bridge, by whose lying on the North side Trent, and preventing the enemies Retreat that way, was this oportunity gained of fighting them; those Yorke-shire horse the next day advanced to assist other Yorke-shire forces already there, to block up Pomfret astle; the enemy having in the Castle and Towne, about 60 horse, and 600 foot. By severall Letters taken in their Generall Officers Pockets, it appears that men of high and low degree in severall Countyes, (before unsuspected.) are deeply engaged in the promoting and contributing toward a generall rising in many parts, some of the Prisoners affirme, That their Army resolved to have march∣ed Southward through Leicester-shire and Northampton-shire, in whose march they doubted not but to have encreased to many thousands, and to have jyned with others, rising about London, and to have raised Colchester Seige.
A List of the Names of the Officers and Gentlemen taken Prisoners. SIr Philip Mounkton, Generall. Col. Robert Portington Lievt. Generall. Gilbert Byron (who at∣tempted to betray Nottingham Castle) Major General woun∣ded. Col. Edward Pocklington Col. Chomeley. Lievt Col. Ralph Ashton. Lievt. Col. Stamp slaine. Majors. Walter Salterstone. Thomas Scot. Fitch Randoll. Thomas Scot. George Roberts. Sir Roger. Copers two Sons of Nottingham-shire, the one a Lievt. Col. the other a Captaine. Captaines. Iohn Elvidge. Io. Rich. Tho. Mony. Will. Bates. Ih Rysby. Ioh. Munson. Rich Bradshaw. Clifton Roades. Anthony Wright. Capt Pinckett. Capt. Dayle. Thomas Bird, who released the Prisoners in Lincoln Castle. Edmund Munckton. Arthur Lee. Cap. Downes. Will. Saltmarsh. Lievtenants. Robert White. Ioh. Gridditch. Edward Blundivill. Henry Hassells. Lievt. Bradwell. Marmaduke Dilman. Foure Cornetts. Two Ensignes, besides seve∣rall other Officers a∣mongst the common Souldiers, who will not yet discover their quallities. 44. Gentlemen of qual∣lity, whose name are inserted afterwards, severall of whom have beene Officers formerly. 500. Common Souldi∣ers taken, many of them wounded. 10 Colours of horse and foot, whereof the greatest part in Cloke∣bagges not delivered out. 1 Waggon and 7 other Carriages with Armes Ammunition and o∣ther Baggage. About 400 horse taken. 100 of them slaine up∣on the place. The names of severall Gentlemen taken Prisoners, whose habita∣tions are in severall Counties. Gentlemen. GEorge Metam Esq; Peter Constable. Ioseph Constable. Robert Riddall. Will. Skellin. Simon Morfin. Iohn Hickman. Gervase Hewett. William Furdey. Ilan Roads. Henry Hopkins. Thomas Dunkin. Marke Johnson Iulian Wombwell. Rob. Stevens. Edw. Downing. Robert Lanckton. Anthony Savell. Will. Marston. Christopher Cole, Thomas Mourley. Ralph Roston. Brookes. Iohn Harfull. Wood. Peter Jackson. Sissill Leek. Fitchrandll. Iames Barlow.
Iames Hopkinson. Iohn Gamble. Rob. French. Rob. Garrison. Francis Waters. Edmund Crathorn. Will. Lssals. Edward Booth. Gabriel Armstrong. Thomas Thornton. Richard Shellin. Thomas Brigam. Ihn Miller. Two Loves of Derby-shire brethren, one taken, the other slaine. Their Generals order to release the prisoners in Lincoln castle: To Mrs. Smith Keeper of the Castle at Lincoln, and of the prisoners there, or to her Deputy or Deputies. THese are to will and require you and every of you, that forthwith upon fight hereof you release the bodies of such and every of such as you have in your custody, who are there committed upon malice, and for their loyalty to his Majesty, rather then any other sufficient ground: And at the request of the bearer hereof Tho. Bird Captain, who hath been these two yeers here unjustly imprisoned for his Majesties cause, who will intimate to you such persons as he upon oath knows worthy of their liberty, you are to deliver such men to him for their inlargement: Of the which faile not as you will answer the contrary at your perill. Given under my hand this first day of Iuly 1648. Philip Monkton. Col. Portington and Cap. Thomas Bird see this Warrant executed. According to this Warrant I Thomas Bird doe set at liberty (contrary to law) all the men within the castle and goale of Lincolne, and also the bodies of Hellen Cooke, Mary Saule, Anne Penneston, Anne Readmell, and Avis Ostler.Some of the women were committed for killing their basard children. Witnesse my hand this first of July 1648. Tho. Bird. IT is required that Thomas Goodwin Gent. be released accor∣ding to the command of Philip Monkton. FINIS.
