N665 E526_34 R205658 99864974 117207
A New Marriage, Between Mr. KING, AND Mrs. PARLIAMENT. The Banes forbidden by Captaine ARMY, with the Grounds and Reasons he gives for the same. Come, come away unto this happy Wedding, All Loyall Souls, expect no other bidding: Unite their hearts in bands of PEACE and LOVE, And JOVE will showre downe Blessings from above: They are out-ask'd, all parties are agree'd, Save those from whence your Miseries proceed; Subdue such Wandring Rebells to their KING, And through all Nations shall your Honor ring. Tudor rose surmounted by a crown Scottish thistle surmounted by a crown French fleur-de-lis surmounted by a crown Irish harp surmounted by a crown nou. 30th Printed in the Yeere MDCxLviii.
A Nw Marriage, &c. Let all that fear God, and honor the King, and desire to yeeld obedience to no other Power then what is ordained of GOD, and to be freed from the Tyranny of the sword, and to lead qui∣et and peaceable lives under his Majesties Government, sub∣scribe their hands for King CHARLES, who is by undoubted right authorized by God to be King of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, and hath no superiour to chastise or to punish him, but God alone: Therefore whereas all Loyall Subjects are bound by a solemn Oath not to seek to Depose, or murder his Majestie, or any wayes to offer violence unto his sacred Person, Crown and Dignity; but on the contrary, to defend him against all Con∣spiracies, to reveale all Treasons against His Majestie, and bear unto Him Faith and true Allegiance. And whosoever shall neg∣lect his duty herein, or dissent from the rest, and will have no King, nor yeeld obedience to His Majestie, that their Names and Places of abode be taken in writing that they may be proceeded against as Traytors and Rebells. But if they can alledge or de∣clare any crime or impeciment, that King Charles shall no longer be King, or that He and His Parliament may not be joyned toge∣ther, Let them forthwith make their Allegations good, or els be accounted Traytors, and sediious Slanderers for ever after. And because the Persons to be married dwell in divers Parishes, therefore let these Banes be asked throughout the Three King∣doms, and the day appointed for solemnization of this happy Wedding; the Persons to be married, comming into the body of the Parliament-House with all their friends and neighbours: and there let all Loyall People say as followeth. DEarly beloved brethren, friends and Fellow-subjects, We are gathered together in the face of this Congregation, to joyn together in the bands of eace and Unity these two Persons, namely Mr. KING, and Mrs. Parliament, that they may become members of one Body, for the mutuall Society, helpe, ayde and assistance one of the other, for the comfort of all
that are subject unto their Power, as also to the terrour of such as deny or despise the same. Therefore if any can shew any just cause why these two may not be joyned together, let them now speak, or for ever hereafter hold their peace. Cap. Army. I forbid the Banes, and hold it altogether unawfull for these two to be joyned together for these weighty Reasons following. 1. Because the said King hath a great Estate and Revenue, and We having conquered him; both he, and his Estate is become ours; and therefore we say he is a Delnquent, and a Tray∣tor to the Kingdoms trust, guilty of the murder of his Father, of the shedding of the innocen blood of his subjects, betraying Rochel, bringing in the Spanish Fleet, granting Commissions to the Irish Rebells, raising an Army to destroy the Par iament, and much mis∣chief more; which we intend to accuse him of, that so we may cut off the wicked from the Earth, because his Estate may goe in the Line of the Righteous, the men of Israel, the godly, and well affect∣ed party; and therefore we hold him uncapable of Marriage, and had rather destroy the Issue he hath already, then he should marry againe, or beget more. 2. It cannot be expected, that we should take so much paines to conquer, and so slightly give up what we have conquered into his hands we took it from; no, what we have, we intnd to keek, what we have no, we intend to get, and part with nothing but for the increase of the godly, we having subdued all, all is become ours, & shall be at our disposing, the King being our King, we ought to di∣spose of him, Therefore we pronounce him a capitall Traytor to the Kingdom, (that's the Saints) and the grand Author of all our miseries, and will with all speed bring him to exemplar Justice for all the Treason, blood or mischief that we shall judge him to be guilty of, that so he may speedily dye without mercy, because the Estate and Revenue of the Crowne may be speedi y sequestred to sa∣tisfie the longing desires of the well affected, godly and self-deny∣ing Saints in the Army. 3. For Mrs. Parliament, she being a woman of a light carriage, inconstant, and likely to be fruitlesse, by reason she is troubled with the consumption in her Members, the bloody Issue, and falling∣sickness, about the time of our apppoach; yet considering the good service shee hath formerly done us, and now having no more need
of her, we commit her to the care of Dr. Period, to be speedily cu∣red of her infirmities, and to be throughly purg'd, till the become all Independent, and of the New Elect, the godly and well-affected party, with whom we intend she shall joyne Issue and beget a new sanctified brood of Kings and prnces out of the Kingdomes Army, that may Rule, Reigne and govern by the Spirit, and make them∣selves Great & GLORIOUS out of the destruction of the old ones; that none but the Saints may enjoy the good things of the Land, and all things may become New, and be made the more service∣able to the Nations welfare, and wee honoured in being the King∣doms Army, and the common peoples Treasurers, to keep their Estates for them, and pay our selves, and save our King the King∣dom a labaur, so the common people being our King, we will prey upon them hereafter as we prey upon King Charles, and divide their Inheritances amongst our selves, levelling the Titular Lords and overawed Commons as we list, that Generall shall become a more honored Title then King, Lietenant Generall, then Prince, a Colo∣nel shall be better then a Duke, a Major then a Marquesse, a Lief∣tenant above a Lord a Sergeant better then a Knight, and and a common souldier Master to a Commoner in Parliament, to place or displace them as we shall have occasion; For these Reasons I hold this contract utterly unlawfull, renounce both parties, and forbid the Banes, and professe my selfe enemy to both; and shall doe my uttermost to bring them both to destruction. 4. That her companion Mrs. London, be suddenly by us declared Delinquent, and upon the least colour of opposing us the Kingdoms Army, to be immediately plundered, and proclaimed Enemies and Traytors to the Kingdoms Army, which now i the supreame Po∣wer, and have a right to all by conquest; And therefore for these weighty Reasons, we the Kingdoms Army, the godly and Well∣affected Party doe hold it utterly unlawfull that those two destroy∣ers of our soveraigne Lord and King the People, should be joyned or contracted together, but be both brought to speedy Justice for all the Innocent Blood, and Treasure that hath been so lavishly x∣pended, to inrich the Committees withall. Therefore I forbid the Banes. Mr. Common-wealth. Here is like to be a Kingdom well govern'd, when the sword shall sway in stead of the Scepter, the Hemet be worne for the Crowne, Beel-coates in stead of Parlimen▪Roabes, the field Ordnance command Gods Ordinance, and
slaves, and upstart souldiers to be both Judges, and crucifiers of their King and the controwlers of a parliament, that the servant should be above his master that payes him wages, is a most wicked and preposterous thing, and not any wayes t be suffred; Besides what Cap. A my alledges against his King. is notoriously knowne to be the rancour and poyson of his envious, covetous and ambiti∣ous mnde for fearing least we shoud have Peace, and his Trade of Warre should be spoiled, therefore he shoots forth his venomous Arrowes, even bitter words, false Accusations, and slnderous re∣proaches against His Majestie, to draw and alienate the hearts and affections of his Subjects from him, and make Him odious unto them, that so they might defer peace contnue Warre, and enrich themselves by Rapne and plunder: Peace spoiles their Trade, they had rather want their Arreates, then want their trading; no il can betide them worse then peace, besides the rich plunder of the King∣dome, and the blood of Loyall subjects is so sweet unto them, that they are resolved to carrowse the other odd Tuskin in blood Roy∣all, and drink to the confusion of Monarcy, though they pierce all the Vessels of Honor for the same, both King, Prince, and Nobes, as they have already done the Earl of Strafford, Canterbury, Burleigh, Lucas, Lisle, and many others, that they have already murdered, be∣cause they sought to crosse their pernicious Designes, which now are made known unto us by their late monsterous Remonstrance to the parliament & Kingdom, where they seem to challenge a po∣wer above the King, to bring him to Tryall, and judge him, that so they may cut him off, as they have already done his Subjects: And therefore let all good people give consent to this Marriage, and to deal with Cap. Army according to his deserts, that what he would have done to others, maybe done unto himself; That he may be brought to speedy Tryall for all the Treason, Blood and mischief that he is guilty of, and whatsoever he hath forceably, and fraudulently taken from the subject, may be restored, that so Ju∣stice may no more be mocked in the face of God, but they may be punished that take a reward to slay the soul of the innocent blood, and not onely remove the Land-mark, but sequester and sell Land, goods and all, stop judgement, the right of the Stranger, of them they have made Fatherlesse, and Widdowes; that smite their neigh∣bours secretly. Therefore I give my consent to this Marriage, approving Peace better then Warre, Unity then Division, concord then discord; what say you Mr. Generallity of Common-People to this happy Nuptiall?
Omnes. A Marriage, a Marriage, a King, a King, wee all give our consent. Then let all the People Pray as followeth. FRom Everlasting Parliaments, and cut-throat Armyes, from all Sedition & privie Conspiracies, from Tyranny, blood, and plun∣derers, from all false Doctrine & Heresy, from hardness of heart, and all uncharitableness, and contempt of Gods Word and Com∣mandements; Fom cheating Committees, Pursuivants, Bthel and his 40. blood-hounds, informrs, setters, peepers, sneakers, false ac∣cusers, and all other Parliament Vermin. Good Lord deliver us. That it may please thee to Keep and Defend our gracious King CHARLES, from Fairfax, Cromwll, Ewres, Rolf, Hammond, and al other Sectaries, Rebells and Hereticks, that hunt after his prcious life. That it may please thee to indue all the Lords in Pariament, the Presbyterian Commons, the Lord Major of London, and both the Sheriffs, and Common-Counsell with Wisdom and Under∣standing, that thy may preserve themselves, and the City from the Tyranny, and plunder of the Army, who intend to Levell their E∣states; That it may please thee to bring into the Truth all such as they have caused to Erre, and are Deceived; To piety all Prisoners, Fatheress Children, Widows, all Ministers and others, that now suffer Persecution for the testimony of a good Conscience, and are desolate and oppressed, in danger, want and tribulation; and final∣ly to beat down this Satannicall and Canniball Army under our feet. Wee beseech thee to hear us, &c. People. Pittifully behold our slavery and oppression, and in thy mercy speedily deliver us, as we do put our trust in thee, Amen. Then let the people sing Psal. 3. and Psal. 43. O God how are my Foes increast; and Judge and revenge; So read Rom. 13, and con∣cude with Psal. 18. O God my strength, &c. Then shall the People say, Mrs. Parliament, wilt thou have this man to be thy King, to live together in the holy Estate of Obedi∣ence; wilt thou love honor, keep and protect Him; forsaking all o∣thers; keep thee only to Him. Ans. I will. Then shall his Crown be placed on his Royall head, have his Revenew and Lands restored, and reside at Whitehall with Freedom and Honor.
Then shall all the Common-people say. Forasmuch as King Charles and his Parliament are contracted, together, and have pighted their Troath each to other, to live toge∣ther in Peace and Unity, after Gods Ordinance, and so quietly to ru e & govern the People and Kingdoms committed to their charge, therefore it is requisite, that we obey, honor, and keep their Laws, and with our Persons, Lives and estates defend them from all Trea∣sonou Plotts, and Conspiracies, Treacheries and Combinations. Affronts, or disgraces that shall be attempted against them or ei∣ther of them, and all such offenders, of what ranck or quality so∣ever, in Army or otherwise, to bring to exact triall, according to the Lawes of the Land in such cases provided: and moreover doe pro∣mise, vow and sweare to live and die with and for them, and al∣wayes to bear Faith and Allegiance unto them, and remain con∣stant in these our Resolutions to our lives end. Then let the People sing, Psal. 119. O all ye Nations, &c. And after this, if the Army, or any other seditious persons what∣soever shall seek to make a disunion between these parties so joyned together, let King and Parliament declare themselves unto the Lord Major and Comon Counsell of the City of London, and Sheriffe Browne shall be forthwith supplyed at 12. houres warning with an Army of 20000. armed compleat, and in 24. houres, as many more, to chastise all such seditious Coras, and rebellious She∣ba that blow the Trumpet of Schisme and Sedition, on purpose to distract and amuse the people, and to rent the Kingdome from his Majestie, and to make it their owne; that they might for ever crush the People by cruell Oppressions, in an Insolent and Tyranous Goverment by the sword; which makes them at this time use all the slights of the old Sectary Satan to advance their Pride and am∣mition, break the reynes of all Government, sow the tares of Sedi∣tion against their most vertuous and Religious King, and his most Royal Stock, ungraciously, and ungratefully plotting and contriving their ruine, even in the time of the Treaty, when the people expect the Issue thereof, Peace and prosperity, and a happy period of all dissentions and civill Discords, that have so soon ruined this but lately flourishing Kingdome. But now, if we misse of Peace, His Majesties is guiltlesse, and destruction lies at our very doores, there∣fore let us be valiant, and rather defend our selves like men, then basely & cowardly, to yeeld up our King, Religion, Lawes Librties and purses to the fury of a handfull of plundering Souldiers. FINIS.
