P1135 E660_8 99865866 118117
TRACTATƲS De Simplicium Medicamentorum facultatibus. A TREATISE OF THE Nature and Qualities of such Sim∣ples as are most frequently used in MEDICINES, Both Purging, and others. Methodically handled, for the benefit of those that understand not the Latine Tongue. To which is added: Many Compound Medicines for most Diseases incident to Mankinde: As also two Alphabeticall Tables, very necessary for the Reader. Together with, The Explanation of all hard words or Termes of Art, whereby the Vulgar may the better understand it. By ROBERT PEMEL, Practitioner in Physick, at Cranebrooke in Kent. Turpis est calamitas Medicamento purgante dato hominem occidere. Hippoc. de med. purg. fol. 98 Licensed and Entred according to Order. LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, for Philemon Stephens, at the guilded Lyon in St Pauls Church-Yard. 1652.
REader, most, if not all the faults here mentioned, an intelligent Reader would amend without any direction: Those which are as easily mended as discerned, with literall faults, such as [doth, for both] [tumors for tumours] [small for smell] are omitted—as also. 2. or 3. mistakes in the Latine and Hebrew names, which as onely the learned will discerne, so their ingenuity will pardon. Chap. Line. Errata. Correction. 3 64 Diagnieium Diagredium. 16 4 Pine Syrupe Pine-spurge. 39 86 Gum Elmne Gum elemne. 46 68 Storchados. Staechados. 50 45 Lorage Lovage. 66 2 Hepatoxium Hepatorium. 86 42 Potion. Lotion. 90 15 By Decoction The Decoction. 94 16 Purflow Purslan 95 15 Rodes Nodes. 106 7 Outward use Inward use. Id. 16 Inward use Outward use, 115 6 Keep long Not keep long. 117 16 Heart of. Heat of. 119 29 Rodes, Nodes. Id. 32 Oyle of Sarin Oyle of Savin. 124 13 Swimmings Swounings. Id. 23 A Candle A Caudle. 127 22 Into the cotten Into the eares with cotten. 131 18 Inflations Inflammations 137 13 Provoketh Profiteth. 146 21 The First See the 66 Chap. 156 29 Sage and Hyssop Sage & Hyssop water. Id. 50 Foin Allomo Some Allom. 157 6 Outward use Inward use. Cap. 24. last line, for seu, read see. Chap. 35. l. 73. before salt put out black. Chap. 136. The Title of it is mistaken, for Lavender r. Cammock. In the Table of Compound Medicines in B. Breast to clease r. Brest to cleanse. In the Table of hard words, for Orrosive Corrosive.     Viscious Viscous. The word [Note] in the Preface should have followed these words, [many Diseases.]
To the kinde READER. COurteous Reader, as the knowledge of Diseases is most necessary and usefull for such as take upon them the Noble art of Physick; so no lesse profitable is the know∣ledge of simple medicines and their nature: For it is most true; Medicus tantum bene curat, quantum recte cognoscat, he onely cures well that rightly knows; he that rightly knows diseases and their causes, as also the vertue of simple Medicines, he cures best.Hippoc. Aph. sect. 4.3. Thus much witnesseth Hippocrates Si qualia oportet purgari, purgentur, confert, & facile ferunt. Contraria vero difficulter If those things be purged as should be, it doth good, and the Patient doth easily indure it:Medicamentorum pur∣gantium res non ita se habet, quemedmodum vulgo putatur. Hip. de med. pur. fol. 98. but if o∣therwise it be done, the Patient doth in∣dure it painfully. Now how shall we know when seasonably to purge the body, if we have not exact knowledge of those Medi∣cines we give. Therefore we are to fit our Medicines accor∣ding to the nature of the sick; And most certaine is that of Hippoc. Oportet igitur biliofis dare quod bilem purgat.Hip. de med. purg. 16. Pituitosis quod pituitam. Hydropicis quod aquam. Atrabiliariis quod bilem atram. Wee ought to give to Cholerick per∣sons those things which purge Choller, to Flegmatick bodies those things which purge Flegme, to Hydropicall that which purgeth water, and to Melancholly persons that which pur∣geth black Choller or Melancholly. I have here collected (for
the benefit of such as are not expert in the Latin Tongue.) This Tract of the nature of simple Medicines, both purging and others that are most in use, and easie to be got; Also in most Chapters you have variety of compound medicines for many Diseases.[Note] I have not given particular exam∣ples in every Chapter of Decoctions, that being needlesse; for if it be an herbe, you have an example thereof in the Chap∣ter of Mugwort, as also in some other Chapters, by which you may make a Decoction of any other herbe; if it be a root, you have an example thereof in the Chapter of Eringo-roots. Also Note that a seruple is twenty grains, a dram three scruples, an ounce eight drams. Now my hearty desire is that it may be usefull unto all that shall read it. What I have done herein and how methodicall, I have been, I leave to others to judge, for now it is Coram Judice, and surely not without error,Errare Aliquando acci∣dit omnibur ante me ho¦minibus, & procul du∣bio omnibus post me ac∣cidet. for humanum est er∣rare, tis incident to the best to erre; some have lapsed herein before me, and others will after me, however let my good will be accepted, which if I finde, I shall be encouraged (God assisting me with life and strength) to publish some other Tracts usefull for the vulgar capacity, as also for young Practitioners. Septemb. 16. 1651. Robert Pemel. Medicus.
AƲTHORS Made use of in this TREATISE. ACtuarius, printed 1556 Amatus Lusitanus, printed 1556 Constantius Affricanus, printed 1539 Jo: Carolus Rosenbergius, printed 1624 Ant: Benivenius Jo: Carolus Amatus, printed 1623 Joan: Rodulp. Camerarius, printed 1624 Dorstenius, printed 1540 Dioscorides. Dodonaeus, Doringius, printed 1620 Fernelius, printed 1610 Fragosus, printed 1600 Freitagius, Aur. med. printed 1630 Freitagius, de Opio, printed 1632 Galenus, printed 1549 Gartias ab Horto, printed 1574 Gorraeus, printed 1583 Gerrarde. Hartmannus, printed 1635 Grulingius, printed 1644 Heurnius, printed 1594 Hippocrates, printed 1546 Greg. Horstius, printed 1631 Joubertus, printed 1567 Lemnius, printed 1581 Massaria, printed 1634
Matthiolus, printed 1565 Melichius, printed 161 Monardus Anglice, printed 1596 Had. a Mynsicht, printed 1645 Oribasius, Parkinson, Pet. Paulus, printed 1587 Plinie, printed 1634 Piso, printed 1580 Ranzovius, printed 1585 Renodaeus, printed 1645 Riverius, printed 1649 Rondeletius, printed 1628 Sadlerus, printed 1637 Schroderus, printed 1644 Schyronius, printed 1623 Stocherus, printed 1634 Sennertus instit. printed 1628 Sennertus pract. med. printed 1632 Thonerus observat. printed 1649 Trallianus, printed 1560 Weckerus, printed 1576 Weikardus, printed 1628 Note, That Freitagius his Aurora Medicorum, is false printed in the pages, from pag. 104. to 494. so that you must mend them, and then you will finde the quotations right.
AN Alphabeticall Table OF ALL THE SIMPLE MEDICINES IN THIS TREATISE. A AGarick Chap. 2 Agrimonie, see Egrimonie Alchoofe Chap. 112 Almonds Chap. 5 Aloes Chap. 3 Allum Chap. 70 Amber Chap. 62 Amber-greece Chap. 72 Ammoniacum Chap. 4 Angelica Chap. 74 Anniseed Chap. 76 Antimonie Chap. 75 Armen Stone Chap. 42 Aromatick Reed Chap. 84 Assa Fetida Chap. 7 Asarabacca Chap. 8 Asure Stone Chap. 42 B BAsill Chap. 133 Baulme Chap. 124 Bastard Saffron Chap. 13 Beetes Chap. 79 Betony Chap. 80 Bezar Stone Chap. 81 Bdellium Chap. 9 Birthworth Chap. 6 Bistort Chap. 10 Bitter Vetch, see Orobus Bole Armoniack Chap. 82 Borrage Chap. 83 Brimstone Chap. 164 Broome Chap. 32 Bryonie Chap. 11 Burnet Chap. 142 C
CAmbogia Chap. 35 Cammocke Chap. 136 Camomill Chap. 86 Camphor Chap. 12 Carrot wild, see Dancus Chap. 99 Cardamomes Chap. 89 Carduus Benedictus Chap. 90 Carthamus, see Bastard Saffron Chap. 13 Castor Chap. 92 Caslia lignea Chap. 14 Cassia Fistula Chap. 15 Centory Chap. 93 Ceterach Chap. 94 Chast tree Chap. 67 China Root Chap. 95 Cinamon Chap. 14 Cinke Foile Chap. 141 Cloves Chap. 91 Coloquintida Chap. 17 Comlrey Chap. 97 Corall Chap. 18 Coralline Chap. 98 Costus Chap. 20 D DAnewort Chap. 56 Dates Chap. 24 Daucus Chap. 99 Dill Chap. 73 Dittany Chap. 25 Dodder Chap. 27 E EGrimonie Chap. 66 Elaterium Chap. 26 Elecampane Chap. 101 Elder Chap. 56 Endive Chap. 100 Epithymum Chap. 27 Eringo Roots Chap. 102 Euphobium Chap. 28 Eye bright Chap. 103 F FEnnell Chap. 105 Fenugreeke Chap. 106 Figs Chap. 104 Fleawort Chap. 52 Flower de Luce Chap. 41 French Barly Chap. 113 Fumiterrie Chap. 29 G GAlbanum Chap. 31 Galingall Chap. 30 Garlick Chap. 69 Gentian Chap. 33 Germander Chap. 96 Ginger Chap. 170 Grapes Chap. 168 Ge Chap. 109 Gomell Seed Chap. 126 Guajacum, see Pockwood Chap. 110 Gutta gummi, see Cambogia Chap. 35 H HArts Horne Chap. 19 Hearb of Grace, see Rue Chap. 153 Hedge Hyssope Chap. 34 Hellebor white Chap. 36 Hellebor black Chap. 36 Hermodactyles Chap. 37 Honey Chap. 122 Honey Suckle Chap. 88 Hore hound Chap. 146 I JAcap Chap. 40 Ivie Chap. 111 Ivory Chap. 19 Jujubes Chap. 115 Juniper Chap. 114 K
KNee-Holme Chap. 152 L LAvender Chap. 118 Lettuce Chap. 117 Licoris Chap. 108 Lignum vitae, see Pockwood Chap. 110 Lungwort Chap. 147 Lupines Chap. 149 M MAce, see Nutmeg Chap. 132 Madder Chap. 54 Maidenhaire Chap. 87 Mallowes Chap. 121 Manna Chap. 44 Marjerome Chap. 120 Marigolds Chap. 85 Marsh Mallows Chap. 71 Mastich Chap. 45 Mechoacan Chap. 46 Melilot Chap. 123 Milke Chap. 116 Mints Chap. 125 Misselto Chap. 166 Mugwort Chap. 78 Mummie Chap. 128 Muske Chap. 127 Mustard Chap. 161 Myrrhe Chap. 48 Myrobalans Chap. 47 N NEttles Chap. 167 Nigella, or Gith Chap. 130 Nitre Chap. 131 Nutmeg and Mace Chap. 132 O OLibanum Chap. 135 Opium Chap. 49 Opopanax Chap. 50 Organy Chap. 137 Orobus Chap. 138 Orris Chap. 41 P PArmasitty, or Sperma Ceti. Chap. 162 Pepper Chap. 143 Piony Chap. 140 Pine Spurge Chap. 16 Plantaine Chap. 144 Pockwood Chap. 110 Polypodie Chap. 51 Purslaine Chap. 145 Q QUicksilver Chap. 77 R RAddish Chap. 148 Raisons Chap. 139 Rest Harrow, see Cammooke Chap. 136 Rosemary Chap. 151 Roses Chap. 150 Rubarbe Chap. 53 Rue, or Herb of Grace Chap. 153 S SAge Chap. 156 Saffron Chap. 21 Sagapenum Chap. 55 Salt Chap. 155 Sanders Chap. 57 Sarcocll Chap. 58
Sarsaparilla Chap. 158 Sassafras Chap. 157 Scammony Chap. 59 Sea bind weed Chap. 61 Sea Mosse, see Coralline Chap. 98 Sebestens Chap. 160 Sene Chap. 60 Setwall Chap. 169 Sowbread Chap. 23 Spikenard Chap. 129 Saint Iohns wort Chap. 39 Spurge Garden, see Pine Spurge Chap. 16 Stechado Chap. 163 Strawberries Chap. 107 Sugar Chap. 154 T TAmarinds Chap. 63 Tormentill Chap. 64 Turbith Chap. 65 Turmerick Chap. 22 Turneps Chap. 149 U VAlerian Chap. 165 Vardigrease Chap. 68 W WAllwort Chap. 56 Water Germander Chap. 159 Water Lilly Chap. 134 Wild Gourd, see Coloquintida Chap. 17 Wood Aloes Chap. 43 Wormwood Chap. 1 Z ZEdoarie, see Setwall Chap. 169
AN EXPLANATION OF All such hard VVords, or Terms of Art, that are to be found in this Treatise of Simples used in MEDICINES, Whereby the Vulgar may the better understand it. A ABdomen, that part of the belly that covereth the Entrals or Bowels. Abortion, miscar∣rying of Women. Absterfive, cleans∣ing or scouring Accesse, a fit either of an Ague, falling Sicknesse, or the like. Acrimonie, sharpnesse. Adjacent, neare. Adstrictive, binding. Adulterate, corrupt, counterfeit. Adust, burnt. Agarick trochiscated. Agarick in Trosses, or small Cakes. Alacrity, chearfullnesse. Alexipharmacall, against poyson and ve∣nome. Animosity, courage, stoutnesse. Anthonies fire, wild fire, or the Shingles. Aromaticall, smelling sweet, like Spice. Arthritick, Pains of the Joynt. Arthriticall paines, Pains of the Joynt. Asthma shortnesse of breath. Astringent, binding. Attenuate, to make thin. Attractive, drawing. B Bole, a lump or medicine given upon the point of a knife, to the quantity of a Nutmeg, till the whole be taken. C Cachecticall, of ill constitution. Cachochymie Such a body wherein there is abundance of ill humours. Cacochymicall Such a body wherein there is abundance of ill humours. Callous knots, hard bunches. Cardiack passion, the passion of the heart.
Cardiacall, proper for the heart. Catarrhe, Rheume. Chronicall, of long continuance. Cicatrice, to heal up into a skar. Citrine, yellow. Coagulated, thickned like curd, or curd∣ded. Colature, straining. Collyris, Medicines for the eyes in a liquid forme, Condensed, thickned. Consolidate, to knit or unite, and to make sound againe that which was broken or bruised. Contusions, bruises. Corroborate, to strengthen. Corroding, gnawing, eating. Coronall futuro, the seame or future on the forepart of the head Corpulent, fat, grosse. orrosive, fretting. Crude, raw. Crudities, rawnesse. D Decocting, Boyling. Decoction, Boyling. Debility, weaknesse, feeblenesse. Defluxions, flowings down of humours. Dentifrice, a Medicine to make the teeth white by rubbing them. Detriment, hurt or damage. Diaphoreticall, provoking sweat. Discusse, to expell, dissolve, or breake. Diureticall, provoking Ʋrine. Diuturnall, of long continuance. Dulcediny, sweetnesse. Dysentery, the Bloody Flux. E Ebullition, boyling bubling. Emulsion, a Medicine like Milke. Entralls, Bowels. Epitheme, a Medicine compounded of distilled waters, wine, vineger, and powders, in which a cloath is dipped, and so applied to the Liver, Heart, &c. Evacuate, to empty or cleanse. Evaporate, to consume away in smoake, or like smoake. Excoriate, fretting, or going of the skin. Expectorate, to cause flegme to be easily spit forth Expectoration, the same with the for∣mer. Eruginous, green like Vardigrease. Eruptions, breakings out. Extenuate, to make thin or diminish. F Filme, a thin skin. Faecula, dregs. Fluent, flowing or abounding. Fomentation, when liquour is laid up∣on a part or member with a spunge or clout. Fragrant, smelling sweet. Fiable, easie to be broken. Frigitidy, coldnesse. Fumigation, a perfume. G Gargle, to wash the mouth. Gargarisme, a water to wash the mouth and throat. Genitalls, the privy Members. Geniture, generatin conception. Glutinous, thick like glew. Glutinative, glewing together. Gonorrhaea, running of the reins. H Hectick, Consuming Feaver. Hecticall, Consuming Feaver. Hepaticall, proper for the Liver. Hydromell, honied water, or water and honey mixed together. Hydropical, having the Dropsie. Hypochondriack winde, Melancholly winde. Hystericall fits, fits of the Mother. I Impinguating, faming, or making fat. Impurity, foulnesse. Incarn, to breed flesh in a Wound. Incorporate, to mix into a body.
Inflammabilious, of a fiery, flaming, or burning nature. Infusion, a liquor wherein certaine drugs are steeped for a time, without boyling. Injection, a casting in. Insolation, a setting in the Sun. Inspissated, thickned. Inveterate, old, of long continuance. L Lenifie, to make smooth. Locall, belong to a place, Lotion, a washing. Luxation, a bone out of Joynt. M Macerate, to steep or infuse. Macerating, steeping. Maturity, rpenesse. Menses, the courses of Women, because they come every moneth. Mesentery, a part in the middle of the bowells full of veins. Mollifie, to soften. Muscilage, the seeds or roots of slimie plants laid a steep in water, boyled, and drawne through a Sive. Mundie, to cleanse. N Nauseous, Inclining to vomit. Nauseousnesse, Inclining to vomit. Nephticall, pains of the reins by reason of gravell or stone. Nodes, hard bunches on the Joynts. Nuke, the hinder part of the neck. O Obnoxious, hurtfull, dangerous. Obstructions, stoppings. Obstructed, stop't. Occult, hidden, secret. Orifice, the mouth of a wound, Fistula, or such like. Oxymel, a syrupe made of honey, vineger, and water. P Palpitation, beating of the heart or brain. Peccant, offensive or faulty. Pectorall, good for the breast. Penetrate, to pierce. Pessary, a Medicine made like a finger, or suppository, to be put up into the secret parts of Women. Phlegmon, a hot swelling. Plethorick, full of bloud and humours. Potently, strongly, powerfully. Pregnant women, women with Child. Primarily, chiefly, or in the first place. Ponderous, weighty. Porous substance, full of small holes. Putrid Feavers, rotten Feavers. R Ratifie, to make thin. Rancid, stinking, ranke, or mouldy. Recreate, to refresh. Remisse, flacke, more easie. Remote, far off, far distant. Represse, to keep backe, to keep downe. Retentive, reteining, or having power to keepe. Robustick, strong. S Scirrhus, a hard swelling. Serous humours, watery humours. Specick remedy, a remedy that helps by its speciall and particular vertue. Sperme, seed. Spermaticall Flux, Flux of seed. Spongious flesh proud flesh. Stomachicall belonging to the stomach. Strangulatory Medicine, a Medicine that doth soon strangle or choak one. Stupefaction, a making dull or senselesse. Suffocation of the Mother, a rising or choaking of the Mother. Strumous swelling, the Kings Evill. Sulphureous, of the nature of Brim∣stone. Suppression, stopping staying. T Tabulat's, small Cakes made round or square. Tenuity, thinnesse.
Terms, Courses of women. Torrifyed, dryed. Tortions, gripings. Transparent, cleare that one may see through. Tremulation, trembling or quaking. Trosses, round Cakes. Tumours, swellings. Tunicle, a skin. Ʋ Virulent, filthy, stinking, or poysonous. Viscerous parts, the bowells or inward parts. Viscid, Tough. Viscious, Tough. Unctious, fatty, oyly, Uritories, the passages of urine. Uterine parts, parts belonging to the womb. Vulnerary, good for wounds. The Books following are to be sold by Phile∣mon Stephens at the Guilded Lyon in Pauls Church-Yard. TWo Treatises formerly published by Robert Pemel, the Au∣thor of the foregoing Book. Viz. 1. Of the chiefe internall Diseases of the Head. 2. Help for the Poor, A collection of Medicines to be easily obtained, with an Appendix concerning letting blood in the Small Pox. A seasonable Treatise written by Sir Hen. Spelman, Kt. deceased, wherein all Questions concerning Tithes, are learn∣edly discussed. An Exposition on foure Psalms, Viz. 27.84.85. and 87. by that Faithfull Servant of Christ, Mr Thomas Peirson, de∣ceased. Milke for Babes, a Treatise expounding and applying the Principles of Religion, with three Sermons on these Texts, Psal. 119.12. Mark 3.45, 46. Psal. 81.5. Likewise foure Sermons on these Texts, Judges 11.27. Matth. 7.12. 1 Tim. 1.19. A Dictionary in Latine and English, containing near ten thousand Primitive words, besides thrice that number de∣rived from, or knowne by them; with an Interpretation of
Scholasticall words, often used in Sermons: by Tho. Willis, M. A. Wisedomes Conquest, exemplified in a Grammaticall Tran∣slation of the 13th Book of Ovids Metamorphosis, Containing the Curious and Rhetoricall contest between Ajax, Ʋlysses, for Achilles Armour, exhibiting The power of Valour, and preva∣lence of Eloquence, by Tho. Hall. The exemplary life and death of Mr Samuel Crooke, late Pastor of Wrington in Somerset-shire. A Treatise opening the Promises and Threatnings of Scripture, by F. Bridges. A Grammar for Children, in English, being a Synopsis, containing the Rudiments of the Latine Tongue 12• The sum of three Sermons on Ephes. 1.22, 23. wherei  shewed that the Church is the proper subject of the New Co∣venant, together with severall other Practicall Propositions, necessary to be considered in reference to the debates now on foot, by W. Sambrooke, LL. B. Ox. Sabatto dominica, Four Propositions tending to reconcile the seeming difference between the letter of the Law, and Chri∣stian Liberty, in the Doctrine of the Sabboath, and the Lords Day. Mr Joseph Medes Exposition on the Revelation of Saint John, both in Latine and English. A Treatise to direct Christians for receiving the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper, with profit and comfort; where∣unto is annexed Meditations fit to be used in the time of pre∣paration, and others in the action of receiving, by John Dow∣name, B. D. Directions for the private reading of the Scriptures, where∣in the order and the drift of the whole Scripture is Methodi∣cally set downe, with choyce rules which shew how to read with profit, first composed by Mr Nich. Bifield, deceased, en∣larged by Mr John Geere, late Pastor of Saint Faith's, London, to which is added, Pithy directions to reconcile places of Scripture, seeming repugnant. An Examination of the chiefe points of Antinomianisme, collated out of divers Sermons, and now drawn together into a body, and published for all that love the holy truth of God, with an Examination of the Pamphlet intituled, the Compas∣sionate Samaritan, handling the Power of the Magistrate, in
the Compulsion of Conscience, by Tho. Bedford, B. D. Arithmaticke made easie in two Books. 1. A perfect Method for knowledge and practise of natu∣rall Arithmaticke, according to the Vulgar way, without de∣pendance upon any other Author for the grounds thereof. 2. A perfect Method for knowledge and practise of Arti∣ficiall Arithmaticke, performed by Logurithmes, resolving all Arithmeticall Questions, by Addition and Substraction. Together with the use of the line of proportion, exhibiting the Logarithmes of any number under 100000. Also an Ap∣pendix resolving all questions concerning interest of money, valuation of Leases, and the like, by Edmond Wingale, E∣squire. Two Tables of Logarithmes, the first conteining the Logar∣ithmes of all numbers from 1. to 100000. The other the Lo∣garithmes of the right Signes and Tangents of all the degrees and Minutes of the Quadrant, each degree being divided into 100. Minutes, and the Logarithme of the Radim or Semidia∣miter, being 10,00000,00000. with their admirable use for the resolution of Problemes in Geometrie, Astronomie, Geogra∣phie, and Nugation, by Edmond Wingale, Esquire. The Construction and use of the rule of Proportion, in Arithmaticke, and Geomitry, Astronomie, Dialling, Geography, Navigation, Gaging of Vessels, Military Orders, Interests, and An∣nuities. A Discourse touching the true notion of the Lords Supper, also the union of Christ and the Church, in a shadow, by R. Cudworth, D. D. now Master of Clare-Hall in Cambridge. The Christian Conflict, shewing the difficulties and duties of the Christian Warfare, with the Armour and graces of Chri∣stian Souldiers, partially applied to Magistrates and Mini∣sters, Husbands and Wives. Together with the case of Ʋsury, Depopulation, and the errours of Antinomonists, occasionally discussed by John Bentham. A Remonstrance of the holy life and happy death of John Bruen, Esquire, exhibiting vanity of memorialls and exem∣plary passages, usefull to all sorts of people, as a path and president of piety and charity, written by W. Hinde, late of Bunbury in Cheshire.
THE NATURE OF Simple Medicines. CHAP. I. De Absynthio. Of Wormwood. COmmon Wormwood is so well known, that it needeth no description. The Names. It is called in Latine, Absynthium, because of its bitternesse, Beasts will not feed on it, neither doe most like the tast of it. The Temperament. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, very bitter and cleansing, yet binding and strengthening. The Duration. It will keep good a yeare. The Inward Ʋse. Wormwood draweth from the Tunicles of the Stomach, and In∣testines, first choller, then flegme, and also doth strengthen the Stomach like Alois. It purgeth choller likewise from the Reines and Liver, and purgeth by Urin. It doth much prevaile in the Green-sicknesse, Jaundise, and Dropsie. It helpeth such as have ob∣structed Livers and Stomachs, the Collicke, and gripings in the Bel∣ly; cleanseth the womb and uterine parts, help Crudities, dry∣veth
away the Hicket, stayeth vomiting, brings a good appetite, expelleth winde, and prevailes in intermittent Agues, and ob∣structions of the Entralls. It preserveth the bloud from putrifa∣ction, and is usefull in the Pestilence. It prevents and resists Drun∣kennesse, vomiting at Sea, and killeth worms. The Vineger wherein Wormwood is boiled, helpeth a stinking breath that com∣meth from the teeth or gums, or from the corruption in the Sto∣mach. It provokes the termes in women. The wine made here∣of is good for all the forementioned purposes, except in such as have Feavers. The Seeds of Wormwood helpe the Bloudy Flux, and other Fluxes of the Belly. Wormwood being steeped in Vineger, and drunken, helpeth such as have taken Mushromes, or Tod stooles. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, in decoction, or the juice is taken by it selfe; it is also infused in wine. Against an Ague. Take of Wormwood in pouder, two drams; Give it in White-wine or Posset-drink, one hour or two before the fit commeth. Against a Quartaine Ague. Take of the juice of Wormwood, half an ounce, Venice Treacle, halfe a dram, Treacle water a spoonfull, mingle them together. Give this before the fit commeth. Doe this for three or four fits together, and it will prevaile, especially at the beginning, the body being first well purged. A Decoction of Wormwood against Melancholy, winde in the Stomach, &c. Take Wormwood, Fumiterry, of each a handfull, Raisons of the Sun, two ounces, make an infusion, and a gentle decoction in three Pints of Posset drinke to two Pints, or two and a halfe; strain it, and drink every morning a good draught thereof. It is good against Melancholly, a cold Stomach, as also to expell winde, and to take away obstructions, or stopping. Wormwood-Wine. Take of dry Wormwood a handfull, put it into a gallon of wine, stop the vessel close, and let it stand to infuse. This helpeth cold and crude stomachs, expelleth winde, easeth the Collick comming of winde, strengthneth the stomach, avails in the Jandise, and killeth wormes.
Wormwood-Wine purging Water. Take Wormwood a handfull and a halfe, Cardus one handfull, Agrimony a handfull, Spleenwort, Vervaine, of each halfe a handfull, Oris-root, one ounce and a halfe, Fennell-root one ounce, Parsly-root halfe an ounce, Capar barke, Asarum, Polypodium, roots of Succory, of each halfe an ounce, or take one ounce and a halfe of Succory roots, Fennell-seed, Smallage-seed, Parsly-seed, and Anni-seed, of each one dram, Calamus, Aromaticus, Cinamon, of each two drams, Sene one ounce and a halfe, Soldanella, or Sea binde weed, three handfulls: Cut and bruise those things that are to be cut and bruised, then put to them sixteen or eighteen pints of White-wine, wherein Steel hath been quenched, let them stand together, after a week drink of it, a good draught in the morning, or a∣bout ten of the clock in the forenoone, every day or every second day. You may make but halfe the receipt. The juice of Wormwood is commended against Melancholly, if two or three drams thereof, be taken in a morning. Heurn. Meth. ad prax cap. 9. f. 200. Against the Jandise. Take the flowers of Wormwood, or the tops thereof, Rosemary and Black-thorne, of each a like quantity, of Saffron half so much; boyle them gently in Renish-wine, let it be given after the body is prepared by purging. The externall or outward Ʋse. Wormwood being outwardly applied killeth worms in the belly or stomach; the juice with Honey helpeth dim eyes, and ming∣led with Niter, it helpeth the Quinsie, being anointed therewith. It taketh away black and blew spots in the skin, that come after falls or bruises, if it be mingled with Honey, and anointed. It helpeth soare and running ears, and ceaseth the pain of them, if the hot vapours of the decoction be taken in thereat, by a Funnell or otherwise: It easeth the tooth-ach. Being bruised and apply∣ed with Rose-water to the stomach, it gives much ease and com∣fort to such as have been long sick. It avails against the hardnesse of the Spleen, or where there is a hot sharp water running between the flesh and the skin, if it be used with Figs, Vineger, and Male of Darnell. A decoction thereof being made, and the Temples bathed therewith, it helpeth the paines of the head that come of a cold cause. Also being boyled in Vineger, and the mouth wash∣ed therewith, it helpeth a stinking breath. Being put into Chests
or Presses where Cloaths are, it preserveth from worms & Moths. If the skin be rubbed with the juice or with the oyle, it drives a∣way Fleas or Gnats. If Children before they be three moneths old, be bathed with a decoction thereof, or their temples, feet, and hands be nointed with the juice thereof, and well rubbed in, they shall not be troubled nor molested with heat or cold all their life time. It is so commended being used as before, that the bo∣dy shall not be infected with Scab, Leprosie, French Disease, Lice, or such like malady, Nisi Deus eos velit punire, except God will punish such for sin. Joan. Rudolp. Camerar. Memorabil. med. & mirab. Nat. arcan. cent. 3. partic. 70. fol. 189. Against the Wormes. Take Wormwood, Horehound, and Lupines, of each a handfull; boyle them in water or honey, or, strong wine, apply it hot to the Navell. A Plaster against the Wormes. Take of Mithridate two drams, Aloes in powder, a dram, with the juice of Wormwood, make a Plaister, and lay it to the belly. The hurtfull Quality. The juice offends the Stomach, being too much used, and also offends the head by raising up vapours which cause drowsinesse and sleepinesse.Absinthium ingratum suum saporem deponit, si prius per ferventem aquā trahatur; radix ejus dulcis & penè insipida, cum exignâ quâdam sal∣fedine. Camerarius in Horto. It is not safe to use it in the Consumption of the Lungs, Fal∣ling-sicknesse, Arthritick paines, Apoplexie, Le∣thargie, and continuall Feavers. Where the Stomach is hot, forbear the use of it, especi∣ally being inflamed. Of such things as are made of Wormwood. There are many Medicines made of Wormwood; as, 1. Worm∣wood-water, both hot and cold. 2. Juice of Wormwood. 3. Spirit of Wormwood. 4. Wormwood-wine. 5. Extract of Wormwood. 6. Con∣serve of Wormwood. [This is excellent against the Dropsie, and Green-sicknesse.] 7. Syrupe of Wormwood. 8. Trosses of Wormwood. 9. Salt of Wormwood. [Good in malignant and Pestilent Feavers.] 10. Chymicall Oyle. 11. Oyle of Wormwood, by infusion. The Dose. The powder is given from a dram and a halfe, to two drams, or three drams. The juice from two drams to halfe an ounce. The decoction from four ounces to six ounces, or more.
CHAP. II. De Agarico. Of Agaricke. AGaricke is a Mushrome, or spungeous substance, growing in the Larir-tree. The Names. It is called in Latine, Agaricus, and Agaricum, either because it was first used in Agaria, or because the best commeth from thence. It is called by Democratus, and others, Medicamentum familiae, be∣cause it is usefull and profitable in a Family. Massaria, fol. 479. Freitag. aur. med. c. 28. fol. 313. Renodaeus dispens. f. 355. The Temperament. Agaricke is hot in the first-degree, and dry in the second or third degree. The Kindes. There are two kinds of Agaricke; one called Male, the other Female: the Male is rejected, and the Female onely in use. The best Agaricke is that which is very white, light, friable, or easie to be broken, very loose and spungie, in tast at the first, sweet, hard, and well compact: but that which is heavy, blackish, close, clam∣mie, and conteining in it little threads, as it were sinews, is count∣ed venomous and deadly. The Duration. Agaricke will keep good three or four years. The Inward Ʋse. Agaricke purgeth primarily Flegme, and Viscuous humours from the breast, mesentery and stomach; and also from remote parts, as from the Brain, Nerves, Muscles,Purga pituiam tennem & aquosam, non autem viscosam & Lentam: sed exhaustis tenuiori∣bus partibus hanc diffi∣ciliorem reddit. Heurn. prax. med. fol. 262. Li∣ver, Spleen, Reins, Womb, and Joynts. It provokes the courses in Women, killeth Worms, is profitable against the Jaundise, Ar∣thriticall paines, Falling sicknesse, Quartaine A∣gue, Stopping of the Ʋrin, and Diuturnall, or long continued Agues, by purging away the offensive matter. It is good against venome, and all flegmatick Diseases, and takes away the pale colour in women, caused by the staying of their courses. It helpeth to cure the Dropsie, Hip-Gout, Cough, Shortnesse of breath, and Consumption of the Lungs, Spit∣ting
of bloud, the pains of the Mother; as also such as have fallen, or are bruised, and have Ruptures. Some commend it in the Col∣licke, and pain of the belly, but it causeth gripings rather then easeth such. The manner of Administring it. It is in Potions, in Pills, in Boles, in infusion and decoction, though by reason of its light substance, it will not endure any long decocting or boyling. It is rarely given by it selfe. A purging Potion that cleanseth the Breast. Take of Raisons of the Sun stoned, halfe an ounce; Figs, ten in number, Agarick cut in thin slices, two drams, Ginger bruised, halfe a scruple; boyle them in fair water gently, strain it, and take thereof four ounces, hot, in which dissolve of the best Manna, one ounce, and as much syrupe of Roses: make a Potion, and take it. Pills to purge Flegme. Take Agaricke in powder, one dram, Salgem in powder, one scruple, Cinamon half a scruple, with syrupe of Roses, make Pils, and take them in a morning. A Bole to purge Flegme and Choller. Take of Cassia that is new drawn, one ounce, Trosses of Agaricke in powder, a dram and a half, mix them, and make a Bole; take it in the morning. A Potion that purgeth Choller and Flegme. Take of Manna, Honey of Roses Laxative, of each a dram and a half, Trosses of Agarick two drams, in powder; dissolve the Manna in two ounces of Succory-water, and make a Potion. Or thus: Take Trosses of Agarick one dram and a halfe, of Succory-water three ounces, infuse or steep it all night in the water, then add one ounce of syrupe of Roses, and make a potion, adding thereto Dia∣phoenicon, two drams. Against shortnesse of Breath, and Wormes. Take Trosses of Agaricke, two drams, Oxymel simplex, two oun∣ces, mix them well together, and take it. Massaria observeth, that Agaricke being infused or steeped, doth little or nothing purge. Massar. fol. 479. The Externall Ʋse. It is used outwardly against the blacknesse of the skin, Figs in the Fundament, and against Fistulaes, also against the biting of
venomous beasts. which hurt with cold poyson; A lye made thereof, and with other hearbs cureth the Dandraffe, or Scurfe, if the head be washed therewith, also boyled with hearbs conve∣nient, it comforteth the brain and memory, stayes Rheumes and Catarrhes. Against the Tooth-ach. Take a piece of Agarick and wet it in Oyle of Cloves, or Oyle of Camphor, and put it into a hollow tooth; this will ease the pain thereof. Against the Figge in the Fundament. Take of Agaricke in powder, two drams, mix it with the juice of Sow-bread, and a little Oyle; Apply it. Against Fistulaes. Take of Salt burnt, Tartar, Agaricke, in powder, of each a like quantity, mix them with Honey, and apply it to Fistulaes. The hurtfull Quality, with the Correcting helpe. Agaricke is offensive to the Stomach, and many times causeth vomiting; therefore that it offend not the Stomach, the third part of Cloves, Nutmeg, Ginger, Hyssop, Galingall, and Mastich, may be put to it: or that it may better purge, Salgem and Ginger may be mixed with it. It may also be given with Oxymell, Scilliticum, or Simplex. Agarick is not to be given without it be well correct∣ed, except you give it to cause vomiting. In all Burning Feavers, and Inflamations Agaricke is very hurtfull, as also in the Collicke. The Compound Medicines made of Agaricke. 1. Syrupe of Roses solutive with Agaricke. 2. Pills of Agaricke. 3. Pil. Hierae cum Agarico. 4. Trosses of Agaricke. 5. Extract of Agaricke. The Dose. The Dose in substance is from two scruples, to a dram and a halfe. In decoction from a dram to halfe an ounce. CHAP. III. De Aloe. Of Alloes. Or Aloe succotrina. ALoe is the juice of an Hearb like the Sea Onion, which after it is pressed out, is dryed, and kept for to use, as neede requireth.
The Names. It is called in Latine Aloes succotrina, in English Aloes, Hearb Aloes, and Sea Housteeke. The Temperament. Alces is hot in the first or second degree, and dry in the third, and very bitter. The Kindes. Constantinus Affricanus mentioneth three kindes of Aloes; one reddish, which groweth in an Island called Scheta; another sort which is black, and is found in Persia; a third kinde yellow, which is found in Arabia. Constant. Affric. de grad. fol. 355. Schro∣derus saith there are four sorts in use now. First, A blackish sort, called Aloe caballina, because it is fit only for Horses. Secondly, Another sort more purer, in colour like the Liver, called Aloe He∣patica. Thirdly, A sort called Aloe succotrina, because the powder thereof is of a citrine, or yellow colour, or because there is great plenty of it in the Island Socotra. Fourthly, The fourth kinde is the purest part of the juice, and is called Aloe lucida, because being held up against the beams of the Sun, it sheweth very clear, like a kinde of red glasse. Schroder. Parmac. med. Chym. l. 4. fol. 240. The best is that which is most clear and transparent, of a reddish or yellow colour, being easie to break, and very bitter. The Duration. It will keep good nine or ten years, being kept dry, and from the wind and Sun. The Inward Ʋse. Aloes purgeth first Choller, then Flegme, not from all parts, but chiefly from the stomach and belly; therefore saith Gallen, Est eustomachicum plus omnibus catharticis. Gal. Alter. de dinamid. fol. 76. It is more proper for the Stomach then all other purging Medi∣cines. And by its adstrictive faculty, it strengthneth the stomach. It much helpeth a crude, moist, and nauseous stomach. It is pro∣fitable in these Diseases, in the Head-ach, when vapours arise from the stomach, in the Night-Mare, in the Scorbute, or Scurvy, in the Falling sicknesse, in Rheumes: It resisteth putrifaction, killeth worms of all sorts, whether in the belly or stomach; nay it is a speciall Antidote against Worms. It preventeth Arthriticall paines, or paines of the Joynts; it quickneth the senses by purging ob∣noxious humours from the braine. It provoketh womens courses, and the Hemrods or Piles. The use of Aloes doth preserve the body
from many dangerous Diseases: it helpeth those that have a pale colour, and is used against the Jaundise: Aloe doth hardly draw humours from any part above the Liver. Fernel. Meth. medend. fol. 112. The manner of administring it, and the time. Aloes is given in powder, in the pap of an Apple, which is very frequent, or in pils. It is most convenient for Flegmatick per∣sons, and may be given before meat, or after meat, and in the morning fasting. It is better to give it before meat, then after meat. Aloe is the basis of most pils, for there are but few purga∣tive pils which have it not as one chiefe ingredient. Pils excellent for the Stomach. Take of Aloes three ounces, of Rubarbe in powder, three drams, mix them, and infuse or steep them in a sufficient quantity of En∣dive-water, let it stand a night and a day, then straine it out, and boyle away the crudity of it, and make a masse for Pills. The Dose is halfe a dram, or two scruples. Pills to purge Choller. Take of Rubarbe in powder, one scruple, Aloes and Mastich, of each halfe a scruple, Diagnieium six graines, Spikneard and Nutmeg of each three graines, with syrupe of Roses, Laxative, make Pills and take them all in a morning fasting, with Physicall observati∣on that is fasting, and then to take some warm Broth, and to keep your selfe warm, but you must fast two or three hours first. De Aloe Lota & Rosata. Aloes being washed looseth part of its purgative faculty, and doth more strengthen then purge. Gallen saith it may be given in Feavers, so that the Feaver be gentle, as in a Quotidian Feaver. Gal. de compos. pharmac. fol. 710. Aloe Rosata is a Medicine very safe and gentle, it may be given to all sorts of persons, before or after meat. It purgeth the sto∣mach of Choller and other offensive humours, openeth stoppings, is good in the Jaundise, and strengthneth the stomach, and is thus made. Take of pure Aloes in powder four ounces, of the juice of Da∣muske Roses clarified, one pound, mix them together, and digest in the Sun, or in a Bath, till all the moisture be exhaled or taken away; then infuse it again in so much more of the juice, and eva∣porate away the juice again: doe thus four times, then keep the masse or lump for your use.
The  all Ʋse. Aloes being outwardly applied hath a consolidating faculty to heal green Wounds, and drieth, as also mundifieth or clean∣seth, and takes away all putrifaction in Wounds. It healeth Wounds of the Testicles and Privities; it cures the rednesse of the eyes, and consumes spots growing therein. It is good in infla∣mations of the Eyes, and Apostumes of the Lips, Nose, and Eyes. It healeth Ʋlcers that are hardly brought to cicatrize and especi∣ally those in the Fundament and privy members. Being mixed with Oxe-Gall, or the juice of Wormwood, it killeth Wormes. If it be dissolved with wine and used, it helpeth the falling or shed∣ding of the hair. Being made in powder, and put on the Hemroids it stayeth the bleeding thereof: mixed with honey and used, it takes away blacknesse and spots. Aloes in powder being mixed with Myrrhe and Dragons bloud, and cast into putrified Wounds or Ʋlcers, eateth out spungious flesh without pain. A Plaister for Wormes. Take of Aloes in fine powder a dram and a halfe, of Mithridate three drams, Oyle of Savin, or Oyle of Wormwood, two or three drams, mix them together, make a Plaister, lay it on the Belly. The Hurtfull Quality. The daily and too frequent use of Aloes, is much forbidden; for being much and often taken, it doth fret and excoriat the stomach and bowells. Constant. Affric. de grad. fol. 355. Aloes is hurtfull to old men. Gal. de sanitat. tuend. fol. 365. Massaria, fol. 72. Freitag. aur. med. fol. 215. Fernel. meth. med. fol. 112. Aloe o∣peneth the Orifices, or mouths of the Vaines, therefore it is hurt∣full to such as have the Hemroids, or Piles, Flux of the Womb, Belly, or any other Bloudy Flux; as also to Women with Child, to those that have the Hectick Feaver, Burning Feaver, and to all hot, and dry, and macerated, or lean bodies. It is very hurtfull to those that have hot Livers, especially given in a large quanti∣ty; which though some deny, yet experience makes it good. And Scaliger Exercitat. 160. Sect. 3. saith, they which deny Aloe to of∣fend the Liver, Experientiae scutica digni sunt, hoc per annos quadra∣ginta compertum habemus. 'Tis not to be given often to Children, especially such as are of a hot and dry Constitution. When the season is extream hot, or very cold, 'tis not so safe to give Aloes, for then it will cause one to void bloud. Antonius Musa, saith, that after the taking of Aloes (in the depth of Winter) he was
so troubled that he could not sit for the space of a week. A. Mu∣sa exam. simpl: med. 4o. 355. Wecher. Antid. spec. 4o. 222. Cinamon, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mastich, and Gum Tragacanth, are the best correctors of Aloes, and may be mixed with it. If Aloes be taken a little before supper, it doth so much the lesse hurt and of∣fend the stomach. Whether the use of Aloes be profitable to preserve health? Gallen doth much commend Aloes, and also Hiera pigra, and saith it is a very profitable Medicament, and gratefull to the sto∣mach; and many praise it, for that it takes away viscuous and corrupt humours that are contained in the Tunicles of the Sto∣mach. Mesue counts it one of the best and wholesomest Medica∣ments, which hath a prerogative above all Medicines. For when other purging Medicines doe weaken the stomach, and hurt the members or parts, the taking of Aloes doth not only not hurt, but doth much comfort the stomack; yea, he thinks if it be often taken, it makes all the parts and members sound. But Cardanus and others are of a contrary minde, and condemne Gallen for that (De tuend. san. lib. 1. c. 45.) he saith, Aloes is a friend to the Sto∣mach: Further, they say, being bitter and loathsome, it is offen∣sive to the Stomach, because the Stomach is much delighted with sweet things: Moreover they say, Hierapigra, although it be cor∣rected and sometimes not unprofitable to take it, yet it is hurtfull to the Stomach, and prejudiciall to the life. But I conceive that the use of Aloes doth much prevaile to preserve health, seing it doth not only purge away the excrements in the bowels, but also it purgeth crude humours, as also Flegmatick and Chollerick hu∣mours from the Stomach, and doth resist putrifaction, being also somewhat astringent: Only note, That it must be given but in a small quantity, and not too often; for if it be given often, and in a great quantity, so that it come to the Liver, it doth much hurt, especially to those that have dry bodies and hot Livers. Whether Aloes doth open the mouths of the veines, and provoke the Hemroids? There is some controversie among Physitians concerning this; Mesne, Serapio, and most of the Arabians conclude, Aloen ora vena∣rum aperire atque sanguinem ciere, that Aloes doth open the mouths of the veines, and open the Hemroide veines, Manardus, Fuchsius, and others on the contrary, altogether refute this opinion of theirs, and by strong and firme reasons out of Gallen, Diascorides,
and Plinie demonstrate, Aloen potius ora venarum occludere, at{que} san∣guinem undicunque fluentem sistere, That Aloes doth rather shut or close the mouths of the veins, and stop bloud flowing from any part. But this controversie may be thus decided or reconciled; if we say that Aloes being outwardly applied doth shut the mouths of the veins, and so doth stay any Flux of the Bloud; but being inwardly taken, so that it pierce or penetrate to the veins, it causeth bloud to flow. For being outwardly applied it hath a certaine binding, astringent, and glewing faculty: As for Dias∣corides and Plinie, they write not of the Hemroids or Piles, but of spetting bloud, which commeth when some veine or vessell is opened; now in such a case Aloes being taken inwardly, hath the same vertue of closing or shutting the veines, as it hath being out∣wardly applied to a bleeding wound. For this is most certaine, if Aloes be taken inwardly it opens the Hemroid veines, and cau∣seth bloud to be evacuated, especially in those that are subject to the Hemroids or Piles, and in such as are subject to have their bloud much heated. And this faculty it hath not from its acri∣mony, or sharpnesse, or bitternesse, but ex quadam insita virtute, from some inherent or naturall virtue. The Compound Medicines made of Aloes. These following are made of Aloes, 1. Aloe Depurata, or wash∣ed Aloes. 2. Aloe Violata. 3. Aloe Rosata. 4. Extractum Aloes, or Extracts of Aloes. 5. Pilulae de Aloes. 6. Pil. de Aloe Lota. 7. Hiera Picra. 8. Pil. de Hiera cum Agarico. The Dose. Aloes in substance is given from a dram to two drams; in in∣fusion from a dram and a halfe to three drams. Aloes Rosata is given from halfe a dram to a dram and a halfe. The same Dose may be given of washed Aloes. CHAP. IV. De Ammoniaco. Of Gum Ammoniacum. GƲm Ammoniacum is the juice of a Firula growing in Cyrene of Affrica, nigh to the Oracle Jovis Ammomis, from whence (as some thinke) it tooke its name. Renodaeus dispens. med. fol. 547.
The Names. It is called in Latine, Ammoniacum, Ammoniacum, and Gummi Armoniacum; in English, Gum Ammoniacum. The Temperament. Ammoniacum is hot in the second degree, and dry in the begin∣ning of the same; or hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. The best kinde. The best Ammoniacum is that which is of a good colour, yellow, without and within like the best Frankinsence, pure, firme or close, without sticks, stones, or any other filth, of a bitter tast, and hath almost the savour of Castoreum. The inward Ʋse. Ammoniacum purgeth thick Flegme from the Head, Nerves, Stomach, Mesenterie, and also from the Joynts. It much pre∣vailes in Asthma, and Orthropnaea, that is, in shortnesse of the breath, and in Diseases comming of Flegme. It is good in old paines of the head, and against stoppings of the Liver: it pro∣vokes the termes in Women, and Urin, and is good in any kinde of Gout, whether Sciatica, or Joynt-Gout, as also in the Falling Sicknesse. It killeth Wormes called Ascarides, and is excellent a∣gainst the hardnesse of the Liver or Spleen. It bringeth away the dead Childe. The manner of administring it. Sometimes it is given with a pectorall decoction, and with Oxymel simplex, or Squilliticum; somtimes with other ingredients, in a Lohoch, or with an Egge. But most usually it is taken in Pills. Pills excellent in shortnesse of breath. Take of Gum Ammoniacum the purest, two drams, of Venice Tur∣pentine seven drams, extract of Saffron, halfe a dram, Spicies Dia∣hyssopi, Diambrae, of each ten graines, mix them together, and make a masse or lump for Pills. The Dose is a dram at a time, or more. Freitag. aur. med. fol. 300. Pills against the obstructions and hardnesse of the Liver, and Spleene. Take Ammoniacum dissolved in Vineger of Squills, two drams; Trosses of Eupotorium, Trosses of Rubarbe, Trosses of Capers, of each a dram, Extract of Centary, the lesser, two scruples, Extract of Gentian, one scruple, Steele prepared, halfe an ounce, Species
Diarxhodon Abbatis, a dram, Species Diambrae halfe a dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrupe of Succory, with Rubarbe, make a masse for Pills. Pills against the Sciatica or Hip-Gout. Take of Ammoniacum thirty graines, of Sagapinum two scru∣ples, or forty graines, Gutta gummi seaven or eight graines; dis∣solve the Gums in the juice of Elecampane, or in the juice of Ivy, and make Pills thereof. If the body be strong you may give them all, but if weak then give but halfe of them. The externall Ʋse. Ammoniacum being outwardly applied is of a dissolving nature, it consumes spungeous or proud flesh, and breeds sound flesh, it softneth Cornes, and the hard swellings of the Joynts, which come by reason of the Gout, and draweth forth Thornes, Splin∣ter, or the like, if it be dissolved with Vineger; but it is more effectuall if it be mixed with Honey, Birthworth, and Saffron. It consumes Strumas, or swellings called the Kings Evill, and ripe∣neth all kind of Imposthumes, being applyed on Wool that is not greasie. Being applyed to tumours of the Breast of Women, it dissolveth them, and brings them to maturity or ripenesse; and mixed with Vineger it decreaseth the Milk, and keepeth it from coagulating or curdling in the Breast, being thereunto applied. Being mixed with Honey, and applied to the Throat, it helpeth the Quinsie, and swelling in the Neck, or Throat. It taketh away spots of the eyes, being mixed with Womans Milk, and it clean∣seth the sight being mixed in Medicines for the eyes. Ammoniacum and Frankinsence dissolved in Vineger, and applied, helpeth Ring∣wormes. A Plaister for the hardnesse of the Spleene. Take of Gum Ammoniacum one ounce, Myrrhe, Frankinsence, Bdellium, of each halfe an ounce; dissolve them in Vineger of Rue, and adde thereunto of the flowers of Camomill in powder, a dram; make a Plaister thereof, and lay it warme to the Spleene. Weichardus, Thes. pharmacent. fol. 243. Or, Take Garden mints, Rue and Melilot in powder, of each halfe an ounce, Niter, Salgem, of each three drams, Ammoniacum dis∣solved in wine, one ounce, with a little Wax and Oyle of Ca∣pers, make a Plaster.
Or, Take of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vineger, halfe an ounce, Ʋnguenium dialtheae compositum, or Oyntment of Marsh-mallowes, compound two ounces with a sufficient quantity of Wax, make a Plaister. Heurnius doth much commend this Plaister following, against hardnesse of the Spleene. Take of Hemlocke foure handfulls, of Ammoniacum halfe a pound; infuse them together eight dayes, adding thereto three or foure ounces of strong Wine Vineger, or more; the Hemlocke also must be bruised. Then having stood eight dayes, dissolve the Gum by boyling it gently, strain it forth, boyle the strained liqour againe, till the moysture be well consumed, then with some Wax and Oyle of sweet Almonds, make a Plaister or Oynt∣ment. A Cerot to dissolve all manner of hard knots and gangli∣ous tumours. Take of Ammoniacum six ounces, Marsh mallow-roote, and white Bryonie-root in powder, of each an ounce, of Turbith mi∣nerall halfe an ounce, of fresh Butter one ounce and a halfe; dissolve the Gums in Vineger, and mix them all together, and with one ounce of Wax make a Cerot. Against Wormes. Take of Ammoniacum one ounce, dissolve it in Vineger, and adde of the juice of Wormwood halfe an ounce, boyle them a lit∣tle, and make a Plaister thereof: warm it, and lap it to the Navill. The hurtfull quality. Ammoniacum may not safely be given to pregnant Women, or Women with Child, for it will cause them to miscarry: And though it provoke Urin, yet if too great a quantity thereof be given, it will cause one to pisse bloud. These things following are made of Ammoniacum. 1. Pills of Ammoniacum. 2. Syrupe of Ammoniacum. 3. Extract of Ammoniacum. 4. Chymicall Oyle of Ammoniacum. 5. A Plaster of Ammoniacum. 6. Emplast. ex cicuta cum Ammoniaco. 7. Ceratum ex Ammoniaco. The Dose. The Dose is from a dram to four scruples.
CHAP. V. De Amygdalis. Of Almonds. ALmonds are of two sorts; bitter, and sweet: of sweet, some are bigger, called Jordan Almonds, others lesse, called Va∣lence Almonds, and Barbary Almonds. The Names. The Almond-tree (saith Plinie) is the first that blossometh in the moneth of January, and by March the Almond is ripe. Plinie Nat. Hist. lib. 16. cap. 25. In Latine Amygdalum, and Amygdala. The Temperament. Sweet Almonds are hot and moist in the first degree, but the bit∣ter are hot and dry in the second degree. The best sort. The best are such as are yellow, full and sound, not broken, nor rotten, but hard and dry, white within, of a good smell and taste. The Duration. They will keep good two or three years. The inward Ʋse. The sweet Almonds are most pleasing to the tast, and they yield good and plentifull nourishment to the body, therefore they are good for weak and macerated persons, or such as are leane. They open and cleanse the breast, provoke spitting, and are good in the Pleurisy and shortnesse of breath; they open the passages of Urin, cleanse the Kidneyes, and provoke sleep. They increase geniture or seed both in men and women, open the stoppings of the Liver, and Spleen, and help the sight. Being blanched and dryed that they may be made into powder, and so taken by it self, or with other things, stayeth the loosnesse of the belly. The Oyle of sweet Almonds cleanseth the Reins, and is good for such as are troubled with the Stone, easeth the pain by opening and making slippery the passages thereof: it is good for Women that are new∣ly delivered, for it helpeth throwes and after pains. Being ming∣led with Sugar-candy, and taken, it helps the Cough and Hoars∣nesse. If you give two or three drams of it to Children that are newly borne, that are troubled with Gripings, and mingle Sugar Pellets, or white candy therewith, it will much prevaile.
Bitter Almonds open the stoppings of the Liver, and Spleene, cleanse the Lungs from grosse and tough flegme, cleanse the Kid∣neyes, and provoke Urine. They take away flatulent or windy humours in the body, and provoke the courses in Women. Being taken with Amylum, or Starch and Mints, they are good against spitting of bloud, and taken with water, they are good for paines in the back, and the inflamation of the Lungs. They preserve from Drunkennesse, if five or six be eaten in a morning fasting. The Oyle of bitter Almonds being taken, killeth Wormes, helpeth the paines, suffocations, and tortions of the womb. Being drun∣ken with wine, it mittigateth the Cough, and brings away the stone or gravell in the Kidneyes. It is reported, that if bitter Al∣monds be given to a Fox, he dieth thereof. The manner of administring them. Almonds are eaten alone, or made into milk or emulsion, lo∣hoch, or March panes. An Emulsion for the Diseases of the Breast or Lungs. Take of sweet Almonds one ounce, of Pine-kernell halfe an ounce, of the seeds of Citrull, Gourds, Melon, and Bombar-seed, or Cotten-tree, of each a dram; blanch the Almonds, and prepare the Seeds. Beat them in a Morter, with a pound of the decoction of Jujubes, and Raisons of the Sun; beating them first, and putting the water in by degrees; then add four ounces of Sugar: make an emulsion for four or five Doses. Renodaeus, dispens. med. fol 226. An Emulsion to extinguish the heat of the Reines, and to help the sharpnesse of the Ʋrin. Take Gourd, Citrull, Melon, and Cucumer-seeds, of each halfe an ounce; Lettice, and white Poppy-seed, of each two drams. Beat them in a Morter, with a pint of Violet-water, then add syrupe of Water-Lillies, three ounces; make an Emulsion for three Do∣ses, or three times taking. Almond-Milk much in use by Practitioners, and others. Take of sweet Almonds blanched (which is soon done by cast∣ing them into warm water) two ounces, of Gourd, Cutrub, Cucu∣mer, and Melon-seeds cleansed, of each two drams; Lettice, and white Poppy-seed, of each a dram; make it according to art, in∣to an Emulsion or milk, with a pint of Rose-water, or Barly-water. Heurnius, prax. med. fol. 21.
A March-pane against leannesse, or also for the Diseases of the Breast and Lungs. Take of sweet Almonds blanched three drams, of Pine-kernels (steeped in Scabious water 9 or 10 hours) half an ounce, of Pistack-kernells (steeped in Scabious-water, a whole day) one ounce, Gum Tragacanth, and Arabicke, of each halfe a dram, of white Starch in powder as much; the pulp of Dates, and Sebestens, of each halfe an ounce, of the whitest Sugar dissolved in Rose-water, so much as is sufficient to make it up into a March-pane. Make it into small Cakes or Trosses, and eat of them at any time. Gor∣raeus, form. remed. cap. 15. fol. 445. For the Stone and Gravell. Take of Oyle of sweet Almonds fresh, two ounces, syrupe of Marsh mallowes, one ounce, mingle them together. Give it in a morning fasting. The outward Ʋse. The Oyle both of bitter and sweet Almonds is good to cleanse the skin from roughnesse and spots, but the bitter is most effectu∣all. Being mixed with Oyle of Roses, and Oyle of Capers, and the Spleen annoynted therewith, it helpeth the hardnesse thereof. It cures deafnesse and noyse in the ears, if it be dropped into the ears; and helpeth the skurfinesse of the head, and sores thereof. If the Temples be annoynted therewith, it easeth the paines of the head, and brings rest; or boyle bitter Almonds with Vineger of Roses, and Rose-leaves, apply it to the Temples. Being bruised with Honey, they are good against the biting of a mad Dog. The powder of the Almond Cakes, after the Oyle is pressed from them, doth cleanse the hands or skin in any place, far better then Sope; and to supple the parts, as also to make them smooth. If the Oyle be mixed with Honey, powder of Licoris, Oyle of Roses, and white Wax, and the eyes therewith annoynted, it clears them, and help∣eth dimnesse thereof. To cleanse the skin, and to beautifie the Face. Take of Oyle of Tartar, one ounce, Oyle of sweet Almonds, and of bitter Almonds, one ounce and a halfe, mix them together, wash the face often therewith. The hurtfull Quality. It is not safe to give them to those that have hot chollerick sto∣machs, and that have hot chollerick Feavers, least they turne into heat and choller. They also cause head-ach, and fill the head with fumes and vapours.
Of such things as are made of Almonds. 1. Confectio Amygdal. dule. 2. Oyle of sweet Almonds. 3. Oyle of bitter Almonds. 4. Lohoch de Papavere. 5. Lohoch de Pino. 6. Lohoch sanum & expertum. The Dose. The Oyle of sweet Almonds is given from two drams to three ounces. The Almonds themselves are eaten ad libitum, or as men please, at any time. CHAP. VI. De Aristolochia longa, & rotunda. Of long rooted Birth-wort, and round rooted Birth-wort. THese are long and round roots, whitish within, and rugged without, well known to those that are Artists. The Names. It is called in Latine, Aristolochia longa & rotunda. In English, Round rooted Birthwort, and Long rooted Birthwort, or Hartworth. The Temperament. These roots are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third degree: or they are hot in the third degree, and dry in the se∣cond. The round hath lesse earthly substance, and more tenuity of parts in it; the long hath lesse tenuity of parts in it. The round is most effectuall in all Diseases. The Duration. It will keep good two or three years. The inward Ʋse. Although all mention not the purging faculty that is in Ari∣stolochia, or Birthwort, yet the Arabians and other Physitians say, they purge first Flegme, and then Choller, and that without trou∣ble or commotion to the body; and strengthen the inward parts, and are void of any maligne quality: which is chiefly to be found in the round root. Now because it doth attenuate and purge flegme, and discusse windinesse, it avails in the affects of the Brain, Nerves, Breast, Stomach, intestine Spleen, and womb. It is good in the Falling Sicknesse, Cramp, Convulsion, Ruptures, shortnesse of Breath, paine of the Side, Hicket, gnawing of the
Stomach, Collicke, (and especially comming of Flegme or winde) swelling of the Spleen. It brings downe the After-Birth, and pro∣vokes the courses, and helps the impurity of the Womb. It is used with profit in the Joynt-Gout, against venome and poyson, against cold Agues, and against stoppings and rebellious humours that are the cause of long Agues. It is excellent for Women that are near their time, or especially in Travell, for it causeth a spee∣dy and easie delivery, and clears the uterine parts of what is of∣fensive to nature; also it brings away the dead Child. It killeth Worms, and resisteth putrifaction. It is given with Oxymel or Hy∣dromel, against the contusions of the Nerves, and Muscles. The long roots infused and taken, helpe to dry up Scab and Itch. The manner of Administring it. It is given in substance, or in decoction. A Powder against the Epilepsie, or Falling-Sicknesse. Take of round Aristolochia, or Birthwort, six drams, of Piony-seed, two drams, make them in powder, and add one ounce of fine Sugar. The Dose is a dram at a time in Blackcherry-water. A Powder against the Joynt-Gout. Take Germander, Ground-pine, Centory, the lesser, Sage, Betony, Gentian, round Birth-wort, of each halfe an ounce, of the wood called Lignum vitae, or Guajacum, seven ounces, make them into powder. Give hereof a dram every day in water of Honey, for certaine moneths together, if need require. Freitag. aur. med. fol. 286. A Potion against winde in the Stomach, and paine thereof. Take of round Birthwort halfe an ounce, Anni-seed and Carra∣way-seed, of each five drams, Agaricke trochiscated two drams and a halfe, Camomill flowers, Centory the lesser, of each two handfulls, of Saffron ten grains; boyle them in broth made with meat, and make a drink for divers Doses, taking a draught thereof morn∣ing and evening, adding a little Sugar thereunto. Or, Take of Treacle of Andromachus, two scruples, of Mithridate a scruple, of round Birth-wort halfe a dram: make the Birthwort in powder, and dissolve it with the rest in Sack, and give it.
Pills having a cleansing and deterging faculty, good against the Falling-Sicknesse, Palsie, Shortnesse of Breath, Old Cough, Hardnesse of the Liver beginning, and in the stopping of the Courses, bringing away the Birth, and After-Birth: being most convenient in the winter season, for such as are of moist Constitutions, and to be used after the Body is purged. Take of round Birthwort one ounce, Gentian-root, Myrrhe, of each three drams, Aloes and Cinamon of each half an ounce; Gin∣ger a dram, make them all into fine Powder, and with Oyle of sweet Almonds make it into a masse or lump for Pills. The Dose is a dram and a halfe, taking Broth presently after them. Fervel. meth. med. lib. 7. fol. 192. Against paine of the side. Take of Birthwort root a dram, Myrrhe in powder, ten graines, make the other in powder, and with water of Honey, or Carduus water, make a Potion, and give it. Against the swelling of the Spleene. Take of round Birthwort in powder, a dram, or of the Extract of round Birthwort, halfe a dram. Give it with Oxymel, Acoratum, or Carduus water, Against the impurity of the Womb, to provoke the courses, expell the After-Birth, and to bring away the dead Child. Take of round Birthwort in powder, a dram, Myrrhe in powder, twenty graines, white Pepper in powder, ten graines, mix them together, and give them in Savine water. In Decoction. Take of round Birthwort bruised, two drams, boyle it in Pos∣set-drink, and being strained give it. Against Botium gulae, or strumous swellings about the Throat. Take round Birthwort, Radish-root, and stinking Gladwin, of each a dram, Pimpinell, or Burnet, Mouseare, Rue, of each two drams; Figwort, Droppewort, of each halfe an ounce; Anni seede two drams, Ginger a dram, Turbith and Sene, of each three drams; make them all into a fine powder, and add thereto of white Su∣gar, four ounces. The Dose is one spoonfull every morning, in White-wine, or Broom-water.
The outward Ʋse. It is used in old rotten and maligne Ʋlcers, and Fistulaes, espe∣cially being mixed with Oris powder, and Honey; for thus used, it cleanseth and incarneth. It cures Ʋlcers of the secret parts, if you wash them with the decoction thereof. The powder hereof doth cleanse the teeth, and make them white, being rubbed there∣with. It easeth the Gout, being mingled with Honey and Salt, and applied. It draweth forth Thorns and Splinters of bones that are broken, being applyed with Terpintine. It helpeth the biting of venomous Beasts, being boyled in Wine, and laid on; or let the powder thereof be mixed with the juice of Rue, and so apply∣ed to the Wound. Being mingled with the powder of Aloes, Lime, or Chalke and Honey, into an Oyntment; adding a little Wine it cures the Cancer in the Nose, and Polypus, if tents be made thereof, and put up: and make an Oyntment for the said purpose, with the powder of round Birthwort, Cypresse, and Honey, and use it as the former. The powder thereof tempered with Honey, cures the Ʋlcers of the mouth and gums. A Pessary made hereof, and with Myrrhe, provokes the terms in Women. It healeth all Wounds in the Head; the fume thereof, or the powder in a quilted Cap, stayeth all Fluxes, and distillations of thin Rheume from the head. An Oyntment to procure flesh in Ʋlcers. Take the powder of round Birthwort and Oris, of each a dram; roots of Reeds and Peucedanum, or Hoggs Fennell in powder, of each a dram and a halfe; Francumsence, Mastich, and Myrrhe in powder, of each two drams; of the Oyntment called Ʋnguentum Comitissae, three ounces, Honey of Roses so much as is sufficent; make all into an Oyntment. An Oyle usefull in the Palsie, and Epilepsie, or Falling Sicknesse. Take of round Birthworth, two ounces, bruise it; Euphorbium and Castor, of each a dram and a halfe: boyle these in Oyle Olive, twelve ounces, strain it, and anoint the spina dorsi, from the Neck to the Buttocks, or shutting of the Hips; do thus for the space of a fortnight, or three weeks. The hurtfull Quality. It is not to be given to Women with Child, because it brings Abortion, or causeth miscarrying. Of such things as are made of Birthwort, long and round. 1. The Distilled Water. [Usefull against creeping Ʋlcers, and
Pustules of the Genitalls, both in men and women, being there∣with washed, or linnen cloaths dipt in the same, and laid on the place all night.] 2. Pils of Aristolochia Fernel. 3. Extract thereof. 4. Diatessaron, or Theriaca Diatessaron. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram. In deco∣ction from a dram to two drams or three drams. CHAP. VII. De Assa Foetida. Of Assa Fetida. ASsa Fetida is a Gum comming from the Plant called Laser, or Sylphyum, growing in Media, Libia, and Syria; (and not of Laserpitium of Diascorides, the juice of which is unknown to Modern Writers) Johan. Schroder. pharmac. med. chym. lib. 4. fol. 180. Others will have it to come from Laserpitium. The Names. In Latine, Laser medicum, foetidum, and Assa Foetida, or Asa foetida. It is so ill sented, that the Germans call it Teuffelz drech, that is, Diaboli stercus, Devils durt, or dung. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree. The best sort. The best is that which is clear, smelling somwhat like Gar∣licke, tough, and not dry or foul with sticks, in colour like the best Myrrhe. The Duration. It will keep good many years. It is adulterated by mixing Meal, Bran, and the Gum Sagape∣num together. The Inward use. It is profitable for Women that are troubled with the rising of the Mother, and Diseases of the Womb; It bringeth downe the courses in Women, and expells the secundine, or After-Birth, being taken with Pepper and Myrrhe. It is usefull in Diseases of the Breast, Nerves, and Brain; and being taken in an Egge that is soft, it helps Hoarsnesse, and given with Oxymel it helpeth the Cough, Jaundise, and Dropsie. Given with Vineger of Squills or
Mulsa, that is, Wine and Honey boyled together, it helps the Fal∣ling Sicknesse. Being given in Wine or Angelica water, it helpeth against Venome and Poyson of venomous Beasts, where any are stung therewith. It cures the Quartaine Ague, and Feavers of long continuance. Taken with Oxymel it dissolveth coagulated milk in the breast; it killeth Worms and expelleth wind: it is used also to take away the loathing of the stomach to meat by the In∣dians, and to strengthen the weaknesse of it also, and is much in use by them to provoke unto Venery. The manner of administring it. It is given in Pils, or in powder, but hardly made into powder, because of its moistnesse; or it is given in wine or other liquor, being first dissolved in the same. A powder against the Quartaine Ague. Take Assa Fetida, Rue, long Pepper, of each two drams, make them into powder, and mix it with a little Honey. Give a dram, or a dram and a halfe of it in any convenient liquor before the fit commeth. Wecher. syntax. fol. 248. 348. Note here, that ex∣cept the Assa Fetida be very dry, you cannot make it into powder; therefore you may dissolve it in honey or wine, and so take it. There is an Electuary made of Assa Fetida, Pepper, Ginger, Rue, Salniter, and Honey, which is commended against the Quartaine Ague, and Chronicall Feavers, or Agues of long continuance. It is so much commended against wind, that Mr Parkinson in his Herball, tells a Story (from Gartias) of a Portugall that tried it upon a Horse whom the King of Bisnager would have bought, but that he was over subject to break wind, but after the Portugall had cured him thereof, the King bought him, and asking how he cured him, he answered, with Assa Fetida given in his Provender: no marvaile, said the King, if he were cured with the Gods met; yea rather with the Devils, said the Portugall, but softly, and in his owne language, for fear of being over-heard. The outward use. If it be mingled with Rue, Salniter, and Honey, it breaketh Car∣buncles, and Pestilentiall sores, being thereto applied; and in the same manner used, it helpeth Cornes, and draweth them forth. Being applied with Garlicke and the white of an egge, it helps Felons and white flaes of the fingers. It clears the fight, and helpeth suffusions or spots in the eyes, being mixed with Honey, and dropped in. It cures the stinging of venomous Beasts, being
applied, and the swelling of the Spleen, being laid on as a Plaister. A perfume thereof is good for the rising of the Mother; also a fume thereof, and of Goats horne, prevents or much mitigates the fit of the Falling-Sicknesse, if the party hold his head over it, when he feels the fit come upon him. It helpeth the Tooth-ach, being put into a hollow tooth. Plinie, lib. 22. cap. 23. forbiddeth it thus to be used, and saith, he knew one that tried it in the same manner, threw himselfe headlong from an high loft, and brake his neck: but surely this was by accident, the party having a cachecticall or plethorick body, and so it stirred up the humours. The hurtfull quality. Give it not to women with Child, nor to such as have very hot and dry bodies. These things following are made of Assa Fetida. 1. Pills of Assa Fetida. 2. Extract of Assa Fetida. The Dose. The Dose is from halfe a scruple to a dram. CHAP. VIII. De Asaro. Of Asarabacca. ASarum, or Asarabacca, is an hearb that hath a round leafe like Ivy, but more round, and tenderer: the roots are ma∣ny, small and slender, of a sweet and pleasing smell, and a little biting the tongue. It growes in many Gardens. The Names. It is called in Latine, Asarum, in English, Asarabacca, Asarobac∣ca, and Folefoot. The temperament. Asarum is hot and dry in the second degree, or as some, in the third degree. The roots are hotter then the leaves. The duration. The roots will keep a year or two. The leaves are best green, which may be had almost all the year. The inward use. Asarum purgeth strongly by vomit, and sometimes by stoole. It draweth away thick Flegme, and Choller, both yellow and cru∣ginous, or green. It is profitable for them that have the Dropsie,
Jaundise, and that have Tertian and Quartaine Agues, as also the Green-sicknesse, Paine of the head, arising of vapours from the Sto∣mach. It provokes sweat, the Courses in Women, and Urine; therefore it is good in the Strangury, and stopping of the Urine, and also in the Hip-Gout, and in Asthmatick persons, or such as are short-winded. It helpeth stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen. The roots are effectuall against the biting of Serpents, and therefore is put with other simples, both into Mithridate and Trea∣cle, of Andromachus (saith Mr Parkinson in his Herball) but I find it only put into Mithridate. It helpeth Chronicall, or long continued Agues, upon a double ground. First, Because it purgeth away thick Flegme and Choller, of all sorts, from the Stomach, and parts adjacent, as also whatsoever is of long continuance in the viscerous parts, which is the cause of these Diuturnall or long-continued Agues, now by vomit, the humours aforesaid are taken away. Secondly, Because it provoketh sweat, and so ex∣pelleth obnoxious humous from those parts, by the ports of the skin. The manner of administring it. The leaves and roots are given by infusion, decoction, and in substance. The green leaves are most effectuall to provoke one to vomit; the roots more effectuall to purge by siege, by Urine, and to provoke sweat. Neither the leaves nor roots will abide any long boyling, for thereby the chiefest strength thereof vanisheth, and is lost. If you give it in fine powder, it doth provoke vomit and Urine. If you give it in course powder, it purgeth down∣wards. Before the fit of an Ague. Take of the roots of Asarum, or Asarabacca in powder, a dram, of white-wine four ounces, mingle them together, and give it before the fit commeth. This taketh away the shaking fit, and causeth the hot fit to be more remisse or gentle. Or thus: Take of Asarabacca-root a dram, of Radish-root one ounce, of Orach-seed halfe an ounce, boyle them in Hydromel, or water and honey; straine it, and give six ounces thereof as before. Or, Take of root of Asarabacca in powder, Broome-flowers, Broome-seeds, of each halfe a dram in powder; give it in Barly-water.
Against the Green-sicknesse, Dropsie, Jaundise, &c. Take of the green leaves of Asarabacca, five, six, or seaven, bruise them, and steep them in Hydromel, or Posset-drink, all night, in the morning straine it, and give the clearest: when it works, take Posset-drink, and keep your selfe warm. To provoke the termes or courses in Women. Take Myrrhe, Cinamon, of each a dram, Savin halfe a dram, Smalladge-seed, and Parsly-seed, Spiknard, Asarum, Squinanth, or sweet Rush, of each a scruple; make all into powder, and give hereof a dram, in the juice of Sea-Holly, or in the juice of Rue. Freitag. ur. med. fol. 325. Against the Quartaine Ague, and Agues of long continuance. Take of the distilled water of Asarabacca, three or four ounces, give it in a morning fasting, or before the fit commeth. This may be given divers times if need be. The externall use. The leaves bruised and applied outwardly, cure creeping and cancerous Ʋlcers, as also the swelling thereof, and hinder their growth and increase. They cleanse Wounds and sores. If the head be washed with a lie made thereof, it strengthneth the braine, being molested with cold, and quickneth the memory. The juice and the water thereof with Pompholigos, helpeth the dimnesse of the sight. The leaves bruised, and applied to the forehead and temples, doe ease the pain thereof, comming of cold. There is an Oyle made thereof, with which if the ridge of the back be nointed, it provoketh sweat, and taketh away the shaking fits of Agues. The leaves also bruised and applied to Womens Breasts, are good to dry up the milk; and is good to be laid to the Di∣sease called the Wilde fire, especially at the beginning. The hurtfull Quality. It is not safe to give it to weak and tender bodies, nor to Wo∣men with Child; for though Fernelius saith in his Method. medend. l. 5. 117. it be free from any malignant quality, and therfore may safely be given to women with Child, especially if it be not given in fine powder: yet Theodor. Dorstenius. Botanic. fol. 14. saith, that both the decoction and water thereof, driveth forth the Child, living or dead, and therefore may not safely be given to Women great with Child.
Of such things as are made of Asarabacca. These following are made of Asarum. 1. Diasarum Fernelij. 2. Extract of Asarum, or Coagulum Asari. 3. Distilled Water of Asarum, both of the leaves and roots. 4. Oyle of Asarum. The Dose. The Dose in substance is from halfe a dram to two scruples, or a dram: in infusion from two drams to halfe an ounce. Brassica Marina, see Soldanella, or Sea bind weed. CHAP. IX. De Bdellio. Of Gum Bdellium. BDellium is a Gum flowing from a tree growing in Arabia, in India, and Media, but it chiefly groweth in Arabia. The Names. It is called in Latine, Bdellium. The Temperament. Bdellium is hot in the second degree, and moist in the first; of a mollifying and discussing nature. The best kinde. The best (say Authours) is clear like glew, fat on the inside, easily melting or dissolving, pure or clear from drosse, sweet in the burning, and bitter in tast; but that we have is not to be found so, for we find little bitternesse in any, and lesse sweetnesse in the burning of it, but strong and unpleasant rather, neither is it easie to be dissolved without warmth; and ours is of a sad brown colour, somwhat like Glew, and much like unto Myrrhe, in colour; insomuch, that some erroneously judge the purer part of this Gum to be Bdellium, and the grosser to be Myrrhe. The Duration. It will keep good ten or twelve years. The inward Ʋse. It provokes Urine, and the courses in Women, breaks the Stone: it is good for those that have the Cough, and are bitten by Serpents, or venomous Beasts. It helpeth to discusse the windi∣nesse of the Spleen, and pains of the side: it helpeth Ruptures, mol∣lifieth
the hardnesse of the Mother, and dryeth up the moysture thereof, and draweth forth the dead Child. It provokes sweat, stoppeth the overflowing of the menses or courses in Women, and also of the womb, as some affirm, which if it doe both, surely 'tis by its Arcanum, or hidden property. It is given against a super-purgation, after the taking of a sharp Medicine, that is, when a Purge worketh more then is meet. The manner of administring it. It is chiefly used in Pills, but it may be dissolved in wine, or any other liquour, and so taken. Pills of Bdellium, that are good against the Hemroids, or Piles, and the overflowing of the courses. Take of Bdellium one ounce and a halfe, Myrobalans, Chebuls, Black Myrobalans, Bellericks, and Emblicks, Concha, Venerea burnt, (which is a Sea-shell) of each two drams and a halfe; Ammios-seed, three drams, Amber two drams and a halfe; make those things in powder that are to be powdered, then macerate and dis∣solve the Bdellium in juice of Leeks, and with a sufficient quantity of syrupe made of the juice of Leeks, make it into a masse or lump for Pills. The Dose is from halfe a dram to four scruples. Pills against the Hemroids. Take of the former Pills, two drams, of Sene, Rubarbe, Agarick trochiscated in powder, of each a dram, with a sufficient quanti∣ty of syrupe of Roses, make a masse for Pills, of which take a dram at a time, in the morning for divers dayes together, if need re∣quire. Riverius observat. med. cent. 3. fol. 236. The Externall Ʋse. It is outwardly used against Convulsions and Ruptures, against swellings of the Throat; it dissolveth hard tumours and nodes of the Joynts, it openeth obstructions of the Womb, mollifieth the hardnesse thereof, and dryeth up its moistnesse, either applied or a fume thereof received: the same is good against swellings, and apostumes of the genitalls, or privy members. A Plaister dissolving hard tumours. Take of Bdellium one ounce, of Sagapenum four ounces, of Am∣moniacum, three ounces, Galbanum, Euphorbium, of each two drams. Dissolve the Gums in Sacke, then add thereto Oyle of white Lil∣lies, and Oyle of sweet Almonds, of each an ounce, Propolis (which is found in Bee hives) four ounces and a halfe: make them in∣to a Plaister.
A Plaister against Nodes, and glandulous tumours. Take of Bdellium and Lupines, of each two drams, of Cow-dung two ounces, of Colewort-root, Capar bark, Sea Onion, pulp of Figs, of each halfe an ounce: make those in powder that are to be powdered, dissolve the Bdellium in Wine, and with a sufficient quantity of Honey, Vineger, Hogs-greace, and Old Oyle, make a Plaister: apply it as need requireth. The Hurtfull Quality. It is not to be given to Women with Child. The Dose. The Dose is from a dram to two drams. These following are made of Bdellium. 1. Pills of Bdellium. 2. Oyntment of Bdellium. 3. Ʋnguentum A∣postolorum. CHAP. X. De Bistorta. Of Bistort-root. BIstort is a thick short knobbed root, blackish without, and somewhat reddish within, a little crooked or turned toge∣ther, of a harsh or binding tast, with divers blackish fibres, or hai∣rie threds growing thereat, and hath leaves like Dock's but smal∣ler. The Names. It is called in Latine, Bistorta, because the root is writhed in the likenesse of a Serpent, in English, Bistort, or Snake-weede. The Temperament. It doth coole and dry in the third degree, and is very astrin∣gent, or binding. The Duration. It will keep good a year or two. The inward Ʋse. Bistort-root is excellent to resist all poyson and venom: A dram of it in powder, taken in Wine or Angelica-water, expelleth the venome of the Plague or Pestilence, the Small Pox, Measles, Purples, or any other infectious Disease; the same in powder, or the de∣coction in Wine, being drunk, stayeth all manner of inward
bleeding, or spitting of blood; as also any Fluxes of the body, and moreover, such as are troubled with vomiting. The powder or the decoction being drunk, helpeth Ruptures, and is available against all bruises or falls, and dissolveth the congealed bloud, and easeth the paines that happen thereupon: the same helpeth the Jaundise, and hindereth Abortion, or miscarrying in Women, kil∣leth Worms, and is profitable for such as cannot hold their wa∣ter, especially if the juice of Plantaine be added thereto. A dram of the powder taken in the water thereof, wherein some Iron or Steel being red hot hath been quenched, is an admirable help in the Gonorrhaea, or running of the Reins, so that the body be first purged. It is very usefull in decoctions for Wounds, being taken into the body: the same stayeth the flowing of the courses in Women. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, in electuary, and in decoction. An Electuary against Womens Flux, or the overflowing of their Courses. Take of old Conserve of red Roses, one ounce and a halfe; Bole Armenick in powder, two scruples; red Corall in powder, a scruple; Bistort root in powder, a dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrupe of Mirtles, or syrupe of Quinces, make an Electuary. Take often of it, especially a little before meat, the quantity of a Nutmeg, and after meat, as much. An Electuary against the Pestilence. Take of LONDON Treacle, halfe an ounce, Mithridate 3. drams, Angelica root, and Bistort root, in powder, of each halfe a scruple; Cardamoms five grains, Camphor four grains, Cinamon in powder, halfe a scruple: Let the Camphor be dissolved in a little syrupe of Lemons, and the rest being in powder, make it into an Electuary. The Dose is a dram or more, morning and evening by it selfe; or in Carduus-water. In Decoction. Take of Bistort root bruised, two drams, boyle it in halfe a pint of Posset-drink, till about halfe be consumed, strain it, and give the clearest in a morning, against the Diseases forementioned. The outward Ʋse. Being used in Fumigations, it dryeth up Rheumes, and stayeth Womens Fluxes, or the bleeding of Wounds: the fibres or fun∣gous substance of the root, doth wonderfully stop the bleeding
of Wounds, or bleeding of the Nose. A decoction thereof helpeth sore mouths, and inflamations of the Almonds and Throat, if they be washed therewith: the decoction of the roots in water, where∣unto some Pomegranet pills, or flowers are added, serveth for an injection into the matrice, as well to stay the accesse or flowing of humours, and to cure Ʋlcers thereof, as also to bring it to the place being fallen downe, and to help stay the abundance of their courses. The water distilled from both leaves and roots, is a good remedy to wash any place bitten or stung by any veno∣mous creature; and is very good to wash any running sores or Ʋlcers, as also Cancers in the Nose, and Polypus (which is a Disease in the Nose) if the powder of the root be applied afterwards. A decoction of the root fastneth the loose teeth, and helpeth the sorenesse of the Gums, being washed therewith. The powder of the root, strewed upon any cut, or bleeding Wound, stayeth the bleeding thereof. The powder mixed with a little Oyle of Ro∣ses, and Wax, helpeth the running of the Reins, if the back be noynted therewith. An Oyntment to hinder Abortion, or miscarrying of Women. Take Oyle of Roses, Oyle of Quinces, of each three ounces, Ce∣russe washed in Rose-water, halfe an ounce, Bistort root, and red Corall, of each two drams, Barbery-seeds, a dram, of white Wax a sufficient quantity: powder those things that are to be powder∣ed, and make hereof an Oyntment, with which annoynt the back warm, morning and evening, laying a warm cloth thereon. Ron∣delet. meth. cur. morb. cap. 63. fol. 168. Against the Tooth-ach. Take Bistort root in powder, Pellitory of Spaine, burnt Allum in powder, of each two drams, make it into a paist with Honey: Put a little piece thereof into a hollow Tooth, or between the Teeth, and it will ease the paine thereof, and draw away much offensive matter, from the head and parts adjacent. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram; in decoction, from a dram to two drams, or three drams. Of such things as are made of Bistort. 1. The distilled water thereof. 2. Diascordium. 3. Emplastrum Coe saris. 4. Emp. Hystericum. Nic.
CHAP. XI. De Bryonia alba. Of White Brionie. WHite Brionie is somewhat like unto the common Vine in his leaves and branches, but something rougher, and whiter: The root is sometimes very great, long, and bitter. The Names. In Latine, Vitis alba, Bryonia, and Bryonia alba: in English, Bri∣onie, and Tetterberries. The Temperament. Briony is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. The Duration. The Root will keep good a year or more, if it be gathered in a dry season and carefully dryed. The inward use. The root of White Briony purgeth strongly, Choller, Flegme, and Water from the Brain, Nerves, Womb, and Joynts; it o∣peneth obstructions or stoppings of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb, therefore it avails much in Hystericall fits, or fits of the Mother, in the Falling Sicknesse, Palsie, Apoplexie, and Vertigo, or swimming of the head, as also in the Gout, or Shortnesse of breath. It pro∣vokes the courses in Women, and cleanseth the Womb, provokes Urine, and is excellent in the Dropsie, for it draweth away water abundantly, both by vomit and stoole. It dissolveth congealed blood in the body, by reason of falls or bruises. The root is good against the biting of Vipers, or Adders, and killeth Worms in the body. It is good in the Kings Evill, the juice being taken with e∣quall parts of Wine and Honey. The foecula, or dregs thereof, are used for the aforesaid Diseases; you may give five or ten grains of it. The manner of administring it. The root of White Brionie is given in powder, in juice, in de∣coction, in syrupe, and in electuary, though every way not plea∣sing to the palate. An Electuary of white Brionie purging the body. Take of White Brionie root, four ounces, Turbith three ounces, Agaricke cut in thin slices, one ounce; Ginger in powder, Mastich,
Lonage seed bruised, of each three drams; macerate or steep them three dayes in two pints of Aquavitae, then boyle them to the con∣sumption of one pint; straine it, to which add clarified Honey, the pulp of Prunes, of each a pound, Sugar a pound and a halfe. Boyle them to the thicknesse of Honey, then being cold, let these things following be put in; Gum Gutta in powder, one ounce, Diagredium six drams, Anni-seed, Fennell-seed in powder, of each two drams, Cloves in powder, halfe an ounce, mix them well to∣gether, and make an Electuary. The Dose is from halfe an ounce to six drams, in white Wine, or Posset drink. This Electuary is excellent in the Dropsie, and Gout. Syrupe of Brionie simple. Take of the juice of White Brionie-root in May, a pound, of pure Honey clarified, two pound; boyle them gently to the thick∣nesse of a syrupe, by often scumming it. The Compound Syrupe of Brionie. Take of the juice of White Brionie-root, five ounces, Vineger of Squills, a pound, of the decoction made with Origanum, dry Hys∣sope, Lonage, Seseleos, Cardamomes, Stoechados halfe a pound, of good Honey, two pound; boyle them gently to the thicknesse of a syrupe. Freitag. aur. med. fol. 355, 356. Both these foregoing sy∣rupes are good in the Falling-Sicknesse, Swimming of the Head, and for Shortnesse of breath. An Electuary for an old Cough, and shortnesse of breath. Take of White Brionie root in powder, a dram, of clarified Ho∣ney three ounces, of the Lohoch or Electuary of Fox-Lungs, halfe an ounce, Spirit of Sulpher eight drops, make all into an Electu∣ary. Take of it chiefly in the morning and evening, as much as a small Nutmeg. Against the Pestilence. Take of White Brionie-root in powder, a dram, Diagredium one graine, take it in the juice of Celandine, and let the party sweat up∣on it. Theod. Dorsten. Botanic. fol. 52. For such as have broken a Bone. Take of the juice of White Brionie-root, two drams, or three drams, of Comfry-water, three ounces, mingle them together, and give it. Continue it for a weeks space, if need require. The externall Ʋse. A decoction of the root, or the juice thereof, taketh away Freckles, or Sun-burning, and all kind of Spots and Scarres. So
doth the Oyle wherein the roots of Brionie hath been boyled. It dissolveth black Bloud, and blew Marks, by reason of bruises, or falls, and dissolveth new swellings. It bringeth to maturity, and breaks old Imposthumes. It draweth forth splinters, and broken bones, and helpeth filthy Ulcers and white Flaes that grow up a∣bout the roots of the Nailes. The leaves, fruit, and roots, doe cleanse old and filthy sores, and are good against fretting and run∣ning Cankers, Gangrenes, and Tetters; therefore the beries are u∣sually called by the Countrey-people, Tetter-berries, may with good successe be applied to them. The root cleanseth the skin from the Morphew, Leprosie, all running Scabs and Manginesse, if a Bath be made thereof, or the juice applied thereunto. A Pessary made of the root, bringeth downe the courses in Women, and bringeth forth the After-birth and dead Child. A Bath made here∣of, cleanseth the Womb from filthinesse and uncleannesse. The root hung about the Neck is good against the Falling Sicknesse, and Convulsion. The root bruised and boyled in Vineger, being apply∣ed to the swollen Genitalls of men, helpeth the same. A decocti∣on of the leaves or roots mingled with Honey, and the mouth and throat washed therewith, cureth Ʋlcers, and sorenesse thereof. The distilled water of the root worketh the same effect, but more weakly, yet the water is used for freckles and spots in the face. Against hardnesse and stopping of the Spleene. Take what quantity you will of the green root of Brionie, bruise it with Figs, and apply it to the Spleen, adding thereunto a little Oyle of Capers. Or, Take Ammoniacum dissolved in Vineger, Oyntment Dialtheae, or of Marsh-mallows, Plaister of Melilot, of each halfe an ounce, Brionie root, and Orris in powder, of each halfe an ounce; Ducks-grease, Goose grease, and Hens-grease, of each three drams, Bdellium and Galbanum, of each a dram and a halfe; Oyle of Orris-root, one ounce and a halfe, of the Mussilage of Linseede, and Fenugreeke, a sufficient quantity of each; dissolve the gums, and boyle them gently together, and add thereto of Wax four ounces, of Turpin∣tine and Rosin, of each one ounce and a halfe: make all into a Cerat, according to art. Against corrupt and fretting sores in the Legs. Take the leaves or root of White Brionie, bruise them with Salt and Vineger, and apply it.
Against the Gout and Sciatica. Take of Brionie-root, green, bruise it, and apply it with Hogs-grease. The hurtfull Quality, with the correcting means. The root of White Brionie doth much trouble the Stomach, head, and other parts: therefore it must not be given to delicate bodies, nor where the spirits are low: for though it have a specifick ver∣tue for the Diseases of the Brain before mentioned, yet it offends the weak. The hurtfull Quality hereof is taken away in part by adding to it Ginger, Cinamon, Quince, or such like. The same is also very dangerous for Women with Child, however it be given, for it causeth Abortion, or miscarrying. These things are made of Brionie. 1. The Extract thereof. 2. Faeces vel Faculae Brioniae. 3. Water of Brionie. 4. Oyntment of Brionie. 5. Ʋnguentum Agrippae. The Dose. The Dose of the root in substance, is from a scruple to a dram; in infusion, from two drams to halfe an ounce. The juice of the root is given from a dram to two drams, or more, in strong bo∣dies. The faeces, or dregs thereof, are given from five graines to twenty. Cambogia, see Gutta Gummi. CHAP. XII. De Camphora. Of Camphor, or Campher. CAmphor is a Gum or liquor of a Tree growing in India, and other places, partly distilling forth of its owne accord, but chiefly by incision, and commeth forth clear and white, without any spot therein; of a very strong sent, and of thin parts, so that being but a while expos'd to the air, both sent and substance vanisheth away. The Names. It is called in Latine Camphora, & Caphura; in English, Cam∣phire, Camfire, Camphor, and Campher. The temperament. Some will have it to be cold and dry in the third degree, others
esteem it to be hot; but of this more hereafter. The best kinde. The best is white, shining, clear as Crystall, not full of spots, easie to be broken, and brittle; also being set on fire, it burneth, and is not easily quenched, and hath also a strong sent. The Duration. It will keep good many years, some say forty years; but it must be kept from the air, and in Flax-seed, or Fleawort-seed, o∣therwise it will evaporate, and consume to nothing. The inward Ʋse. It resisteth putrifaction, and venome, therefore it is frequently used in the Pestilence, contagious diseases, and in Feavers. It ex∣tinguisheth venery or the lust of the body,Camphora venenis strenuè resistit, & cardiacon est. Jou∣bert de peste f. 72 Vide, Thoner. observat. l. 3. ob∣servat. 8. fol. 187. and is good for the running of the Reins, as also against the Whites in Women, and for the rising of the Mother, being dissolved in Balm-water, and so ta∣ken. It cools the heat of the Liver, Backe, and all hot inflamations in the body. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Electuaries, in Powders, Potions, &c. An Electuary against the Pestilence. Take Myrrhe, Saffron, the bone of a Stags heart, or Harts-horne, in powder, of each two scruples and a halfe, of Dittany in pow∣der, two drams, of white Ginger in powder, halfe an ounce, of Zedorie in powder, two drams and a halfe, of Tormentill-roots in powder a dram, of Campher in powder, or dissolved in Aqua vitae, two drams, Mithridate, and London Treacle, of each three ounces; with a little Aqua vitae, make an Electuary. Take thereof morn∣ing and evening as much as a small Nut. A powder for the Pestilence. Take of Zedoary, White Dittany root, Gentian-root, Scordium, Carduus, Sorrell, of each two drams, make them into powder. The Dose is a dram in a morning in Carduus-water, or in the winter let it be given in White-wine. This is a good preservative in times of infection. Or, Take of white Sugar-Candy, a dram, white Ginger two scruples, Camphor halfe a scruple; make them in powder, and give it in two or three ounces of Scabious-water, or Angelica-water.
Or, Take Angelica-root, Bay-berries, of each halfe an ounce, round Aristolochia, or Birthwort, two drams, Gentian-root, Nutmeg, of each a dram, Camphor halfe a scruple; make all into powder. The Dose is a dram or more in Carduus-water. A Potion against the Pestilence. Take of Treacle called Diatessaron, a dram, Angelica-root, in powder halfe a dram, or a dram, of Rose-Vineger, a dram, Cam∣pher three grains, Carduus-water, two ounces. Dissolve the Cam∣pher, and the rest that is to be dissolved, in the water, and make a potion; give it, and let the party sweat after it. This may be given divers times, if need be. Note, That Campher will not be made into powder alone, without a blanched Almond, or some other such like unctious thing, which hereby will be brought into fine powder: neither will it easily dissolve in cold water, but by warmth it will, or with any syrupe it will soon dissolve. The outward Ʋse. It helpeth pain of the head, and heat thereof, if it be mixed with yellow Sanders, and red Rose-water, and the Temples and Forehead bath'd therewith. It stoppeth blood that floweth out of the nostrills, if it be smelled to, and refresheth the brain. It is used against Phlegmous and Erysipelas, or Wilde-fire, also against heat or inflamations of the eyes; it is good in Wounds and Ʋl∣cers, to abate the heat thereof, and is of much use among Women to beautify their face: therefore it is much used against heat, and pimpels of the face. It extinguisheth Venery being applied to the Reins or Testicles, with the juice of Nightshade. Being put into a hollow Tooth that aketh, it easeth the pain thereof; also put in∣to a piece of fine Linnen or Taffety, and hanged about the neck, it cures Agues, especially in Children, and that by a specifick ver∣tue. Also it is good to smell to, for such as have lost their smel∣ling, and to preserve from infection in times of contagion. Against rednesse of the eyes, and to coole and dry. Take of Sumach bruised, two drams, steep it in two ounces of red Rose-water, straine it, and add to the liquor of Campher, four grains, dissolve the Campher, and keep it for your use. Against Ophthalmia, or inflamation of the eyes, in its declination. Take of Tutia or Tutty in powder, halfe an ounce; Lapis Ca∣laminaris
(quenched often in White-wine, and in powder) a dram; Cloves in number (powdered) five, of Honey, one ounce, White-wine two ounces, red Rose-water, four ounces, Campher dissolved in the Rose-water, a dram. Mix them together, shake it often, and wash the eyes therewith. Against rednesse and running of the eyes. Take of Tutty in powder, an ounce, of Aloes succotrine, pow∣dered, halfe an ounce, Campher a dram, Rose-water one pound and a halfe, of White-wine (wherein some Pomegranat pill hath been infused or steeped four and twenty hours) halfe a pint, mix them together, and let them be boyled very gently, or rather warm it in a Kettle of hot water, strain it, and reserve it to use. Against spots in the eyes. Take of Campher a dram, dissolve it in the juice of Fennel, and add some Rose water to it; drop some of it into the eyes. Against the heat of the Liver. Take of Campher halfe an ounce; dissolve it in the juice of Nightshade, dip linnen cloaths therein, and lay them to the region of the Liver. The hurtfull Quality. It is not safe to give it to such as have weak heads, or infirme Stomachs, or to such as abhor the smell thereof: for in great pains of the head and stomach it is dangerous to use it, for it exci∣teth watchfullnesse, and causeth head ach: neither is it safe to give it in chollerick Diseases. Dan. Sennert. med. pract. l. 1. c. 1. fol. 12. & f. 66. Rudolph. Camerar. memor. med. cent. 4. fol. 254. The Dose. The Dose (according to some) is from halfe a scruple to a scruple; but I conceive if it be given alone, 'tis not safe to give above five or six graines at the most, except it be in the Pestilence, or such like Diseases. Of such things as are made with Campher. 1. Essence of Campher. 2. Oyle of Campher. [Excellent in the Tooth-ach.] 3. Trosss of Campher. 4. Ʋnguentum Camphoratum album. Whether Campher be cold or hot, and whether it ex∣tinguish Venery or lust? There is some controversie among Physitians, about the nature of Campher, most agree that Campher is cold, and that without doubt, because it is used in externall heats and inflamations, that
commeth by being in the Sun too long; and because it helpeth pain of the head, and cureth inflamations of the eyes, as also ex∣tinguisheth Venery. Others especially, late Writers say, Campher is hot, and that upon these grounds. First, Because of its infla∣mability, for it doth not only burne easily, but being set on fire, and cast into the water it will burne there: But this Argument Scaliger exercit: 104. sect. 8. doth reject and deride, but without just cause. For nothing doth thus burne, except it be of a sulphurous and butuminous nature, as some conceive: Now all inflamabili∣ous things, or such as are of burning and fiery nature are hot, from whence it appears that Campher is hot; although on the con∣trary we may not conclude, that all things that are hot, are of a burning nature. Secondly, Campher seems to be hot by it's taste, being bitter, how we say, quod amarum calidum, that which is bit∣ter is hot. Thirdly, the strong smell or sent thereof doth demon∣strate it to be hot. Fourthly, the tenuity or thinnesse of parts, and it's great penetrating faculty doth manifest it to be hot; for such properties are not to be found in cold things. Now that Campher doth extinguish heat, heals inflamations, and mitigates paine of the head, proceeding from a hot cause, this it doth by accident, in drawing hot vapours and humours away, and so discussing them in the same manner as Linseed-oyle, Vernix and such like doth cure burning. Others would reconcile the difference thus; by saying, Campher doth consist of a double faculty or substance, as is in Veniger, Rubarbe, &c. one hot which causeth the penetrating, sharpe and burning faculty, the other cold, which extinguisheth lust, and helps inflamations of the eyes: But surely Campher is al∣together hot; for though it be affirmed to be cold, yet tis not easily proved: Neither can the double substance, in Campher be separated, as in Rubarbe and Roses, for the whole substance there∣of is hot, and of a fiery nature, and nothing at all cold; for though it do cool, yet it is not per se, of it's proper nature, but by accident, as it is before shewed. Now concerning it's faculty in extinguishing Venery, tis denied by Scaliger, exercit. 104. sect. 8. For he thus writes, extingui venerem ea non esse verum, pro certo habe∣mus. We have certain experience that Campher doth not extin∣guish Venery, for saith he, a young man did the feat strongly, al∣though he had a piece thereof in his hand: Also he tryed it upon a proud Bitch, by giving it inwardly, and using it outward, but all in vain; Coivit, concepit, peperit. But this experience is not suf∣ficient;
for when it is said, Campher doth extinguish Lust, it is not so to be understood, as if by one act, or by using it out∣wardly once or twice, it should prevaile, but if it be often used doth inwardly and outwardly. Dan. Sennert. de morb. mulier. lib. 4. part 2. sect. 3. c. 6. fol. 250. & Paralipom. fol. 156, 157, 158. Schroder. Pharm. med. chym. l. 4. f. 185. Pet. Paul de cur. morb. l. 1. c. 30. f. 87. Fragos. med. ind. histor. c. 7. f. 106. Greg. Host. Epistol. med. lib. 2. sect. 9. f. 491, 492, &c. CHAP. XIII. De Carthami semine, Of seed of Bastard Saffron. CArthamus seed is a white and long cornered seed, somewhat like French-barley, but a little bigger, and more picked at the one end then at the other. The Names. It is called in Latin Knicus, Knecus, and Knecum, also Carthamus, and the seed semen Carthami, in English, Bastard-Saffron. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree, although Galen saith it is hot and dry in the third degree, which might be in respect of the region or place where it did grow. The best sort. The best is the whitest, and cornered, with a light and hard skin or bark, full of Pulpe unctious, and fatty not ranced: being put into water if it swim it is to be cast away. The Duration. The seeds will keep good three years. The inward use. The seeds purge Flegme and watery humors by vomit and siege: It is a specifick remedy against the Collick; It helpeth also the diseases of the breast and hypoconders, openeth the obstructions of the viscerous parts, and avails in the Dropsie and Jaundies: Being made into a Loloch or licking Electuary, with Sugar and Honey, a few Almonds, and Pine Kernels, it cleanseth the lungs of Flegme, sticking therein wonderfully, causing it to be easily spit forth, it
also cleareth the voice, and increaseth sperme by the often use of it. With Honey it is excellent against the Cough. Being bruised and strained into Milke it makes it to curdle, and is usefull to open and loosen the belly. Parrots doe eat of this seed, yet it doth not loosen them at all. The manner of administring it. It is given in Emulsions, in Tabulats, in Electuaries in Pulpe, &c. An Emulsion or milke purging safely and gently. Take of Mechoaehan, white Turbith, of each one ounce, Anni-seed, Fennel-seed, Cinamon, of each a dram, bruise them, and make a Decoction thereof. Take of this Decoction eleven ounces, of sweet Almonds blanched half an ounce, of Cinamon-water half an ounce, or five drams; make it into an Emulsion, or milkie sub∣stance. Tabulats purging, or square Cakes. Take of Diagredium, Turbith, of each one ounce, of the Pulpe of Carthamus-seed half a dram, Cinamon, Ginger, species of Diatragacan∣thum frigidum, of each two drams, Citron Pill, the Pulpe of pre∣served Quinces, of each a dram; of Sugar nine ounces, of white Sugar-candy one ounce. Powder what is to be powdered, and make Tabulats, or Cakes thereof, and dry them. The Dose is from a dram and a halfe to three drams. Freitag. Aur. med. fol. 282. Against the Jaundies. Take of the Pulpe of Carthamus seeds a dram, Syrup of Worm-wood an ounce, of Succory water an ounce, mixe them together and give it. For the same. Take of the flowers of Carthamus in powder a dram, give it in Hydromel, or Water and Honey, or in Barley water. The outward use. The water of Carthamus is commended against wilde-fire, if clouts be dipped therein and applyed. The hurtfull quality. There are two hurtfull properties in Carthamus, the one, that it offends the stomack, and provokes to vomit; to help this it must be given with Anni-seed, Fennel-seed, Galingal, Cinamon, Ginger, Mastick or such like. The other is that it works but slowly, and stirreth up the humors; to help this it may be given with Carda∣moms, Salgem and such like.
The Dose. The Dose of the Pulpe is from a dram to two drams (though it be rarely given by it selfe, because of its viscosity, or sliminesse.) In infusion from three drams to six drams or more. Of those Medicines that are made of Carthamus. First, extract of Carthamus, 2 Syrup of Carthamus, 3 Electuary Diacarthamum, 4 Species of Carthamus, 5 The distilled water, 6 Olium e enico expressum [which being taken with Muskadel is ex∣cellent against the Collick] 7 Oyle of the seed of Carthamus [three drams of which being taken with powder of Anniseed and Cinamon doth purge flegm as saith Brassarolus.] CHAP. XIV. De Cassia lignea, & Cinamomo. Of Cassia Lignea and Cinamon. BEcause these are so little differing from each other, I shall joyne them together, yet speake severally of their vertues: They are both barks of trees brought to us from the East-In∣dies. The Names. Cinamon is called in Latine Cinnamomum & Cinamomum, in En∣glish, Cinnamome and Cinamon. I know no other names (in use) for the other but Cassia Lignea. The Temperament. Cinamon is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the third-degree and dry in the second. Cassia lignea is hot and dry in the third degree. The best sort. The best Cinamon is that which is of a reddish colour, smelling fragrantly, and of a sharp and biting tast; usually the thin barks or rindes are the best. The difference between Cassia lignea and Cinamon. The Cinamon rinde is much bigger, the Cassia lignea is in very small rindes or barkes: besides there is a manifest difference in the
tast, for the Cinamon hath a rough tast, but the Cassia lignea is very slippery upon the tongue. The Duration. They will keep good eight or ten years, as some report, which I somewhat doubt of, especially of Cinamon. The inward Ʋse. Cinamon is of subtill parts, and very Aromaticall, it com∣forteth the heart and vitall parts, corroborateth and strength∣neth the stomack, braine, nerves, and other cold parts of the bo∣dy: it easeth the pains of the Wind Collick, provokes the Courses and Ʋrine, hastneth the birth: it preventeth and correcteth pu∣trifaction of humours, resisteth poyson, stayeth vomiting, and helpeth nauseousnesse of the stomach: it is frequently used in Car∣diack passions, or passions of the heart, faintings of the spirits, and in trembling of the heart; it causeth sweetnesse of the breath, and brings a good colour in the face; it strengthneth the reten∣tive faculty of all the parts by drying up and consuming the moisture thereof. It is used in the Dropsie and Cough proceeding from moisture. In brief, it avails in all cold diseases of the head, stomack and womb, and is most convenient for cold and moist bo∣dies, and is much used in Lasks, or Loosnesse of the body. Note, That Cinamon is most fragrant about the full of the Moon, and hath the best taste, and is then fittest for any medicine, especially for oyle. Cassia lignea comforteth the Stomack, Liver, and all the prin∣cipall parts, openeth obstructions or stoppings, disperseth grosse humour, repelleth winde, provokes urine, brings downe the men∣ses or termes in women, and doth much facilitate or hasten the birth. The Ʋse of Oyle and Water of Cinamon. There is a Chymicall Oyle drawne from Cinamon, which is most excellent for these Diseases. It comforteth the Stomach, Brain, Heart, and all the principall parts; it helpeth a stinking Breath, resisteth putrifaction, provokes the menses, and helpeth Women in hard labours, easeth the Cough arising from cold, and all cold pains of the head: it is a singular help in fainting of the spirits, and stayeth too much vomiting after the taking of Antimony, if two or three drops thereof be taken in Mint-water. Good Cina∣mon-water hath the same vertues.
The manner of administring them. They are given in Powder, in Potions, Electuaries, and in Pills. A Powder to hasten the Birth. Take of Cinamon a dram, Saffron halfe a dram, Cassia lignea, two scruples, make them all in powder. Or, Take Cinamon, Saffron, of each a scruple, of Borax four scruples, make them in powder, and give it in a little Mugwort-water. A Potion to hasten the Birth. Take of Cassia lignea, in powder, a dram, Saffron in powder, a scruple, syrupe of Mugwort halfe an ounce, Savin-water three ounces, mingle them together, and give it. Pills to hasten the Birth. Take of Cassia lignea, or Cinamon a dram, Castor six grains, Sto∣rax calamita, halfe a scruple, Myrrhe ten grains; make them into powder (adding of Savin in powder a dram and a halfe) and with a little Honey, make a masse or lump for Pills. Give them as need requireth. An Electuary against Fluxes of the Belly. Take of Cinamon in powder, two drams, old conserve of red Roses two ounces, red Corall in powder, two scruples, with sy∣rupe of Quinces, make an Electuary, of which take morning, e∣vening, and before dinner, the quantity of a small Nut. Note, That it is best to make Cinamon in powder, only when you use it, and not to keep it powdered. The outward Ʋse. Cinamon being mixed in Collyries (that is, Medicines for the eyes) quickens the sight, and dryeth up the moisture thereof; mingled with Honey and Vineger, and the place noynted there∣with, it helpeth Ring-Wormes, or Tetters, and taketh away spots or freckles. The powder is commended against clefts of the lips, and other sores being put therein. Oyle of Cinamon is commended for all green Wounds and Ʋl∣cers, if it be dropped therein, and doth much corroborate and warm cold parts of the body, being noynted therewith, and mixed with Honey, it takes away spots from the face, being there∣with anointed. Cassia lignea being cast on coles, and the smoak taken at the Nose, dryeth up Rheumes and Catarrhes, that proceed from cold and moist humours. Also a Suffumigation thereof, helpeth the paine
of the Womb, and the stoppings thereof. Being mixed with Ho∣ney, and applied, it dissolveth swellings and hard tumours. A de∣coction of Cassia lignea, made with White-wine and Rose-water, is commended against the stinking of the Arm holes, if the place be bath'd therewith, and the same is good to wash soar mouths and Gums. The hurtfull quality. Cinamon is hurtfull to those that have hot and chollerick bo∣dies, for in such it inflames the Liver, and blood, and the inward parts: neither may such as have Feavers be too busie with it, nor Women with Child. The same cautions are to be used in taking of Cassia lignea. These best agree with cold and moist bodies, and weak stomachs; and is more usefull in Winter then in Summer. The Dose. The Dose in powder of either, is from a dram to a dram and a halfe. The Dose of the Chymicall Oyle, is two, three, or four drops, in any convenient liquor. The Dose of the Cinamon-water is halfe a spoonfull, or one spoonfull at a time, in Beer or such like. Of those Medicines that are made of Cinamon. 1. Cinamon Water. 2. Tincture or Extract. 3. Elixir of Cinamon. 4. Oyle of Cinamon. 5. Salt of Cinamon. 6. Balsum of Cinamon. 7. Sy∣rupe of Cinamon. 8. Magister of Cinamon 9. Species Diacinamomu. Whether Cinamon be rightly used to stay Womens Fluxes, or the Menstru s in Women? It is very common among many, that when Women are trou∣bled with the overflowing of the Menses or Courses, or any other Flux of the body, then to prescribe Cinamon; and they think it a great binder of the body. They usually burne Claret Wine with Cinamon, and give them Cinamon in powder with Milk. Now in that Flux of the body called Diarrhaea, and other Fluxes; I deny not but it may be used, and that with good successe, for it strength∣neth the stomach and entralls, the imbecillity or weaknes where∣of, is the cause of such Fluxes: but to give it to Women to stay their Courses, is contrary to reason and experience, for it will rather bring them downe, and cause them more to flow, as is be∣fore manifested. Therefore I would advise Women to leave this inveterate custome.
CHAP. XV. De Cassia Fistula, Of Cassia in Canes. CAssia Fistula is a black Cane, having a black substance therein, with seeds like Peony-seeds. It was unknowne to former Writers, or not regarded and esteemed by them. The Names. It is called in Latine, Cassia solutiva, Cassia, or Cassia Fistula: now it is called Cassia as some think, from the Greek word , Quod coriaceum vocant, because the Cods or Canes are like Leather; or as others conceive, from the sweetnesse of the flowers, like unto Cassia aromatica, or Odorata. In English 'tis called Pudding-pipe, because the Cod is like a Pudding. The temperament. Cassia is hot and moist in the first degree. The b st kinde. The best sort of Cassia is that which is taken out of the most heavy Canes, and that are fullest, and shine without; but such Canes as are light, and make a sound or rattle, are not to be cho∣sen, but to be rejected. The Duration. It will keep good in the Canes two or three years. The inward use. Cassia purgeth first choller, then Flegmatick humours. It is profitable for such as are troubled with hot Feavers, Pleurisy, Jaun∣dise, or heat of the Liver, mixed with convenient liquours. It is good for the heat of the Reins and Kidneyes; it bringeth forth Gravell and the Stone; and is a good preservative against the Stone, taken with a decoction of Licoris, or Parsly roots. It pro∣fiteth in inflamations of the Lungs, Breast, and Trachea arterie, or rough arterie, easing those parts very much. It tempers the heat of the bloud, and takes away the acrimony or sharpnesse of the bloud and choller; and quencheth thirst in Feavers. It profits in the Quinsie, and in the running of the Reines, with Licoris, Ru∣barbe, and Anni-seed, as also in sharp Rheumes and distillations. It is a safe Medicine, and may be given to Women with Child,
and that at any time, either in the morning, before dinner, sup∣per,Non diu ante cibum exhibere debet, a∣liâs in nutrimentum ea abutitur natura. Sennert. instit. f. 953. or at night. The manner of administring it. It is given in Boles, or in Potions, but the best way to take it is in a Bole. A Bole. Take of Cassia newly drawne, ten drams, Anni-seed, or Fennel-seed, in powder, halfe a dram, with a little Sugar, make a Bole. Or, Take of Cassia newly drawne, one ounce, of the species of Hiera picra, a dram, or two drams, mix them together, and make a Bole. Take it in the morning, and within an hour after, take a messe of Broth, or some Posset-drink. A Bole to purge Choller. Take of the pulp of new Cassia, one ounce, of the pulp of Ta∣marinds, halfe an ounce, mix them together, and take it as before. A Bole purging Choller from the head. Take of the pulp of Cassia new drawne, seven drams, of E∣lectuary of the juice of Roses, two drams, mix them together, and make a Bole. A Bole purging Flegme from the head. Take of Agarick trochiscated, a dram and a halfe, Stoechados in powder, a scruple, of Cassia newly drawne, an ounce, mix them together for a Bole. A Potion. Take of Cassia newly drawne, ten drams, of the decoction of Succory, and Anni-seed three ounces, dissolve the Cassia, and make a Potion. Or, Take of Tamarinds one ounce and a halfe, or two ounces; in∣fuse or steep it eight or ten hours in Whey or Posset-drink, then strain it, and add to it of Cassia newly drawne, seven drams. The outward Ʋse. Cassia being outwardly applied to those that have the Gout, eas∣eth the paines thereof: Also 'tis good to gargle with Cassia, to as∣swage and mitigate the tumours and swellings of the Throat. It is used in Plaisters, or Oyntments, against hot pimpels, and o∣ther eruptions, or breakings out of the skin, and to take away the roughnesse of the skin.
A Liniment against the Gout, and arthriticall paines of Joynt-Gout. Take of new Cassia two ounces, Oyntment called Populeon, one ounce, with a little Plantaine-water, make a Liniment, or thin Oyntment. This is good in a hot Gout. The hurtfull quality, with the correcting meanes. Cassia is not to be given to such as have weak stomachs, nor windy bodies, nor to such as are loose in their bodies: There∣fore 'tis not safe to give it to those that have their Hypochonders much troubled, or their Spleen swollen; nor to such as have I∣liack, and collick passion, nor to such as have Ʋlcers in their Kid∣neyes or Bladder. It is also forbidden in the Palsie, because of its moistnesse, and in the Gout. If the Belly be loose it may be given with a little Rubarbe, or Myrobalanes. In weaknesse of the sto∣mach mingle with it Cinamon or Mastich. In flatulent or windy bodies, give it with Anni-seed, or sweet Fennel-seed. If the body be bound, you may give it with Oyle of sweet Almonds. The best and safest way to give it, is with some of the foregoing corre∣ctors, or the like, and not alone by it selfe. These things following are made of Cassia Fistula. 1. Cassiae flos, or the pulp of Cassia, or Cassia extracted. 2. Cassia extracted for Glysters. 3. Cassia extracted with Sene. 4. Cassia extra∣cted without Sene. 5. Dia Cassia with Manna. 6. Extract of Cassia. 7. Diacatholicon. 8. Electuary Lenitive. The Dose. The Dose is from one ounce to an ounce and a halfe. Whether Cassia be convenient in hot Feavers. There are some that condemne the use of Cassia in Feavers, e∣specially in Burning Feavers, as in Tertians, and also in Malignant Feavers, and that by reason of its dulcedinie and moysture, it may soon turn into Choller, and also increase putrifaction: But see∣ing that most Authours Write, that it purgeth Choller, and hot humours, I see no reason to condemne the use of it in hot Feavers, nor in Malignant Feavers, for it is not given to alter, but to eva∣cuate humours, and especially if Tamarinds (or the like) be gi∣ven with it. Cinamon, see Cassia lignea.
CHAP. XVI. De Cataputia minore, & de esula minore, seu Tithymalo pineo. Of Garden-Spurge, and of Pine-Spurge, or Small esula. GArden Spurge hath one hollow whitish stalk as big as a fin∣ger; the leaves be long and narrow, like the leaves of Wil∣low, yielding milk, the Flowers are of a pale yellow colour. Pine syrupe, or Small esula, hath weak and tender stalks, half a yard long, whereon grow many small, long and narrow pointed leaves, very like the leaves of Tode-flax; at the top of the stalks grow yellow flowers. The Names. Pine spurge is called in Latine, Tithymalus pineus, esula, ezula and esula minor. Garden spurge is called in Latine, Cataputia minor. The Temperament. They are hot and dry in the third degree. The Duration. The Bark will keep a year or two, though it be best to have it fresh every year. The inward use. The liquor or juice, the leaves, seeds, and roots, or barks, are in use. All sorts of Spurge are of a hot, biting, and inflaming nature; the strongest kind of Tithymale, or Spurge, is that of the Sea, for the least drop of it being taken into the mouth, will so burn, heat, and inflame, that without present remedy, it will endanger death. The milky juice of them is the strongest worker; the seeds and leaves are next in quality thereto, and the roots or barks are of most, of the same operation, but not so strong. The juice of any Tithymale is a strong Medicine to purge the bel∣ly, and to cause vomiting, and bringeth away tough flegme, and chollerick humours. The root is good for the Dropsie, being
rightly prepared. The seeds of Garden spurge are most in use. If you give five, seaven, nine, or ten grains thereof, at a time, they purge by stool and vomit, tough Flegme, Choller, Melancholly, and water; and is usefull in the Jaundise, Iliack-passion, Palsie, and Quotidian-Ague: And usually they swollow the seeds whole without breaking either husk or kernell, for then they wok the more gently and weakly; but if the husk be broken, and the kernells swallowed down whole, or chewed, or bruised, and mixed with drink or Broth, they work more violently. The Milk hereof is more violent then the Seeds or Kernells. The leaves being boyled in fat Broth, worke more safely, and some∣what more weakly: Three or four of the leaves may be taken, being boyled in broth. Small Esula purgeth strongly downward, both Choller and Flegme, and easeth the hardnesse and pains of the belly, and swel∣lings of the Breast. The seed and root prepared helpeth the Drop∣sie, being carefully taken, and with good advise. The leaves steep∣ed a while in Vineger, and afterwards dryed and made into pow∣der (which is the preparation of them) may be given to the weight of three drams, saith Diascorides, which is thought too much. The root (prepared as aforesaid) is given likewise to the weight of two drams, saith Diascorides, in Mead, or Honeyed-water: but one dram must not be given without caution. The seeds (saith the former Author) may be taken to the weight of a dram, but seing nine or ten seeds of the Garden spurge, is a suffi∣cient strong Medicine, 'tis not safe to give so many of these: And of the juice or Milk, Diascorides appointeth a spoonfull, being made into pils with flower, which is the strongest of them all. The extract hereof purgeth more safely. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, Pills, Electuary, &c. A Powder against the Dropsie. Take of Esula prepared, as above written, five scruples; Cina∣mon, Fennel-seed, Anni-seed, Mastich, of each six grains; make them into powder, and give it, as need requireth. Pills against the Dropsie. Take of the bark of Ezula prepared as before, Myrobalan citrine, or yellow, of each four parts, of Aloes five parts, make them in powder, or with the juice of Fennell, or Endive, make a masse or lump for pills. The Dose is from a dram to two drams and a half. Freitag. Aur med. fol. 413.
A Potion against the Dropsie. Take of the essence of Esula, fifteen grains, Oyle of Anni-seed, Oyle of Citron-pill, Oyle of Cinamon, of each one drop, of syrupe of Citron-pill, and Mint-water, of each halfe an ounce: mix them together, and make a Potion. Or, Take of the bark of Pine spurge, prepared, and in powder, halfe a dram; of the juice of Fennell well clarified, one ounce, or two ounces, of White-wine, or Posset-drink, three ounces; add a lit∣tle Sugar, and make a Potion. The externall Ʋse. Esula minor, or small Tithymall, hath a vertue to heal the bitings or stingings of venomous Beasts, and Serpents. The milkie juice taketh away Warts, Cornes, and Callous knobs in the flesh, (being first pared and cut away, and then applyed,) it is used also in running Scabs, and Sores, and to blemished scars, and spots of the skin. The same mixed with Honey, causeth the hair to fall away, being applied, but it must not lye on long; and when you thus use it, 'tis good to mix some Oyle with it, for hereby it doth lesse burn and heat: being put into a hollow Tooth it takes away the pain thereof, but take heed it touch not any other of the Teeth or Gums; 'tis not amisse to cover the parts about with Wax to keep them from the said juice. It helpeth Fistulaes, and corrupt and fretting Ʋlcers, and is good against hot swellings and Carbuncles, and taketh away the Disease in the Fundament, called a Fig, be∣ing a fleshy substance growing there. The milk made up into Trosses or little Balls, with the Meal of Beanes or Pease, and kept dry, doth serve all the year to use (as occasion is offered) for the purposes aforesaid. It killeth Fish if it be mixed with such things as they will eat: but the seeds and milk being rightly used in Baits, only amazeth Fishes, so that you may take them with your hands; and so doth the leaves of broad leaved Spurge, being cast into the water, causeth the Fish therein to rise up to the top thereof, where lying a while as halfe dead, may be taken with ones hand. The Water of Garden spurge taketh away Corns on the Feet, be∣ing often washed therewith; but first let them be cut, then dip linnen cloaths in the same, and wash the place three or four times in a day: the same doth cleanse the skin from Freckles, Morphew, or any other discolouring, either used by it selfe, or
mixed with water of Bean-flowers, and Bastard Dittany: it help∣eth the Itch being gently washed therewith, and also foul Ʋlcers and sores. The hurtfull quality and correction. All sorts of Spurges are heating and burning, being but outward∣ly used or applyed, they exulcerate the skin, and inwardly ta∣ken, they are excoriating purgers, and very offensive to the heart, Liver, and stomach; they break the Veins, excoriate the Guts, and inflame the whole body, whereby many times Feavers are caused. To help that the heart and stomach be not hurt with the same, we are to use therewith such things as are cordiall, and comfort the stomach; as Spikenard, Cinamon, Nutmeg, and Mastich. To help the burning quality thereof, we are to mix therewith such things as are of a glutinous nature, as Gum Tragacanth, Bdellium, juice of Purslaine, and the muccilage of the seeds of Fleawort. To prevent inflaming of the Guts, and that it cause not Feavers, we are to mix with it such things as are cold and moist, as the juice of Sowthistle, Nightshade, Endive, Purslaine, or seeds of Quince, infused and boyled gently in Vineger. These are not to be given but in very strong and rustick bodies, and with good caution; 'tis safer to use them only outwardly, and not to give them into the bo∣dy, especially seing we have so many other good and safe Medi∣cines. The lesser or smaller Esula is the best to use, but bad is the best, as you have heard. In the gathering of the juice, great care must be taken, that they touch not their face nor eyes with their hands. The Dose. The milkie juyce is given (being well prepared) from three grains to six or eight: the root or barke from five graines to ten, or twenty, in a strong body. These things following are made of Esula. First Extract of Esula, 2 Pils of Esula 3. The distilled water thereof.
CHAP. XVII. De Colocynthide, Of Coloquintida Apple. COloquintida is the fruit of wilde gourd, round like an apple, and white having white seeds within. The Names. It is called in Hebrew  &  Pekaynim,, or Pekaim, and Pakkunoth. Therefore in the 2 Kings 4.39. 'tis said And he found  gephen, vitem agri, a wilde Vine, and he gathered there∣of  Pakkugnoth, i. e. Coloquintidas. It is called in Arabick,  Handal, Handaal, and Chandel; from whence we have Tro∣chisci Alhandal, quasi ex Colocynthide. In Greek  and that because  Alvumnovet. In Latine, Colocynthis, Coloquintida, Cucurbita Sylvestris, a Cucumer ob affinitatem tum in forma, tum in qualitate; Also Fel terrae; & mors plantarum, because it imbitters all hearbs growing neer it, or killeth them. In English, Apple of Co∣loquintida, and the bitter Gourd. The Temperament. Coloquintida is hot and dry in the third degree. The best sort. The best Apples are white and full ripe, well compacted, very bitter and light, yea the lighter the better. The Duration. The Apples of Coloquintida may be kept four or five years. The inward Ʋse. Coloquintida purgeth first Flegme and viscous humours, then Choler both green and yellow, as also yellow-water, and that with great violence from remote parts, as from the braine, and the membranes thereof, from the nerves, musles, joynts, lungs and breast: therefore it is profitable for any kinde of head-ach, whether Cephalalgia, Cephalaea or Hemicrania, in the Epilepsie or Falling-sicknesse, Apoplexie, Swimming of the head, and in Fluxes of Rheume flowing to the Eyes; Also in the Sciatica or Hip-gout, and in other diseases of the Nerves and Joynts. Also in Asth∣ma and Dispnaea, a shortnesse of breath, and old Coughs. More∣over it is much commended in the Collick, whether it proceed from Flegme or Winde, as also in the Dropsie, and killeth worms. The seeds may be used in the Yellow-Jaundies.
The inner white, soft, spungie substance, under the outward shell or rinde, is that onely without any seed which is used. The manner of administring it. It is given chiefly in Pils and Trosses, rarely by decoction or infusion, yet it is usuall with the Vulgar to buy a ball of Colo∣quint (as they call it) and boyle it in Beer or Water, and brag how good a purge they can make for themselves or friends, and that for the value of two pence or three pence, but how dear they pay for it in the end daily experience doth manifest. Pils. Take of species Hiera simplex a dram, Trosses Alhandal twelve graines, with a little Syrup of Roses, make seven Pils, and take them in a morning fasting. Pils against the Iliack passion. Take of Coloquintida, Sagapenum of each ten drams, Scamony three drams, dissolve the gums, and make the other in powder, then make them into a masse or lump; if need require you may take a little honey to make them up. An extract of the seeds of Coloquintida. Take of the seeds of Coloquintida bruised, four ounces, Aqua∣vitae a pinte, Aloes two ounces Scammony one ounce: Macerate or steep the seeds in the Aqua-vitae three dayes, and straine it hard, and set it on the fire to evaporate, which being done, adde the rest in powder, stirring them well together, till it become a fit masse for pils. The Dose is from ten grains to fifteen. Freitag. Aur. Med. f. 337. The external use. A decoction of Coloquintida, made with Veniger, easeth the paine of the Teeth, if they be washed therewith. The powder thereof with Honey applyed to the Navill, killeth wormes. Being infused in Vineger it cureth the Morphew, Leprosie, Elephansie, dry scurfe and scabs, if the places be often rubbed therewith. A bath made of Coloquintida,, and the feet and other parts fomented therewith bringeth downe the Courses in Women. The juyce boyled with Hogs-greese and applyed to the hip easeth the Sciati∣ca. An oyle made of Coloquintida and dropped into the ear, take's away the noyse and singing thereof, and is good against baldnes and falling of the hair. Coloquintida is used in Glisters and Suppositories.
A Glister. Take of the Pulpe of Coloquintida, two drams, Camomel flow∣ers a handfull, Anniseed, Cuminseed, of each halfe an ounce: Make a decoction in fair water, straine it, and in a pint of the decocti∣on desolve honey of Roses oyl of Camomel, of each three or four ounces, and make a Glister. A Suppository. Take of Coloquintida in powder, a scruple species Hiera simplex halfe a dram, Salgem halfe a scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Honey, make a Suppository. A Ball made of Coloquintida, which purgeth onely by smelling to it. Take of Colocynthis and Esula, or pine spurge in powder, Aloes and Myrrhe in powder, of each a dram, with the juice of Coriander make two bals, to hold in each hand one, and being warmed therewith, smell often to them. The hurtfull quality with the correcting means. Coloquintida hurts the heart, liver and stomach by its strong ope∣ration: it opens the mouthes of the veines, whereby many times after the taking of it, blood is voided both upward and downe∣ward; It also excoriats the bowels and passages of the Urine, and bringeth great gripings and tearing pains. Therefore it must not be given to women with child (for being but applyed to the wombe, it killeth the child) nor to children, aged persons, or such as are weake, neither to any that have the Plurisie, Hectich Feaver, or any inflamation. It is not safe to give it alone, but being well corrected it may be given to strong and rustick bo∣dies. It is corrected with Hepaticall, Cardiacall, Stomachicall, and other gentle means, as Tragacanth, oyle of sweet Almonds, Gin∣ger or Mastich: Some adde Bdellium, and other astringent things. But surely those things that binde make the operation of the Me∣dicine, afterwards more strong; for though the binding faculty of such things may hinder the operation for a time, yet it will at length bring forth and worke more violently. Sagapenum is counted a good corrector of Coloquintida, because of it's clammy faculty, whereby it preserves the bowels from gripings The Dose. The Dose in powder is from five graines to ten, or fifteen. These things following are made of Coloquintida. First Pils of Coloquintida. 2 Pilulae Alhandal. 3 Extract of Co∣loquintida 4 Trosses of Alhandal. 5 Chimicall oyle of Coloquin∣tida.
6 Oyle (by infusion) of Coloquintida. 7 Wine and Vineger of Coloquintida. CHAP. XVIII. De Corallio Rubro, Of red Coral. REd Coral is a hard stony substance, growing on the Rocks in the Sea. The Names. Coral is called in Latine, Corallium, Coralium, and Coralium, this Corallium rubrum, in English, Red Coral. The temperament. Red Coral is cold and dry in the second degree. The best kinde. The best is that which is smooth, clear and red, for the redder it is, the better it is. The Duration. It will keep good ten or twenty years. The inward Ʋse. Red Coral doth dry, cool and bind, it strengthneth the heart, stomach and liver, purifieth the blood, and is therefore very use∣full in the Pestilence, against venome, and all pestilent Feavers, and malignant diseases, it cheares the heart, and is good against Melancholy, helpeth such as spit blood, or that bleed at the mouth or the nose, as also stoppeth the Fluxe of blood in man or woman, and being taken in wine or other liquor frequnt∣ly, it taketh away the hardnesse and stopping of the Spleen: it stayeth the Gonorrhaea, or running of the reins in men, and the whites in women, helpeth conception by its binding faculty, and is good for the stopping of of the Urine, and paines of the Stone in the bladder, if the powder (when it is burnt) be taken in Whitewine or Posset drinke: the powder taken in Wine, o di∣stilled Water brings rest to such as have an Ague, and is good for such as have Cramps. It is much commended in the falling sick∣nesse, or to prevent it, if a Childe so soon as it is borne, take ten graines thereof in black-Cherry-water, or in the Mothers mike. Some affirme that it causeth an easie delivery of the birth; which
fit doe, it is by a specifick vertue, for experience doth manifest it to be of a binding nature. The Chymicall oyle of Coral is commended against the Falling-sicknesse in children and others, as also in all Fluxes of the belly, and spitting of blood. The manner of administring it. It is given in Electuary powder, &c. An Electuary against the Flux of the belly. Take of red Coral in powder, three drams of Marmede of Quinces two ounces and a halfe, species Diamargariton frigidum two drams, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Quinces, make an Electuary, take of it a little before meat. An Electuary against vomiting of blood, by reason of a bruise or fall. Take of red Coral in powder a dram, conserve of red Roses, con∣serve of Comfry, of each one ounce, Ble Armoniack washed in Rose water and in powder, Blood stone in powder, of each a dram, A∣cacia, Myrtle-Berries, of each a dram, Suger Pellets halfe an ounce, with an ounce of Suger dissolved in Rose-water, make an Electua∣ry. The Dose is three drams, or halfe an ounce, with red Wine in the morning and before meat. A Powder against Ruptures. Take of Myrtle-berries, Cinamon and Nutmeg, of each two drams, of Knot-grasse dry, halfe an ounce, seeds of Plantaine and Purslaine, of each three drams, and the seeds of Garden Cresses, a dram, of red Corall a dram and a halfe; make all into powder, adding so much Sugar as will make it sweet. The Dose is from halfe a dram to a dram in red Wine, every morning or, second morning for a Months space if need require. A Powder against the Fluxe of the belly. Take of red Coral a scruple, roots of Tormentil two scruples, Mirrhe a scruple, Gum Tragacanth a dram, Plantaine-seeds halfe a dram, Dragons blood a dram, trosses of Spodium a dram, Bole Armoni∣ack and Harts-horne burnt, of each a dram; make them into powder. The Dose is a dram in Plantaine-water. The outward Ʋse. It helpeth sore Gums and Ulcers in the mouth, and healeth up soul hollow Ulcers in other parts, and filleth with flesh, and is used in medicines for the eyes, to stay the Flux of Rheume, and
takes away the heat and rednesse thereof, by cooling and drying up the moisture thereof: it fastneth loose teeth, and maketh them white, and helps to breed teeth in Children, the gums being rub∣bed therewith, and some hang it about their neck of such as have the Falling-sicknesse. A Powder to white the Teeth. Take red Coral, Brick, of each half an ounce, make them into powder, and take some of it, lay it on a course linnen cloath, and rub your teeth therewith. For bleeding at the Nose. Take of red Coral in powder half an ounce of Bole Arminick, in powder an ounce; with the juice of Sheapherds purse and lint or tow make Tents, and put them up into the nostrils. The hurtfull quality. It must not be given too often, where the body is very costive or hound. Of those things that are made of red Corall. First, Estence, of Tincture of Corall, 2 Chymicall oyle or li∣quor of Coral. 3 Flores Coralliorum. 4 Olium Coralliorum succina∣tum [good in the Falling-sicknesse and Apoplexie, if three or four drops be given in any convenient liquor.] 5 Syrup of Coral simple and compound. 6 Magister of Coral. 7. Salt of Coral. 8 Dia∣corallion. The Dose. The Dose is from a scruple to a dram. CHAP. XIX. De Cornu cervin, et Ebore, Of Harts-horne and Ivory. THese being of some affinity, I shall speake of them in one Chapter. Ivory is the Elephants tooth, & Harts-horn is generally known. The Names. Harts-horne is called in Latine Cornu-eervi, or Cornucervinum. Ivory is called in Latine, Ebor & Ebur.
The Temperament. They are cold and dry in the first degree. The best kinde. The best sort is the whitest. The Duration. They will keep good many years. The inward use. Harts-horn resisteth putrifaction, provoketh sweat, and is very cordiall; It is chiefly used in the small Pox, Measles, putrid and Malignant Feavers, and in such like diseases where sweating is needfull. It is good in Fluxes of the belly, spitting of blood, Jaun∣dies and paine of the bladder, taken with Gum Tragacanth, it stayeth the flowing of the wombe. Burnt Harts-horne killeth wormes, resisteth putrifaction, hel∣peth the Collick, stoppeth the Flux of the belly, and provoketh sweat. Ivory doth strengthen the vicerous parts, stayeth the Whites in Women, is usefull in the Jaundies, driveth away Wormes, easeth paines of the Stomack, and doth wonderfully open obstructions or stoppings. Some commend it against barrennesse, and say it maketh Wo∣men fruitfull, but it rather hinders fecundity and conception then helps it. The manner of administring them, They are given in Powder, in Electuary, in Decoction, &c. A Powder against the Jaundies. Take Parsley-seed, Nettle-seed, Nutmeg, shavings of Ivory, Harts-horne burnt, of each halfe a dram, make all into powder. Give halfe a dram of it at a time, in White-wine, or Posset drink, for a week or more if need be. A Powder to expell wormes. Take of Worm-seed an ounce, Lupines halfe an ounce, Worme-wood dry, two drams, Harts horne burnt, a dram and a halfe. Make them into powder, and give it from a Scruple to a dram. Take of Purslane-seed, and Lettuce-seed, of each two drams, Sene three drams and a halfe, Harts horne burnt, halfe an ounce of Dittany five drams, make a powder thereof. The Dose is from halfe a dram to a dram. Note that the Sene is to be infused in
strong Wine Vineger, one night, and afterwards to be dryed. An Electuary against the Flux of the Belly. Take of conserve of red Roses, two ounces, species of Aromati∣cum Rosatum, a dram, Bole Armonack in powder, and red Corall in powder, of each a dram, Harts horne burnt in powder, two scruples, with syrupe of Quinces, make an Electuary; Give of it as much as a small Nut, in the morning, before dinner, and at night. An Electuary against the Pestilence. Take shavings of Harts-horne, Bole Armoniacke, Sorrell-seeds of each two drams; yellow Sanders halfe a dram, Saffron in powder, a scruple; Conserve of red Roses, Conserve of Wood-Sorrell of each two ounces, Conserve of Borage and Sage-flowers, of each six drams, with Syrupe of Wood-sorrell, make a moist Ele∣ctuary, and take so much as a Chesnut at a time, once or twice a day, if need be. A Gellie to strengthen such as are weake. Take Harts-horne and Ivory, of each one ounce, boyle them in a quart of water, till it come to a jelly (which you may soon know by setting some to coole) then strein it, and add Sugar, Rose-water, and a little juice of Lymonds, and boyle it gently a while, then keep it for your use. Take often seaven or eight spoonfulls of it warm. The outward use. Harts-horne burnt, and mixed in Plantaine water, is a good Medicine for Ʋlcers of the eyes, and to stay defluxions thereof. It makes the Teeth white, being rubbed therewith. The shavings of Harts-horne, being burnt, the smell thereof driveth away Serpents, and venomous Creatures. Being made warm in Vineger, and the Gums washed therewith, it easeth Children that breed Teeth. The ashes of Harts-horne burnt, ap∣plied to the head with Wine, is good against the Scurfe and Dan∣druffe of the head, among the hairs, as Plinie saith, Nat. hist. lib. 28. fol. 324. The shavings of Ivory in powder, being mixed with Honey, ta∣keth away the duskish spots that appear in the Visage, if the face be therewith anoynted. Also the dust thereof which the File or Saw doth make, in Filing or Sawing, doth cure the white Flawes or Impostumations breeding at the root of the Nails. Plin. Nat. Hist. fol. 130
The Dose. Burnt Harts-horne is given from five grain to twenty; Magi∣ster of Harts-horne is given from halfe a scruple in any convenient liquor. Ivory is given from halfe a scruple to a scruple, or to a scruple and a halfe. Of such things as are made of them. Of Harts-horne are made, 1. Magister. [Which is an excellent Diaphoretick, for it expelleth all obnoxious and filthy humours, by the pores,Grulingius. Flori∣leg. fol. 209. and is usefull in Feavers, Pestilence, Scab, Dysenterie, or Bloody Flux, Dropsie, and Stone.] 2. Distilled Water. 3. Liquor, or Spirit. 4. Oyle. 5. Salt. 6. Burnt Harts-horne. 7. Extract thereof. Of Ivory. 1. Ivory Burnt. 2. Magister of Ivory. CHAP. XX. De Costo. Of Costus-root. COstus is a root brought from India and Arabia, as Authors say, of a brownish colour, having a rind on the outside. The Names. It is called in Latine, Costus, and in English Costus. The temperament. Costus is hot and dry in the third degree. The Kinds. Some make three sorts, others two sorts, bitter and sweet, but we have but one sort that I have seen of late. The best sort. The best is that which hath a good sent, whitish, light, bitter, and aromatick, having a rind like Cinamon, but thicker, not old, nor worm-eaten. The Duration. It will keep good five or six years. The inward Ʋse. It heas the body potently, expelleth wind, helpeth slow con∣coction hinders corruption of the meat, easeth the Collick com∣ming
of Wind and Flegme, killeth broad Worms of the belly, provoketh the Courses, and Urine, helps to cleanse the womb from impurity, and helpeth conception. It is good against the pain of the breast, healeth Ruptures, cures Convulsions, and pains of the side, stirreth up Venery, taken with Wine and Honey, cures venome, and the stinging of venomous Beasts, therefore 'tis used in Antidotes. It is good in the Dropsie, Gout, Palsie, and taketh away the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, Electuary, Trosses, Pills, &c. Trosses against the Hickop. Take of Costus, Saffron, Roses, Mastich, Spikenard, in powder, of each halfe an ounce, Asarum in powder, two drams, Aloes and O∣pium of each a dram; with the juice of Fleawort, make little Tros∣ses. Take a dram at a time. Stocher. prax. cap. 32. fol. 166. The outward use. It is used with Oyle to annoynt the body, before the cold fit of Agues, to warm it, as also against the coldnesse and weaknesse of the finews, and the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout. Used with Water and Honey, it amendeth the discolouring or blemishes of the skin; it helpeth the Mother, and cold Diseases of the Womb, as well by bathing as suming. Being made into powder, and cast into moist Wounds and Sores, it dryeth up the moisture thereof. The hurtfull quality. Hot and dry bodies must not be too busie with Costus, for that is proper only for cold and moist bodies. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a dram to a dram and a hale. Compounds made of Costus. 1. Electuary Caryo ostinum. 2. Pilue Mato costinae. 3. Oyle if Costus.
CHAP. XXI. De Croco. Of Saffron. SAffron is a Drug so common, that 'tis needlesse to describe it. The Names. It is called in Latine, Crocus, and Crocum, in English Saffron. The Temperament. Saffron is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first. The best kinde. The best is that which is new, well coloured, and hath the tops of it a little white in the very end; long, tough, not soon brayed, of a most fragrant smell, which being moistned dyeth the hand, and being tasted, it coloureth the spittle, and staineth the teeth. The Duration. It will keep good (saith Platearius) five years, if it be kept in a bag of Leather, but Plinie saith, it is best to keep it in a box of horne. Plin. Nut. lib. 21. cap. 20. The inward use. Saffron is profitable for the Head, Stomach, Heart, Liver, Spleen, Bladder, Womb, Animall, Vitall, and Naturall spirits. It is use∣full in cold Diseases of the Brain and Nerves, quickens the me∣mory and senses, doth much comfort the heart, and recreateth the spirits, and makes them chearfull that use it; therefore 'tis called Corhominis, the heart of man; and when we see a man o∣ver-merry, we have a Proverb, Dormivit in sacco croci, he hath slept in a bag of Saffron. It expells venomous vapours from the heart, and therefore is very usefull in the Plague, Pestilence, and Small Pox, strengthneth the stomach, preserveth the entralls, helpeth concoction, and naturall heat; it is very profitable for the Lungs and Phthifis, or consumption of the Lungs and shortnesse of the breath, therefore by some it is called Anima pulmonum, the soule of the Lungs. It is good in the Pleurisie, openeth the stoppings of the Liver and Gall, therefore is usefull in the Jaundise, and against Melancholly, provoketh Urine and Venus, hastneth Child-birth: is procures a good colour to them that use it, and drives away
drunkennesse, as Authours say; but I rather believe it hasteneth drunkennesse, by fuming up to the Brain; for 'tis apparent that it provokes sleep and drowsinesse. It is profitable in fits of the Mother, especially the tincture thereof. It is best for old persons, such as are flegmatick, and melancholick, and that in the winter season. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, Potions, &c. A Powder to bring away the Birth or After-Birth. Take Saffron, Cinamon, of each a dram, make them in Powder, and give it in Posset-drink. Or, Take of Saffron a scruple, of Cassia lignea, a dram, make them into Powder, and give it as before. A Potion for the same. Take of Saffron in powder, a dram, of Mithridate two scruples, or a dram, dissolve them in sweet Wine, and give it. Against shortnesse of breath. Take of Saffron in powder, a scruple, of Musk in powder, a graine; give them in Wine. Against a Rheume that is ready to suffocate; and short∣nesse of Breath. Take of the juice of Ocymum, or Basill, halfe an ounce; of Saf∣fron in powder, a scruple; Musk a graine, mix them together, and take it. To expell the Small Pox, or Measells. Take of Saffron in powder, five graines, ten graines, or more, give it in Posset-drink. The outward Ʋse. It is outwardly used against the Gout, to ease the paine thereof, being mixed with the yelk of an Egge, and Oyle of Roses, and applied. A Cataplasme, or Pultis, made of Saffron, Milke, and the crums of Bread, being applied, mollifieth Tumours and Aposthumes. It easeth soar eyes, and blood-shotten, being used with red Roses, and the white of an Egge. Being mixed with red Rose-water, and Womans milk, it preserveth the eyes from the Small Pox, and Mea∣sles; it is used against Erysipelas, or Wild-fire, and inflamations: it helpeth deafnesse if it be mixed with Oyle of bitter Almonds, and put into the ear warm; or dip black Wool in some of it, and put
it into the ears. It killeth the Itch, and is used in Pultisses, for the Matrix and Fundament, to ease the pain thereof, and also for old Swellings, and Aches. Against a vehement paine of the head. Take Saffron, Gum Arabicke, Euphorbium, Myrrhe, and Nutmeg, in powder, of each two drams, mix them with the white of an Egge, and apply it to the Fore-head and Temples. A Collyrie for the paines of the eyes, and to stay defluxi∣on of humours. Take of Saffron two drams, red Roses halfe an ounce, Gum A∣rabick three drams, Opium and Spikenard, of each a dram, Rose-water, or Plantaine-water, halfe a pint, or more; make a Collyrie, and wash the eyes often with it. An Oyntment against the Piles, and the Disease called a Fig in the Fundament. Take the yelk of an Egge, and an ounce of Oyle of Roses, beat them well together, then add white Sugar, and white Sugar-Candy in powder, halfe an ounce, Saffron in powder, two scruples. Apply it to the Fundament, and if the pain be more inward, dip a piece of linnen cloath in it, and put it up. The hurtfull quality. Saffron causeth head-ach, offendeth the brain and senses, brings drowsinesse, and hurts the fight: it causeth a loathing of the sto∣mach, and takes away the appetite, and provokes laughter, espe∣cially being taken in too great a quantity. Vid. Rudolph. Camerar. syllog. memorab. med. cent. 3. cap. 44. fol. 167. Some write, that if two or three drams thereof be taken; it brings death. It is not safe to give it to women with Child. The Dose. The Dose is from a scruple to a scruple and a halfe, but for Children the Dose must be lesse. Of such Medicines as are made of Saffron. 1. Tincture or Essence of Saffron. 2. Extract of Saffron. 3. Chymicall Oyle. 4. Trosses of Saffron. 5. Crocomagma. 6. Species Diacrocuma. 7. Elect. de Ovo. 8. Oleum crocinum. 9. Emplastrum Oxycroceum.
CHAP. XXII. De Curcuma. Of Turmericke. TƲrmerick is a root like Ginger, but yellow like Saffron, with∣in and without, and not so flat as Ginger, but rounder, hot in the tast, and bitterish, but nothing so bitter, being fresh by reason of the moysture in it, as when it is dry. The Names. It is called in Latine, Cyperus Indicus, Crocus Indicus, and Curcu∣ma, in English, Turmerick. The temperament. Turmericke is hot and dry in the second degree, or (as some say) in the third degree. The best sort. The best roots are those that are yellowest and soundest, not worm-eaten. The duration. It will keep good many years. The inward Ʋse. It is very effectuall to open the stoppings of the Stomach, Li∣ver, Gall, Bladder, and Womb, it is much used against the yel∣low Jaundise, and is very good in the Dropsie, and Green-sicknesse, for it openeth obstructions very much, and helpeth to bring down the menses, or womens courses. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, Pills, Decoction, &c. The outward use. It is outwardly used to take away the hair, and is put into those Medicines that are made for the eyes, and for the Itch, and Scab, if some juice of Oranges, and the Oyle of the Cocar, or Indian Nut, be mixed with it, as Gartias saith. Gart. ab horto, Aromat. hist. l. 1. cap, 39. It is much used to colour wooden dishes, cups, and such like, in stead of Saffron. The Indians use it much both to colour and season their meats and broths, because it is cheaper then Saffron.
The hurtfull quality. It must not be given to hot and dry bodies. The Dose. In powder, the Dose is from a scruple to a dram, in decoction, from a dram to two drams, or more. Cuscutha, see Epithymum; CHAP. XXIII. De Cyclamine. Of Sow-Bread. CYclamen or common Sow-bread is an hearb that hath leaves like Ivy, or Asarabacco, only the upper part of the leaves have here and there white spots, and that side of the leafe which is next the ground, is of a purple colour; the root is round like Turnep, black without, and white within, with many small threads or strings. The Names. It is called in Latine, Cyclaminus, Cyclamen, Arthanita, and Panis porcinus, in English Sow-bread. The temperament. Sow-bread is hot and dry in the third degree. The duration. It will keep good a yeare. The inward use. Sow-bread purgeth tough flegme and water, and is effectuall to take away obstructions or stoppings of all the inward parts, helps the Collicke comming of thick flegme. It is usefull in any Head∣ach, and in cold Diseases of the Brain and Nerves: 'tis profita∣ble in shortnesse of breath, in the Jaundise, and expells choller by sweat, openeth stopping of the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Bladder, and Womb, also cleanseth the impurity thereof, brings downe the courses violently, provokes Urine, openeth the mouths of the vessells, and provokes the Hemroids, helpeth the Dropsie, and any hard swelling of the Spleen or Liver. Being drunk with wine it expelleth poyson and venome. The wine wherein Cyclamen hath been boyled, doth help the stopping of the Spleen. The root (saith
Plinie) if it be put into a cup of wine, it makes as many drunk as drink thereof. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 9. fol. 229. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, in powder, and in juice. The outward use. The root boyled in Oyle of bitter Almonds, or Oyle of Camomill, and dropped into the ears, cures Deafnesse, and Noyse in the ears: or the root bruised with Peach-kernells, & bitter Almonds, and in∣fused two or three dayes in a little Aqua vitae, then presse out the juice or creamy substance, and drop some of it into the ears. It cures foul Ʋlcers and Fistulaes, and takes away the hardnesse there∣of, consumes proud flesh, dissolveth all cold swellings, and scro∣phulous tumours. The juice put up with wooll openeth the Hemroids, and moveth to the stool strongly. The same helpeth the Pin and Web in the eye, being infused with Honey, and put in: the juice snuffed up purgeth the brain from offensive humours; but be not too busie with it, because it is a sharp Medicine. If the belly be bath'd with the juice, it will provoke to stool, and that strongly, and also killeth Worms. The root being applied pro∣vokes the courses: it cleanseth all deformities of the skin, as freckles, and spots, and the marks of the Small Pox, and Measles. The juice or the decoction thereof with Vineger, taketh away the falling of the haire, if the place be bath'd therewith. Applied to the region of the Spleen, it easeth the hardnesse thereof: the juice mixed with Honey, or Plantaine-water, helpeth all manner of fores in the Mouth, or Throat, or the Tooth-ach, being washed there∣with. A decoction thereof healeth Wounds, the running sores in the head, bones, or members, out of joynt, Kibes or Chilblaines, and the Gout: the root bruised and applied with Honey, draweth forth splinters, thorns, and pieces of loose bones: the root in powder, mingled with Honey, helpeth the fleshinesse that grow∣eth in the Nose, if it be therewith anoynted; but 'tis best to mix other things with it, because of its sharpnesse. Bruised and applied to the biting of any venomous Beast, it helpeth the same. Being burnt, and the ashes mixed with Vineger, and applied to the Hip, it helpeth the Hip-Gout. The leaves laid to the Navill, and secret parts, doth much help Women in Travell, or the root hanged about them in their Travell. The distilled water from the root (saith Matthiolus) snuffed up into the Nostrills, stay∣eth
the bleeding thereof wonderfully; and if you give six oun∣ces of the water to drink with an ounce of Suger, it will stop the blood that cometh from the breast, stomack, or liver, or if any veine be broken in them. Matthiol. in lib. 2. Diascor. 159. fol. 407. The juice mingled with Vineger helpeth the falling downe of the fundament, if it be anointed therewith. The juice of Sow-bread, and the juice of Plantaine (of each a like quantity) mixed to∣gether, and Aloes, Myrrhe and Olibanum added thereto, stoppeth the bleeding of the nose, if it be applyed to the nostrils and fore∣head. An Errhine to purge the Head. Take of the root of Sow-bread a dram, of Elaterium a Scru∣ple, macerate or steep them in four ounces of Water and Honey one night. Put up Tents (dipped in the same) into the Nose, but beware of too frequent use thereof. The dry powder is not safe to snuffe up, without it be mingled with some other things. The hurtfull quality and correction. Sow-bread by reasons of its acrimony and biting faculty, hurts the Liver, and brings gnawing pains to the stomach, neither must it be used inwardly without much caution. It is dan∣gerous for pregnant women, or women with child to meddle with this herbe, least they miscarry, for it destroyeth the birth; but not so dangerous (as some Authors fabulously report) for Women to stride over, or but to touch it. It is not to be given without correcting helpe. Now the correcting meanes are Mel Passulatum, or Honey of Raisons, Manna, Mastick, Syrup of Quinces, or with species Diarrhodon Abbatis, or with Oxymel and Hydromel; or in powder it may be given with Chicken broth, or Veale broth. The Dose. The Dose in substance is from a dram to a dram and a halfe. The juyce is given from a dram to two drams or three drams. Of such Medicines as are made of Sowbread. First, Ʋnguentum de Arthanita majus. 2 Ʋng. de Arthanita mi∣nus.
CHAP. XXIV. De Dactylis, Of Dates. DAtes are long and round fruits growing in the East and West Indies, and in other places, from whence we have them: They abound in Indiae, Syria, Aegypt, Arabia, and such hot places. The Names. They are called in English Dates The best are called Cariotae, and Phaenicobalanis, which were also called Regiae, because they were fittest for the dyet of Kings. The Temperament. Dates are hot and dry almost in the second degree, and astrin∣gent, or binding, especially when they are not through ripe; be∣ing through ripe they are hot and moist in the second degree, some say hot and moist in the first degree. The best sort. The best Dates are such as are Yellowish in colour, sweet, ripe within, new, uncorrupt, not worme-eaten, and having their caps on, therefore called Cap Dates, for if the Caps fall off they soon decay. The Duration. Dates will not keep good long, especially in the Summer time, some will keep halfe a year, or longer. The inward Ʋse. Dates yeeld a grosse and clammy and fatty, or impingnating nourishment, therefore they are used against Consumptions, and wasting of the body: they helpe the hoarsenesse and roughnesse of the throat, the sharpe Cough by reason of sharpe rheume falling on the breast and lungs. The decoction of them taken alayeth the force of hot Agues, and stayeth spitting of blood, the paine in the stomach and bowels by reason of a Flux; and boyled in water and honey, and taken doth refresh the spirits: they somewhat provoke to Venery: the decoction helpeth the weak∣nesse and paines in the back and bladder; they strengthen the weaknesse of the Liver and Spleen, being mixed with other con∣venient medicines: They are used in broth's against Consumptions,
and pining diseases, and are counted restorative, especially the sweet ones. Dry Dates being eaten doe stop the belly, and stay vomiting of women with childe, and helpe against miscarying: they stay womens courses, and the bleeding and falling downe of the Fundament and Piles, being taken in red Wine. The manner of administring them. They are given in brothes, Decoctions, and Electuaries. A decoction against the Cough, shortnesse of breath, and the Plurisie. Take of Dates, six in number, Figs four, French Barley an ounce, Raisons of the Sun stoned, an ounce, Sebesten and Jujubes of each fifteen, Licoris halfe an ounce, Maiden-haire, Hysop, Scabious, Colts-foot, of each halfe a handfull: Cut the herbs and fruits, and bruise the Licoris, then boyle them in three pints of spring water to a quart, straine it, and drink of the clearest, morning and eve∣ning, seven or eight spoonfulls warme. The outward Ʋse. Dates made into a Poultis alone, or with other things, and ap∣plied to the stomack and belly, stayeth the vomiting of Women with child: The Decoction of Dates, or the leaves of the Date-tree maketh the haireblack, being often used, and stayeth fretting Ʋlcers. Being mixed with Wax and Saffron, they helpe the black and blew marks remaining after stripes or blowes, and reduceth the skin to its naturall colour. Date stones being burnt and washed serve instead of Spodium to binde and restraine the fluent hu∣mours into the eyes, and to consume the Pin and Web in them, and to dry up Pushes, being used with Spikenard, it it stayeth the falling of the hair from the eye brows, being mingled with wine, and used it helpeth any Excressences of the flesh, as Wens and such like, and bringeth foul Ʋlcers to Cicatrising, and stayeth the spreading of Ʋlcers. A Poultis made of them and applyed helpeth any luxation or joynts out of place, and they are used in astringent, Cataplasmes, or Pultises. The hurtfull quality. They breed ill and grosse humours, and thick blood in the bo∣dy, and are hard of concoction (especially in such as are of a hot constitution) bring the head-ach, obstruct the Liver, and breed winde, therefore they are not to be used by such as are troubled with the head-ach, Collick or hot Livers.
These Medicines following are made of Dates. First, the Electuary Diaphoenicon mesuae. 2 Diaphoenicon solidum. 3 Electuarium resumptivum. 4 Lohoch e Pino. 5 Lohoch sanum & ex∣perium. Diagredium seu Scammonium. CHAP. XXV. De Dictamno Cretico, Of Dittany of Creete or Candy. DIttany of Crete is an hearb much like unto Penny-royal, but hath greater leaves and hoary, covered over with a soft downe, and white woollen Cotten, growing in Candy. The Names. It is called in Latine Dictamum and Dictamus, or Dictamnum cre∣ticum, also Dictamnus creticus, and it is so called a dicte promontorio Cretae, because plenty of it grows there in that mount, in En∣glish, Dittanie and Dittanie of Candy. The temperament. Dittany is hot and dry in the third degree, of a biting nature, especially being green. The best kind. The best is that which is newest, white, and not too full of strings. The Duration. It will keep a year or longer. The inward Ʋse. Dittany provokes the Courses, hasteneth the birth, and bringeth a∣way the dead child and after birth. It profits those that have the Dropsie & Spleen swollen. The juice drunken with wine is a present remedy for those that are bitten or stung by any venemous crea∣ture; nay the herbe is so effectuall against the poyson of all beasts that are venemous, that the very smell drives them away, or if they do but touch the herbe. The powder being mixed with hony and taken, easeth the Cough an killeth Wormes, and a decoction there∣of taken, is profitable in the Jaundies. The distilled water is com∣mended against the Pestilence, if three ounces be drank morning and evening, and sixe ounces thereof against Venome: also three ounces thereof taken in a morning is profitable against the Stone.
The manner of administring it. It is given in powder Electuary, &c. Powder to bring away the dead Childe. Take of Dittany of Crete a dram, of Saffron five grains, make them in powder, and give it in wine. An Electuary against Venome. Take Dittany of Candy, round Birth-worth in powder, of each halfe an ounce, with six ounces of honey, make an Electuary. The Dose is from a scruple to a dram in wine, or Carduus water. The outward Ʋse. A Pessarie made of the juice and the powder bringeth away the dead child, and after birth, being applyed. A Bath or decoction made thereof and used all over, cures the Jaundies. The juice mixed with the powder help's the Ʋvula fallen, being nointed therewith, also the juyce mixed with womans milk taketh away the pain of the ears being put therein. The root of Dittany and Acorus root in powder, being snuffed up into the nostrils purgeth the brain; The powder of Ditanie and Castor mixed with the juice of Rue, and put up into the nose is good for those that have the falling-sicknes. If a weak member be rubbed with the juice thereof, it strengthneth the same. It draweth forth thorns or splintes out of the feet or other parts being applyed. It is reported that the wild Goats in Candy being wounded by the hunters with arrows, doe by eating this herb drive them forth. The juice is a present remedy for all wounds made with iron, beeng put therein, it doth mundifie and cleanse the same, especially 'tis commended for wounds made with vene∣mous weapons. The juice hath a purging faculty being anointed or applyed with Barley meal. The hurtfull quality. Beware of giving it to Women with child, for it will soon cause them to miscarry; 'tis not for hot chollerick and dry bo∣dies, nor to be much used in hot seasons. The Dose. The powder is given from a scruple to a dram. Of such things as are made of Dittanie. First, Distilled water of Dittanie. 2. Diadictamnum. Ebor seu cornu cervinum. Ebulus, seu Sambucus.
CHAP. XXVI. De Elaterio, Of Elaterium or the juice of wilde. Cucumber. ELaterium is the juice of wilde Cucumber dryed. The Names. It is called in Latine Elaterium and Elacterium. The Temperament. Elaterium is hot and dry in the second degree, or (as some hold) in the third. The best kinde. The best Elaterium is that which is whitish  gray, light and bitter in tast. The Duration. Threophrastus. lib. 9. cap. 14. saith, that a Physician kept some Ela∣terium that was two hundred years old, which notwithstanding was of much vertue. I have kept some seven years, and longer; and I conceive that (if it be well prepared and kept close from the aire,) it may keep ten years. The inward use. Elaterium purgeth Flegme, Choller, but chiefly water from the Abdomen, or belly, from the braine, joynts, nerves and veines. It is profitable therefore in the Dropsie, Green-sicknesse, and joynt-Gout, in the head-ach, whether Hemicrania or Cephalaea, in the Falling-sicknesse, Gout, Shortnesse of breath, Jaundies, obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, stoppings of the Courses and Hemrods, as also in the Palsey and Quinsey. The manner of administring it. It is given in Pils, Powder, in Boles, and in Potions. Pils against the Dropsie. Take of Pils called Alephanginae a scruple, Elaterium three graines, or four in a very strong body. Mixe them together and make Pils; Give them with Physicall observation. Massaria, fol. 481. Or, Take of Pils of Rubarbe two scruples, Pils Aggregative a scru∣ple
and a halfe, Elaterium three graines, with the juice of Ireos make pils. Or, Take Pils of Rubarbe Agarick trochiscated, and in powder of each a scruple, Rubarbe in powder halfe a scruple, Elaterium three graines, with the juice of Wormwood, make Pils, and take them as before. Pils purging water and flegme from the joynts. Take Pils Alephanginae halfe a scruple, Pils Aggregative, and Pils of Hermodactyls of each a scruple, of Elaterium two or three grains, with a little extract of Wormwood make pils thereof, give these on∣ly to strong bodies. A Powder against the Dropsie. Take of Mechoachan in powder two scruples and a halfe, speci∣ of Diaturbith  ubarbe halfe a scruple, Elaterium two or three grains, A five grains, Mastick three grains, make a Powder hereof. Or, Take of Elaterium 6 grains, of Soldanella or Sea-bindweed, Ginger of each a scruple, Galangal, Cloves and Cinamon, of each ten grains, make a powder hereof for two Doses, give it in any convenient liquor. A Bole. Take of Elaterium two graines, Diagredium two graines, with a little conserve of Roses make a Bole. A Potion. Take of Sene two drams, Polypodium of the Oake three drams, Damaask Prunes fix, Anniseed, sweet Fennel-seed, Licoris bruised, of each a dram; bruise the Polypodium, and make an infusion in strong Beer, straine it, and adde of Syrup of Roses laxative one one ounce of Elaterium two gaines, make a Potion. The externall use. Elaterium boyled with Barley-meal and the yolke of an Egge or Eggs, being applyed to Imposthumes, ripeneth them and bringeth them to maturity, and applyed with Terpentine it breaks them. Also being mingled with Honey and Goats dung, it dissolveth white swellings, struma'es and other hard tumours, if it be ap∣plyed thereunto. Being mingled with Beane-flower and the juice of Fumitory, it takes away spots and freckles of the face. Elaterium
boyled with the oyle of Lillies and Linseed-oyle cureth the Hemor∣rhoides that are much swollen. An oyle made thereof is profitable for the nerves, Palsey, and trembling of the hands, and being put into the ears, it cures deafnesse. It bringeth down Womens Cour∣ses that are stayed, and killeth th the birth if it be applyed to the secret parts. A Plaister against the Dropsie. Take of the root of wilde Cucumbers bruised a pound, mace∣rate, or steep it in a sufficient quantity of Vineger of Squils for the space of four and twenty hours, then adde of Honey clarified two pound, boyl them to the thicknesse of a Cerote, then adde of Cum∣min-seed in fine powder, four ounces, make a Plaister, and ap∣ply it to the belly warme. An Oyntment for the Dropsie. Take of the juice of wild Cucumber, and of the juice of Walwort, of each three ounces, oyl of Sesanum seeds, oyle of Orris, of each two ounces, Wax an ounce and two drams, make an oyntment, according to art, with which annoynt the belly morning and evening warme. The hurtful quality with the correcting means Elaterium hurts the inward parts, provokes to vomit, opens the mouths of the veins, brings great gripings and torments in the belly, killeth the birth, though but outwardly applyed to the secret parts; therefore it must not be given to women with child, weak persons, nor to such as have any inward inflamma∣tion, or Ulcer in the bowels. The best correctors of it are things that mitigate and allay the sharpenesse and acrimony of it, and not such as are astringent; but such as are a little cooling and moistning, as Gum iragacanth, Amylum, and water of Honey, sweet milk or Creame, or conserve of Roses, Violets, juice of Licoris, and with posset drink, or with some cordiall spices. It is not fafe to give it alone, nor to any but such as have very strong and able bodies. Of such things as are made of the juice of wilde Cucumber. First an extract thereof. 2 Syrup of the root of wild Cucum∣ber, [Freitag. aur. med. f. 343.] 3 Oyle. 4 Ʋnguentum Agrippae. 5. Ʋnguentum Aregon.
The Dose. The Dose is from two graines to four graines, or five at the most. CHAP. XXVII. De Epithimo & Cuscutha, Of Dodder of Time, and Dodder. EPithymum and Dodder are plants like unto threads, very much snarled, or wrapped together, confusedly winding them∣selves about herbs, the one growing upon Time, the other upon Flax or Line. The Names. Epithymum is called Time, or laced Time. Cuscutha is called in Greek , in Latine Cuscutha Cussutha, Cassutha, and Cassytha, in English Dodder. The Temperament. Epithymum is hot and dry in the third degree. Dodder is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second. The best. The best is that which is fresh and new, not too old; the tops and flowers are most effectuall. The best is that which comes from Crete. The Duration. They will keep good a year. The inward Ʋse. Epithymum purgeth Melancholy and adust Choller, as also Flegme from the braine, heart, spleen and hypochonders; It a∣vails against Melancholy, old and inveterate pains of the head, swimming of the head, madnesse, falling-sicknesse, faintings, Quartaine Ague, Hypochondriack passions, Scirrhues, or hardnesse of the Spleen, and windinesse thereof, stoppings of the Kidnies, and is very usefull in the Scab and Itch, Leprosie, Elephansie, malig∣nant Ʋlcers and Cancers, as also the French-Pox: It cleanseth the blood very much, from Melancholy and adust humours. Avicen commends it against the Cramp: It is profitable in the Jaundies, in opening stoppings of the Gall. It hath also a strengthning proper∣ty
besides its purging quality, as in Rubarbe, and a very safe Me∣dicine for the stoppings as well of the Liver, as Spleen, purging the Veins of flegmatick and chollerick humours, and helpeth Childrens Agues, if a little Wormseed be put to it. Taken with Lapis lazul, it cures the Quartaine Ague. Note, That it will not endure any long decocting or boyling. Cuscuthe, or Dodder, is very profitable in stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen, cleanseth the blood from Melancholly, and is usefull in the Jaundise, provokes Urine, and cleanseth the Veins of Chollerick and Flegmatick humours. Being taken with Worm∣wood it purgeth Choller. If halfe a pint or lesse of the decoction be taken, with halfe an ounce of Sugar, it cures Children of Agues. Moreover, it hath the same vertues as Epithymum hath, though not so fully, only some will have Cuscutha more proper for the Liver, and Epithymum for the Spleen. But the Cuscutha is more or lesse effectuall, according to the vertues of those hearbs on which it groweth. For that which groweth on Nettles and Broom, pro∣vokes Urine, that which growes on Tares (which is the most common) is not so good, for Tares are of hard digestion, and bind the belly, and breed thick and Melancholly blood. The seeds drunk with Wine, and Sage, ease the Hip-Gout. The distilled water of Cuscutha taken, helps the effects of the Liver and Lungs, by cleansing and strengthening; also cures the Jaundise, expells the stone of the Bladder, and easeth gripings in the belly, helps to bring downe the Courses in Women, and swellings about the Navill, and cures Agues in Children. The Dose is three or four ounces morning and evening; to Children give lesse. The manner of administring them. They are chiefly given in Potions and Powders. A Potion against Melancholly. Take of Epithymum halfe an ounce, of Sene one ounce and a halfe, Anni-seed two drams, Licoris a dram, Damask Prunes ten or twelve; Bruise the Licoris and Anni-seed, and cut the Prunes, then infuse them on hot embers five or six hours, with half a pint of Posset-drink; strain it, and give the clearest. Or, Take the flowers of Balme, Rosemary, Borrage, and Buglosse, of each halfe a handfull, of the outside of yellow Myrobalans, half an ounce, Epithymum, Time, Sene, Polypodium, of each two drams, or
halfe an ounce; boyle them in a sufficient quantity of water, till about halfe be consumed, strain it, and add syrupe of Roses an ounce; make a Potion, and give it. Or, Take Epithymum, Cuscutha, Sene, Origanum, or Wild Marjoram, of each two drams, of red Ciches a dram, make a decoction in a suf∣ficient quantity of water, strain it, and in the clearest, infuse or steep of Agarick trochiscated, a dram, of Cinamon halfe a dram, let them stand one night; then strain it, and to the strained liquor add Confectio Hamech, two drams, or halfe an ounce, and make all into a Potion. The externall use. The distilled water of Cuscutha, or Dodder, clears the fight, if it be dropped into the eyes; the leaves made into a Pultis, and ap∣plied to the Spleen, doth ease the pain thereof; also boyled with Oyle and Wine, and applied to the Flanks, helpeth the Strangury. The hurtfull quality. They are not convenient for hot and dry bodies, neither is the use of them so safe in Summer, as in Winter. The too frequent use of them offends the stomach, and causeth dry'th: And because they are weak in operation, use them with Salgem, Ginger, or black Hellebor, and to mitigate the drynesse of them, give them with Posset-Ale, or with a decoction of Raisons, Violets, and Borrage. The Dose. The Dose in substance is from two drams to three drams, or halfe an ounce; in infusion or decoction, from an ounce to an ounce and a halfe, or two ounces; and let this be in the winter time, for in hot weather you must give lesse in quantity. Of such things as are made of them. 1. The distilled water of Epithymum and Dodder. 2. Syrupe of Epi∣thymum. 3. Decoction of Epithymum. 4. Syrupe of Apples Magistrall. Esula minor, or Tithymall; see Cataputia minor.
CHAP. XXVIII. De Euphorbio, Of Gum Euphorbium. EƲphorbium is a Gum of a brown yellowish colour, in small grains like Mastich, and comes from a certain plant growing in Lybia, and in Barbary. The Names. It is called in Latine, Euphorbium, from a famous Physitian, whose name was Euphorbius, (Brother to Antonius Musa) who was also Physitian to Juba King of the Mauritanians, or Moors, and first found out the vertue of this Gum. In English 'tis called also Gum Euforbium, or the Gum Thistle; or the Gum of the burning thorny plant. The temperament. Euphorbium is hot and dry in the fourth degree. The best kinde. The best is the clearest, of a brown yellowish colour, but whi∣ter within, and without filth. That which is pale is to be rejected. The Duration. It will keep good four or five years. Some affirme, that it will keep its vertue forty years. The inward use. Euphorbium purgeth thick and tough flegme, but chiefly and more strongly watery humours from the Joynts, and remote parts of the body: Therefore it helpeth the Dropsie, and any kind of Gout. It purgeth flegme and water from the Brain and Ner∣vous parts, and also thick flegme from the stomach. It is pro∣fitable in the Apoplexie, Palsly, Lethargie, and in all soporiferous or sleepy Diseases, and cold Diseases of the Brain, and resolution of the Nerves, in Convulsions and tremblings. And because it draweth tough and thick humours from the Joynts, it is used in the French Pox; and by some it is counted available in the Pesti∣lence. Also it is esteemed a present help against Apostumes, and painfull Nodes or Bunches of the Joynts. It speedily helps the Collick proceeding from tough and glassie flegme, especially when
the tunicles of the stomach and bowells have much tough flegme cleaving to them. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, in Pills, and Electuary. Pills against the Collicke. Take of the Powder called Diagalanga, Aromaticum rosatum, of each two drams, Castor in powder, halfe a dram, Euphorbium in powder, ten grains, Opium dissolved in Muscadell, thirty grains of Pepper, Saffron, and Myrrhe in powder, of each halfe a scruple; make all into a masse or lump for pils. Of a dram make ten pills, and give of them four or five, if the pain cease not give nine or ten. Rondel. meth. cur. morb. c. 25. fol. 481. But I conceive halfe a dram will be a sufficient Dose, and must be given with caution. An Electuary against the Collicke. Take of Opium two drams, Castor, Euphorbium, Storax, Myrrhe, Pepper, long and black, a scruple, of Parsly-seed, and Smallage-seed, Cummin-seed, Cinamon, of each two scruples, with a sufficient quantity of clarified Honey make an Opiat Electuary. It must be kept six moneths before you use it. Rondelet. de med. intern. fol. 1005. The externall use. It is outwardly used in all cold Diseases of the Nerves, as in Convulsions, Tremblings, Palsies, and in pains of the Joynts, in the Sciatica, as also in the French Pox, in sleepy Diseases of the Brain, if it be mixed with Oyle of Spike, and the neck anoynted there∣with, it availeth much. Collyries made thereof may be used in suf∣fusions of the eyes, as also to take away the filmes thereof: But in the use of it about the eyes, I advise Practitioners to be very careful and wary, because of its burning faculty. In wounds and contu∣sions of the Nerves, it doth much profit. Mingled with Oyle of Bay, Bears grease, Wolves grease, or such like, it cures the Fox∣mange, and Scurfe of the head. The Nape of the Neck being anoin∣ted with the Oyle of Euphorbium, recovereth the speech of those that have lost it by reason of the Apoplexie, or any other casualty, and takes away the Noise and pain of the ears, being put into them. Euphorbium mingled with Vineger, and applied, takes a∣way the marks and scars of Wounds, and all other foul spots and blemishes of the skin. It helpeth to scale bones that are loose, and that suddenly. It is used with other means to provoke sneezing, as also to draw Blisters.
An Oyntment for the Head-ach, proceeding from a cold cause. Take Oyle of Dill, Oyle of Camomill Oyle of Marjerome, Oyle of Wallflowers, of each halfe an ounce; Oyle of Nutmeg, two drams, Cloves in powder, halfe a dram, white Pepper in powder, halfe a dram; Euphorbium powdered, ten grains, with a little Wax make an Oyntment, with which annoynt the Temples, and the fore∣part of the head, morning and evening warm. Weichard. thes. pharm. fol. 18. Or, Take Oyle of Dill, Oyle of Orris, of each halfe an ounce; white Pepper, wild Time, of each a scuple and a halfe; Castor a scruple, Euphorbium halfe a scruple; powder what is to be powdered, and with a little Wax make an Oyntment, and use it as the former. Piso de morb. cognosc. & curar. l. 1. c. 8. f. 29. A Liniment for the Palsie. Take of common Oyle two pound, of Camomill flowers a hand∣full and a halfe; Sage, Betony, Rosemary, of each a handfull, Castor halfe an ounce, Euphorbium two drams, Myrrhe, Bdellium, Gum He∣dera, of each two drams, white Pepper, Mustard-seed, of each a dram, wine of Castor a pint, make those things (that are to be powdered) into a grosse powder, and boyle them together with Cinamon, Mastich, Elecampane, and Acorus root, of each a dram, till the Wine be consumed, then strain it, and add of Oyle of Tur∣pentine, three drams; make a Liniment, with which annoynt the Neck. Johan. Sadler. prax. med. f. 149. The hurtfull quality with the corrective means. Euphorbium is of such a hot burning nature, that if it be taken alone it inflames the mouth, and throat, as also the stomach, bow∣ells, Liver, and all the body, therefore with some it is counted a∣mong the venomous-Plants, rather then among Medicines. It brings cold sweats, and causeth many times faintings. It is very dangerous to give it to Women with Child, to Children or weak persons, or to any that have inward inflamations.Nunqū datur per os, nec cum alijs, nisi raro & paia quantitate. Reno∣daeus. dispensat. fol 566. It is safest to give it only to strong persons, and such as have cold, windy, and temperate bodies, and not to those that have hot and dry bodies. Till it be a year old you may not use it. It is ever used alone without some good corrective.
There are diverse wayes and means prescribed to correct the malignity of Euphorbium. Some conceive it the best way to make it into grosse powder, and not into fine powder, and so to give it, for hereby it doth not cleave to the bowels and inward parts. Others make it into a past with Oyle of sweet Almonds, and dry∣ing it in an Oven keep it for their use. Others dissolve the same in Vineger, and so strain it. Others take Euphorbium, Mastich, Traga∣canth, of each a like quantity, with which they make a paist, and dry it as before, and so make pills thereof. Others infuse it in spi∣rit of wine, and so make a kind of extract thereof, which is to add fire to fire. Surely the best means to correct it, are such things as doe allay the heat and acrimony thereof, and such as are lubri∣cious or slippery, viz. Oyle of Roses, Oyle of sweet Almonds. We must not forget the Anteuphorbium, which is an hearb that growes near the Euphorbium, and is somewhat like Purslaine, the juice whereof doth so temper the heat of Euphorbium, that being mixed therewith and given, it seldome or never fails to give ease: But because this is a stranger with us, why may not the paist above mentioned be infused or steeped in the juice of Purslaine, and then boyled to a sufficient height, and Trosses or small round Cakes made thereof? Or else you may mix Euphorbium with the juice of Purslaine, and so give it. Freitagius saith, he hath knowne it given unprepared with Barley-water, and Syrupe of Violets, or with Broth, and that with good successe; and that he hath knowne a scruple (in robustick bodies) hath been given, and that with∣out any danger. This I beleive, for being old it looseth much of its burning and operative faculty. I have kept some, ten or twelve years, and for ought I know it had as much age before I had it, yet it hath operated well, and also been usefull outwardly to draw Blisters, &c. The Dose. The Dose is from four grains to ten. The Compounds following are made of Euphorbium. 1. Extract of Euphorbium. 2. Pills of Euphorbium. 3. Species Hi∣erae logadij. 4. Philonium persicum & Romanum. 5. Emplastm de Ra∣nis vigonis. 6. Oyle of Euphorbium simple and compound. 7. Chymicall Oyle of Euphorbium.
CHAP. XXIX. De Fumaria. Of Fumiterrie. FƲmitterry is an Hearb so well knowne, that I need not describe it. The Names. In Latine 'tis called Fumaria, and Fumus terrae; in English, Fumittery. The temperament. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second, and not cold as the Vulgar conceive, for its bitternesse sheweth it to be hot. The duration. The Hearb will keep good a year, and the juice may be kept a year with Oyle of Olives powred on it. The inward use. Fumiterry purgeth gently Melancholly and salt humours; it is opening, cleansing, and strengthening, it purgeth the impurity of the blood, and is usefull in obstructions and stop∣pings of the Liver, Spleen, and Entrals, and doth corrobate or strengthen those parts: It purgeth Chollerick humours by Urine, and avails in the Itch, Scab, Leprosie, Cancer, Fistu∣laes, and foule Diseases of the skin, arising from adust hu∣mours; as also in the French Disease. It is profitable in Feavers (arising from choller both yellow and black) in the Jaundise, Quartaine Ague, Scorbute, or Scurvie, killeth Worms, and prevails in Chronicall Diseases arising from stoppings of the viscerous parts, and in affects of the Hypo∣chonders. The powder (saith Brasavola) of the dryed Hearb given for some time together, hath cured a Melancholly per∣son. The distilled water cures the yellow Jaundise, if three or four ounces be drunk morning and evening, for certaine dayes together, and avails against the Scab, Itch, and such like Diseases; and being constantly taken it preserveth from
the Leprosie. Being taken with London Treacle, and Bole Armo∣niack, it is good in the Pestilence, as a dram or two of Treacle, and a scruple of Bole Armoniack mixed in two ounces of the water, and so taken. Also it dissolveth congealed blood and tumours, and provoketh the Termes or Courses in Wo∣men. The manner of administring it. It is given in Potion, Decoction, in juice, and in Powder. A Potion against Melancholly and Choller. Take of Sene two drams, Fumiterry and Wormwood of each as much as you can hold between two or three fingers; of Cinamon bruised, a dram; infuse them in Succory-water, and a little Wine, for a night, strain it, and in the strained liquour infuse or steep of Rubarbe (cut in thin slices) halfe a dram, or a dram, five or six hours, then strain it again, and add to it of the Electuary called Diacatholicon, halfe an ounce; make a Potion. A Potion against Melancholly. Take of Fumiterry, tops of Hops of each halfe a handfull, Raisons of the sun stoned, halfe an ounce, Polypodium of the Oak, green, bruised, halfe an ounce, Dodder, Epithymum, of each three drams, Anniseed and Licoris bruised, of each halfe a dram. Make a decoction in a sufficient quantity of water, strain it, and infuse or steep therein, of Sene two or three drams, strain it, and dissolve in it Diacatholicon an ounce, and as much syrupe of Violets. A Potion against the Dropsie. Take of the juice of Fumiterry two or three ounces, of the powder of the root of Esula prepared, eight or ten grains; Elder-water▪ an ounce, with a little Suger make a Potion. A delicate Potion to purge the blood. Take of the decoction of Fumiterry, made with Whey or Posset-drink, five ounces, steep therein (on hot embers a whole night) of Sene halfe an ounce, Rubarbe a dram, strain it, and dissolve in it of syrupe of Roses, Laxative, or of Manna an ounce, make a Potion.
Against the Scorbute or Scurvy. Take the juice of Fumiterry, and Scurvygrasse, of each two ounces; give it (in the Spring time) in Goats Whey. A decoction of Fumiterry made with Posset-drink, and four or five ounces thereof taken morning and evening, in the Spring time, doth much purifie and cleanse the blood. Against the Jaundise. Take Fumiterry, Wormwood, of each a handfull, boyle it in Posset-drink, or Whey, and being strained, drink of it, four ounces, morning and evening. Or, Take two or three ounces of the juice of Fumiterry, and give it in two ounces of Ceterach-water. Against the Joynt-Gout. Take of the juice of Fumiterry, three ounces, of Hermoda∣ctilles in powder, two scruples, mingle them together, and give it in a morning fasting. Against the Scab, Itch, and Leprosie. Take of the juice of Fumiterry, two ounces and a halfe, or three ounces, warm it over the fire, and scum it; then add a little sugar, and half a dram of Fennellseed to it, and give it in a morning. The outward use. The juice dropped into the eyes, doth clear the eyes, and quicken the sight; but at the first it will cause the eyes to water: the juice also mingled with Gum Arabicke, and ap∣plied to the lids, will cause that the haire (that hath once been pulled off) shall not grow again. A decoction thereof made, and the feet bathed therewith, cures the Gout; or boyled in Wine, and so applyed, doth the like: the juice mixed with the juice of Docks, and Oxymel, or Vineger, cu∣reth the Morphew, being anointed therewith. Also a Bath made of the same, with Mallowes, Violets, and Dock roots, with Barly Bran, and Nep, cureth the Scab, and Itch. The juice mingled with Oyle of Nuts, and Vineger, cures maligne Scabs, and the Leprosie, being noynted therewith. The distil∣led water helpeth sores and Ulcers of the mouth, being there∣with washed and gargled, especially if you take four ounces
of the water, adding thereto one ounce of honey of Roses, and wash the mouth therewith. The hurtfull quality. It is somwhat flatulent or windy, therefore 'tis good to mix with the juice or decoction, some Anniseed or Fennelseed, and infused in Whey, or given with infusion of Sene, it doth work the better. The Dose. The juice is given from halfe an ounce, to two or three ounces. The Powder from two drams to foure drams. The decoction from three ounces, to five or six ounces. Of such things as are made thereof. The Water. The Juice. The Conserve. The Syrupe, both simple and compound. Pills of Fumiterry, and the Oyle di∣stilled from the dry hearb. CHAP. XXX. De Galanga, Of Galingall. GAlingale is a small root of a reddish colour, both with∣in and without, and smelleth somwhat sweet, and groweth in China. The Names. It is called in Latine, Galanga, in English Galingall. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the second or third degree. The sorts or kinds. There are two sorts, the greater, and the lesser, but the les∣ser is most in use.
The best kinde. The best is that which is of a reddish colour, or brownish within and without, heavy and aromaticall, or smelling sweet, especially being bruised, of a hot tast; and full of smal holes. The Duration. It will keep good three or four years. The inward Ʋse. Galingal is profitable in all cold diseases of the stomach, braine and wombe, help's concoction, expels winde and crudities, and strengthens the stomach, being boyled in wine, and taken morning and evening. It strengthneth especially a moist brain, helps the Vertigo, or swimming of the head, and avails against the palpitation or beating of the heart, and is ve∣ry usefull in the gnawing of the stomach, and easeth the Col∣lick, which proceedeth of winde, and in the diseases of the Mother, and stoppings of the Urine, and hath a speedy ope∣ration to cleanse the Uritories, or passages of Urine from slimy flegme and stones gathered therein, or the passages in the neck of the yard, & also to wast and consume any fleshly excrescence in the neck of the bladder or yard. Galingal con∣duceth to Venery, and help conception, and is profitable for them that have cold reins, and excellent for them that have cold and windy affects of the wombe. It helpeth a stink∣ing breath, being boyled in wine and so taken. It is chiefly good for cold and moist diseases. The manner of administring them. They are given chiefly in powder and decoction. Against weaknesse and faintnesse of the heart. Take the powder of Galingal, two scruples; of the juice of Borrage one ounce and a halfe, mixe them together, and give it with a little Sugar in the morning fasting, or any other time.
Against a weake stomach, and wind. Take Galingal, Pepper, and Parsley-seed in powder, of each half an ounce, of Honey four or five ounces, mixe them toge∣ther, and adde two ounces also of conserve of Red Roses; Take the quantity of a Nut thereof morning and even∣ing. Or, Take an ounce of Galingal and bruise it, of White-wine a pint and a halfe, or a quart, boyle it till about halfe a pint be consumed, straine it, and drinke a draught morning and evening. The outward use. It helpeth a stinking breath, being often chewed in the mouth, and also a cold, moist braine, being snuffed up into the nose in powder, or chewed in the mouth. The hurtfull quality. It must not be given in hot diseases, nor to hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given in powder, from a scruple to a dram, in decocti∣on from a dram to two drams or three. Of such Medicines as are made of Galingall. The chiefest species made thereof is Diagalangal which helps the cold effects of the stomach and liver, and helps concocti∣on, drives away soure belching, expels winde and flatulent humours, and also helps a stinking breath. There are many other species made thereof.
CHAP. XXXI. De Galbano, Of Gum-Galbanum. GAlbanum is a Gum taken from one kinde of Ferula, or Fennel-giant, of a very strong and stinking savour. The Names. It is called in Latine Galbanum, in English Gum Galba∣num. The Temperament. Galbanum is hot and dry in the second degree, or hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in the second, or in the beginning of the second. The best kind. The best is clear, a little yellowish with white pieces a∣mongst it, without filth or sticks, neither too dry, nor too moist, of a strong savour, dissolving chiefly with wine and vineger. The Duration. It will keep good many years. The inward Ʋse. Galbanum is profitable for all cold diseases of the wombe, for the rising or falling of the Mother, and all stoppings thereof, it helps to bring away the birth and dead child, and provokes the Courses in Women: 'tis usefull in Convulsions and Cramps, Falling-sicknesse, inward Ruptures, in pains and tumours of the Spleen and Sirrhus, in shortnesse of breath Cough, in the paines of the side, and in torments of the bow∣els: It resisteth poyson, killeth worms, and is an Antidote against Venome, and all venemous Beasts, for saith Plinie no Serpents will come neer to them that are besmeared with Galbanum. Being taken in wine with Mirrhe, it brings away
the dead child out of the wombe and Mola, or false concepti∣on: it is excellent in the Collick dissolved in wine, and taken with oyle of sweet-Almonds, and a little Saffron, and also for the stopping of the Urine. The manner of administring it. It is given chiefly in Pils. Pils against the suffocation of the Mother. Take of Galbanum two scruples, Sagapenum a scruple, Assa fetida a scruple, oyle of Amber four drops, make Pils there∣of and give them. Against the paine and swelling of the Spleen and Sirrhus. Take a dram of Galbanum, and dissolve it in a little Vineger of Squils, or Oxymel of Squils, and give it. Against Wormes. Take a dram of Galbanum, dissolve it in a little Sack or Muskadel, give it with Sugar Pellets. The Outward Ʋse. It mollifieth, softneth, and dissolveth the hard tumours and swelling, as Scirrhus, Kings-evil, Aposthumes, hardnesse of the Spleen, hard nodes of the joynts and Biles, also easeth pains in the side, especially being mixed with oyles, oynt∣ments and plaisters for the same purpose. It taketh away freckles and spots in the face, or skin, being mixed with Vine∣ger and Niter, and so applyed. It takes away the pain of the ears, being used with the oyle of Roses, oyle of Nardus, or such like. It cures the Tooth-ach, if the hollow-tooth be stopped therewith: it draweth forth thornes, splinters and broken bones, being spread on Leather, and applyed, especi∣ally if you mixe Terpintine with it. It avails in the fits of the Mother or Falling-sicknesse, be∣ing but smelled to, or a perfume thereof on Coals; also a Pessary hereof used brings away the birth and dead child, and also provokes the Courses, it cures the bitings of Scorpi∣ons,
or other venemous beast being applyed thereto: It helps the Sciatica if a plaister thereof be applyed. It cleanseth wounds and ulcers, cures rifts of the feet and ancles, especi∣ally being mixed with Gum-Tragacanth, Dears sut and oyle of Violets. It cures scal'd heads being dissolved with honey and so applyed. Against fits of the Mother. Make a Plaister of Galbanum on Leather about the bignesse of the Palme of your hand, and lay it to your navell. The hurtfull quality. It is dangerous to give it to pregnant women, or women with child, least they miscarry therewith: neither must it be given in hot diseases. Plinie saith, tis not good in difficulty of Urine, but Diascorides, and others say the contrary. The Dose. The Dose is from a scruple to a dram, or a dram and a halfe. Of such things as are made of Galbanum. Oyle Chimicall of Galbanum, Galbanetum, i. e. Balsa∣mum Galbanetum, seu spiritus Terebinthinae Galbanetus. Cerot of Galbanum, or Ceratum matricale. CHAP. XXXII. De Genista. Of Broom. BRoom is better known for it's sweeping helpe, then for its Physicall use, therefore I shall give you the vertues thereof. The Names. It is called in Latine Genista and Genesta, and that be∣cause
it helps the pains of the knees, or quod facile generet, spe∣ciemque propagat. The Temperament. Broom is hot and dry in the second or beginning of the third degree. The Duration. The flowers and seeds will keep a year. The inward use. The flowers, seeds, stalks and roots are in use, but chiefly the seeds and the flowers, they draw forth thick Flegme and Choller, as also water by vomit and stool, and that some∣what strongly in many bodies,The seeds and flow∣ers are Spleneticall, nephriticall and he∣paticall, that is, good for the Spleen, Stone and Liver. and draweth from the joynts Flegmatick and Waterish humours, whereby it helpeth those that are troubled with the Dropsie, Gout, Sciatica, and paines in the joynts, helpeth the pains in the sides, and swellings of the Spleen, cleanseth also the reins, kidneys and bladder of the gravel and stone ingendred therein, and hindreth the matter from growing and increasing to be a stone againe, and provokes Urine aboundantly. The constant use of the powder of the leaves and seeds doth cure the black Jaundies, being taken in Wine. The seeds purgelike Hellebor, say the ancient, but sure it is meant of Spartium of Diascorides, or of Spanish-broom, for our ordinary Brom doth not work so, nay, we pickle the flowers and seeds in Vinegar, calling them Broom-Capers, and eat them with meat, finding no ill quality in them, but are excellent to stir up appetite to meat, and helpe ob∣structions of the Spleen, and to provoke Urine, as also opens the Uritory parts. The seeds and flowers being any way taken doe much preserve from the Gout and Stone. The flow∣ers being made into a conserve, or preserve with Honey or Sugar, and eaten off, doe much consume the Kings evill. The distilled water of the flowers is profitable for the a∣foresaid
purposes, and helpeth Surfets, also altereth the fits of Agues, being taken before the fit with some Centory water. It is most excellent for to help the Kings evil if one ounce of the water be taken morning and evening for a months space or longer if need require. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder and decoction, &c. Against the Gout, and Arthriticall pains. Take of Broom-seeds a dram and a halfe, of Mastick, Roses and Cinnamon, of each a scruple, make them into powder, and take it in broth: this will draw flegmatick humours from remote parts, and cause them to be voided both up and downe. Or, Take of Broom-seeds three drams, Roses and Mastich of each a scruple, make them into powder, and give a dram thereof in broth, or in Water and Honey. The outward Ʋse. The tops or flowers of Broome bruised and mixed with Hogs-grease, cure the ach or pains of the knee, as also the Gout, or bruise, or any swelling by reason of humours falling downe. The flowers also bruised and mixed with Honey and Roses, or the white of an Egge beaten together and applied, consume the hard swelling of the Kings evil. The juice of the young branches made into an ointment with Hogs-grease, and anointed: or the young branches bruised, or flowers, and heated in oyle or Swines-grease, and laid to the sides that are pained, either by the winde, as in stitches and the like, or in the Spleen, easeth them in once or twice using it. The same boyled in oyle is a safe and sure medicine to kill Lice, and other vermine breeding in the head or body. The juice boyled with oyle and applyed helpeth the Sciatica
or Hip-gout. The juice alone, or mixed with Honey and ap∣plyed, cures green wounds and putrified Ulcers. The flow∣ers and tops being bruised and applyed, help the biting of Serpents and venemous creatures. The Oyl distilled from the root and seeds, is very usefull to take away spots, freckles and deformities of the skin, being applyed. A decoction of the tops of Broom, easeth the Tooth-ach being washed therewith. Note that the flowers will not en∣dure any long decocting or boyling. The hurtfull quality, and corrective means. Because it doth offend the stomach and heart, let it be gi∣ven with Roses, Mastich, Anniseed, Fennel-seed, or with Honey of Roses. The Dose. The seeds are given from a dram to a dram and a halfe, or two drams. The juice of the flowers, from a dram to two drams, or three drams. The powder of the dry flowers, from a dram to two drams. The powder of the dry root from two drams to halfe an ounce, in broth or such like. The juice of the root from a dram to halfe an ounce, with Hydromel, or water and honey. Of those things that are made of Broom. The distilled water of the branches and flowers Con∣serve of the flowers, Salt of Broom, The flowers preserved with Sugar.
CHAP. 33. De Gentianae radice, of Gentian Root. GEntian hath leaves like with ribs like Plantain, but bigger and more like the leaves of white Hellebore, the stalks are full of joynts and hollow, the leaves grow by couples at every joynt, the flowers are yellow, the root is long and thick, of the colour of earth without, and yellowish within. The names. It is called in Latine Gentiana, and 'tis so called from Gentius King of the Illyrians, who brought it first into use and credit, in English 'tis called Gentian and Felwort. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. The best sort. The best is that which is yellow within, sound without holes, bit∣ter, and not easie to be broken. The best (saith Pliny) is that which is found in Illyricum or Sclavonia. The duration. It will keep good a yeer or two. The inward use. The root is chiefly in use. It is alexipharmacall, opening and atte∣nuating, and avails in the Pestilence and contageous diseases, against the stinging of venemous beasts, and against the biting of mad dogs, and preserves from putrefaction, also in stoppings of the liver and spleen, or for such as are liver-grown as they call it, in the Dropsie and suffocation of the Mother, and against Convulsions, Falling Sick∣nesse, Ruptures, pains of the side, bruises, Wormes, and debility or weaknesse of the stomack, dissolveth congealed bloud, and provokes the courses. It brings away the birth, after-birth, and dead childe: it is useful in the cough, shortnesse of breath, and gripings of the stomack and belly. Being steeped in wine and drunk, it refresheth those that are over wearied with travel, and are by cold and ill lodg∣ing abroad, grown lame in their joynts. It is good against all Agues, a decoction thereof being taken, or the powder thereof: also the de∣coction thereof helpeth the Stone and stopping of Urine It repelleth
winde very much in the body, and is profitable in all cold diseases; for could we but like this and other bitter things it would effect very much in curing of many desperate diseases. The Italians (not unde∣servedly) do call the Croswort, Gentian. Petimborsa quasi mettere in bursa, put it in your purse, either as Matthiolus saith, that it was to be gathered wheresoever it was found, and fit to be kept in our purse as ready to be used upon all occasions, or that it did by curing of dis∣eases, get store of crowns to be put into the purse. The distilled wa∣ter of the leaves, flowers and roots hath neer the same vertue, and is excellent to cure Agues that proceed from obstructions of humours, or bloud, and killeth Wormes, consumes all viscuous humours in the stomack, provokes the courses in women, and helpeth a stinking breath: you may give two or three spoonfuls of the water morning and evening; but before the fit of an Ague, you may give two or three ounces thereof. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, powder, &c. Against the biting of a mad Dog. Take of Gentian root bruised a dram, or two drams, boile it in a∣bout half a pinte of water and honey, til neer half be consumed, strain it, and adde of Myrrhe in powder two scruples or a dram, of Crabs-eyes burnt, and in powder two drams, mix them together, and give it at four times morning and evening; wash also the wound with vineger and salt water, and apply Cupping-glasses thereto, to draw out the venome. Or Take of the root in powder two scruples, or a dram, give it in Carduus water. Or Take of Gentian in powder thirty graines, of Rue in powder a scruple, of Pepper powdered five graines, give it in Angelica-water. The externall use. The juice or powder of the root healeth fresh wounds, and is ve∣ry effectuall for all sorts of foul, putrid, or rotten ulcers wheresoe∣ver, yea though hollow or fistulous, cancrous, fretting or running, for it doth very much cleanse, dry and heale up: also the same ap∣plyed to ulcers, knots or kernels of the neck or throat which is cal∣led the Kings evill, healeth them safely and speedily, as also the painfull swellings of the hemorrhoidall veines called the Piles, when
they are fallen down, and grow ulcerous or sore. The juice being put into the eyes, takes away inflammations, and rednesse therein, and cleares them from skins and films growing upon them. The root is in use among Chirurgions to inlarge the orifice of any wound or sore. The fresh root or the dryed made into a Pessary, and put into the Matrix, expelleth the dead childe and after-birth, for it throughly worketh upon those parts. The juice, root, or herbe, or decoction thereof is given to cattel to drink, to free them from Bottes and Wormes, and many other diseases as also when they be∣gin to swell, being poisoned by any venomous worme or ticke, which they often licke up with the grasse as also when they are bitten or stung by the udders or other tender places, which presently there∣upon swel, and put the cattel to much pain, making them forbear their meat, which being perceived, the Countrey-people presently bruise the leaves of any kinde of Gentian, and take the juice thereof, and stroke the udder or bitten place, which doth soon help them. The distilled water of Gentian, cleanseth the face from freckles, mor∣phew, or other spots, and discolourings of the skin, being often lightly washed therewith. Against Bruises. Take of Gentian root in powder an ounce, mix with it a little Oil-olive, and apply it warm. The hurtfull quality. It must not be given to women with childe, for it will cause them to miscarry, neither is it to be used in hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given in powder from a scruple to a dram, in decoction from a dram to three drams. Of those things that are made of Gentian. The distilled water of the leaves and root; The extract of Gen∣tian; The thickned juice [a dram whereof is excellent against in∣termittent Agues, being taken before the fit] Diatessaron. CHAP. 34. De Gratiola, of Hedge-Hyssope. GRatiola is an herbe that hath leaves like common Hyssope, but a little shorter and broader.
The names. It is called in Latine Gratiola, & Gratia Dei, in English Hedge-Hyssope. Now it is called Gratiola per Antiphrasin, because it is in no wise gratefull and pleasant to those that take it, for it is very bitter and of violent operation. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree, or in the end of the second, in taste very bitter, and somewhat astringent. The Duration. It will keep good a yeare. The inward use. It purgeth choler and flegme, but especially waterish humours; Therefore it is profitable in the Dropsie, Green-sicknesse, obstructi∣ons of the liver and spleen, in the Hip-gowt, quartane Agues, and long continued Feavers, as also in quotidian Agues. It prevails much against putrefaction, and killeth Wormes. It worketh both by vomit and stool. Some commend it in the French Pox, Scorbute, or Scurvy, and against the pestilence. The manner of administring it. It is given in Potions, Powders, Pils, &c. A Potion. Take of Hedge Hyssope half a handfull, Sene half an ounce, Raisons of the Sun six drams, Anise-seed & Cynamon bruised, of each half a dram; boyl them in a pinte of Renish wine to half a pinte, then straine it, and being sweetned with sugar, give it to drink in a morn∣ing fasting with physicall observation. A Powder. Take of Hedg Hysop in powder two drams, Cynamon, Anise-seed in powder, of each a scruple, of pure Sugar half an ounce, mix them well together: Give a dram, or a dram and a half hereof in broth. Pils excellent in the Dropsie. Take extract of Hedge Hysop, extract of Mechoacan, of each a scruple, Salt of Hedge Hysop six grains, mix them together, and make Pils thereof. Jo. Hartmanus pract. Chym. f. 246. Melichius mentions Saccharum Gratiolae magistrale in his Dispen∣satory, which is not made with the flowers, but of the leaves with Sugar, not by boyling it, but by setting it in the Sun and often stir∣ring it together. The Dose is from six drams to an ounce in strong bodies; He saith, that it worketh without any trouble, Melich. Dis∣pensat. f. 119. He doth not mention what quantity is to be taken, but I conceive at least as much Sugar as leaves, or as much more.
The externall use. The powder of the herb, or the juice thereof cureth green wounds, and cleanseth old and rotten sores. It may be put into Oiles and Oint∣ments that are made to cleanse and heal wounds and old ulcers. The hurtfull quality, and the correcting help. It worketh churlishly, and troubleth the stomack, therefore it must be given with Cynamon, Anise-seed, Liquorish, Sugar, Honey, deco∣ction of Cicers, or in posset-drink. Some macerate or steep it in vine∣ger, then dry it, afterwards they infuse or steep it in milk, and dry it again, then they give it in powder. The Dose. It is given in powder to a scruple, in decoction from half an ounce to an ounce: but the extract thereof is more commodious then ei∣ther the Dose, of which is from a scruple to half a dram. These compounds following are made of Gratiola, or Hedge Hysope. The extract Salt of Hedge Hysop, Conserve of Hedge Hysop. CHAP. 35. De Gutta gummi, of Gum gutta, or Cambogia. GUtta gummi, or Cambogia is a concreted or hardened juice, ra∣ther then a gum, made up into hard rolls, yellow both within and without, and being moistned it gives a yellow colour: What it is made of none hath yet certainly determined; some conceive it to be the juice of Spurge, condensed or dryed, and mixed with a little Saffron or Turmerick; others judge it to be made of Scammonie and Tithymal: others judge it to be made of Rubarbe; others of Euphorbium; others think it to be made of one kinde of Aloes. But sure they are deceived that judge it to be made up of Aloes, and that because it is not bitter as Aloes is; moreover, it purgeth rather water than choler. Neither can it be made of Euphorbium, for then it would burn and heat more in the mouth then it doth; nor is it likely to be made of Rubarbe, for it hath neither the taste nor qualities of Rubarbe; besides, Rubarbe is a stranger in those places from whence this is brought. There are many other opinions about it, which I will not trouble the Reader with. It is brought unto us here in England from the East-Indies, and some say from China.
The names. Among all simples, minerals, or vegetables, I have not obser∣ved many to have more names given it then this. It is called, Cambo∣chia, Cambogia, Cambugio, Gummi de Goa, Gummi gutta, Gummi Gith, & Gemon, Gummi Indicum, Gummi ad Podagram, Gummi Peruanum, Gutta Geman, Gemu, Gutta Gamandra, Gutta Munda, Chattajemon, Ghittajemon, Ghittajaman, Catta Ganma, Succus Gambici, Succus Cram∣bici, crocuspurgans. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the first degree, The best kinde. The best sort is that which looks yellow, being pure without any filth or mixture, and being wet with water or spittle lookes of a yel∣low colour, and makes the water or spittle very yellow. The Duration. It will keep good many yeers. The inward use. It purgeth chiefly water and ferous humours, and that without any great violence, therefore it is useful in the Dropsy and any kinde of Gout, as also in the yellow Jaundise, and obstructions of the liver and spleen. Many time it provokes to vomit, sometimes it workes up and down. It is used also against scab, itch and such like. The manner of administring it. It is given in divers formes, as in Pils, Potions, Powders, Boles, &c. Pils. Take of Gutta Gummi fifteen grains, Species Diambrae three grains, oile of Fennell three drops, with a little Syrupe of Roses, make six or seven Pils. Pils against the Jaundise. Take of the best Rubarbe in powder a dram, of Cambogia six grains, with syrup of Succory, make Pils. A Potion against the tertian Ague. Take of Cambogia eight grains, syrup of Roses solutive one ounce and a half, Endive-water two or three ounces, make a Potion, and give it before the third fit with physicall observation. A Powder against Arthriticall paines. Take of creame of Tartar two scruples and a half, or a dramme, Gutta Gummi foure graines, Galingall and Cynamon, of each four
graines, make all into powder, and give it in any convenient liquour. A Bole usefull in the Yellow Jaundise. Take of Gutta gummi ten or twelve graines, Conserve of Red Ro∣ses two drams, make a Bole and give it in a morning fasting, drink∣ing a draught of posset-drink after it. This I have used with good successe. Tabulats, or Rolls. Take of Gutta gummi seven grains, Trosses Ahandale four grains, Oil of Anise-seeds two drops, with Sugar dissolved in Cynamon-wa∣ter, make Rolls or little Cakes. It may be given in broth, or other convenient liquour. As Take of Cambogia twelve or sixteen grains, Creame of Tartar a scruple; give it in broth with a little Sugar. Against shortnesse of Breath in a Childe. Take of Gutta gummi three or four grains, Oxymel of Squils half an ounce, or an ounce, mingle them together, and give it. If you mix it with salt of Wormwood, or with black salt of Ash, and give it in the Dropsie, you will finde it to work effectually. The externall use. It was in use with Painters and Picture-drawers before Physicians used it. It is useful in Ointments and liniment for the Dropsie. The hurtful qualities, with the meanes to help it. It worketh many times very churlishly, and doth much trouble the stomack; therefore it is given with Oile of Mace Chymicall, or with Oile of Cynamon, with species Diambrae, with Conserve of Ro∣ses, &c. Also you may give it with Cream of Tartar, or Tartar vitrio∣lated in broth, as is declared above. It must be given with caution in hot and cholerick bodies. These things are made of Gutta gummi. Extract, or Magister of gum Gutta, Ghitta Jemu corrected by spi∣rit of Vitriol, or Tartar Minderi. The Dose. The Dose is from five grains to twelve, or to a scruple.
CHAP. 36. De Helleboro albo, of white Hellebore. WHite Hellebore hath broad leaves with ribs or sinews like unto great Plantain leaves, or Gentian, the root being dry is black without, and white within, some as long as ones finger, and some shorter. The Names. It is called in Arabick  Charic, from  Charac, rupit, corrupit, and well it may, for it is a tearing Medicine, and soon breaks the veins in a mans body. In Greek  Copā, quòd esu perimat: In Latine Helleborus albus, Helleborum, & vera∣trum album, now it is called veratrum à verando, unde veratores & ve∣raculi: and because such Prophets were counted mad, and out of their wits, therefore it was so called, for that it cureth such; or quòd mentem vertat, Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 25. c. 5. f. 218, In English, 'tis called white Hellebore, or Neese-wort. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree. The best kinde. The best is the whitest, not too hot and biting in tast, nor provo∣king spittle, for such doth sooner suffocate, and being broken, it seemes to smoak or send dust from it: the best part is that which is towards the nether end, for the uppermost part of the root which is thickest and bulbous like to an Onion-head is good only for Dogs. The duration. It will keep good many yeers, some say thirty yeers. The inward use. The roots are only in use. They are usefull against madnesse and melancholy, also against the swimming of the head, Falling Sickness, Leprosie, Cancer, Elephancie and foule diseases of the skin, as also the quartan Ague. It brings down the courses, and kils the childe in the wombe: it helps the old Cough, Dropsie, Sciatica, Gowt, Cramp, pains of the joynts and sinews. It killeth Mice or Rats being boyled in milke, or mingled with flower and Honey, or Butter. or boyled in milk, and set where Flyes, Wasps, Gnats, &c. do much resort, it kils as many as touch it.
The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, in infusion, and in substance; take one example in substance. Take of white Hellebore in powder a scruple, give it in broth, milk, or Grewell, but you were better let it alone. Heurnius mentions an Electuary made of white Hellebore, which you may finde in his Prax∣is Medicin. f. 242. The outward use. It is used to provoke sneesing, being put into the nostrils, and pur∣geth the head of superfluous humours, and is good in the Lethargie, and such like sleepy diseases, especially if Marjoram be put to it, and made in powder, and so snuffed up into the nose: it cures the Lepro∣sie, Scab, Itch, and such like foul diseases of the skin, being used with Hogs-grease, or mixed in oyntments. The juice of the root dropped into the eares, helps the noise and singing thereof, and the root mixed with other things helps the dimnesse of the sight. Being boil∣ed in lie, and the head washed therewith, it killeth Lice, and helpeth the running scabs and sores thereof. Boiled in vineger, and the mouth washed therewith, easeth the toothach; the same decoction helpeth also itch and scab in the hands, and cleanseth foul sores and ulcers in the legs and other parts, & put into Fistulaes, it taketh away the hard∣nesse of them. A Pessary made thereof and put up, brings down the Courses and dead childe. The hurtfull quality. White Hellebore is a vehement and strangulatory medicine, and induceth most terrible symptomes: and causeth strong vomiting, bringeth Convulsion, Cramp, Hicop, and fainting of the spirits, and ofttimes suddenly suffocateth the party; therefore I advise the vul∣gar not to meddle with it, but to leave it as a dangerous and deadly medicine. But if any will venture to give it, let it be with good ad∣vise, and in very strong bodies. Give it with Mead or honied water and sal-niter The safest way is to give it by infusion, or decoction and not in substance: let it be infused in juice of Quinces, or given with the syrup of Quinces, or give the decoction with Anise-seed and Cynamon, adding a little Sugar thereto. Pliny adviseth not to give it in close weather, or upon a dark and cloudy day. It must not be given to such as have long necks, or are crooked and short-breath'd, or to women with childe, old persons, or such as have any vein bro∣ken in their breast, or lungs, or spit bloud, or to such as have any ul∣cer in their lungs. If any desire to read more of white Hellebore, let
them consult with these following Authors; Hippocrat. Epist. lib. de veratri usu f. 532. Oribas. lib. 8. c. 2. c. 4 c. 5, 6. &c. Matthiolus Com. in lib. Diascor. 146. fol. 754, 755. Paul. Aeginet. lib. 7. c. 10. f. 433. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 25 cap. 5. fol. 217, 218, 219. Pet. Salius divers. de affect. partic. de Rabie, c. 19. f. 370, 371, 372, 373. Heurn Prax. med. l. 2. f. 240, 241, 242. Valleriol. Observat. Med. lib. 3. Observat. 9. f. 107, 108, 109. Marold. Pract. Med. f. 378. Forst. de Venenis l. XXX. Observat. 9. Antonius Benivenius de abditis morb. causis cap. 51, 52. relates of two that died after the taking of white Hellebore, the one had a quartane Ague, and took it, who died within six houres after he was called to the party; the other who was troubled with a pain of his stomack two yeers, and could not be cured thereof by any Medicines, at length white Hellebore was given him, which cured him of all diseases, for he died within a short time after the taking of it. The Dose. It is given in substance from ten grains to a scruple or more, in de∣coction, or infusion from a dram to two drams. Of such things as are made of white Hellebore. There are made thereof Oxymel Helleboratum, Vomitorium Heurnii. CHAP. 37. De Helleboro nigro, of black Hellebore. TRue black Hellebore hath sundry fair green leaves rising from the root, each of them standing on a thick round stiff green stalk about an hand-breadth high from the ground, divided into seven, eight, or nine parts, or leaves, and each of them dented from the middle of the leaf to the pointward, on both sides, abiding green all the Winter, &c. The roots are a number of brownish black strings, which run down deep into the ground, and are fastened to a thick head, of the bignesse of ones finger. There are other bastard kindes that are used in stead thereof, The names. It is called in Latine Helleborus niger, veratrum nigrum, also Me∣lampodium, and that because it was found by Melampos a Shepherd, or Southsayer, who was first thought to bring it in use, and cured the daughters of Praetus therewith, which were mad and foolish, but
by the use of this were brought to their right senses again. In Eng∣lish 'tis called Black Hellebore and Christmasse-Flower, because it flou∣risheth about that time, especially when the Winter is milde. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree. The best sort. The best is that which is not too new, nor too old, Heurnius will have it to be laid in leaven twenty dayes before it be used. The duration. It will keep good two or three yeeres. The inward use. The roots are most in use, especially the barke. Black Hellebore purgeth Melancholy and burnt choler, as also thick and viscuous flegme, from the bloud (whereby that is infected) and entrails, and from remote parts; therefore it is very useful in pains of the head, swimming & giddines thereof, in the Apoplexie, in Melancholy, Mad∣nesse, Falling Sicknesse, Hypochondriack affects, hardnesse of the spleen, quartane Ague, and erratick feavers, also against the Dropsie, Scab, Leprosie, Cancer, scald Head or scurf, Elephancie and such like foul diseases of the skin. It is profitable against pain & noyse of the eares, and against stubborn and contumacious diseases. It is counted as an Antidote against the Leprosie, Scab, Tetter, &c. hardnesse and swel∣ling of the Spleen, old quartane Agues, pains of the joynts, Apost∣humes and the Kings Evil. It quickneth the brain and senses, provokes urine, and brings down the Courses in women. It hath an excellent faculty to draw away whatsoever is mixed with the bloud, and cau∣seth it to corrupt, and is profitable in a long continued Jaundise. Some say it will cause the Devill to be cast out, being taken by such as are possessed. Thus we may say, that although the Devil cannot be cast out by humane art or physicall means, yet by taking black Helle∣bore, the melancholy humour is drawn away (which is Balneum & sedes Diaboli, the bath and seat of the Devill, and so the Devill is more easily cast out, from whence it may rightly (say some) be cal∣led, fuga Daemonum. But I think the white Hellebore, rather de∣serves this name then the black. It is usefull in pains of the belly, in the Gowt, Sciatica, Cramp, or Convulsion, pains and aches of the joynts or sinews. It killeth Wormes, especially the leaves of the ba∣stard kinde called Beares-foot. Some commend it in Consumptions of the Lungs and of the whole body. The extract of black Helle∣bore is very safe for the Diseases before mentioned.
The distilled water of the root (saith Dorstenius) purgeth Melan∣choly and glutinous humours out of the body, if a dram thereof be given with three ounces of white wine; and if half an ounce or one ounce of the water of the leaves be taken in a morning fasting, it stayeth the flux of the body. Dorsten. Botanic. fol. 111. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, in infusion, or in substance. In decoction: Take of the bark of black Hellebore bruised two drams, Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, of each a dram, make a decoction in water; straine it, of which take four ounces, of syrup of Roses an ounce, make a Potion. In infusion. Take of the barke of black Hellebore two drams, Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, of each a dram, Cynamon, Cloves, of each three grains, make an infusion in water or white wine, according to art; of which (being streined) give three ounces. In substance. Take of black Hellebore-root prepared, and in powder; give it in Oxymel. Or Take a dram of black Hellebore-root, of Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, Cynamon, Mastick, of each ten graine, make them into powder, and give it in broth. The externall use. It is outwardly used against the Leprosie, Morphew, Scab, Itch, Warts, and Pushes of the skin, being boyled with vineger, and bath∣ed therewith. The powder put into Fistulaes, or hollow Ulcers; doth soon heal them, and if there be callons, or hard flesh grown in the Fistula, the root left in it for two or three dayes, will consume it quite, and put into a wound where dead or spongious flesh is, it consumes it, and preserves the flesh from putrefaction. A decoction thereof helpeth the tooth-ach, and the sores of the mouth, being gargled; and being put into the eares, it helpeth the noyse thereof. A Pessary made of the root, and put up, prevailes wonderfully to bring down the termes or courses in women. A Cataplasme or Poul∣tis made of the root, with Barley-meale, and wine, is good to be ap∣plyed to the bellies of such as have the Dropsy. In time of the Pesti∣lence it is usefully applyed to, or in any sores, either in the groine, or under the arme; or an issue made, and a piece of the root put in to keep it open, doth much avail to draw sorth corrupt humours out of the body. The root is in use to rowell cattel withall, and to help
them of the cough. Being put upon the swollen Hemorrhoides, it cleanseth them. Against the Gowt. Boyle the herbe or root in salt water, and bath with it; also lay the herb or root boyled to the affected part. For wormes in the ears. Take of the powder of black Hellebore-root half an ounce, of the juice of Rue, or Assmart four ounces, mix them together, and put thereof into the eares. For the scurffe of the head. Boyl the roots of Lupines in vineger, and adde to it powder of black Hellebore, and anoint with it, wash the head after with warme water. The hurtfull quality, with its corrective help. The ancient Writers counted it very dangerous, though not so dangerous as the white; yet that it worketh not without trouble and difficulty; therefore it is not to be given but to robustick and strong bodies, because it bringeth convulsions, which happily may be spoken concerning Hellebore in substance, of such as did grow in hotter clymates then ours is, or of some other kinde then we now use: for we do not finde any such great danger in any of that which is now in use with us; yet 'tis not safe to give it to children, women with childe, or weak persons. It is corrected with Mastick, Cyna∣mon, Anise-seed, Origanum, &c. to a dram of Hellebore adde half a scruple of any of these. It is given more safely in decoction or in infusion then in substance. The Antients did infuse the root a day and night in vineger, and then used it. Macerate or steep the bark (casting away the middle) three dayes in Quince-wine, or Muskadell, dry it, and keep it for your use. It may be given also in broth with some seeds as before mentioned. Also you may give it in wine of Raisons, Oxymel, syrupe of Quinces, or with juice of Quinces. Some give it with Scammonie to quicken its vertue. Note that all prepa∣rations of Hellebore vvhich are made by sharp and acute li∣quours, such as are spirit of wine, Anise-seed-water, or spirit of Anise-seed, Aromatickes, or oile of such, also the putting Hellebore into Radish-root, and so to take it, (except you desire a vomiting or turbatory medicine to be made of white or black Hellebore) are to be rejected. The Dose. The dose in substance is from a scruple to two scruples, in infusion or decoction from a dram to two drams, or more.
Such Medicines as are made of black Hellebore. The distilled water of black Hellebore both of the leaves and roots. The extract thereof Syrup of Roses solutive with Hellebore, Oxymel Helleboratum. CHAP. 38. De Hermodactylis, of Hermodactiles. HErmodactyles, are whitish roots about the bignesse of a Chesnut, smooth, flattish, and sharp at the one end, but somewhat fuller at the other, growing upon I know not what plant, comming from I know not what place, and truly may be called, opprobrium me∣dicorum, the shame or disgrace of Physicians. The names. This root is called in Latine Hermodactylus, in English Hermoda∣ctyle, and Hermodactyles. The temperament. They are hot and dry in the second degree. The best kinde. The best are such as are white both within and without, of some good bignesse, which being lightly bruised and made in powder, look like wheat-flower, and of a pleasant and sweet taste. Such as are worm-eaten are to be rejected. The duration. They will keep good three or four yeers. The inward use. They purge chiefly thick and tough flegme from the joynts, there∣fore they profit in any kinde of Gowt, yea, they are so available in the Gowt, that this root is called Theriaca Arthritidis, Treacle for the Gowt. It is used also in the French Pox The manner of administring. They are given in potions, drinks, Pils, &c. A Potion. Take of Hermodactyles, cut in thin slices, or bruised Sene, Epithy∣mum, of each two drams, Raisons of the Sun stoned half an ounce, licorish bruised a dram, Ginger bruised half a dram; make an infusi∣on in a sufficient quantity of water upon hot embers all night, strain it, to which add of syrup of Roses one ounce.
A purging Drink against watery humours. Take of Hermodactyles, of Lignum vitae, of each three ounces, Mechoacan foure ounces, Ginger two drams, Sarsaparilla, Licorish, of each two ounces, of Nutmegs two drams, of Seabind-weed one ounce & a half: cut and bruise those those things that are to be cut & brui∣sed; put them all in a vessell with three gallons of new Beer (in a bag) adding thereto of Seue an ounce. After six dayes take a draught of it in the morning, and before supper D. Sadlerus Prax. Med. f. 205, The externall use. They are outerwardly used in the Gowt, to ease pain: they are also good to cleanse wounds, and to consume proud flesh therein, as also to heal old wounds and Ulcers. A Poultes to ease the Gowt. Take of new milk a quart, Barley-meal a pinte or more, Harmo∣dactyles in powder three ounces, the yolks of foure Eggs, Saffron in powder two drams, crumbs of bread so much as is sufficient to make a poultes, apply it warm. Or Take new Cow-dung a pound and a halfe, Hogs-grease half a pound, or twelve ounces, Hermodactyles in powder two ounces and a half, make a poultes and apply it. The hurtfull quality, and the corrective means. There are two things in the use of Hermodactyles to be minded. First, that the hurtfull quality may be taken away; for it troubleth the stomach, and causeth windinesse; now to help this, let it be mixed with Cummin-seed, Mastick, Ginger, Long-pepper, Mint, Cynamon, Cloves, or Mace. Secondly, that means be used to quicken its slow operation, and (for of it self it works but slowly) by sharp means. Mesue commends Sea-onion for this purpose, if Trosses be made of the juice thereof with the powder of Hermodactyle., Ginger, and Sal gem. Neither is it unprofitable to this purpose, if you make Trosses or little cakes thereof with Ginger, and the juice of Radish. In pur∣ging from the joynts, it will be proper to mix with it a little Eupher∣bium well corrected. Also if the essence thereof be drawn forth with spirit of wine or the like, it will be very usefull for the forenamed dis∣eases. They are rarely given alone, but by decoction, infusion, or mixed with something to correct the noxious, or hurtfull quality thereof.
These compounds are made of Hermodactyles. Pils of Hermodactyles, Pils Arthriticall, Electuary Caryocostinum, E∣lectuary benedicta laxativa, extract thereof, Pulvis Arthriticus. The Dose. They are given in substance from two scruples to a dram and a half, in infusion or decoction from two drams to three drams. CHAP. 39. De Hyperico, of Saint Johns-wort. SAint Johnswort is an herb that hath brownish, upright, hard, round stalks, two foot high, having two small leaves set one against an∣other at every place, which are of a deep green colour, somewhat like the leaves of lesser Centory, but narrower, and full of small holes in every leaf, which are easily perceived being held up against the light, the flowers are yellow, which being bruised yield a reddish juice, the root is hard and woody, with divers strings, & of a brown∣ish colour. The names. It is called in Latine Hypericon, and Hypericum, also of some, Fuga Demonum, quia Daemon inde fugere creditur, because they superstiti∣ously imagine that it drove away the Devil. Some call it Perforata, because of the smal holes in the leaves that seem to be bored through. In English it is called Saint Johns-wort, and Saint Johns-grasse. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of subtile parts. The duration. It will keep good a yeer. The inward use. It is diuretical and vulnerary. A dram of the seeds being taken, doth purge choler, causeth the stone to come away, kils Wormes, resists venome, and helpeth the biting of venemous creatures, also provokes urine, and the courses in Women, and helps the Falling sicknesse, Palsey, and Sciatica, being drunk fourty dayes together. A decoction thereof cures tertian and quartane Agues: it is most excellent for all inward wounds in any place, and for congealed bloud, or spitting of bloud, or vomiting bloud, by reason of a vein broken in any place; it is very useful in all vulnerary potions, for it resolves, opens, consoli∣dates,
and is of a glutinous nature, and truly I know not a better wound herb. Being made into powder and taken in Wine, it cureth the Gowt, and is much commended against the Jaundise. The Salt of S. Johns-Wort helpeth the Plurisey, and expelleth the Stone, you may give a dram- thereof in any convenient liquor. The distilled water of S. Johns Wort profiteth such as have the Falling sicknesse, (especially taken with the root, or seeds of Pyony) as also the Apo∣plexie and Palsey; the dose is two or three ounces every day. It also stayeth the Flux of the belly being taken with Red Wine, and cureth inward wounds. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction or in powder. Against the Jaundise. Take of the herbe and flowers of St. Johns-wort two handfulls, boile them in a pinte and a halfe of Wine or water, straine it, and give of it with Sugar for divers mornings together; This toherus doth much commend, and further adviseth to put the herbe in your Shoes, bosome, and to weare it about your head. Stocher. prax. aur. f. 185. Against spitting or vomiting of blood. Take of the seeds of t. Johns-wort in powder halfe a dram, or a dram, of the juice of Knot-grasse one ounce, or of Plantaine-water two ounces, of syrup of Quinces halfe an ounce, mix them together, and take it. The outward use. The leaves cure all green wounds, (except such as are in the head) as also burnes and scalds. The herbe dryed and made into powder is effectuall to cure wounds and sores, and rotten festered Ulcers, be∣ing strewed thereon. The distilled water cures also wounds being washed therewith. The Oile of St. Johns-wort either simple or compound is good for all green wounds, and old sores and Ulcers in the legs, or else where that are hard to be cured, and is effectuall for all Cramps and aches in the joynts, and paines in the Reines, but the compound Oile is much better. The simple Oile is made thus. Take foure ounces of the flowers of St. Johns-wort, infuse them in a pinte of Sallet-Oile, and three ounces of white Wine, set them in the Sunne for ten or twelve dayes, then boyle them in a Balneo, or Kettle of seething water, straine it, and put in new flowers, and let it stand so long againe, then straine it as before, and renew it a third time, and straine it againe, which being hot, put two ounces of
pure Turpentine to it, and keep it for green wounds, or sinevvs that are prickt, or any vvound made vvith a venomous vveapon. Gerard hath a compound Oile made thus. Take vvhite Wine tvvo pintes, oile-Olive foure pounds, oile of Turpentine tvvo pounds, the leaves, flovvers and seeds of St. Johns vvort tvvo great handfulls, gently bruised, put them altogether into a great double Glasse, and set it in the Sun 8 or 10 dayes, then boile them in the same Glasse, per balneum Mariae, that is in a kettle of vvater vvith some stravv in the bottome, vvherein the Glasse must stand to boile: vvhich done, straine the liquor from the herbs, and do as you did before, putting in the like quantity of herbs, flovvers, and seeds, but not any more Wine. Another Oile of St. Johns-wort excellent against wounds. Take of Sallet-Oile tvvo pound, of earth vvormes vvashed and flit five ounces, of the flovvers and tops of St. Johns-vvort halfe a pound, of small Centory-flovvers, and of the tops of svveet Trefoile, of each tvvo drams, Gum Elmne one ounce; let them stand in the Sun certaine dayes, then straine it, and keep it for your use, you may add some Turpentine if you vvill. The Dose. The seeds are given from a dram to tvvo drams. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled vvater, Salt, Tincture thereof, Oile. CHAP. 40. De Jalapio, of Jalap. JAlap is a root like Mechoacan, but covered vvith a black bark, and grayish vvithin, being put to the fire a gumminesse vvill arise, and sometimes flame. It is brought to us in thinne slices, some bigger, some lesser. In taste it is pleasant, but gummie, vvhereby it stickes to the teeth being chevved. The Names. It is called Bryonia mechoacan nigricans, Chelopa, Celopa, Celapa, Ge∣lapum, Gelapo, Jalapium, Jalapa, Jalappa, Jalappium, Gialapa, Mechoa∣canna nigra, Salapa, Xalapa, Zaqualtipan, Rhabarbarum nigrum; In English 'tis called, Black Mechoacan, or Jalap. The temperament. It seemeth to be like Mechoacan in quality.
The best sort. The best is that vvhich is hard and solid, not too old. The duration. It will keep good two or three yeares. The inward use. It purgeth Flegmatick, Cholerick, and Melancholick humours, but chiefly watery humours: Therefore it is profitable in the Drop∣sie and cachecticall diseases, that is, such as are subject to the Green sicknesse. It strengtheneth the Liver, Spleen and stomach. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, in Pils, in Boles, and in Potions. In Powder. Take of Jalap in powder two scruples, or a dram, creame of Tar∣tar a scruple, Oile of Cynamon and Anise-seed, of each a drop, mixe them together, and give it in Succorie-water. Or Take Jalap and Creame, of Tartar, of each two scruples, make them in powder, and give it as before. In Pils. Take of Jalap in powder two scruples, of Scammonie three or four graines, Oile of Cynamon a drop, with syrup of Roses, make Pils and give them. In a Bole or lump. Take of Jalap in powder two scruples, Creame of Tartar in pow∣der a scruple, Oile of Anise-seed two drops, Conserve of Roses halfe an ounce, make a Bole, and give it. In a Potion. Take Sene, Polipodium of the Oke bruised, of each two drams, Ja∣lap cut in thin slices a dram and a halfe, Anise-seed and Fennell-seed bruised, of each a drame, make an infusion in halfe a pinte of strong beere, upon Embers all night, then straine it, and adde to the clear of the electuary Diaphoenicon two drams, syrup of Roses halfe an ounce; make a Potion and give it. The hurtfull quality. It many times troubleth the stomach, and causeth a Nauseousnes thereof, or inclination to vomit; therefore the safest way is to give it with some Oile of Anise-seed, Cynamon, Mint, or with Anise-seed and Ginger. It workes well in white Wine. To quicken it, you may mixe therewith a few graines of Scammonie, or the ex∣tract of Scammonie.
Of those compounds made of Jalap. There are made thereof, extract of Jalap, Magister of Jalap. The Dose. The dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram; in infusion from a dram and a halfe to two drams and a halfe. CHAP. 41. De Jride, of Flower de Luce, or Orris. IRis is a root long and knobbie, with many strings hanging at the end; but being dry it is without them and white. The names. It is called in Latine Jris & Jreos, now it is called Jris à Coelestis arcûs similitudine, from the Raine-bowe, whose various colours the flower thereof doth represent; In English 'tis called, Flower de Luce. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, but the root being green is hotter, then when 'tis dry, and hot in the mouth and Throat. The duration. The roots dry will keep good a yeare or two. The inward Ʋse. The fresh jucie of the root of Flower de Luce' purgeth Choler, Flegme, and watery humours, and worketh both upward and downevvard. It is chiefly usefull in the Dropsey, Jaundise and quotidian Agues. Being boyled in water and vineger, and drunken, it helpeth the stinging and biting of venomous creatures. If it be boyled in Wine and drunk, it provoketh urine, helpeth the Colick, and bringeth dovvn the courses in vvomen. It is much commended in the Cough and shortnesse of breath, and to help expectoration, or spitting. It helpeth the diseases of the Liver and Spleen the wormes in the belly, and easeth gripings and stitches of the side, as also the shakings of Agues: it is good in Cramps and convulsions that arise from cold humours, for it vvarmeth and comforteth the parts. Some say it helpeth those vvhose sperme passeth from them unavvares; others conceive it consumes and vvastes the sperm. The manner of administring it It is given in Potions, in Pils, &c. But the fresh juice is most in use.
Take the juice of Ireos three drams or halfe an ounce syrup of Roses, Solutive an ounce, Cynamon in povvder a scruple, mixe them together: make a potion, and give it. Or Take of the juice of Ireos three drams, Elaterium six graines (or rather but three) mingle them together and take it in the morning fasting. D. Sadler. prax. mea. f. 203. The externall use. The juice being put up into the nostrils, provoketh neesing, and thereby purgeth the head of flegme. It gives ease to such as have the Piles; and easeth the paine of the head, and procures rest if it be ap∣plyed vvith Rose-cake and vineger, it cleanseth spots in the eyes, and helpeth vvatery eyes by cleansing them. It helpeth the paine and svvelling of the Cods being thus used. Take of the roots in povvder halfe an ounce, Cynamon, and Dill, of each tvvo drams, Saffron a scruple, mix them vvell together, lay them on a scarlet-cloth, moistned in vvhite Wine, and apply it vvarme to the Cods. The roots are effectuall to vvarme and com∣fort all cold joynts and sinevvs, as also to ease the Gowt and Sciati∣ca, and mollifieth, dissolveth and consumeth all scrophulous ru∣mours and svvellings, especially made into an Oile called Oleum Irinum, vvhich Oile also helpeth the Cramp and Convulsion, the rheume that is cold and distilling from the head, and being nointed on the brest, it helpeth to extenuate, or make thin tough and cold flegme, making it more easie to spit out: it he peth the stench of the nostrils, the paine and noise in the eares, and much easeth the pain∣full Piles. The root it selfe green or in powder doth cleanse, heale, and incarnate wounds, and covers with flesh the naked bones that Ulcers have made bare, and is also good to cleanse and heae up Fi∣stulaes and Cancers that are hard to be cured. The green roots bruised and applyed to black and blew markes in the skin, taketh them away and all other discolourings of the skin, whether morphew or the like; but it is better to apply it with red-Rose-water, and a little Lin-seed-oile, or oile of Parmacity (as the vulgar call it) in manner of a poultes. A decoction of the roos gargled in the mouth, easeth the Tooth ach, and helpeth a strong or stinking breath. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective meanes. Jreos offendeth the stomach, and causeth blood to be voided, if given in too great a dose, and to weak persons. It is not safe
to give it to women with childe, because it bringeth down the cour∣ses, yea, a Pessary made of the juice with Honey, and put up into the body, bringeth away the birth; therefore it is not safe to give it a∣lone, but with good correctives. In gripings of the bowels give it with Mastick: in the joynt-gowt with Castor: in the Dropsie give it with Honey of Roses. That it offend not the Liver, give it with Ru∣barbe, juice of Agrimony, Species Diarrhodon, &c. It may be given with a little Wine and Cynamon, adding thereto a little Manna, or Honey of Roses, or the juice may be given with a decoction of Raisons of the Sun, or with Posset-drink. The juice may be boiled (for by boiling it loseth of its strong operation) and given with Sugar, syrup of Violets, or in an Egg to sup up, but let the pure juice only be given, after it hath stood a while to cleer. The Dose. The juice of the root is given from six drams to an ounce and a half, or two ounces. The powder of the root is given from a dram to two drams, Note that the roots of Ireos do not all work alike, for in some cli∣mate they work stronger then in another. These following are made with Ireos. An extract, A wine, Species Diaireos simpl. Diaireos Solomonis, Trechisci bechisi albi, Oile of Orris. CHAP. 42. De Lapide Lazuli, & Armeno of Azure-stone, or Lazul-stone, and of Armene-stone. LApis Lazuli, or Azure-stone, is a stone of a skie colour, with cer∣tain veins of gold or silver in it. Armene-stone differs little from the other, only having some greenish spots in it. They are both found in the same place, or digged out of the same Mine, only the Lapis Lazuli is found more frequent∣ly in the Golden Mines, and Lapis Armenus in the Silver Mines, also the Lapis Lazuli hath more maturity then the other. The names. Azure-stone is called in Latine Lapis caeruleus, Lapis Lazuli, Lapis Cyaneus, in English Azure-stone, and Lazul-stone.
The other is called in Latine, Lapis Armenius & Armenus, because it was brought from Armenia, but now it is found in Germany; in English Armeniack, and Armene-stone. The Temperament. Lapis Lazuli is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the se∣cond degree, and dry in the third. Lapis Armenus is hot and dry in the beginning of the first degree, or hot in the first degree, and dry in the second. The difference between them. Lapis Armenus is more skie-coloured, and hath green spots, as also sometimes black spots in it, and is more brittle, and sooner dis∣solveth. Lapis Lazuli is sometimes with Golden and sometimes with Silver veins, and is not easily broken. The duration. They will keep good many yeers without any corruption. The inward use. Lapis Armenius purgeth black Choler effectually from the brain, and is usefull in melancholy diseases, as against madnesse, melancho∣ly, giddinesse of the head, pains of the head, Falling sicknesse, Night∣mare; against diseases arising from fear and grief, &c. against the Leprosie, Obstructions of the Spleen, Cancer, black Morphew, and all melancholy diseases; being twelve times washed, or oftner; it pur∣eth onely downwards, for otherwise it worketh upwards by vomit. Lapis Lazuli is of a hot burning nature. It hath a double or two-fold formall specifick vertue, for by the one it purgeth melancholy, and by the other it strengthneth the heart wonderfully, and recreates or cheereth the spirits. It avails in melancholy diseases, stoppings of the Spleen, quartane Ague, and the Piles, being taken with a deco∣ction of Sene and Fennel-seed. It cleanseth the veins and bloud from corruption, and is profitable for diseases arising from fear, grief and sadnesse, whereby the heart is oppressed, it purgeth the breast and lungs, by which means it helps such as are short-breathed and stopt with flegme, it drives away melancholy Fevers, and preser∣veth from the Leprosie. It brings down the courses in Women. See Trallianus de Melancholia, cap. 16. f. 127. Editione 1560. These are much of one nature, only some hold that Lapis Arme∣nus is the stronger in operation, others say that Lapis Lazuli is the stronger in working.
The manner of administring them. They are chiefly given in Pils and Confections. Pils against Melancholy. Take of Hiera picra, and Epithymum, of each foure scrupls, Aga∣rick and Lapis Armenus, of each four scruples, Scammony two scruples or a dram, Cloves twenty; with the juice of Citrons make a masse for Pils. The Dose is two scruples or a dram. Against faintnesse of the heart, and sadnesse. Take of Lapis Lazuli prepared two scruples, of the juice of Bor∣rage, or Buglosse half an ounce, of the bone of a Stags heart ten grains in powder, mix them together, and give it. The externall use. Lapis Lazuli being hung about the neck as an Amulet, keeps chil∣dren from fearfulnesse, sharpens the sight, prevents faintings in wo∣men with childe, and hinders miscarrying; but neer the time of their delivery it must be taken away, lest it hinder the birth from comming forth. It is used in medicines for to cleer the eyes, and to take away the haires of the eye-lids. The hurtfull quality These being taken unprepared cause vomiting, and offend the sto∣mack. They are prepared by washing and by burning. By washing thus, bruise them, and make them in fine powder, wash them in fair water, till the water become cleer after washing. Others do thus, after they are thus washed they dry them in the Sun, or hot place, and wash them again, and so a third time or oftner if need be; and last of all, they wash them with Borrage, Buglosse, or Rose-water, or infuse them in the juice of either, and being dry keep them to use, and when they use them, they add thereto Cloves, Hiera picra, Sal-niter, &c. By burning thus, take Lapis Lazuli what quantity you will, burn it in a crucible, then make it into powder, and wash it first in common water, then wash it in Rose-water, or Borrage-water, dry it and wash it once or twice more, or oftner till the water look cleer, then dry it and keep it for your use. Note, that being burned or washed they only work downwards. The Dose. The Dose (being washed) is from half a dram to a dram. These things are made of them. Lapis Lazuli washed or prepared. Pils of Lapis Lazuli essence, or extract of Magister. Oile or liquour.
CHAP. 43. De Ligno Aloe, of Wood-Aloes. LIgnum Aloës is a wood somewhat blackish on the outside, and more gray and discoloured within, brought from India. The names. It is called in Latine Xylaloës, Yyloaloës, Agallochum, and lignum Aloës, in English Wood-Aloës, or Wood of the Aloe-tree. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, astringent, and a little bitter, and of subtill parts. The best kinde. The best is that which is knobbed, or in uneven pieces, very brittle and breaking short, somewhat black on the outside, and more gray and discoloured within, of a small sent, until it be burned, and then it yields a most fragrant odour, or small, also being put to the fire, it will sweat out an oily moisture, and that with small bubbles, which soon vanish away, and being put into water it will swim. The Duration. It will keep good many yeers. The inward use. It strengtheneth all the inward parts, but especially the brain, which it doth wonderfully corroborate and dry, therefore it is use∣ful in the Apoplexie, Palsie, Lethargie, and losse of memory, also a∣gainst faintings of the spirits and cold diseases of the heart and sto∣mack, for it doth much conduce to weak livers and fainting spirits, helpeth the Dysenteries, or Lasks and Pleurisies. It dryeth up defluxi∣ons of rheumatick humours, flowing from the brain, and hinders sweating. It doth strengthen a weak and languishing stomack, taketh away putrefaction, dryeth up humidity, and expelleth winde. By rea∣son of its bitternesse it killeth wormes, and is put into divers cordi∣als and Antidotes. It helpeth also the cold diseases of the wombe. The extract thereof is good for the fore-mentioned diseases. The manner of administring it. It is used chiefly in powder and electuaries. A powder against a moist and cold brain. Take of lignum Aloës in powder a dram, of pure Sugar six drams,
mix them well together, and take thereof every morning as much as will lie on six pence dry, or in broth. An Electuary for the same. Take of wood-Aloës in powder two scruples, species Aromaticum rosatum a dram, conserve of Betony, conserve of Rosemary, of each an ounce and a half, spirit of Marjoram two or three drops, make an Electuary, and take morning and evening thereof as much as a small Nut. The externall use. It is used outwardly in fumigations to dry up rheume, and in quilts for the same purpose. A fumigation thereof (say some) pro∣voketh the flowers in women. The hurtfull quality. It must not be given to hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The Dose is from ten grains to twenty or thirty. Medicines made thereof. Extract thereof. Species Diaxylaloës. CHAP. 44. De Manna, of Manna. MAnna is a condensed dew, falling from the aire somewhat like carv'd Honey, but in small grains like Mastaick. Some will have it to be a kinde of Gum-issuing from trees, but the former is more probable. The Names. It is called in Hebrew  Man, quasi praeparatus cibus; from the Hebrew root  Manah, paravit, constituit, for it was food prepa∣red by God for the Israelites, or Manna may come from  Mah, quid, &  Na, quaeso, What is it? quia nesciebant quid esset. For when that dew fell about their tents, every one asked each other what it was. In Caldee 'tis called  Manna: in Syriac , in Arabic  Man, &  Alman, in Persian  Tar∣nagabin, in Greek , &  aërium mel. The Septua∣gint translate it according to the Hebrew , Man, Exodus 16.31, 33. but in the New Testament 'tis called , John 6.31. Heb. 9.4.
In Latine Manna, Mel aërium, Mel roris, seu roscidum, Mel sylve∣stre, Manna purgatoria. It is called also Tereniabin, Thereniabin, & Trungibin, Teringibil, in English Manna. The Temperament. Manna is hot and moist in the first degree. The kindes. There are three kindes of Manna. First, that which is found on leaves, and is called, Manna de folio, this is most perfect and good. Secondly, that which is gathered from bouhs and trunks of trees, and is called Manna ligni, vel trunci, but is not so good as the for∣mer. Thirdly, that which falls on the earth; or on stones and sticks, and is called Manna terrae. Or Manna is of two sorts, one called Manna liquida, which is liquid and thin, like some kinde of Honey; the other is called Tereniabin, which is Manna coagulated, and is hard being in greater or lesser pieces. Ant. Musa exam. suc. prae∣dent. f. 341. Tragos. aromat. fruct. &c. histor. f. 108. The best kinde. The best is that which is white, grained like Mastick, being sweet and pleasant in taste The best is called Manna Calabrensis. How Manna is adulterated. Manna is adulterated with Sugar-pellets, and the green leaves of Sene rolled up with them: or with Amylum Sene, &c. but this deceit is soon discerned by the taste. See Levinus Lemnius herb. bibl. expli∣cat. cap. 3. f. 12. The duration. It will keep good a yeer. The time of gathering Manna. Manna is gathered in Aprill and May. The inward use. Manna purgeth choler gently and hot humours, therefore it is profitable in burning Fevers and Phrensies: it lenifieth the hoarsness of the throat, quencheth thirst, and easeth the cough, and is conveni∣ent in the Pleurisie, and inflammation of the lungs. It may be given to such as are troubled with the stopping of their urine, and to such as have weak Kidneys, and also to such as have Ulcers therein. Wo∣men with childe, and children may safely take it. The manner of administring it. It is given in Potions. A Potion. Take of Manna two ounces, or two ounces and a half, dissolve it in four ounces of clean broth or posset-drink, strain it and give it.
Or Take of Manna two ounces, Pulpe of Tamarinds one ounce and a half, dissolve first the Manna in foure ounces of Posset-drink, and then the Tamarids, make a Potion. A Bole Take of Manna half an ounce, of Cassia newly drawn one ounce, with Sugar make a Bole. Tabulates, or Cakes. Take of Manna one ounce, Cream of Tartar in powder a dram, make Tabulates or Cakes thereof, and give them as need requireth. Schroder. Pharm med. Chym l. 4. f. 249. Against the Collick. Take an ounce of Manna, and two ounces of the Oile of sweet Almonds; dissolve the Manna in the Oile and give it. Note, that Manna is not to be boiled (for then it doth more hurt then good) but only dissolved, and so strained through a clean cloth, casting the drosse away. The hurtfull quality. Manna doth not profit in intermittent Feavers, nor is it safe to give it in cold diseases, for in such it will more hurt then help. The Dose. The Dose is (in children) from three drams to an ounce. For per∣sons of yeers the Dose is from an ounce and a halfe to two ounces, or three ounces. Here note that these Doses are to be given only in broth or posset-drink, for if it be given in the infusion of Sene or such like, then the Dose is to be lesse. These Medicines are made of Manna. Electuary Diacassia with Manna. Electuary Lenitive of Man∣na Vide Spirit of Manna. Schroder. Pharm. Med. Chym. l 4. f. 249. Water of Manna, Syrup of Manna. Vide Tretag. aur. Med. f. 423. VVhether Manna be more convenient in hot, or in cold diseases? Heurnius, Massaria, Platearius, Sennertus, and some others deny the use of Manna in hot burning fevers, and commend the use of it in cold diseases, and in old persons: now the reason they forbid the use of Manna in burning fevers, is from a place in Galon de ali∣ment. facult. l. 1. c. 8 f. 120. and de sanit. tuend l. 4. where he saith that Honey and all sweet things are not convenient in hot diseases and hot seasons, because they are apt to turne into choler. But others do approve of Manna in burning fevers, and daily experience doth wit∣nesse how usefull it is in hot diseases; For my owne part I have known the use of it above twenty yeares in Frensies, burning fevers,
&c. and that with good successe; but the best and safest way is to give it with infusion of Sene, with creame of Tartar, or with a de∣coction of prunes and Tamarinds, &c. Actuarius meth. med. f. 340. VVecher. antid. spec. f. 222. Theod. Dorstenius de herb. caet. simpl. med. f. 285. Constantinus Afric. de gradibus f. 347. Fernel. meth. med. l. 5. f 112. Tragos. hist. Ind. med. f. 110. Matthiol. Comment. in lib. 1. Diascor f. 85. VVhether the Manna now in use among Physicians be such as the children of Israel had in the. wildernesse? To which I answer in the negative, and that for these reasons. First, because that Manna which the Israelites had, was miraculous, and but for a time, Joshua 5.11, 12. Nehemiah 9.20, 21. now that it was miraculous appeares plainely by that place in Exod. 16.18. And when they did mete it with an Omer, he that gathered much, had nothing over, and he that gathered little, had no lack. But our Man∣na has continued many yeares. Secondly, the heat of the Sun melted that, but the heat of the Sun or fire condenses, or hardens ours. Third∣ly, that putrefied in one night, when it was kept contrary to Gods command, Exod. 16.20. ours doth not so, but is durable, and will keep good many monethes. Fourthly, that was hard to be ground in a Mill, or beat in a Morter, Numb. 8.11. ours not so, but soft, and being put on the tongue it melts. Fifthly, that was nourishing, ours purging. Sixthly, that fell all the yeare, except on the Sabbath ours is gathered in the Summer. CHAP. 45. De Mastiche,, of Mastich. MAstick is a gum, or a gummie rosen in small whitish graines, flowing from the Lentisk-tree. It is called in Latine Mastiche and Mastix, in English Mastich, or Masticke. The temperament. Mastick is hot and dry in the third degree. The best kinde. The best is that which is cleere, splendent, white and brittle, and is brought from the Isle of Chio. The duration. It will keep good many yeares. The inward use. Mastick is excellent for the stomach, and doth much strengthen
the same, stayeth vomiting and nauseous subversions thereof, and helps the retaining vertue of the stomach, and brings good concocti∣on and digestion. It stoppeth the flux of the belly, and profits those that spit blood, and that have coughs, being taken with syrup of Colts-foot or the like, it stayeth the acrimonie, or sharpnesse of strong purging medicines, and is a good corrector of them: it stayeth thin distillations falling from the braine, and thikneth them, especi∣ally in Fevers, and preventeth the Falling-sicknesse and giddinesse of the head arising from vapours if a few graines thereof be taken after meate, and helpeth also the stinking of the breath. If three or foure graines thereof be taken at night when you go to bed, it easeth all paines in the stomach, and prevents the like for the future. The powder of Mastick with Amber and Venice-Turpentine is good a∣gainst the running of the reines, and for both whites and reds in women. Plinie saith, it provoketh urine Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 24. c. 7. f. 184. Oile of Mastick chymicall is usefull for the forenamed disea∣ses. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, in electuary, in powder, &c. In decoction. Take of mastick halfe an ounce, boile it in three or foure pintes of water; Give of the decoction often to drink of. It is profitable in loosenes and fluxes of the belly.. Schroder. Pharm. med. chym. l. 4. f. 194. Mastick must not be too much boiled for feare of losing its vertue. An electuary for the cough proceeding from thin rheume, and against spitting of blood. Take of mastick and Olibanum in powder, of each two scruples, Conserve of red Roses two ounces, Diacodion halfe an ounce, mixe them together, and take thereof morning and evening as much as a small nutmeg. The outward use. Mastick being infused, or steeped in Rose-water, is good to wash the mouth withall to fasten loose teeth, and to strengthen the gums, or mastick heated in wine, and the Gums, mouth, and teeth wash∣ed therewith cleanseth the corruption thereof, and fastneth the loose∣nesse both of Gums and Teeth. It is used in ointments and plaisters to mundifie and heale ulcers and sores, to stay the freeting fluxes of humours to them, to dry them up, and to fill up the hollownesse. It strengtheneth and bindeth also the parts whereunto 'tis applied,
and comforteth the aking joynts and sinews very much; it is used al∣so in plaisters and ointments to strengthen and comfort the stomach. Mastick dissolved in milk, and dropped into the eyes, takes away the dimnesse thereof. The teeth being rubbed with the powder there∣of, it whitens them. Being held in the mouth and chewed upon, it doth dry and comfort the brain, draweth flegme from the brain, and stayeth the falling down of humours, and also causeth a sweet breath. It is used to lay the haires of the eye-lids even. The same spread on Velvet or Plush and laid upon the temples, stayeth the Rheume from falling down, and easeth the tooth-ach. It knitteth broken bones. The oile of Mastick made by infusion and ebullition, or boiling, is mollifying, comforting and binding, very usefull in diseases of the Mother, against all pains in the belly and stomach, the hardnesse of tumours, and pains of the joynts and sinews; it also comforteth the brain, and strengtheneth the liver and heart. Against pain of the temples proceeding from vapours ascending up to the brain. Take of Mastick and Olibanum in powder, of each half an ounce, Bole Armoniack in powder two drams, with the white of an Egg, and a little Vineger, make a poultesse, and apply it (on lint or towe) to the temples. Against chaps of the hands and lips. Take of Mastick in powder half an ounce, Deers-suet an ounce, Oile of Roses four ounces, make an Ointment, by meking the Deers-suet with the Oile, and keeping it stirred, when it is almost cold put in the Mastick, and keep it for your use. The hurtfull quality. Mastick causeth belchings in the stomach, against which you may eat Carraway or Anise-seed-Comfits. The Dose. The Dose is from five grains to ten, or twelve, but give not too much of it. Of such Medicines as are made of Mastick. Pils of Mastick, spirit of Mastick, Oile Chymicall of Mastick. Aqua Mastichina, Oile by infusion and boiling, Ointment of Ma∣stick.
CHAP. 46. De Mechoacana, of Mechoacan. MEchoacan is a whitish root cut in thin slices, brought to us from beyond the Sea, somewhat like white Brionie-root. The names. It is called in Latine Mechoacanna, Mechoacana, Mechoaca, Me∣choaca Peruviana, Mechoacanum Indicum, Rhabarbarum album, & Rha∣barbarum Mechoacanum; in English 'tis called Mechoacan, Mechoaca, and Indian Bryonie. Now it is called Mechoacan, because it is brought from a place in the Province of New Spain, called Mechoacan, neere the City Mexico. The temperament Mechoacan is hot in the first degree and dry in the second, consist∣ing of an airie substance and subtile parts, as also of an earthy quali∣ty, or somewhat binding. The best kinde. The best Mechoacan is that which is new, whitish, in taste like meal, or insipid, not old or wormeaten. The duration. It will keep good two or three yeers. The root is kept good and much preserved if it be kept in wax, saith Tragosus Med. Ind. hist. c. 35. f. 81. Monardus giveth counsel to roll it up in Sear-cloth. Monard. f. 26. The inward use. Mechoacan purgeth chiefly thick flegme, water, and serous hu∣mours, and that from the head, stomach, belly, reins, nerves and joynts; therefore it is profitable in a long continued head-ach, and lethargie, in pains of the joynts, reins and wombe, in the Falling sicknesse, Catarrhe, Rheume, diseases of the breast, in old Coughs; shortnesse of breath, Jaundise, stoppings of the Liver and Spleen. It is very usefull in the Dropsie; for it draweth away water and flegme, and also strengtheneth the Liver, and inward parts; It is commended in the French Pox, Kings Evill, Scurvy, and Gowt, and causeth one to make water, easeth the Collick, and expelleth winde wonderfully. It helpeth inveterate Agues, whether Quotidian, or Tertian. It doth
much conduce to the purging of crude and viscous, or tough humours in the stomach and breasts of children. It worketh without any hurt∣ful quality, molestation, nauseousnesse, or griping, and is void of any hurtful quality; for having done its work, it leaveth the inward parts strengthened, without debility and weaknesse, contrary to most purgative Medicines. Old-men, children, women with childe, and weak persons may safely take this inoffensive Medicine. The manner of administring it It is given in Powder, Pils, Boles, Tabulates, or Roulets, and Potions. But the best way is to give it in white Wine, for so it works best: It may be given with a little Cynamon in broth, or with Ma∣stick, Anise-seed, or Fennel-seed. Note that the powder given by it self, or with Wine doth work better, then mixed with Syrups or other things. A Powder against the Dropsie. Take of Sene and Mechoacan of each two drams, Ginger, and spe∣cies Diagalanga, of each three grains, Diagredium two grains, make a powder and give it in broth. Pils. Take of Mechoacan in powder a scruple, Gum Gutta six or eight grains, with syrup of Roses make Pils, and give them with Physical observation. A Potion. Take of Mechocan in powder a dram, or a dram and a half, white Wine or Fennel-water four ounces; let them stand all night, or all one day shaking them two or three times together, then put to them of syrup of Roses laxative an ounce mix them together, and make a Po∣tion. Or you may give it only with the white-Wine. Tabulates. Take of Mechoacan in fine powder a dram and a half, of Diagre∣dium three grains with Sugar dissolved in a little Rose-water, make cakes, dry them gently, and give them for a Dose. A Bele. Take of Mechoacan in powder a dram, of the Electuary called Diacarthamum two drams, with syrup of Storchados make a bole or lump, and eat it in a morning fasting. Note two errours of Monardus, the one is in that he saith, hac radice purgatos esse fortiores, quàm antè; the other that after the taking of a little broth, or food, it ceaseth to work any more, which is contrary to daily experience. Tragos. Med. Ind. Hist. f. 82.
The hurtfull quality, Although it work without any hurtfull quality; yet in hot disea∣ses, and pure tertian Feavers, and also in hot and dry bodies, and in such as are subject to be bound, 'tis not safe to give it. The Dose. The Dose to a childe is a scruple or a scruple and a halfe, to per∣sons of yeers, in substance from a dram to two drams: in infusion from two drams to half an ounce. Medicines made of Mechoacan. Pils of Mechoacan, extract of Mechoacan, both simple and com∣pound. Vide Schroder. Pharm. Med Chym. l. 4. f. 232. CHAP. 47. De Myrobalanis. of Myrobalans, or purging Indian Plummes. MYrobalans are fruits brought us from the East-Indies. The names, and kindes. There are five kindes of Myrobalanes. First, the yellow Myrobalane, or purging Indian Plum, as big as a reasonable Plum, somewhat long and not round, of a yellower colour then the rest, called in La∣tine Myrobalanus Citrina. The second is the Chebule, or purple My∣robalane, called in Latine Myrobalanus Chebula, and is the greatest and longest of all the five sorts, of a blackish purple colour on the out-side, while it is fresh and also dry, being five square as the for∣mer, of the thickest substance, and more fleshy then any other, and with the smallest stone in the middle, not fully so hard to break as the former, but with the smallest kernel therein. The third sort is the Bellerick, or round Myrobalane, yet being as it were three square in many, of a pale russetish colour when they are fresh, but of a dark or dusty whitish colour on the outside being dry, of the thinnest sub∣stance, or least fleshy of any of them: the stone whereof is thick and greater then any other, proportionable to the fruit, very hard to break, with a kernel within of a reasonable bignesse, and is called in Latin Myrobalanus Bellerica. The fourth sort is the six square Myroba∣lane, or beaded, called in Latine Myrobalanus Emblica, they are round
in shew, and brought unto us broken into small pieces, without any stones, the kernels within being separated into three severall divisi∣ons, having each of them two cauls, wherein the parts of the ker∣nell lie almost three square. The fift sort is the black or Indick My∣robalane, called in Latine Myrobalanus Indica, and are eight square (as Gartias saith) which may be when they are fresh, but they can∣not be so plainly discerned in those that are brought over to us dry; they are the smallest of all the rest, somewhat long, altogether fleshy, without any stone in the middle, and the blackest of any. In Arabick they are called  dulegi or delegi. The temperament. They are cold in in the first degree, and dry in the second. The best sort. The best are such as are new and not too old, fleshy, thick, and heavy or ponderous, and gummie within. The duration. They will keep good two or three years. The inward use. All the sorts of Myrobalans do purge gently, some more, some lesse than others, some also purging choler, some flegme, and some melancholy: but they have in them also an astringent faculty much more then is in Rubarbe: they are exellent in fluxes of the belly. The Citrine or yellow Myrobalans do purge choler, strengthen the stomack, heart and liver, profit such as have the Hemorrhoides, and are proper for such as are of a temperate heat, they are good in tertian feavers, cause a good colour, and hinder old age, being often used. The Chebule do purge flegme, quicken the brain, and sharpen the sight, strengthen the stomach after purging, they are profitable for such as have the Dropsie, and are troubled with long continued Agues. The Emblick and Bellerick purge the stomach from rotten flegme lying therein, and strengtheneth the braine and joints, heart and liver, and binde all other loose or fluent humours in the parts of the body, and are very effectuall for the trembling of the heart, and to stir up the appetite, stay vomiting, and restraineth the fury and belch∣ing of choler, qualifieth the great heat of the inward parts, and al∣layeth thirst, giveth ease to those that are troubled with the Hemor∣rhoides or Piles, by restraining the fiercenesse of choler flowing into them, and for this last effect the Citrine are most used.
The Indies or black Myrobalans do purge Melancholy and black or a dust choller, and therefore are available for the quartane Ague, the Leprie and all Paraliticall diseases, and they cause a good colour of the face. They are brought over unto us preserved, especially the Chebules and Emblicks, whereof the Chebules are more used physically, for such purposes as are before set downe, then the Emblicks are. Note that the rinde is to be used when you finde them in any re∣ceipt, and not the stone. The manner of administring them. They are given in decoction, in infusion, and in powder, but the decoction or infusion doth purge better then any way else, yet so gently that they binde and strengthen the stomach, liver and heart, but given in powder they binde more then they purge. A Potion against the Dysenterie flux. Take of red Roses, of Plantaine, of each two drams, of Licoris bruised halfe an ounce, Raisons of the Sun stoned, and Tamarinds of each six drams, of yellow Myrobalans halfe an ounce: boile them gently in a sufficient quantity of water and Honey, strain it, in which steep or infuse of Rubarbe foure scruples, of Spicknard half a scruple; let them stand five or six houres, straine it and adde syrup of Quin∣ces, or syrup of red Roses an ounce; make a Potion and give it. Against a loosenesse of the body. Take and burne a pinte of Clarret wine with a little Rose-mary and Sugar, in which put to steep all night a dram of Rubarbe a little dryed at the fire, and halfe a dram of Chebule Myrobalanes, which standing by the fire all night, and strained forth in the morning, is to be taken at two severall times, a draught in the morning fasting, which if it help not sufficiently the first time, being renued and taken two dayes more, will certainly stay the laske wholly, if the malignity and sharpnesse of the humours be not too strong, that scarce any me∣dicine will cure it. Parkinson in his Herball, folio 248. The outward use. The Citrine are used in Collyries, or medicines for the eyes, with the juice of Fennell or Rose-water, and against the inflammations; and flowing of humours to the eyes: the powder thereof with Ma∣stick or Rose-water is used in Ulcers to heale them and dry them. The powder of the kernels is used against dimnesse of the eyes, or to take away the web therein, or the powder thereof infused in Rose-water, and dryed, and then infused two or three times more, and
dry them, then make it in powder and use it. The Bellerick stay the flowing of the Hemorrhoides, and help the falling of the haire, the affected place being bathed with the decoction thereof, and the powder strewed on afterwards, and it makes the haire become blacker. The hurtfull quality with the corrective help. Although these may be given without any danger or detriment, yet they are not to be used in obstructions, or stoppings of the in∣ward parts, nor where the body is much bound, nor in feavers. They are profitably infused in Whey, or Posset-drink, or in the juice of Fumitory, or juice of Worme-wood, adding a little Spikenard, or Honey thereto. That they offend not the stomach being stopt, they may be infused in Oile of sweet Almonds, and rubbed with ones hands, and then dryed. Some give them in fat broth, as with the pulp of Raisons, or with Honey and Raisons of the Sun boiled toge∣ther. Others give them with Manna, Cassia, Conserve, or syrup of Violets. Others mixe a little Scammonie with them to quicken their slow operation. They may be given also with infusion of Sene, Hydromel or water and Honey, or with opening and diure∣ticall things, or such things as provoke urine. Note that the infusion of Myrobalanes doth only purge, and little or nothing binde the body; the decoction there of doth both purge and binde, the powder of them doth also purge and binde, but more binde then purge, and being dried and so given, they only constringe, or binde the body. The Dose. The dose of them in infusion and decoction is from three drams to six drams, or to an ounce, in substance the dose is from halfe a dram to two drams, or more. Of the compounds made of Myrobalanes. Pils of Myrobalans extract of Myrobalans, Syrup of the five kinds, Myrobalanes preserved. CHAP. 48. De Myrrha, of Myrrhe. Myrrhe is a gum, or concreted gummie juice of a certaine tree growing in Arabia, Aethiopia, and other places, of a reddish colour. Stacte is the purer part of Myrrhe, or liquid Myrrhe, sweating out from the tree of its owne accord before the tree be cut.
The names. It is called in Latine Myrrha, in English Myrrhe. The temperament. Myrrhe is hot and dry in the third degree. The best kinde. The best is that which is pinguous or fatty, reddish and cleare, having some whitish veines in it, very bitter and light. That which is heavy and blacke is to be rejected. The difference between Bdellium and Myrrhe. Bdellium in sight is somewhat like to Myrrhe, but may be distin∣guished thus; Myrrhe is extreame bitter, so is not Bdellium; againe Myrrhe is easier to be broken, and of a more quick sharp sent. The duration. Myrrhe will keep good many yeares; Platearius saith it will keep good a hundred yeares. The inward use. Myrrhe is opening, discussing, glutinative, and drying: it resisteth putrefaction, and is usefull in stoppings of the wombe, brings down the courses, and expells the childe living or dead, being taken with a decoction of Lupines ane the juice of Rue. It helpeth stoppings of the Breast and Lungs, and hoarsenesse, as also the cough, and is usefull in the Quinsey, Pleurisy, or paines of the side, in the Collick, in fluxes of the belly, and killeth wormes. It mollifieth the hardnesse of the Matrix, and is good against rheumatick distillations It ta∣keth away the shivering fits of Agues, being taken an houre or two before the fit commeth, especially of Quartane Agues, as if a dram or lesse be taken in Muscadine warme two or three times before the fit come, and sweat after it: this cured Matthiolus of a quartane Ague. Mathiol. Com. in lib. Diascor. Cap. 68. f. 78. Pils made thereof with Treacle and Birth-wort-root, are effe∣ctuall for the same purpose, to take one or two at a time as big as a Pease, an houre before the fits, for many dayes together: it is also a great preservative in the Plague or pestilence, and against the ve∣nome, or poison of Serpents and venomous creatures, therefore it is put into Antidotes and Counterpoisons: it is a singular remedy, for a stinking breath. It doth conduce much to women to help Con∣ception, especially by removing obstructions, or stoppings from the uterine parts
The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, in Pils, in electuary and Trosses, though it be rarely given alone by reason of its bitternesse. To hasten the birth. Take of Myrrhe in powder two scruples: Give it in a little Posset-drink, or make foure or five Pils thereof with a little Honey, and give them, drinking a draught of posset-drink after them. The outward use. It healeth wounds of the head, and helpeth to cover bones that are bare, and incarneth good flesh in deep wounds. It helpeth a stinking breath if the mouth be washed with the decoction thereof; and helpeth rotten gums, and fastneth loose teeth, being dissolved in wine and washed therewith, it cleanseth also the filthinesse of the Eares. Being used with Ladanum and Wine of Myrtles, it stayeth the falling or shedding of the haire: it helpeth watering eyes, and taketh away the skin that beginneth to grow therein and darken the sight, and helpeth ulcers of the eyes. It is commended to beau∣tifie the face, and to make it smooth and youthfull, to be made into an oile, or rather liquour of Myrrhe, which is made with Eggs boil∣ed hard, cut in the middle, the yolkes taken forth, and filled up with the powder of Myrrhe, then put into a Glasse and set in a Wine-seller, or moist place, and with this liquor to wash the face. A fumigation hereof comforts the braine, and dryeth up super∣fluous humours. It openeth, and mollifieth the hardnesse of the ma∣trix, and a fumigation thereof helpeth conception; and it bringeth downe the courses if a Pessarie be made thereof and used. It doth facilitate or hasten the birth being used to the genitals or privities with oile of white Lillies. Being used with Vineger it helpeth Tetters and Ring-wormes, and freckles, or used with Cassia and Honey it helpeth the Gangrene and wilde fire, the stinking, or chafing of the arme-holes, used with oile of ox it doth extend and mollifie the nerves that are stiffe with cold. It helpes Tenas∣mus (or a desire often to go to stoole) from a cold cause. A Powder for wounds in the head. Take of myrrhe half an ounce of Madder-seed, of Cypresse-root, of Orris-root, of Sarcocole, of each three drams, make a powder, and us it as need requireth. The hurtfull quality. It must not be given to women with childe, for it causeth them to miscarry, nor to such as have very hot and dry bodies.
The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples. Of such things as are made of Myrrhe. Trosses of Myrrhe, Myrrhe depurated, or cleansed, Extract of Myrrhe, Oile of Myrrhe. CHAP. 49. De Opio, of Opium. OPium is the juice of black Poppie-heads, being cut after they are full ripe. Meconium is the juice of the heads and leaves of white or black Poppy, pressed forth. The names. It is called in Latine Opium, and in English also. The Temperament. Most of the Ancient writers say Opium is cold in the fourth degree, others will have it partly cold and partly hot; but some of the new Writers will have it to be altogether hot, as Sennertus, Doringius, Schroderus, &c. Now the reasons given that it is hot are these. 1. Because it is bitter, now that which is bitter is hot, but Opium is bitter, therefore hot. 2. It is sharp and biting, that being put upon the tongue it bites and blisters the same and palate. 3. Causeth drynesse. 4. It is of a very strong smell and savour. 5. It doth soone burne and flame be∣ing set on fire; for the true Opium (saith Plinie) will burne like a Candle; From whence we reason thus, Omne quod citò inflammatur, est calidum: Opium citò inflammatur: Ergo calidum. That which doth soon burne and flame is hot, but Opium doth soone burne and fleme, therefore it is hot. 6. It troubleth the minde, and brings a kinde of madnesse or dotage to such as take it. 7. It stirs up and provokes Venery. 8. It stirs up and provokes the Itch. 9. It provokes sweat. 10. It softneth hardnesse, and discusseth, or dissolveth swellings, all which are effects of heat. Now though Opium be narcoticall, or stupefactive, or make dull and senselesse; yet this doth not proceed from its frigidity, or coldnesse, but this it doth by an occult, or hid∣den quality. They that desire to know more concerning the nature of Opium,
let them read that excellent Tract of Doringius de Opio printed 1620, and Freitagius de Opio, & Med. Opiat. printed 1632. Also Sennertus Paralipomena fol. 347, printed 1644, and Mercurialis de morb. vene∣nosis, & venenis lib. 2. cap. 7. fol 59, 60, 61. printed 1624. The best Opium. The best is that which is heavy, not too thick in substance, nor too thin, in colour like Aloes, very bitter in taste, and burning, of a stink∣ing smell, soporiferous like Poppie; if dissolved it be yellow like Saffron, 'tis adulterate, for it ought to be of a brownish yellowness, colour being dissolved. The best is called Opium Thebaicum, because it comes from Thebes. I much question whether we have the true O∣pium of the Ancient, for that which we use is either adulterate, or meconium. It is adulterated with Glaucium, which is the juice of an herb, with leaves like to horned Poppy. The Duration. It may be kept good many years, some say nine or ten years, o∣thers say twenty years. The inward use. Opium is given to provoke sleep, to ease the paine of the Iliack and Collick, as also to mitigate the paine of the stone in the blad∣der or kidneys, and to ease pain of the Gowt; It cooleth inflamma∣tions, agues, or frensies, and stayeth defluxions which cause a cough, or consumption: It is given in great paines of the head, and to stop fluxes of the belly, and womens courses. It is put into Mi∣thridate, Treacle, and other medicines that procure rest, and ease paine. The manner of administring it. It is given in Pils, Potions, Boles, Electuaries, &c. An Electuary against fits of the mother, and paines of the wombe, either with an ulcer, or without an ulcer. Take of the species Diamoschu amari, and Diambra, of each two drams, Castor in powder a scruple, Opium halfe a dram; with syrup of Mugwort make an Electuary. The dose is a dram. The outward use. It is used outwardly to ease the paine of the Gowt, or any other paine, to cause sleep, and to cool inflammations: being put into a hollow tooth, it easeth the paine thereof. Some commend it in me∣dicines for the eares and eyes; but I think it rather dulleth the sight then otherwise.
An oyntment to cause sleep. Take of Ʋnguentum Populeum one ounce, powder of Mandrake-root or leaves a scruple, oile of Nutmeg (by expression) a dram, oile of Violets halfe an ounce, Opium a scruple, make an ointment, and at night anoint the temples therewith. Against the Tooth-ach. Take Pellitory of Spain a dram and a halfe, Henbane-seed a scru∣ple, Opium five and twenty graines, make all into fine powder, and with the Mussilage of gum Tragaanth (made in spirit of wine) make up little balls, and put on into a hollow tooth, there to re∣main an houre. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective meanes. Opium by all is counted a dangerous medicine, and the frequent use thereof bringeth Palsies, Lethargies, trembling of the joynts, cold sweats,This you must understand of the true Opi∣um, for that which is now in use (being well prepared) is not so dange∣rous. shortnesse of breath, and great sleepi∣nesse: it doth much stupifie the senses, and under∣standing, and often brings death. It is dangerous to give it to children, women, or delicate bodies. Opium is corrected with Castor, Euphorbium, juice of Garlick or Onions, also with spirit of wine, vine∣ger, and sharp juices, as with juice of Lemon, or Ci∣tron; others correct it with Breast-milk, Almond-milk, Butter, and oile of Almonds. Note, that in pains of the head, it is not to be used with Saffron, because it offends the head, but with Nutmeg. The Dose. The dose is from a grain to two or three, but it is rarely given by it self. I have known it given (to ease the pain of the stone) from five grains to fifteen, and all in a short time; for at the first five graines gave ease, and that for some reasonable time, then seven or eight, so that the dose was increased still. Opium is much in use in Asia and Africa, so that if they abstain from it they think their life is in danger thereby, which wants not admiration as Gartias ab horto saith, especially being so narcoticall and stupefactive, for such as use it much are still sleepy and drovvsy. The dose among them there, is from a scruple to fifty grains. The Turks and Persians take it to tvvo or three drams, and they thinke thereby they are more apt to performe any businesse, and especially they are fitter for vvarre, Verery, and animosity Also Hollerius writes of a Spaniard, that in the hot vveather did eat halfe an ounce
of it at one time, and that vvithout any hurt to the party: Holler. de morb intern. lib. 1. cap. 6. fol. 54. But vvonderfull is that of Gar∣tias ab horto Aromat. lib. 1. cap. 4. fol 23. vvho relates of one that for divers dayes together did eat three slices of Opium, vvhich did vveigh ten drams and upvvard, and although he vvas sleepy and stu∣pid, yet very ready to dispute of any thing. Opium hath killed ma∣ny, therefore my advice is to let it alone, and not to meddle vvith it, or else to look that it be vvell prepared. Pet. Forestus in his obser∣vations mentionss a vvoman, that took Opium one day, and vvas found dead the next day. I shal relate what I have heard of an empericall practitioner, who (being ill and not taking rest) sent to one (either Physician or Apo∣thecary) for some Opium, when the messenger had it, the party he had it of said, There is too much for once, but I hope your Master knows that the messenger brought it home, and this emperick (it seems) took it all, and wrote to this effect in a piece of paper, I shall sleep so many houres and then wake, but forgot to give any notice thereof: after he had took it, he fell into such a sleep, that he was given over for dead, laid forth and buried; so soon as he was buried, his wife (thinking to finde some money) looking in his chamber found this writing before mentioned, whereupon she sent and had the grave digg'd up, and the coffin opened, where they saw he had turned himself when he waked. Of such things as are made of Opium. Extract of Opium, Laudanum Opiatum, Nepenthes Opiatum. CHAP. 50. De Opopanace, of Opopanax. OPopanax is a Gum of a plant called Panax, very brown on the outside, and yellow within. It is taken chiefly from the roots of Panax, and not from the stalks. The names. It is called in Latine and in English Opopanax, and Gum Opopa∣nax.
The temperament. Opopanax is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the third de∣gree, and dry in the second. The best kinde. The best is brown without, and white or yellow within, bitter and of a sowerish sent and somewhat strong, which being dissolved with Wine or Vineger, will make it look yellow, and not mixed with sticks or drosse, but clean Gum. The duration. It will keep good five or six years. The inward use. Opopanax purgeth thick and tough flegme from remote parts, as from the brain, nerves, sensitive parts, joynts, and breasts; therefore it is profitable for any cold disease incident to any of those parts, as in the Palsie, in debility, or weaknesse of the sight, old cough, short∣nesse of breath, Sciatica, and in other kindes of Gowt. It is good for Convulsions and Cramgs, as also against winde in the belly, Stitches in the side, hardnesse of the Spleen, Strangury, and difficul∣ty in making urine. It likewise discusseth the Windinesse, Hardnesse, and Suffocations of the Mother, and bringeth down the courses, and brings away also the mola or lump of flesh bred in the Wombe. Being drunk with Water and Honey, or Wine it helpeth the Itchings and inward soares of the Bladder. It expelleth Wormes, helpeth the by∣ting of a mad Dog, and is good against poysons of other venomous creatures. Dissolved in Wine and given, it helps the Dropsie; and ta∣ken in Vineger one houre before the fit commeth, it takes away the cold fit of an Ague, and especially if you dissolve some of it with the juice of Smallage and Oile of Dill, and anoint the ridge of the back therewith. It is good after falls and bruises to dissolve any con∣gealed bloud, especially in cold bodies, and where no Feaver is. It is commended against the Falling Sicknesse, and it dissolveth Milk coa∣gulated, or curdled in the stomach. The manner of administring it. It is given with Wine, Honey, or any convenient juice, but chiefly in Pills. Pils against the Palsie and Convulsion. Take of Opopanax, Rue, Serapinum, Pepper, of the juice or extract of Lorage, Myrrhe, of each a dram: Powder what is to be powdered, and with the juice of Cowslip, make a masse, or lump, of which
frame Pils. The dose is a dram, every second, or third night, so long as need requireth. The externall use. Opopanax being dissolved with Vineger, and the juice of Smallage and applied, it softneth the hardnesse of the spleene, and a plaister made thereof dissolveth the Kings evill, and hard nodes of the joints, as also any plague-sore, botch, or bile, especially if you dissolve it in Vineger, and mixe it with a little Leaven, and so apply it. Being dis∣solved in a little Vineger, and applyed with the pulp of Raisons of the sun, it easeth any kinde of Gowt. It dissolveth hard tumours of the womb: if the mouth be washed with a decoction of Vineger, made with Opopanax, it easeth the paine of the Teeth; or if it be a hollow tooth, let it be stopped with a peece of Opopanax. Some commend it against the dimnesse of the sight, being mixed with o∣ther things. Opopanax doth much help to the curing of old ulcers, and Fistulaes, breeds good flesh, and especially where the bones are bare and naked, and that by a peculiar vertue. It is with profit ap∣plied to the biting of any venomous creature. The hurtfull Quality. It must not be given to Women with childe (for it destroyes the birth) nor to such as have hot diseases: It is corrected with Spik∣nard, Mastick, &c. The Dose. The Dose is from halfe a dram to a dram, or a dram and a halfe. Of such compounds as are made of Opopanax. Extract of Opopanax, Pills of Opopanax, Oile of Opopanax. CHAP. 51. De Polypodio, of Polypodie. POlipodium is a root generally knowne, growing on the roots of Trees, chiefly on Okes, sometimes upon houses and old walls. The names. It is called in Latine Polipodium, also ilicula, quasi parva filix; be∣cause the leaves are like Ferne. In English Polipodie, and Oke-ferne. The temperament. Polypodie is hot and dry in the second degree.
The best kinde. The best rootes are those that are fairest, or biggest, and full of nodes, which groweth on Okes, and is therefore called Polypodium quercinum. The duration. These roots will keep good a yeare or two. Note, that the hotter the Region is where it growes, the better it is. The inward use. Polypodie purgeth adust choler, or melancholie, and flegme, though but gently. Therefore it is commended against melancholy, as in affects of the Hypochonders, quartane Ague, also in stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, Jaundise, Scurvy, or Scorbute, and in any kinde of Gowt, in the Leprosie, Scab, and foule diseases of the skin. It doth much prevaile in the Collick, arising from a cold cause, and that by a specifick vertue. The distilled water both of rootes and leaves is much commend∣ed against the quartane Ague, being taken many dayes together, as also against melancholie, troublesome sleep and fearefull dreames: And taken with some Sugar-Candy dissolved therein, it is good a∣gainst all the ill affects, or diseases of the Lungs. Also this water helps the pale colour of the face, and purgeth the blood. The Salt and Oile of Polypodie are used in the Pleurisie, and paines of the side. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, broth, or infusions, for it can hardly be made into powder alone. By infusion. Take of Sene. Raisons of the sun stoned, of each halfe an ounce Maiden-haire, Polypodie, white Tartar, of each three drams, of Fu∣mitorie-water, Carduus water, Buglosse-water, of each two ounces: let them infuse one night, in the morning boile them gently, then straine it, and to foure ounces of the clearest add Honey of Roses So∣lutive, or Manna two drams or halfe an ounce, mixe them together, and give it; it purgeth gently. Freitag. aur. med. f. 256. Against hardnesse of the spleen and melancholy winde, it may be given with Epithymum and Salindum, or the decoction of an old Cock (with Polypodie, Sene, Epithymum, Thyme, Dodder, black Hellebore, Buglosse, Creame of Tartar, Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, Raisons of the sun, and such like) is much commended.
In diseases of the breast use Polypodie with Figs, Raisons of the sun, Elecampane, Hyssop, Maydenhaire, Hore-hound, &c. In the Collick boile it with Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, &c. In the scab arising from burnt choler, boile it in Posset-drink, or Whey. The outward use. The juice of the green root, or the powder of the root snuffed up into the nose, cureth the disease called Polypus. A plaister made of the roots and Honey, helpeth luxations or bones out of joynt, Ruptures, chaps of the fingers, and the Piles. If the root be steeped in Wine foure and twenty houres (made sharp with a little spirit of sulphur, and then dryed) it may be used for a Dentifrice, or me∣dicine to make the teeth white and cleane, being rubbed therewith. The hurtfull quality. It is judged by many to be windy and to offend the stomach, but daily experience doth manifest the contrary, and that it is a safe and gentle medicine, fit for all sorts of persons, and may be given in any season. It is given with Anise-seed, Fennel-seed, Ginger, &c. Not because it offends the stomach, or hurteth the other in∣ward parts, but to help its energie or force. Let the Polypodium you use be new; for if it be too old, it bindes the body. Heurn. prax. med f. 271. The Dose. It is given in decoction, or infusion from halfe an ounce to two ounces, or more. Compounds made of Polypodie. Salt of Polypodium, Extract of Polypodium, Syrup of Polypodium, Oile of Polypodium. CHAP. 52. De Psyllio, of Flea-wort. FLea-wort is an herb that riseth up with a stalk two foot high or more, full of joynts and branches on every side up to the top, and at every joynt two small long and narrow whitish green leaves somewhat hairie: the seeds are small and black, lke to Fleas in bignesse and colour. The names. It is called in Latine Psyllium, Pulicaria harba, and ulicaria, because it is like unto Fleas, and not because it driveth away Fleas; for that
it will not do. In English Flea-wort, not Flea-bane. The temperament. The seeds are cold and moist in the second degree. The best seeds. The best are the biggest and the fairest, heavy, that being put into the water they sinke. The duration. They will keep good a yeare or two in the seeds. The inward use. The seeds are chiefly in use, the missilage, or infusion whereof being made with Rose-water, or Barley-water, and taken with sy∣rups of Violets, syrup of Roses, or Sugar, purgeth choler and thick flegme, and is usefull in hot burning Feavers, in great thirst, and helps to eifie the drynesse of the mouth and throat; it helpeth also the hoarsnesse of the voice, and diseases of the breast and lungs caused by heat, as the Pleurisie and such like. It helpeth all inflam∣mations of the head, and all hot paines of the joynts. The mucci∣lage of the seed made into an Electuary with Marmalade of Quin∣ces, with Popie-seed, and Sugar-pellets, or Sugar-Candy, and so taken, doth temper the heat and roughnesse of the throat, and tongue, and stayeth hot fluxions, or rheumes flowing downe. In hot burning Agues, it quencheth thirst, and abates heat, being ta∣ken with syrup of Violets, or Barley-water, and purgeth also cho∣ler gently. The seeds torrified or dryed, and taken with Plantaine-water stay∣eth the flux of the belly, and helpeth the corrosions, or gripings of the belly that come by reason of hot, cholerick, sharp and malignant humours, or by the super-purgation, or over-working of any violent medicine, such as cammonie or the like. The seeds being kept on the tongue, easeth the cough, and helpeth the drynesse thereof pro∣ceeding from heat. It dothnso wonderfully coole that (saith Fer∣nelius) being cast into hot boyling water, it presently cooleth it. Fer∣nel. meth. med. lib. 6. cap. 1. fol. 143. The outward use. The seeds bruised or the herbe, and mixed with the juice of House-leeke or Night-shade, easeth the hot Gowt and hot Apo∣stumes, being thereunto applyed; mingled with Oile of Roses and Vineger, it cures hot swellings in the joynts, and Apostumes be∣hinde the Eare; with Vineger, or Oile of Violets, it helpeth the paine of the head, if it be applied to the fore-head and Temples.
The same laid to with Vineger is good against the going out of the Navell, and burstings of young Children. The water wherein the seeds have been steeped is good against St. Anthonies fire, or Wilde-fire. The juice with Honey put into the Eares killeth wormes, and stayeth the running thereof. It helpeth hot swellings, or eruptions of the skin, as blaines, wheales and such like; as also paines of the joynts, and places out of joynt, and the Hip-gowt. The same is applyed to womens nipples, and sore breasts, and that with good successe, laying it often thereon. Being mixed with Hogs-grease, and applyed to foule corrupt and filthy Ulcers and sores, cleanseth and healeth them, by cooling the heat and repressing the sharpnesse of the humours flowing unto them. The Muccilage of the seed made in Plantaine-water, whereunto the yolke of an Egge or two, and a little of the oint ment called Populeon is put, is a most safe and sure remedy to ease the sharpnesse, prickings and paines of the He∣morrhoides, or Piles, if it be laid on a cloth, and bound thereunto. It stayeth the bleeding of the Nose applied with the juice of Shep∣herds-purse and Bole. The hearb boyled, or the seeds with the root, and the fundament bathed therewith, or to sit over the hot liquor, easeth the Tenesmus, a disease when one is often provoked to stoole. It taketh away the burning and acrimonie of Lime, Euphorbium and Cautharides. It taketh away the roughnesse of the haire being ba∣thed with the mussilage thereof. Flea-wort-seed keepeth Camphor very well, and that by its coldnesse and moisture. The hurtfull quality, and correction thereof. Some have judged it to be dangerous to take it inwardly, & that it is hurtfull to the nature of man, and causeth stifnesse, and coldnesse of the body; which is to be no otherwise understood then of all cold herbes such as Night-shade, House-leeke and such like, being not taken with discretion. 'Tis not amisse to give it with Cynamon or Mace. It is not safe for cold and moist bodies, neither may it be given to such as have narraw entrals, or narrow passages within. The Dose. The seeds of Fleabane (which are to be given in infusion rather then in substance) are taken from a dram to three drams, or halfe an ounce. Of such things as are made of Flea-wort. Electuary of Psyllium. [the Dose of which is from half an ounce to an ounce] the distilled water of Flea-wort.
CHAP. 53. De Rhabarbaro, of Rubarbe. RƲbarbe is a root of a yellow colour, brought chiefly from Chi∣na, in the East-Indies. The names. It is called in Latine Rhabarbarum, in English Rubarbe and Rew∣barbe. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree, of a mixt substance, partly airie, thin and purging, whereby it openeth the stoppings of the Li∣ver, Gall, and viscerous parts, and also draweth away choler: partly grosse and earthy, whereby it bindes and constringeth the body, and doth wonderfully strengthen the stomach and entrals, or in∣ward parts. The kindes. There are three kindes of Rubarbe mentioned by Authours. First, Rhabarbarum Indicum, and that is brought from China. Secondly, Rhabarbarum Barbarum, which comes from Barbary. Thirdly, Rha∣barum Turcicum, which comes from Pontus and Bosphorus; for the Turkish Merchants bring it from thence. The best kinde. The best Rubarbe is brought from China, and is of a light purplish red, or yellowish colour: being chewed in the mouth, it is somewhat clammy, and in colour like Saffron, which being rubbed on paper sheweth the colour more plainly; in taste it is somewhat bitter, but of a pleasing smell. The duration. It will keep good two or three yeers if it be kept close from the aire. The usuall way to keep it is to wrap it up in Cotten-wooll. The inward use. Rubarbe purgeth choler, flegme and watery humours; and is there∣fore usefull in diseases of the Liver, as in cholerick and long conti∣nued Feavers, in the Jaundise, Green-sicknesse, Dropsie, Stoppings of the Liver, as also against the hardnesse thereof, or intemperate coldnesse. It is so effectuall for the Liver, that 'tis called the life, soul,
heart, and the Treacle of the Liver. It cleanseth the bloud gently, and is profitable against tumours of the Spleen, putrid, or rotten Feavers, and in all fluxes of the belly, whether bloudy or not, as also in spit∣ting of bloud, and in bruises or falls. The powder of Rubarbe given with Cassia and Venice Turpentine washed, cleanseth the reins, and strengtheneth them afterwards, and is very effectuall in Gonorrhaea, or running of the Reins. It killeth Wormes, helpeth the Hickcock, and may be given to weak persons, old-men, children, women with childe; and that without any danger. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, in infusion, in Pils, Boles, &c. A Powder. Take of Rubarbe two drams, Spicknard a scruple, make them into powder, and give it. A Potion. Take of Rubarbe cut in thin slices two drams, Spicknard five grains, Goats-Whey, or Posset-drink four ounces; steep them all night, and strain it, then add syrup of Roses solutive one ounce and a half, make a potion. Pils. Take of Rubarbe in powder five scruples, of Spicknard in powder five grains, with syrup of Roses make pils, and give them. A Bole to cleanse the reins. Take of Cassia newly drawn an ounce, of Rubarbe in powder four scruples, mixe them together and make a Bole, or lump. Now seeing Rubarbe is of a mixt substance, as before is shewed; if you desire to open Obstructions, then give the infusion thereof; if you desire to bind and strengthen, give it in substance. And when you would give it more to purge then to binde, make but a gentle straining thereof; but if you would binde the body more then purge, strain it hard, that so more of the earthy substance may come forth. Rubarbe by boiling loseth its purgative faculty. Note, that there is a kinde of contrariety, or Antipathy between Rubarbe and Diagredium, for being put together in one Medicine they work very churlishly; yet I have observed that when Diagredium is put to an infusion of Rubarbe (being lightly strained) it worketh better then when Diagredium is gi∣ven with the substance of Rubarbe. This (I conceive) may be the cause why Confectio Hamech worketh so churlishly upon the stomach, for if you leave out the Rubarbe, and put in the more of Sene, you shall finde it to work better. And so in other compositions where the
substance of Rubarbe is put to Diagredium, you shall finde them to work churlishly. Rubarbe may be cut into thin slices or pieces, and so taken with Raisons of the Sun, as Massaria gives counsel, f. 478. The outward use. Rubarbe healeth those Ulcers that come in the eyes, or eye-lids, being steeped in white Wine, or any other convenient liquour. Being boiled in Wine and applied, it taketh away the black and blew spots that come by bruises or falls, or oile wherein Rubarbe hath been boiled, taketh away black and blew spots. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective means. Rubarbe is hurtful to those that have very hot and dry bodies, as also to such as are hectical, or troubled with the Strangury. It is cor∣rected with Spicknard, Squinanthum, or Cynamon, especially where you desire more to strengthen then to purge. If you give it to purge and open obstructions, or stoppings, give it in Whey, Posset-drink, Endive or Succory-water, or in White Wine, being first infused therein. The Dose. The Dose in substance is from a dram to two drams, in infusion from two drams to half an ounce. The compounds made of Rubarbe. Extract of Rubarbe. Trosses of Rubarbe. Pils of Rubarbe. Syrup of Succory with Rubarbe. Syrupus Augustanus, vel de Rhabarbaro. Syru∣pus Diasereos. Rhabarbarum conditum. Syrupus Magistralis ad Melan∣choliam. Oile of Rubarbe. Whether Rubarbe (being dried or burnt) may be used in the Dysenterie, or Bloudy-Flux? Although many learned Physicians give counsel to dry or burne Rubarbe, and so to give it in the Bloudy-Flux, and the greater the Flux is the more to dry, or rather to burn it, because hereby it bindes the more: yet surely Rubarbe being much torrified or burnt, hath a sharp and biting qualiity, whereby it doth rather increase the Flux then stop it. Massaria, f. 478. Rondel. Meth. cur. Morb. f. 457. Amatus lucit. cur. Med. Cent. 2. f. 176. Schroderus Pharm. Med. Chym. lib. 4. f. 235. If you would use Rubarbe to binde chiefly, it is best to cast away the first decoction, or infusion, then to boil it gently, and to make a strong expression, or straining thereof, and so to give it.
CHAP. 54. De Rubia tinctorum, of Madder. MAdder hath many long four-square reddish stalkes trailing on the ground, rough or hairy, and full of joynts: at every joynt come forth long and somewhat narrow leaves, standing like a star, or the rowell of a spur about the stalks, rough and hairy: to∣wards the tops whereof come forth many small pale yellow flowers, the root is very long and red. The names. It is called also Rubia tinctorum, and all from the colour, because it dieth Wooll or Cloth into a red colour. The temperament Madder-roots are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, and have an opening quality, and also an astringent property. The best. The best are the reddest and fairest roots, not too old. The duration. The roots will keep good two or three yeers. The inward use. Madder bringeth down the courses in women, and provoketh u∣rine, bringeth away the birth and after-birth, cureth the Jaundise, o∣peneth the stoppings of the Speen, Liver and Gall, and diminisheth the Melancholy humour. Some have reported that it provokes urine so much, that it causeth bloud to come forth with it, but this is only the colour of the root, which being taken into the body doth cause the urine to look like bloud, as Rubarbe doth make it look yellow. The same taken in decoction or powder, dissolveth congealed bloud in the body, and is good for such as have falne, or are bruised, and is much used in vulnerary or wound-drinks. It is good for such as have the Dropsie, Palsie, Sciatica, or Hip-gowt. The seeds of Madder taken with Vineger and Honey, helpeth the swelling and hardness of the Spleen. It is used also to amend, or help the ill colour of the face, and it helpeth Ulcers of the mouth, if to the decoction be added a little Alome and Honey of Roses. The juice of the root or deco∣ction
thereof is given to such as are hurt with venomous beasts, and preserveth the body from putrefaction. It is very good for such as have the Itch or Scab. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, and in powder. A decoction to provoke the Courses. Take of Madder-roots bruised two ounces, of Licoris bruised an ounce, of Mugwort two handfuls, of Rue half a handful; boil these in three pintes of White Wine, till a pinte or more be consumed, then strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar. Give a good draught there∣of warm, morning and evening. A powder against falls or bruises. Take of Madder-roots two drams, Mumme a dram, Rubarbe half an ounce; make them into powder, and give a dram (for a Dose) in Wine. The outward use. Madder-roots bruised (especially green) and applyed to any part that is discoloured with Freckles, Morphew, the White-scurfe, or such like deformities of the skin, cleanseth them throughly, and ta∣keth them away, especially if Vineger be mixed therewith, or the powder of the root mixed with a little juice of Gar∣lick, Oile, and a little Honey, cureth any Itch, Scab, or foulness of the skin, being anointed therewith. The juice of the root drop∣ped into the eares, mitigates the pain thereof. The roots applyed as a Pessary, or the powder of the root made up with Oile of Savin, and applied brings away the birth and after-birth. The leaves of Madder have a speciall property to colour the haire of the head. Dyers use it much, saith Plinie (Nat. Hist. lib. 24. c. 11. fol. 192.) to colour their Wooll, and Woollen-cloth, so do Curriers about their skins and Leathers. The hurtfull qualities. It must not be given to Women with childe, nor often to such as have hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples, or more, in decoction, from tvvo drams to half an ounce.
CHAP. 55. De Sagapeno, of Gum Sagapenum. THe Gum Sagapenum is the juice of a kinde of Ferula, growing in Media. The names. It is called in Latine Sagapenum, and Serapinum. The temperament. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. The best kinde. The best is that which doth smell like Garlick, or between Laser and Galbanum, bright and cleer of a yellowish colour without, but white within, and will soon dissolve in water, or Vineger, also sharp in taste. The duration. It will keep good four or five yeers. The inward use. Sagapenum purgeth thick, grosse and tough humours, as also wa∣tery from the stomach, belly, wombe, reins, brain, nerves, joynts, and lungs. Therefore it is profitable in the Dropsie, old cough, shortnesse of breath, pain of the head, as in the Megrim, Falling-Sicknesse, Palsie, Cramp, or Convulsion, trembling of the joynts, in stoppings and tumours of the Spleen, in the quartane Ague, Col∣lick, in the stopping of the Urine, and in suppression of the Courses in Women. It is useful in suffocation or rising of the Mother, and against the stinging of venomous beasts, or poyson taken into the body. The manner of administring it. It is chiefly given in Pils. Pils against the Dropsie. Take of Sagapenum, (moistned or dissolved in the juice of Ele∣campane) two scruples, Trosses of Alhandal a scruple, Diagredium five grains, with syrup of Roses make a masse or lump for two Do∣ses. The externall use. Being dissolved in Wine and applyed, it easeth paines of the side, the cough and shortnesse of breath, and is commended against the
Pleurisy, but I question whether it be not too hot, except in a bastard Pleurisy. If it be dissolved in Vineger and the juice of Rue, and ap∣plyed, it helpeth Contusions and bruises, and used with Oile of Rue to the back, it driveth away cold paines thereof. Being dissolved with Vineger of Squills, and applyed, it dissolveth the hardnesse of the spleene, as also the Kings evill, or Scrophulaes bred under the eares and neare the throat, and those hard nodes that arise in the joints after the Gowt; with the juice of Rue or Fennell, it cleareth the sight, and takes away all spots therein. Dissolved with Oile, and applyed, it strengtheneth those members that are out of joint, or the strained members, and joynts. It draweth forth Thornes or splinters, and breaketh any Botch or Boile. Being put into Gly∣sters it easeth the Collick; and a Pessary made thereof and put up, bringeth downe the after-birth, and the courses A fumigation thereof with the horne of a Goat is commended against the Lethar∣gie. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective meanes. It hurts the Liver and Stomach, therefore it is corrected with the third part of Mastick, Cynamon, Ginger, Spicknard, &c. It must not be given to women with Childe, for it kills the birth. The best way to prepare it for the diseases of the braine, nerves, breast, joynts, and cold diseases of the Wombe, is to dissolve it in Wine, and with Aqualangii, &c. to draw forth its vertue in the manner of an extract. The dose. The dose is from halfe a dram to a dram. The compounds made of Sagapenum. Pils of Sagapenum, extract of Sagapenum, oile thereof. CHAP. 56. De Sambuco & Ebulo, of Elder and Wall-wort, or Dane-wort. THe Elder and Dane-wort, being of such affinity, I shall joyne hem together in this Chapter. The Dane-wort is very like Elder, but much lower in growth.
The names. Elder is called in Latine Sambucus from Sambix the first finder of it. Dane-wort is called Low-Elder, in Latine Ebulus, in English Wall-wort, Dane-wort, or Dwarfe-Elder. The temperament. They are hot and dry in the second, or third degree, and the Wall-wort is somewhat hotter then Elder. The duration. They will keep good a yeere. The inward use. There is in use the flowers, leaves, inward barke or rinde, the Seeds, Berries, and the spongie substance. They are profitable in the Dropsie, joynt-Gowt, Agues, stop∣ping and swellings of the spleen, stone of the Kidneys, affects of the Wombe, and St. Anthonies fire. They purge tough flegme, water and thin choler chiefly from the belly and joynts. They are good in the Scorbute or Scurvy, and kill wormes in the stomach or belly. The first shoots, or young leaves of the Elder boiled in Broth or Posset-drink, draweth forth strongly choler and tough flegme; the tender leaves eaten with Oile and Salt do the same. The inner bark boiled in water and given to drink, worketh much more violently; and the berries also green or dry expell the same humour, and is often given with good successe to help the Dropsie, by evacuating great plenty of waterish humours: the bark of the root also boiled in Wine, or the juice thereof drunk, worketh the same effect, but more effectually then either leaves or fruit do; the juice of the root taken, provoketh vomit mightily, and purgeth the watery humours of the Dropsie. The decoction of the root cureth the biting of the Adder, as also of a mad Dogge, and bringeth downe the courses of women. The decoction of the Berries in Wine being drunk provoketh Urine. The powder of the seeds first prepared in Vineger, and then taken in Wine, halfe a dram at a time for certaine dayes toge∣ther, is a meanes to abate and consume the fat flesh of a corpulent body, and to keep it leane. The Berries so prepared, and as much with Tartar, and a few Anise-seeds put to them, a dram of this powder given in Wine, cureth the Dropsie by purging very gently The dry flowers are often used in decoction for Glisters to expell
winde, and easeth the Collick; for they lose their purging quality which they have being green, and reteine an attenuating. The flow∣ers in Ale or Beere are very good for such as have the Dropsie, be∣ing put into a bag. The flowers of both provoke sweat. The Vi∣neger made of the flowers of Elder, by Ma ceration and setting in the Sunne is much more used in France then any where else, and is gratefull to the stomach, and effectuall to quicken the appe∣tite, and helpeth to cut grosse and tough flegme in the breast. The distilled water of the inner bark of the Tree, or of the root, is very powerfull to purge the waterie humours of the Dropsie, or Tympa∣ny, taking it fasting and two hours before supper: The dose is two ounces in the morning, and as much before supper, or take foure ounces in the morning. The water of the flowers also is good in the Dropsie, and openeth the stoppings of the Liver, Spleen and Reines: it driveth away the tertian Ague, and is good against me∣lancholy, and strengthneth the stomach. The dose is three or foure ounces fasting. The Mushromes of the Elder called Jewes-eares, are much used (being dryed and boiled with Ale or milke with Columbine-leaves) for sore throats, and with a little Pepper and Pellitory of Spain in powder to put up the Uvula or palate of the mouth when it is fallen downe. The young and tender branches of Dane-wort and leaves thereof taken with Wine, helpeth those that are troubled with the stone and gravell. The juice of the root is a strong purger of watery humours, and excellent for the Dropsie. The leaves boiled in water and gi∣ven to drink, helpeth the dry Cough and the Quinsie. The dryed Berries or Seeds beaten to powder and taken in Wine fasting, work∣eth the same effect as the juice of the root doth. The powder of the seeds taken in the decoction of Ground-pine, and a little Cyna∣mon to the quantity of a dram at a time, is an approved remedy both for the Gowt, joint-aches and Sciatica, as also for the French disease, for it easeth the paines by withdrawing the humours from the places affected, and by drawing forth those humours that are fluent, peccant and offensive: the powder of the root worketh the same effect. The root steeped in Wine all night, and a draught thereof given before the fit of an Ague, doth much prevaile to abate the fit, or to take it quite away, especially taken the second or third time if need be. In a word, what hath been said of Elder may be said of Dane-wort, only Dane-wort is more forceable or power∣full then Elder.
The manner of administring them. They are given in powder, Boles, and decoction. A Powder against the Hip-gowt, and joynt-gowt. Take Dane-wort-seed, Turbith, Hermodactyles, Sene, Tartar, of each a dram, of Cynamon two drams, make all into fine powder. The dose is foure scruples, in any convenient liquor. A bole purging flegme, and usefull in the Dropsie. Take of the juice of Elder berries halfe an ounce, powder of Seabinde-weed a dram, Oile of Cynamon foure drops, make a bole or lump, rolle it up in Sugar, and take it in a morning, drinking some Posset-drink after it. A decoction against the Quartane Ague and Quotidian. Take of Elder-bark, with the root, of each an ounce, of Asarum three drams, Cynamon a dram and a halfe, boile them in milk, and give halfe of it. This will work upward and downward. Take it before the fit commeth, once or twice if need be. Vide Blochwitius, Anotomiâ Sambuci. The outward use. A decoction of the roots of either, mollifieth the hardnesse of the wombe, if women do sit therein, and openeth the veines, and bringeth downe the courses. The leaves boiled and laid hot upon a∣ny hot and painefull Apostumes, especially in the more remote and sinewie parts doth both coole the heat and inflammation of them, and ease the paines. The juice of the leaves snuffed up into the Nostrils, purgeth the tunicles of the brain. The juice of the green leaves applyed to hot inflammations of the eyes, asswageth them. The juice of the berries boiled with a little Honey, and dropped into the eares, easeth the paines of them. A decoction of the root maketh the haire black if it be washed therewith: the leaves boiled till they be tender, then beaten and mixed with Barley-meale, and applyed to hot inflammations, as∣swageth them, and helpeth places that are burnt either by fire or water, cureth Fistulous Ulcers being laid thereupon; and easeth the paines of the Gowt being beaten and boiled with tallow of a Bull, or Goat, and laid warme thereon. The young buds and leaves of the Elder, and as much of the roots of Plantaine beaten together, and boiled in Hogs-grease, this being laid warme upon the place pained with the Gowt doth give present ease thereto: the leaves also burnt, and the powder of them put up into the Nostrils stayeth the bleed∣ing once or twice used. The leaves of Elders boiled tender, and applied warme to the fundament, easeth the paines of the Piles, if
they be once or twice renewed growing cold. The pitch in the middle of the Elder stalkes, being dried and put into the cavernous, or hollovv holes of Fistulous Ulcers that are ready to close, open∣eth and dilateth the Orifices, whereby injections may be used, and other remedies applied for the cure of them. The Mushromes cal∣led Jewes-eares, helpeth the inflammation of the eyes being mace∣rated or steeped in Rose-water, or Plantaine-water, and the eyes washed therewith. The dryed Jewes-eares steeped in Rose-water and applied to the Temples and forehead, do ease the paines of the head or head-ach. The distilled water of the flowers of Elder, is of much use to cleare the skin from Sun-burning, Freckles, Mor∣phew or the like: and both the fore-part and hinder-part of the head being bathed therewith, it taketh away all manner of head-ach that commeth of a cold cause. The same water taketh away the heat and inflammation of the eyes, and helpeth them when they are blood-shotten. The hands being washed morning and evening with the same vvater of the flovver doth much help and ease them that have the Palsy in them, and cannot keep them from shaking. The foule inflamed or old Ulcers and sores of the leggs, being often vvashed vvith the vvater of the leaves or of the flovvers distilled in the middle of the moneth of Maey doth heale them in a short space. The water also helpeth the paine of the side, if a linnen cloth be vvet therein, and the side bathed therevvith vvarme. Oile of Elder-flovvers doth assvvage paine, cleanse and mundifie the skin, profiteth in stoppings of the Liver and spleene, and is good for the paines of the joynts and nerves, and is very usefull in burning and wild-fire. An ointment made of the green leaves of Dan-wort & May butter made in the Moneth of May, is accounted with many a sove∣reigne remedy for all outward paines, aches and cramps in the joynts, nerves or sinewes, for starcknesse and lamenesse by cold and other casualties, and generally to warme, comfort, and strengthen all the outward parts ill-affected, as also to mollifie the hardnesse, and to open the obstructions of the spleen, the grieved parts anoint∣ed therewith. Against burning by Fire or Water. Take one pound of the inner bark of Elder, bruise it or cut it small, and put it into two pound of pure Sallet-Oile, or Oile-Olive, that hath been first washed oftentimes with the distilled water of Elder-flowers, let them boile gently a good while together, and afterwards straine forth the Oile, pressing it very hard; set this Oile on the fire againe, and put thereto foure ounces of the juice of the young branches and leaves of the Elder-tree, and as much new Wax, let them boile to the Consumption of the
juice, after vvhich being taken from the fire, put presently thereto two ounces of liquid Vernish (such as Joyners use to ver∣nish Bed-steds, Cubboards, &c.) and afterwards of Olibanum in fine powder foure ounces, and the whites of two Egges being first well beaten by themselves, all these being well stirred and mixed toge∣ther, put it up into a cleane pot, and keep it for to use when occa∣sion serveth. Parkinson Treatise of Plantes, fol. 210, 211. taken out of Matthiolus. Against the Tooth-ach. Take of the root of Elder cut in thin slices, two ounces and a halfe, Vineger of Elder, or White Wine halfe a pinte: boile them to∣gether, then wash the mouth and teeth therewith. Or Take of the middle rinde of Elder, and flowers thereof, of each a handfull, of Jewes-eares one or two, boyle them in a sufficient quan∣tity of Vineger and Wine, use it as the former. An Ointment against the hardnesse or scirrhus of the Spleene. Take Oile of Elder an ounce, Ammoniacum dissolved in Vineger, of Elders two drams: boile them to the Consumption of the watery substance, then add a little wax, and make an ointment. Two or three drams of Wax will be sufficient. With this Ointment anoint the spleen morning and evening warme, laying a warme cloth on. A Cataplasme or pultis against bruises. Take of Elder-flowers in powder two ounces, Camomill and Worme-wood in powder, of each halfe an ounce, mix them with a sufficient quantity of Oile of Elder, and apply it warme to the bruis∣ed parts. For the Piles or Hemorrhoides. Take a handfull or two of Elder-leaves, and boile them in water till they be tender, take them out of the water and mix a little Linseed-Oile therewith, then apply it warme (upon a red cloth, or a piece of Scarlet) to the Piles, there letting it lye till it be almost cold, then apply fresh, do thus for the space of an houre or two if need require, and let it be bound up, having the party to his warme bed. This saith Gerard hath not failed at the first dressing to cure the said disease. Ger. Herball. fol. 1423. The hurtfull quality. Both Elder and Dane-wort offend the head, are hurtfull to the stomach and liver that is hot, as also bringeth gripings, & weakneth the body, let them be given with Anise-seed, Carraway-seed, Cy∣namon,
Mace, &c. Wal-wort is not to be given but to such as have strong bodies. The dose. The juice of the leaves or rinde is given from halfe an ounce to an ounce or two ounces. The juice of the berries from two drams to six drams. The seeds from halfe a dram to a dram. The distilled water from two ounces to four ounces. The powder of the bark or rinde from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such things as are made of them. From the flowers of Elder are made these following. The distilled water both of the flowers and leaves. Spirit of El∣der-flowers. Wine of Elder-flowers. Syrupus acetosus Sambucinus. Honey of Elder. Conserve of Elder. Oile both by infusion and di∣stillation. From the berries, Rob-Sambuci, or Pulp of the berries. Tincture, Extract, Wine, Spirit, water distilled. Oile. From the tender branches. Conserve. From the leaves, middle rinde, roots and Jewes-eares. Distilled water. Syrup. Oile. From Dane-wort are made: the distilled water; the spirit: from the flowers. Rob-Ebuli, or the pulp of the berries. Tincture or essence. CHAP. 57. De Santalis, of Sanders. THese are woods that are brought to us from the Indies. The names and kindes. There are three sorts of Sanders, white, red and yellow. The white is called in Latine Santalum and Sandalum album, the red Santalum rubrum, the yellow Santalum citrinum or flavum. Difference betweene Brasill-wood and red Sanders. They differ thus. 1 They grow farre one from the other. 2 San∣ders is neither sweet in taste, nor giveth any dye as the Brasil doth. 3 Red-Sanders is more ponderous and weighty then Brasil, and vvill sink in vvater. 4 It is a harder and shorter grained vvood, and more brittle in breaking short.
The temperament. They are cold and dry in the second or third degree. Some say they are hot, the red is more cooling and binding. The yellow is the best, the next is the vvhite, the red is least of use. The duration. They vvill keep good three or foure yeares, or longer. The inward use. They are Cephalicall, Hepaticall, and Cardiacall, that is good for the Head, Liver and Heart, to open the obstructions of the Liver, and to coole the heat thereof, and to ease the paine of the head, e∣specially the white and the yellovv. They are good for faintings of the heart and papitation o beating thereof, also for weak and faint stomackes which comes through heat; good against melancholy, and procureth mirth and alacrity. They are used to stay and binde the spermaticall flux in men and women, for which purpose either the powder taken in a reare Egge, or mixed with other things for the purpose, or steeped in red Wine, and kept in a hot Balneo, or in hot Embers close stopped all night, and strained forth and drunk in the morning and evening, both stay the Gonorrhea, or running of the Reines in men, and the whites in women. They are good in hot diseases, as in burning Fevers, inflammations of the Liver, and such like. The Indians (saith Gerarde) do use the decoction made in water against hot burning Agues, and the overflowing of the courses, Erisipelas, the Gowt, and all inflammations, especially if it be mixed with the juice of Night-shade, House-leek, or Purslane. They are put in Collises and Jellies, and all delicate meats, which are good to strengthen and revive the spirits. The red Sanders have an astrictive and strengthning faculty, but are not cordiall as the other two: they are used in divers Me∣dicines and meats both for their faculty and pleasing red colour, which they give to them, as in savvces, Pies, &c. The red is often used to stay defluxions of thin rheume from the head, and to coole hot inflammations, hot Gowts, and to temper the heat of hot Agues. The manner of administring them. They are given in Powder, Electuary, and Pils. A powder against the Pestilence. Take of the three Sanders, of each two drams, Cloves and Cy∣namon, of each a dram, Harts-horn two drams, make them into a fine powder, and take thereof morning and evening half a dram in Car∣duus-Water.
An Electuary against the Whites in Women. Take of old Conserve of Red-Roses four ounces White and Red-Sanders in powder a dram and a half, with syrup of Water-lillies make an Electuary, and take of it morning and evening as much as a Nutmeg. The outward use. It is used outwardly in Catarrhes, or Rheumes, pains of the head, against vomiting, and in Epithemes and Fomentations against the intemperate heat of the Liver. They are used against the Gowt and hot inflammations with the juice of Purslane and Plantain, or Hous∣leek. Applied with Rose-water to the temples, it giveth ease to the head-ach, and keepeth back the flowing of humours to the eyes. Be∣ing applyed to the breasts of Maids, or Women mixed with the juice of Purslane, abateth their greatnesse, and hindereth their over-much growing. The Dose. The Dose is from a scruple to two scruples. Of such things as are made of Sanders. Extractum gummosum. Species Diatrion santalon. Trosses of San∣ders. Ointment of Sanders. Cerote of Sanders. CHAP. 58. De Sarcocolla, of Sarcocoll. SArcocolla is a Gum of a plant growing in Persia, bitter in taste, and in very small pieces and powder, like the small pieces of Fran∣kincense, and little bigger then Poppy-seed. The names. In Latine Sarcocolla, in English Sarcocoll. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the first degree, or hot in the second degree, and dry almost in the same. The best kinde. The best is that which is new, inclining to white (for being old it waxeth reddish) or of a pale colour, bitter in taste, of a porous sub∣stance, viscous and easie to be dissolved in water,
The duration. It will keep good five or six yeers. The inward use. It purgeth flegme both crude and tough, chiefly from the brain, eyes, nerves, joynts, breast and lungs; therefore it profits and avails in coughs, and shortnesse of breath, especially in old persons that are flegmatick; also in all pains of the joynts. It is thought by some to fatten the body, and to increase sperm or seed. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or in pils. The externall use. It is used outwardly against inflammations of the eyes, with milk and the white of an Egg, and to stay Rheumes and Catarrhes, De∣fluxions, and Rednesse thereof, also against all spots in the Eyes. It cleanseth corrupt Ulcers, and incarnateth, or breedeth good flesh, also closeth up Wounds and Ulcers. A fume made thereof is profitable aganist Tenesmus, a disease when one is often provoked to go to stool. Being mixed with Saffron and Honey it heals Scrophulaes, or hard swellings called the Kings Evill in the neck, after they are sufficiently drawn. It is used against bleeding of the Nose, or to stay the bleed∣ing of Wounds, and healeth Ulcers in the Eares, being mixed with Hydromel, or Water and Honey, and instilled therein. A powder for Wounds in the head. Take of Myrrhe half an ounce, Madder-seeds, Cypresse, Orris, Sar∣cocoll, of each three drams: make them into powder, and use it where need is. A Powder to incarnate, or breed good flesh. Take Sarcocoll, Aloës, Olibanum, Dragons-blood, and Orris, of each two drams, make them into powder. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective meanes. Sarcocolla must not be given to hot and dry bodies, or cholerick stomacks, for it doth much trouble and offend such. The often use of it causeth young men to wax old, and to become bald. It is cor∣rected as Sagapenum. The Dose. The Dose is from a dram to two drams. Of such medicines as are made of Sarcocoll. There are made Pils of Sarcocoll, Trochisi albi, Rasis.
CHAP. 59. De Scammonio, of Scammonie. SCammonie is the juice of a root, being full of milkie juice, of a grayish colour. The names. It is called in Arabick  Mahmûda, in Greek , i. e. sodiendo, & cavenda radice, saith Minsheu in his guide into the Tongues, fol. 647. n Latine it is called Scammonium, Scammo∣neum, and may be derived from the Hebrew word  Shamen, i. e. pinguis, because of it's unctious quality, or Shamen, per Metaphoram, signifieth robustus, for Scammonie is of strong operation, and fit onely for robustious bodies Scammonie being prepared, (that is, baked in a Quince in embers, or baked in an oven) is called Diagre∣dium, Diagrydium, Diacrydium, & Diadredium. In Greek , i. e. Lachrymula, a little teare. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree. The best kinde. The best is of a dark grayish colour, somewhat light, and not pon∣derous, a little spongie also, or with some holes in it, somwhat clear, and not muddy or drossie, of a strong taste, brittle or easie to break, being wet with the tongue, it shewes like milke, but not burning in the mouth or throat; for that is a signe of adulteration, and that it is mixed with Spurge. The best comes from Antioch. The duration It will keep good two or three yeares, some say twenty. The time of gathering and p eparing it. The time to gather it and to prepare it, is in June. The inward use. Scammonie purgeth primarily and chiefly choler and watery hu∣mours▪ and that both strongly and speedily from remote parts: af∣terward (say some) it purgeth flegmatick humours. The manner of administring it. It is given in Pils, Potions, Boles, &c, and is the Basis or chief ingredient of most purging electuaries and pills. Pils. Take Pils Aggregative, and Cochiae, of each two scruples, Diagre∣dium three graines, make Pils thereof,
A Potion. Take of Polypodie, Sene, of each two drams, Anise-seed, and Licoris bruised, of each a dram: bruise the Polypodie: and make an infusion in a quarter of a pinte or strong Beer or Ale all night on embers, then strain it, and adde of Diagredium eight grains, syrup of Roses laxative an ounce, make a Potion. A bole. Take of Conserve of Roses half an ounce of Diagredium eight or ten grains, mix them together, and make a Bole. The externall use. Scammonie being mixed with Honey and Ox-gall, and rubbed on pimples or wheales taketh them away, and boiled in vineger and an∣ointed, taketh away the Leprosie, and spreading scabs. If it be mixed with oile of Roses and vineger, and applyed to the head, it easeth old pains thereof. Being applyed with Honey and oil, it dissol∣veth cold swellings. A Pessary made thereof, and put up, bringeth down the Howers, and expelleth the Secondine or after-birth. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective meanes. There are these hurtfull qualities found in Scammony. First, it in∣genders sharp and gnawing windes in the stomack, insomuch that it provokes to vomit: to help this, it must be baked in a Quince with Fennell-seed, Daucus-seed or Galingall. Secondly, it inflames the spirits, especially in those that have obstructions, or stoppings, and have putrid humours, whereby burning feavers are procured. This is helped by putting into your decoctions, those things which do cool and extinguish the heat thereof, as Flea-wort-seed, pulpe of Prunes, juice of Roses or Violets, or with Rose-water, or Violet-water, or with the juice of a sowre sweet Quince, and mix with it a little Su∣mach or Spodium: or before boiling of the same, (that is, the Scam∣monie) steep it in oile of Roses or Violets. Thirdly, it hath a strong opening and drawing faculty, whereby it brings immoderate fluxes of the belly, by opening the mouth of the veines exceedingly: This is helped by mixing binding and astringent things therewith, as Mastick, the juice of Quince, or of yellow Myrobalanes. Fourthly, it raseth or shaveth (by it's acrimonie) the intrals and guts, and thereby brings paines and torments thereof, and procureth the Dy∣senterie, and Tenesmus, or Bloody-Flux, and often provoking to stool. This hurt is taken away by using fat, moist and slippery me∣dicines, as Gum Tragacanth, or Bdellium, oile of sweet Almonds, oil of Roses, or pulp of Prunes with Sugar, with the mssilage of Flea∣wort-seed,
Mastick and Quinces taken afterwards, and vvarm water last of all: All which causeth it to passe the sooner from the sto∣mack and bowels, and keepeth it from doing hurt. From hence the wise are taught to give Barley-broth (sweetned with sugar) to those that have taken thereof. Fiftly, it hurts the heart, liver, and stomack totius substantiae proprietate, through the propertie or essence of it's whole substance. This hurt is taken away, if cold medicines as well as hot being mixed together and given, thereby to yield help to the heart, liver, and stomack. It may also be taken with Cassia, Manna, the pulp of Raisons, and Sebesteus. It is dangerous to give it in Fea∣vers, or to give it to old and weak persons, children, or women with childe, or to such as have hot and dry bodies, or to persons that have great obstructions. It is seldome given alone, but mixed with some other medicine. Heurnius adviseth to give Barley-broth after the taking of it: Heurn. prax. med. f. 259. The Dose. The Dose is from six graines to twelve. The compound medicines made of Scammonie. Extract of Scammonie, Extractum Diagredii aromati satum, Elixir Scammonii, sive Pill, Scammonii Crollii, Scammonium sulphuratum. In∣fusion of Scammonie, or purging spirit. Diacydonium lucidum Scam∣moniatum, Gelatina Cidoniorum cum Turbith. with many others which you may finde in Schroderus pharm med chym. lib. 4. f. 247, 248, 249. CHAP. 60. De Sena, of Sene. SEne is a leafe of a plant like unto Licoris, and was not known to the ancient Writers. The names. It is called in Latine Senna, & Sena, in English Sene. The temperament. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first. The best kinde. The best is the greenest leaves, and that which is new, not brown, nor too old. The best is said to come from Alexandria, and is called Sena Alexandrina.
The duration. It vvill keep tvvo or three years; but the newer it is the better it vvorks. Some say it vvill keep good ten years. The inward use. Sene purgeth chiefly and primarily melancholy, afterward thick flegme and other humours, from the spleen, Mesenterie and entrals, also from the brain, lungs, liver and heart. It is very profitable in ob∣structions of the spleen and Hypochonders, and against hard swel∣lings thereof, as also in chronicall Agues, whether quartaine or quo∣tidian. It is a singular remedy against melancholy; the Falling-Sick∣nesse, and foul diseases of the skin, as in scab, itch, leprosie, elephan∣sie, &c. It quickens the senses both of seeing and hearing, takes away the cause of sadnesse and melancholy, and is usefull in madnesse, in the frensie, &c. It causeth a fresh, quick, and lively habit of the bo∣dy, and cleanseth and purifieth the blood. It is given also in all head-aches and palsies. Sene is a very safe medicine, and may be given to old men, women with childe, delicate bodies, and children. The manner of administring it. It is given in substance, in decoction, or by infusion, which last is the best way. In substance. Take of Sene of Alexandria a dram, or a dram and a half, make it in powder and give it in posset-drink, or mace-drink. In Decoction. Take of Sene one ounce, Anise-seed, Carraway-seed, Ginger, of each a dram, Licoris two drams, Currents and Raisons of the Sun, of each an ounce, make a gentle decoction hereof in a sufficient quan∣tity of water, and strain it. The Dose is from two ounces to foure ounces. In infusion. Take of Sene an ounce, Raisons of the Sun half an ounce, Anise-seed, Citron-seed, of each a dram, make an infusion on hot embers in Fennel water, for the space of five or six hours, then strain it, and give the clearest. Or Take of the fore-mentioned infusion four ounces, Confectio Hamech two drams and a halfe, syrupe of Roses one ounce, make a Potion, and give it against melancholy.
Or thus for the poorer sort. Take of Sene half an ounce, Borrage-flowers, and Rose-leaves, of each half a dram, Ginger half a dram: let them be macerated or steeped in Whey or Posset-drink, for the space of six or seven houres, then strain it, and being sweetned with Sugar give it to drink. If you add three or four grains of Diagredium to the same, it will be the more effectuall. Weichard. de Med. nunnul praepar f. 92. Note, that ene doth better purge the body when it is infused, then when it is decocted or boiled; for this is certain, that Sene (be∣ing boiled) doth much binde the body after the taking of it: and Sene will not endure any long boiling. The outward use. The Lie wherein Sene and Cammomile-flowers are boiled, is commended for weak brains, to comfort and strengthen them, as al∣so for the sight and hearing, if the head be washed therewith; the same Lie is very profitable for the sinews that are stiffe with cold, or shrunk with Cramps: it helpeth also the Itch in the body and hands, if they be washed therewith. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective means. Because Sene is judged (by many) to be windy, and to offend the stomach; therefore it is corrected with Ginger, Cloves, Galingall, Anise-seed, or Cynamon. It is excellent to infuse it in Whey or Posset-drink. Also it may be given with fat broth of a Cock, with the deco∣ction of Prunes, Jujubes, Raisons, Marsh-mallows, or with Manna and Cassia, or Polypodium, Violet-flowers, Borrage, &c. In hot Dis∣eases inuse it in Whey, or Posset-drink; in cold diseases infuse it in Water of Fumitory, or Wine; for being steept in Wine it doth not offend the stomach Schyronius saith, that Sene s hurtful to the blad∣der and Wombe, especially if there be any Ulcer there. Schyron. Meth ed. f. 107, 116. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a dram to two drams, in decoction from three drams to six drams, in infusion from half an ounce to an ounce. The compound Medicines made of Sene. Pulvis Senae Montagnan. Syrup of the leaves of Sene. Syrupus de Pomis Reg. Saboris Electuarium Diabalsemer, seu Elect. Senatum R. nd. Passulae laxativa. Extract of Sene. Elect. de Sena Nicolas. Con∣fectio Hamech.
Whether Sene offend the stomach, and be a griping and windy edicine? Although some hold that Sene doth offend the stomach, especially being weak; yet in regard that it is somewhat bitter, and partaking of heat and drynesse, it doth rather strengthen and profit the sto∣much, then weaken and offend it. Now that after the taking of Sene in some bodies, (especially in Women and flegmatick persons) gripings do follow, is not denied, but this comes not from the flatu∣lency or windinesse of the Sene, but by accident in drawing grosse and flegmatick humours to the bowels, and there causeth these gri∣pings, especially where the passages are much stopt. Fernel. Meth. l. 5. f. 115. reitag. Aur. Med. f. 264. Sennert. Instit. f. 959. Matthiol. Comment. in lib. 3. Diascor. f. 521. CHAP. 61. De Soldanella, of Seabinde-weed. SEabinde-weed is an herbe grovving neer the Sea, having many small branches somewhat red, trailing or lying upon the ground beset with small and round leaves, not much unlike Asarabacca, but smaller: the flowers come forth like a bell, of a bright red incarnate colour: the seed is black, and groweth in round cods: the root is small and long. The names. In Latine, Soldana, Soldanella, & Convolvulus marinus, in English Seabinde-vveed, Seacavvl, Seacoale, Sea-vvith-vvinde, because the branches winde themselves, and the flowers are so like the small kinde of Binde-weed, & that it growes naturally neer the Sea-coasts. It is called also Sea-bels, for the likenesse of the flowers, and some call it Sea-fole-foot, for the resemblance of the leaves and Scottish scurvy-grasse. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The duration. It will keep good a yeare.
The inward use. Binde-weed purgeth chiefly water, and flegme also, therefore it is very usefull and profitable in the Dropsie, and openeth the obstru∣ctions, or stoppings of the liver, and killeth wormes. It hath two excellent properties, the one is that it wonderfully draweth away watery humours, the other that it corroborates or strengtheneth the liver. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, Decoction, Pils, &c. A Powder against the Dropsy. Take of Sea-bindeweed a scruple, Hermodactyles halfe a scruple, Turbith and Diagredium, of each seven graines, Ginger and Cyna∣mon, of each four graines, make a powder hereof, and adde oile of Fennell and oile of Anise-seed, of each two drops, mix them toge∣ther, and give it in Posset-drink. A Potion against the Dropsie. Take of Sea-bindeweed a handfull, Raisons of the Sun stoned an ounce, Anise-seed a dram; make a decoction in the broth of a cock, straine it, and adde syrupe of Pumitarie an ounce, of the ele∣ctuary Diaturbith two drams, make a potion, and give it. The outward use. The powder of the dried herbe is used to bring or raise up flesh in deep and hollow Ulcers, helping also to heal them. The juice also not pressed, but issuing forth of its own accord when it is broken, gathered and dried, and afterwards relented or made soft, and laid as a plaister to the bottom of the belly, draweth forth watery hu∣mours by siege. The hurtfull quality, and the corrective meanes. Diascorides and some of the Ancient write that it is an enemy to the stomach, and sharp in taste, and therefore adviseth that it be boiled in broth of fat meat, to hinder the strength of its working, and they say it must be given only to strong bodies. And happily it might operate so with them by reason of the climate where it did grow. But that which we use now is a most safe medicine, and may be given to children and weak persons as daily experience doth ma∣nifest. It may be given with Cynamon, Ginger, Anise-seed, Ma∣stich, or Sugar, also with Rubarbe and Cubebs, for Rubarbe is count∣ed an excellent consort for it. In decoction it is given with Raisons and Anise-seed.
The Dose. In powder it is given from halfe a dram to a dram and a halfe, or two drams. In decoction from halfe an ounce to an ounce and a halfe. The juice is given from two drams to halfe an ounce. Of such things as are made thereof. Extract of Seabinde-weed. Succus inspissatus. CHAP. 62. De Succino, of Amber. PLinie saith, Amber issueth forth from trees like as Gum in Cherrie-trees, and Rosin in Pines, Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 37. Cap. 3. f. 607. But it is generally taken for a kinde of liquid Butimen, whose springs and fountaines are in the Germane Seas, and running into pieces, some greater and lesser then others, and is taken up with Iron-hooks, being soft under water, but hardning in the Aire like Corall. The names. In Latine Electrum, Chrysolectrum, Glessum, Resina terrae; but the usuall Latine names are Succum, Carabe, Charabe and Karabe in English 'tis called Amber. The temperament. Amber is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second. The best kinde. Although Authors mention three sorts, yet there are but two sorts in shops, the white and the yellow: the best is the whitest, and that which is most cleare, and being rubb'd will draw straws unto it, and gives a sent like Bitumen. The duration. It will keep good many yeares. The inward use. Amber strengtheneth the heart and stomach, stayeth vomiting, dryeth up moist humours in the stomach, and hinders the breeding thereof, and stayeth the flux of the belly. It is usefull in cardiack passions, and palpitations, or beatings of the heart. It recreates, or refresheth the braine, and is profitable in Rheumes, or Catarrhes, in
the Falling Sicknesse, Apoplexie, Lethargie, Swiming of the head, suffocation, and inflation or windinesse of the Mother. It stayeth the flowing of blood and seed, provokes the termes in women, and cau∣seth a speedy delivery. It helpeth women that have the whites, and men that have the running of the Reines; for it stoppeth the flux, and strengthneth the parts very much. Being taken in Saxifrage-wa∣ter, it is a sure remedy for such as have their urine stopped. It is ve∣ry good for old coughs, and those that are falling into a Consump∣tion, being mixed with conserve of Red Roses, and so taken morn∣ing and evening; and is profitable for joynt-aches, and the running Gowt, if it be taken vvith tvvo or three ounces of the decoction of Lignum vitae. The chymicall oile of Amber taken inwardly availeth against the Pestilence and contagious aire, if three or foure drops be taken for divers mornings together, in Carduus or Angelica-water. It helpeth the biting of a mad Dog, and is excellent to preserve from the A∣poplexie, Falling Sicknesse, svviming of the head, and Night-mare, taken in Piony-water, Betony-vvater, Lavender, Rosemary, black-Cherry-vvater, or in Lily Convally-vvater, or Sage-vva∣ter, or taken in Wine, especially if it be taken about the nevv of the Moone, in the morning fasting: for this oile is a singular secret to comfort the animall, vitall, and naturall spirits. If five or six drops be taken in Sage-water it restoreth the speech lost. It dryeth up Rheumes and sharpneth the sight, being taken in Fennel-water, or Eye-bright-vvater. It helpeth trembling of the heart and faintings of the spirits, shortnesse of breath taken vvith Horehound-vvater, and the Pleurisie vvith vvater of Sage of Jerusalem. It helpeth spit∣ting of blood taken vvith Tornentill-vvater. It helpeth a cold sto∣mach and vomiting being taken vvith Mint-vvater. It helpeth the intemperate frigidity or coldnesse of the Liver and Spleene, taken in Spleenwort-water or Wormwood-water, and helpeth such as are melancholy if it be taken in Borrage or Buglosse-water. Given in Endive-water, or a few drops thereof taken in the pap of a roasted Apple, with a leafe of Gold cureth the Jaundise. It doth wonderful∣ly ease the stone and urine stopt in the Kidneys or Bladder, if a few drops be given in Saxifrage, or Parsley-water. It stirs up to Venery taken with Diasatyrion in Wine. It helpeth the Running of the Reins taken with water or syrup of Purslan. It easeth the Collick taken with Cynamon-water or Aqua-vitae. It cureth the Dysentery, or bloudy
Flux taken in Tormentil-water. It killeth Wormes taken in Tansey-water. It helpeth the joynt-Gowt and Sciatica or Hip-Gowt taken with the decoction or Lignum sanctum, as also trembling and the cramp. It much helpeth the affects of the wombe, as the suffocation and precipitation or aling down thereof, as also barrennesse, taken in Minch or Penny-royall-water, or Anise-seed-water, and easeth paines in travell, bringeth away the childe and after-birth, provo∣keth the termes, and bringeth avvay the dead childe, given in Savin-vvater, especially if five or six drops thereof be given, and then as much more vvithin halfe an hour if need require. The manner of administring it. It is given in povvder, in Electuaries, &c. A powder to hasten the birth. Take of Cynamon halfe a dram, or a dram, Cassia lignea, tvvo scruples, Saffron half  dram, of white Amber a scruple, make all into powder, and ge in Savin-water. An Electuary against the pain and heat of the stomach, &c. Take of conserve of red Roses two ounces, Marmelate of Quin∣ces an ounce, Mastick in powder two drams, red Corall in powder a dram & a half, oile of Amber a scruple; with syrup of Quinces make an Electuary. Take of it morning and evening before meat and af∣ter meat. It is excellent also to stay vomiting and the flux of the bel∣ly. Doring. de ol. succinii viribus f. 73. The outward use. Amber being burned on hot coals, and the fume thereof received to the head, doth help moist distillations thereof falling on the eyes, teeth, nose or stomach. The fume thereof (saith Doringius) cured an old man of the Apoplexie, that was judged to be certainly dead. Do∣ring. de ol. Succinii viribus, f. 71. Being worn about the neck, it cures Agues, and helpeth swellings of the throat and almonds, and is good in times of infection, especially used with salt, and hinders defluxions. A fume thereof doth much help to cure the Falling Sicknesse, and is good in the Pestilence, made into powder, and mixed with Ho∣ney and Oile of Roses, it is good for the infirmities of the eares, and mixed only with Honey, it cleers the dim sight. It is a present re∣medy against burning or scalding, if it be boiled with Linseed-oile, and the parts anointed with the same, or wet clouts therein, and lay them on. It is commended against the clifts or chaps of the hands, if the powder be strewed thereon, for it closeth them up
and dryeth. The Chymicall Oile of Amber is good for cold and moist diseases of the brain, if the temples or nape of the neck be anointed with a few drops thereof: it discusseth, or expelleth winde in the eares and head, and strengtheneth the memory. It is commend∣ed in the curing of Wounds, Ulcers, and Fistulous tumours being ap∣plyed with other ingredients. It helps the Cramp being anointed therewith, and deafnesse if a few drops be put into the eares with Cotton-Wooll. It helpeth the stinking of the breath, if it be mixed with Plantain-water, or Rose-water, and the mouth washed there∣with, and easeth also the pain of the teeth comming from a cold cause; it cleanseth black teeth, and maketh them white, and helpeth the putrefaction of the gums and teeth. It is useful in the relaxation or swelling of the Uvula, or palate of the mouth. It stayeth the bleeding of the nose if the nostrils be anointed therewith, especially if a cloth wet in Plantain-water be applyed to the temples. A Plaister against the heat of Ʋlcers. Take of white Amber in powder an ounce, of Honey a pound, of common Salt in powder two ounces, mix them together and apply it. This draweth out the heat, easeth the paine, and healeth it Doring de Ol. Succin. virib. f. 183. The hurtfull qualty. It is not to be given in very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. Amber in powder is given from a scruple to a dram, or four scru∣ples. The Chymicall Oile from three drops to ten. Of such things as are made of Amber. Oile of Amber, Magister of Amber, Tincture of Amber, Pils of Amber, Balsam of Amber. CHAP. 63. De Tamarindis, of Tamarinds. TAmarinds are the fruit of a tree growing in India, Gart. ab Hor∣to, aromat. histor. cum annotatione car. clus. f. 119. Others say they are strangers in India, and grow in Arabia, being brought from thence into the Indies. Renodaeus de Mat. Med l. 1. sect. 1. f. 349.
The names. They are called in Latine Tamarindi, from the Hebrew word Tamar, i. e. Palma, and Indus. In Greek they are called , Palmulae acidae, in English Tamarinds. The temperament. They are cold and dry in the second degree, or in the beginning of the third The best kinde. The best are of a blackish, or reddish colour, fresh and moist, of a sharp taste, with many threds (as it were) among them. They are adulterated with Prunes, but that is easily known by the colour and taste. The duratisn. They will keep good (being kept close) two or three yeers. The inward use. They purge choler and adust humours; therefore are used in acute Feavers, in the Frensie & madnesse, they stay vomiting, cool inflam∣mations both of the Liver and stomach, as also of the reins and back, and help the running of the Reins; they also stay Rheumes and Distillations. They open obstructions, or stoppings both of the Li∣ver and Spleen, and are profitable against all eruptions or breakings forth of the skin, which arise from the heat of the bloud, or from sharp or salt water running between the flesh and the Skin, or Scab, Itch, Leprosie, and such like. They quench thirst wonderfully, and are good against the Jaundise; as also most excellent in Erysipelas, or Wild-fire, bleeding of the nose, (arising from choler) and Womens fluxes. The manner of administring them. They are given in Boles, in Potions and Decoctions. A Bole. Take of the pulp of Tamarinds an ounce and a half, species Diar∣rhodon Abbatis, two scruples, mix them together and make a Bole. A Powder. Take of the pulp of Tamarinds half an ounce, Manna two oun∣ces, Succory-water four ounces; dissolve them in water and make a Potion. Or Take of Prunes, Sebestens of each ten in number, Tamarinds an ounce, of the foure greater cold-seeds, viz. Gourds, Cutruls, Cu∣cumers
and Melons, of each a dram, of Borrage, Buglosse, Rose∣mary and Violet-flowers a dram; make a gentle decoction in about a pinte of Endive or Violet-water, then strain it, and add thereto sy∣rupe of Roses one ounce and a half, syrup of Violets half an ounce, Oile of Vitriol five drops, mix them together, and give it. This is excellent in burning Feavers arising of choler. They may be given in Posset-drink or Whey, also in Succory-wa∣ter, or Goats-Whey. Against the small Pox, boil them with Dates, Figs and Jujubes, and give them in broth made with Lentiles: But note, that they must not be much boiled, for they will not endure any long boyling. They are most convenient in hot and acute Feavers, in hot seasons, and in hot bodies. The externall use. They are applied outwardly against all inflammations of the skin, as Wheals, Pimples, and such like. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective meanes. There are two inconveniences in Tamarinds, First, they offend and hurt a cold stomach; therefore to help it, give them with Ma∣stich, Cynamon, Anise-seed, Mace, or such like. Secondly, they are very astringent and binding, therefore in the beginning of putrid Feavers abstain from them, and be very cautious in giving them, ex∣cept it be in a small quantity, and with Manna, Cassia, or the like. The Dose. The Dose of the pulp is from one ounce to two ounces. In deco∣ction or infusion it is given from two ounces to three or four ounces. The compound Medicines made of Tamarinds. Pulp of Tamarinds, Electuary lenitive, Electuary Diacatholicon, &c. CHAP. 64. De Tormentilla, of Tormentill. TOrmentill is an hearb so like Cinquefoile that many mistake it. Cōmon Tormentil hath many slender weak branches rising frō the root, leaning as it were upon the ground, with many short leaves that stand closer to the stalks then the other Cinquefoiles do,
with the foot-stalks encompassing the branches at severall places: the leaves be small, five or most commonly seven growing upon a stem much like the leaves of Cinquefoile or five-leafed grasse, but some∣what longer and lesser dented about the edges many of them: the flowers be yellow, much like Cinquefoile, but smaller: the root is black without, but reddish within, and sometimes a little crooked. The names. It is called in Greek , ex  septem, et , folium, that is, seven leaves. In Latine Tormentilla, quia valet adversus tormenta intestinorum. In English Tormentill and Set-foile. The temperament. It is dry in the third degree without any manifest heat, binding, and of subtile or thin parts. The duration. The herbe will keep a year, and the root two yeares. The inward use. Tormentill is Diaphoreticall and Alexipharmacall, and vulnerary, that is, it provokes sweat, expels poyson, and is good to cure wounds. The herbe, root and water are in use. It is much used in the pestilence, and other malignant diseases, as small pox, measles, spotted feavers and purples, driving forth by sweat any contagion, especially if a flux of the belly be joyned with these diseases. It is usefull in Catarrhes (to dry up rheumes) and in the French disease. It cureth the bloody flux, and all other fluxes of the belly, and stop∣peth the spitting of blood, pissing of blood, vomiting, and the over-flowing of womens courses. The powder of the root or the deco∣ction thereof is very available against Ruptures, bruises or fals, and dissolveth congealed blood, and easeth the paines that happen there∣upon. It helpeth also the stoppings and hurts of the lungs and liver, and is good against the Jaundise, and cureth the tertian Ague. The decoction of the root in wine being drunk, hindereth abortion, or miscarrying in women with childe, the leaves killeth wormes in chil∣dren, and it is a great help to such as cannot keep their water, if they put thereto some juyce of Plantain. A dram of rhe root in powder taken in water wherein red hot iron or steel hath been quenched, is a good remedy for such as have the running of the reines, especially the body being first well purged. The leaves, seeds, or roots are good to put in decoctions for wound-drinks. In a word, it is most excellent in he time of the plague or pestilence. The distilled water of Tormentill taken in a morning fasting, is
lent against venome or any contagion, and is a good preservative in times of infection. The dose is two or three ounces The same taken morning and evening, cures all inward ulcers in the body, stayeth the flux of the belly, especially the Dysentery or bloudy flix. It doth com∣fort the brain, heart, stomach, liver and spleen; as also the whole bo∣dy, and cureth most Agues. The best way to still the water is to steep the herb all night in wine, and then distil it Balneo Mariae. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, Electuary Potions, and Decoctions. A powder against the Pestilence. Take Tormentil root, Dyttany, of each a dram, Sorrel and Citron-seed of each a dram and a half, Ginger, Cynamon, Saffron, white and red Sanders, of each half a scruple, Bole Armoniack and terra si∣gillata, or sealed earth, of each four scruples. Make all into powder, and give half a dram thereof or more, in Carduus-water, and let them sweat after it. An Electuary against the Pestilence. Take of Tormentil-root in powder two drams, of the three kindes of Sanders in powder of each a scruple, Wood-Aloes in powder half of a scruple, Angelica-root in powder a dram, conserve of Red Roses and of Rosemary, of each two ounces and a half, with syrup of Gillowflowers make an Electuary. Give of it morning and evening about a dram. A Potion against Infection. Take of Tormentil-root in powder half a dram, London-Treacle a Dram, Carduus-water an ounce and a halfe, mix them together, and give it warm, let the party sweat after it. The outward use. The decoction of the root is good to cleanse sores and wounds, and to dry them up: the root or the juice may be put into ointments for Wounds and Ulcers. The root of Tormentil and Pellitory of Spain and burnt Allome, of each a like quantity, made up into a paste, and put into a hollow tooth, doth not only asswage the pain, but stay∣eth the flux of humours which was the cause thereof. The decoction thereof helpeth rotten Sores and Ulcers of the mouth, or secret parts. It dissolveth all Knots, Kernels, and Hardnesse about the Eares, Throat, Jawes, and the Kings Evill, if the leaves and roots be bruised and laid thereunto. The same also easeth the pains of the Hip-gowt, by restraining the sharp humours that flow thereunto.
The juice of the leaves and roots used with a little vineger, is a spe∣ciall remedy against the running sores in the head, or other parts, scabs also, and the itch, or any such eruptions in the skin, proceeding of salt and sharp humours: the same is effectual for the Hemorrho∣ides or Piles, if they be washed and bathed therewith, or with the distilled water of the herb and roots. It dryeth up sharp Rheumes that fall from the head to the eyes, and cause rednesse, pain, and wa∣tering, itchings or the like, if a little prepared Tutia, or white Amber, be used with the distilled water hereof. The powder of the root doth wonderfully stay the bleeding of the nose or any wound, or vomiting. The same mixed with Vineger, Oile of Roses, and a little Wax being made into a plaister, and laid to the back, doth pre∣vent Abortion in Women, or miscarrying. If women sit over the de∣coction thereof, it is a good help to prevent miscarrying, especially if after the use thereof they make a plaister with the powder and Honey, laying it to the navel and back. The distilled water being in∣jected doth much help to cure the Whites or Reds in Women. The powder of the root mixed with Oil of Camomile easeth the pains of the joynts. The distilled water doth cleanse Wounds, Fistulaes, Can∣kers and Sores being washed therewith, and doth much help to the speedy cure of them, and the water also alone doth cleer the sight, and stay the flux of Rheume being washed therewith. A Plaister to prevent miscarrying in Women. Take of the plaister called Emplastrum contra rupturam, two oun∣ces, the root of Tormentill in powder two drams, Oile of Roses, or Quinces half an ounce, make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the back warm. The hurtfull quality. It must not be given in very dry bodies, nor to such as are much bound in their bodies. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram, in decoction from a dram to three drams. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled Water. Dioscorium, &c.
CHAP. 65. De Turpetho, of Turbith. TƲrbith is the root of a certain plant, brought us from beyond the Sea, neither have any set down certainly what it is. The names. It is called in Latine Turpethum, Turpetum, Turbitum, Turbith, in English also Turbith, quasi turbatorium, because it troubleth the stomach. The temperament. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second: or hot and dry in the second degree. The best kinde. The best is that which is white within and hollow, like a Cane or Reed, Gummy, with an ash-coloured bark or out-side, smooth and not rugged, easie to be broken, fresh, not worm-eaten, and not ve∣ry great, or thick, which is not so good. The duration. It will keep good three or four yeers. The inward use. Turbith purgeth thick, viscid and flegmatick humours from the stomach, veins, joynts, nerves, and breast; moreover, it draweth away water in the Dropsie. It is profitable in the Gowt, in long continued Agues comming from grosse and tough humours, and in all diseases arising of thick flegm. Some say it purgeth first and primarily flegm, and then somewhat adust humours, therefore it is used in the French pox, Elephansie, Leprosie, Morphew, and also in madnesse. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, or in substance. In decoction. Take of Betony a handful, Turbith three drams, Citron-seed, Long-Pepper, of each half a dram; make a decoction in a sufficient quantity of water, strain it, and add thereunto Honey of Roses so∣lutive one ounce and a half, make a potion. Massar. f. 481. In substance. Take of Turbith in powder a dram and a half, mix it with posset-drink
(wherein hath been boiled Betony, Ivy, Anise-seed, &c.) and give it. It may be given in broth wherein hath been boiled Raisons and Figs. It will endure boiling indifferent well, but especially if it be first infused it is better. The externall use. The powder of Turbith being mingled with honey, and applyed, eateth and consumeth dead flesh in ulcers and wounds, and is profi∣table in Gangrenes. The hurtfull quality, with the corrective means. Turbith hath three hurtfull qualities; first, it is slow and weak in operation, so that except it be quickened with something it often∣times draweth away thin flegme, and leaves the thick behind. Se∣condly, it offends and troubleth the stomach, bringing a nauseousness thereof, and many times causeth vomiting, according to the verse. Nolo damnosum Turbith mea viscera turbet. Thirdly, it macerates or consumes the body, and brings leannesse and Consumption. It is corrected with Ginger, Cynamon, Anise-seed, Mastick, and the like. Also oil of sweet Almonds is a good cor∣rective for it, especially in lean bodies: it is not safe to give it to wo∣men that are with child, old, and weak persons, or to children. After the use of Turbith the eating of fish is forbidden, and also you must avoid the South-winde. Heurn. Prax. Med. fol. 266. Tretag. Auror. Med. fol. 322. Sennert. Instit. fol. 857. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a dram to two drams, in decoction two drams to halfe an ounce. The compound Medicines made of Turbith Extract of Twrbith, Species Diaturbith with Rubarbe, Pils of Tur∣bith, Vineger of Turbith. Deo soli gloria.
CHAP. 66. De Agrimonia, of Agrimonie. The names. IT is called in Latine Eupatorium, from Eapator the first finder of it, and Agrimonia; some also call it Hepatoxium, because it is a good help to the Liver: In English, Agrimonie and Egrimonie. The Temperament. It is hot and doth moderately binde, and is of a temperate dri∣nesse, it cutteth and scoureth, and is of subtill parts. The Duration. It will keep good a yeare, being well dryed. The inward use. It openeth the stoppings of the Liver, and cleanseth it; it helpeth the Jaundise, and strengthneth the inward parts, and is good for the Bowells, and healeth their inward woundings, and bruises or hurts, and qualifieth all inward distempers that grow therein: A decoction of the herbe made with wine, and drunk, is good against the sting and biting of Serpents, and helpeth them that have foule, or troubled, and Bloody Waters, and is usefull in long continued Fluxes of the Liver, especially in old people; It is good for the Strangury, and helpeth also the Collick, it helpeth the Cough, and clenseth the Breast: It is good help to ridde a Quartaine or Tertian Ague, if a draught of the Decoction be taken warme before the fit; the leaves and seeds stop the the Bloody flixe, being taken in wine. The roots or leaves boyled in wine, and drunke, helpeth such as have the Palsey. It is accounted a good herbe against the Spleene being stopt, as also against the Pestilence, and the biting of a mad Dog. The di∣stilled water helpeth the Jaundies, Cough, and killeth wormes, if two ounces thereof be taken Morning and Evening; and it is esteemed a secret experiment against the Quartaine Ague, if foure ounces thereof be taken Morning and Evening for many dayes together, but I rather approve of the Decoction. The leaves or roots are good in the Dropsey and Green-sicknesse. The manner of administring it. It is chiefly given in Decoction. A Decoction against the Jaundes. Take of Hore-hound two handfulls, Elecampane root, Buglosse,
and Agrimony, of each a dram and a halfe, of Rubarbe, and wood Aloes, of each a dram; Bruise the wood Aloes and the roots, boyle them in three pints of White-wine to a quart. Note that the Ru∣barbe must not be put in, till the rest be almost boyled. Take of this two ounces Morning and Evening. If there be a feaver boyle it in Wa∣ter. The outward use. It helpeth old Sores, Cankers, and Ulcers that are of hard Cura∣tion, being stamped with old Swines grease and applyed, for it cleans∣eth and afterwards healeth them: in the same manner also applyed, it draweth forth thornes or splinters of wood, Nayles, or such like that is gotten into the flesh, and helpeth to strengthen Members that be out of joynt: it helpeth also foule impostumed eares, being bruised and applyed; or the juyce dropped into them: The leaves bruised and applyed, to the biting of a mad Dog, helpeth the same, and the juyce mingled with Vineger taketh away warts being laid thereon. The distilled water of the herbe is good for all the purposes aforesaid, and to cure Ulcers and sores of the mouth and throat being gargled or washed therewith. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. These following are made of Agrimonie, Syrup of Agrimonie. Pils of Agrimonie. Trosses of Agrimonie. Water of Agrimonie. The Dose. The leaves are given in Powder, from a scruple to a dram. CHAP. 67. De Agno Casto, of the chaste Tree. The Names. IT is called Castus, that is, chast, because the Athenian ma∣trons, in their Thesmophoria did use these leaves as Sheets to lye up∣on, thereby to preserve their chastity: In Latine it is called Agnus castus and vitex, also Salix Marina, or Salix Amerina, in English Chast tree. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of a very thin essence or substance, sharp also and binding.
The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare, the seede will keep longer. The inward use. It is a singular good remedy for all such as desire to live chaste, for withstandeth all filthy desires to Venery or Lust, and dryeth up the seed of generation, in any manner used and taken. The seeds being drunke, resisteth the bitings of venemous Beasts, Spiders, or the like, and helpeth the Dropsy and those that are troubled with the Spleen: it also procureth milke in womens Breasts, it procureth their courses and urine stopped, and helpeth the windinesse of the Stomach and Belly, and is usefull in the stoppings of the Liver. A dram of the seed given in Powder causeth sleepe. The decoction of the herbe and seeds is good for women troubled with the paines of the Mother, or in∣flamation thereof, and is said to help an Ague if a draught thereof be taken before the fit. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Decoction powder electuary. Trosses, &c. An Electuary to coole and abate Lust. Take conserve of Water Lillyes, and conserve of mints of each one ounce, of Lettice stalkes candyed, sixe drams; of the seeds of Agnus Castus a dram and a halfe, of Rue seede halfe a dram, of Corall a dram, of Crystall halfe a dram, of Camphor a scruple; make those things in powder, that are to be powdered, and with syrupe of Pur∣slane make an electuary; Take often of it as much as a nut. The outward use. It helpeth hardnesse, stoppings, Apostumations and Ulcers of the Matrix, if women sit in the Decoction thereof, or receive the hot fume thereof. The leaves with butter dissolve the swelling of the Cods being applyed: applied to the head it easeth the paine thereof, and is good in the Lethargy, being boyled in salt water with Sage and Smal∣lage, and the hinder part of the head washed therewith: the same used to the limbs, taketh away wearinesse upon travaile or labour: the leaves are good for wounds. The seeds used with Barly meale doth mollifie hard swellings and break Impostumes: and with Niter and Vineger it helpeth freckles of the face; used with Hony it helpeth the sores in the mouth and throat. With Vineger and Oyle it is good for the Frensy and Lethargy. The Leaves used in a fume, and also strowed, drive away Serpents; and being laid on cure their bitings: Also strowed in the bed or carried about neere the skin, it causeth chast∣nesse:
The seeds laid on with water doth heale the clifts of the fun∣dament. The hurtfull quality. It troubleth the head and bringeth paine thereof, especially when it is greene. The Dose. The seede is given from a scruple to a dram. Medicines made thereof. Syrupe of Agnus Castus, Trosses of Agnus Castus. CHAP. 68. De Erugine, of Verdigrease. VErdigrease is the rust of Copper or Brasse, of a greene co∣lour. The Names. It is called in Latine, Aerugo, Aes viride, and Flos aeris; in English, Verdigrease. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree. The best kinde. The best is that which is greenest, and cleane from drosse. The Duration. It will keepe good many years. The outward use. It is of a sharp corroding quality, stoppeth freting & spreading soars, taketh away superfluous flesh in any Ulcer or Fistula, and eateth out the callous or hard flesh thereof, and is good in Ulcers & sores of the Eyes: mixed with Hony and used, it consumes the fleshinesse in the nose called Polypus, and helps the Disease in the fundament called a Fig. It cures Cankers and sores in the mouth being used with Hony and Plantaine water for a Gargarisme. It is thought Achilles first used this Medicine in the cure of Telephus: and therefore Achilles is commonly painted, scraping off the rust of his Spheare head, with his Sword, into the wound of the said Telephus. It is a drying astringent, and corrosive Medicine. It cures Kibes in cattell, being mixed with Soap or Hogs-greace. Pliny. Nat. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 5. fo. 216.
A water against Ʋlcers of the Privities. Take of Raine water foure pints, of white Candy halfe a pound; Boyle them a little, then adde of Verdy-grease in powder two ounces, and keep it to use. An Oyntment for the same. Take of white Camphor oyntment foure ounces, of Aloes an ounce, burnt Allum a dram and a halfe, Verdigrease a dram, Oyle of Roses one ounce, Tutty three drams, Camphon sixe graines; let those things that are to be powdered be made in powder, and make all in∣to an Oyntment. The hurtfull quality. It is a sharp, corroding and burning Medicine, therefore there must be care in the use of it. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Ʋnguentum viride. Ʋnguentum Apostolorum. Ʋnguentum Aegypti∣acum Greene Treat. Tinctura viridis, &c. CHAP. 69. De Allio, of Garlick. The Names. IT is called in Latine Allium, in Egnlish Garlicke, and poore mans Treacle. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and raiseth Blisters being ap∣plyed to the Skinne. The Duration. It will keep a yeare, or longer, being taken up dry. The inward use. Garlick being eaten, heateth the Body, maketh thin thick and grosse humours; cutteth such as are tough and clammie, digesteth and consumeth them; also openeth obstructions or stoppings, and is an enemy to cold poysons, and to the biting of venemous Beasts, and therefore is by Gallen and others rightly called, The Country-mans Treacle. It taketh away the roughnesse of the throat, helpeth an old Chugh, provoketh Urine, killeth Wormes, expelleth Winde, helpeth the Collick, cures the Dropsy proceeding from a cold cause, provo∣keth the courses in women, and stirreth up Venus or Lust, but dryeth
the seed of Generation, and is most excellent for a cold and moist stomach and to stir up naturall heate; Zacutus Lucitanus, de Prax. Med. Admir. lib. 2. Obser. 11. relates of an old man, who in the winter season, lying in the cold some time, had the innate or naturall heate of his stomach almost gon, and his appetite even lost and decayed, who after many hot Medicines used, yet all in vaine, at length he was cured with Garlick and Hony. It is a good Preservative against the contagious and pestilent ayre. A Decoction thereof made with Ori∣gan and Wine, being drunke, killeth Wormes, Lice, and Nits. It is profitable against the biting of a mad Dog, and for such as are inclined to the Palsey, for shortnesse of breath, and to dry up Rhume, and also for the cold Head-ach. It is commended against the Consumption of the Lungs, pissing of blood, and for such as cannot hold their water: The distilled water is good for the same Diseases, and for the Quinsey. The milke wherein Garlick hath been boyled, is good for wormes in Children. Give two ounces of the water Morning and Evening for a week if need be. The outward use. The Decoction thereof used for a Bath or Fume to sit over, brings downe the flowers, and after-birth. It cureth the bitings of mad Dogs, or the biting of any other venimous creature, being bruised with Rue and applyed. It taketh away the Morphew, Tetters, and cures scabbed heads in Children, Dandraffe and Scurfe, tempered with Hony, and the parts anoynted therewith. The juyce killeth Lice and Nits if the head be noynted therewith. The ashes of Garlick being strowed in Ulcers cureth them. The smell of Garlick driveth away venimous creatures, and applyed with Figs and Cummin it cures the bitings of the Mouse called a Shrew. A clove of Garlick put into a hollow tooth that aketh easeth the paine thereof, or stamp it with Safforn and Pepper, and hold it between the teeth; being bruised and applyed to the throat, it helpeth the Quinsie and swelling thereof: it helpeth the Gout being stamped with House-leeke and applyed: The juyce mixed with Safforn and Goose-grease cures the noyse of the eares, being put therein. Garlicke burned and the ashes mingled with Hony, and laid to black and blew markes, after bruises, taketh them away, and helpeth wilde fire and Scabs, being bruised and ap∣plyed. They usually cure the Pip in poultery with Garlicke. Against the Cough in Children. Take one ounce of Hogs grease, and halfe an ounce of Garlick,
bruise it, and mixe them together, lay it to the soles of the feet at night warme. The hurtfull quality. Garlick (especially eaten raw) maketh the eyes dim, offendeth the head, hurteth the stomach over liberally taken, causeth thirst, hurteth the Kidneys, heateth and burneth the blood, yeildeth no nourishment to the body, and is hurtfull to Young men, and to such as are hot and cholerick, and in hot seasons; and hurteth Women with Childe and such as give suck, it is onely good for such as are cold and moist, and abound with Flegmatick, grosse and tough humours, for old persons and in cold seasons. The best way is to boyle it throughly, and to eate it with Oyle, Vineger, or such like. Of such things as are made thereoof. The distilled water of Garlick. The electuary of Garlick which is made thus, Take of Garlick foure or five cloves, bruise it well with two or three drams of Hony, and as much Mithridate, then adde of Parma∣citty, Juniper berries of each a scruple, Castor two scruples, Pellitory of the wall in powder a scruple, with Oximell Squillitick make in Ele∣ctuary, and give of it Morning and Evening as much as a Nut. It is ex∣cellent in the Chollick and against winde. Whether Garlick and Onions be convenient in the Pestilence? Concerning Garlick and Onions, there is some question whether they be convenient and profitable in the Pestilence? Gallen. 1. de Differ. Feb. cap. 1. among foode of ill juyce and nourishment doth mention Garlick and Onions, and many other Physitians doe forbid the use of them, because they increase hot humours, whereby a Feaver is soon bred. But Galen also saith that Garlick is the Country-mans Treacle, and doth commend it against the biting of a mad Dog, and other ve∣nemous creatures. But this may soone be decided thus, If we say that Garlick and Onions are profitable and usefull, not as aliment or food, but as a Medicine; For as it is certaine that it yeilds no good nourish∣ment, so it is as certaine that it is excellent against Venome and Poy∣son, being used in a small quantity (as before is shewed) and very usefull in the Pestilence.
CHAP. 70. De Allumine, of Allum. The Names and kindes. IT is called in Latine, Allumen, or Salfugo Terrae, Antonius Musa mentions foure sorts of Allum, Exam. Terrarum, Fol. 459. Schro∣derus writes of five sorts, Schroder. Pharm. Med. Chym. lib. 3. cap. 24. fol. 143. But we have but two sorts ordinarily among us, Roch Allum, and common Allum; true Roch Allum is rare and hard to be got. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third or fourth degree. The Duration. It will keepe good many yeares. The best kinde. The best is that which is clearest, white and pure, and is brought out of Aegypt. The inward use. Plinie saith, it is taken in Pills, for the stoppings and hardnesse of the Spleene, driveth away the Itch, and bringeth forth corrupt blood by urine. The vulgar use to make Possets of it, as thus, to take a pint of milke, and a piece of Allum as big as a Wallnut, and boyle it; then take off the curd, and drinke of the clearest a good draught, before the fit of an Ague. The outward use. It is astringent or binding, yet cleansing, and is good in putrified Ulcers, takes away proud flesh, cureth the Itch, and Scab, cleareth the Sight, and is usefull in lotions for the mouth, throat, or elsewhere; mixed with a litle Vineger it cleanseth the Gums, rotten Teeth, and fastneth loose Teeth, being washed therewith. It stauncheth blood, and used with Vineger into any place where the haire hath been plucked up, it causeth that which cometh againe to be but soft and in manner of a downe. With the juyce of Pomgranat it is good for the infirmities of the eares, and amends the fleshinesse growing about the Nailes, and helpeth Kibes. Mixed with the juyce of Beets it cleanseth the Leprosie. Boyled in water and used, it kills Nits, Lice, and such venome breeding in the head, and cures the Dandraffe. In a Glister it is very good for the Bloody-flix. Burnt Allum in Powder
is chiefly used, to take away spongious Flesh, to dry up Ulcers, and to procure a Cicatrize. A Water against filthy eating Ʋlcers. Take of Plantaine and red Rose water of each halfe a pound, Alum two ounces, Sugar one ounce; boyle them together to the melting of the Sugar and Allum, then reserve it to use. A Water against the ill smell of the Armeholes and Feet. Take of Allum one pound; Boyle it in about a gallon of Water, and wash the parts therewith. Of such things as are made thereof. Burnt Allum. Spirit of Allum. Magister of Allum, &c. Allum water Magistrall. CHAP. 71. De Althaea, of Marsh-Mallowes. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Althaeae, & Bismalra, because it is twice as good in effect, as the other sorts are, in English Marsh-Mallow, Morish-Mallow, and White-Mallow, from the colour of the leaves. The Temperament. It is moderately hot, but dryer then the other Mallowes; and of a mollifying and softning Nature: the roots and seeds are more dry and of thinner parts. The Duration. The leaves will keep a yeare, the roots longer. The inward use. The roots are in the most use; A decoction thereof doth ease the gripings of the Belly, bringeth away Gravell and the Stone, easeth such as are short winded, and is good in all diseases of the Brest and Lungs, as Coughes, hoarsenesse of the Throat and Voice, Plurisy and such like: The roots and seeds boyled in wine or water, is usefull for them that have any Excorations or frettings in the guts, or Bloudy-flix, and this it doth by qualifying the sharp Cholerick humours that are cause thereof, and by the Sliminesse easing the paines and healing the sorenesse, and in some sort stayeth the further eruption of blood. It: it profitably taken of them that are troubled with Ruptures, Sciati∣ca, Cramps, or Convulsion of the Sinews. The dryed roots boyled in
milke and drunke, are good for the chin-Cough. The roots boyled in wine are good for such as have fallen and bruised themselves, and for those that have any bone or member out of joynt, and for such as have any swelling, paine or Ach in the Muscles, Sinewes, or Arteries of the Body, and cures such as are stung with Bees or the like. The di∣stilled water is good for the aforesaid purposes. The syrop of Marsh-Mallow is chiefly used for the Collick, Stone or Gravell, in Blader or Kidneyes; the Dose is a spoonfull or two in Posset drinke, or with Wine, in a morning. The manner of Administring it. Both leaves, seeds and roots, are used in decoction. A decoction provoking urine. Take of Marsh-Mallow root halfe an ounce, Licorish two drams, Fennell root, and Parsely roote, and Kneeholme of each one ounce, Parsely seede, and Gromell seede, of each two drams; Bruise them all and boyle them in a sufficient quantity of Water or Posset drinke, straine it, and adde Sugar to it; Drinke a good draught thereof Morning and Evening warme. The outward use. The leaves or roots are effectuall in decoctions for Glisters, to ease paine and griping of the Belly, whereby the Stone may descend out of the Kidneys or Bladder more easily; boyled in Wine and applyed, they helpe Impostumes of the Throat, the Kings Evill, and those Kernells behinde the Eares, as also inflamations, or swelling in wo∣mens breasts. The muccilage of the roots, and of Lineseede and Fe∣negreek put together, is much used in Pultises, Oyntments and Pla∣sters, that serve to mollifie and digest all hard tumours and inflamati∣ons, and to ease paines in any part of the body: the seeds greene or dry, mixed with Vineger cleanseth the Skin of the Morphew, and all other discoloring thereof what ever. The roote boyled in Vineger, easeth the Tooth-Ach, being holden in the mouth. The leaves laid to with Oyle, help burnings and scaldings, and are good against the bitings of men and Dogs, and against the stinging of Bees and Wasps. Oyntment of Marsh mallowes doth mollifie, heat and moi∣sten, and is very usefull in the Plurisie, in paines of the breast and side. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled Water. The Muccilage. Syrupe of Marsh-mallowes. Oyntment of Marsh-mallowes, simple and compound.
CHAP. 72. De Ambare griseo, of Ambergrise. THere are divers opinions concerning Ambergrise, but the most likely and probable opinion is, that it is a kinde of Butumen, whose springs are in the Rocks of the Sea condensate, or thickned in∣to the forme and substance usually observed, having that Oylinesse which is in it from its owne Originall, and being light is carryed by the Waves of the Sea, unto the shores of sundry Countries and Cli∣mats. Renod. Dispens. lib. 2. Sect. 1. c. 10. fol. 559. Fragos. Hist. Med. Ind. de gum. Concret. cap. 2. fol. 89. Gruling. Flrorileg. fol. 289. The Names. It is in Latine called Ambra, Ambragrisea, and Ambergrysea; in English, Ambergrese, and Ambergrise. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The best kinde. The best is not very white, but dry, and grayish more or lesse, sometimes with spots or veines, and sometimes without. Oylie, espe∣cially being pricked with a pin or needle, not ponderous but light, and of a good sent. The black is to be rejected, so is that which is very white. The Duration. It will keepe good many yeares being kept close: The outward use. It warmeth, resolveth, and strengthneth, what way soever it be taken. It comforteth the braine, warmeth and resolveth the cold defluxions of humours thereon, and on the nerves: it doth likewise comfort and strengthen the memory, revive the heart and spirits, helpeth barrennesse proceeding from a cold cause: It is effectuall a∣gainst all weaknesse of the body and joynts, helpeth weaknesse of the stomach and loathing of meat. It doth most conveniently agree with aged persons and moist bodies, to warme, comfort, and strengthen their cold decayed spirits, adding rigour and lustinesse to them, and is accounted helpfull to stir up Venus or Lust. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in Powder, Electuary, or Pills,
The outward use. It easeth the paine of the head, being dissolved in a warme morter, and mixed with a little Oyntment of Orenge flowers, the Temples and forehead being anoynted therewith. It helpeth fits of the Mother, being applyed to the place, and abateth the fits of the Falling-sick∣nesse, being often smelt to, and also recreates the Heart, and both Vi∣tall and Animall spirits being held often to the Nostrills. The hurtfull quality. It is not safe for women to smell to it, that have fits of the Mother, or have weake braines, nor is it good for very hot and dry Bodies. The Dose. The Dose is from two graines, to foure or five in any convenient Liquor. Of such things as are made thereof. Species Diambrae. Essence of Amber. Poma Ambrae. CHAP. 73. De Anetho, of Dill. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Anethum, and Anetum, in English, Dill and Anet. The Temperament. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, especiall being greene, but being dryed, it is hot and dry in the third degree. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare, the seede longer. The inward use. The decoction of the hearbe and seeds provoketh urine, expelleth winde, easeth pains and swellings in the body, stayeth vomiting and the Hickops extinguisheth Venery or Lust, for it mightily expelleth winde, and dryeth up the naturall sperme, and is very effectuall in the Collick, and griping paines. It is accounted by most writers good to breed milke, but truly I rather thinke it dryeth up the milke in womens brests. The seeds are good to digest raw, and viscous, or tough humours in the Body. If two drams of the seeds be boyled in White-wine and drunke, it comforts the wombe, helps the windinesse of the Mother, provokes the courses, and expells the afterbirth. The seeds are most in use.
The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in Decoction. A Decoction against winde in the Belly or Stomach. Take Stachados, Camomill flowers, Rue and Melilot flowers of each halfe a handfull, Aniseede, Carraway-seede, Fennell-seede, Dill-seede, and Bay-berries of each three drams; Bruise the seeds and make a Decoction in foure pints or lesse, boyle it to the Consumption of about halfe, straine it, and give thereof a good draught, Morning and Evening with Sugar. The outward use. It stayeth the Hickocks, being boyled in Wine, and but smel∣led unto, tyed in a cloth. The Decoction helpeth the rising of the Mother, if women sit therein, or receive the fume thereof. The seed being toasted or fryed, and used in Oyles or Plasters, dissolveth the A∣postumes in the fundament, and dryeth up all the moist Ulcers especi∣ally in the secret parts. Oyle wherein Dill seede, or Dill hath beene boyled procureth sleepe; and is effectuall to warme, to resolve hu∣mours and Impostumes, or hard Tumors, and to ease paine. The hurtfull quality. It dulleth the sight being often taken, and extinguisheth Venery or Lust, and is hurtfull for hot and dry bodies. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled water. Oyle of Dill seede Chymicall: Oyle by inso∣lation, or infusion, and setting in the Sunne. CHAP. 74. De Angelica, of Angelica. The Names. IT is called in Latine Angelica, from the Angel-lick properties there∣of, in English also Angelica. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second or third degree. The Duration. It will keep pood a yeare, the root and seeds will keep longer. The inward use. The rootes and leaves are most excellent against Poyson and Ve∣nome, and against the infection of the Plague and Pestilence, by defending the Heart, the blood and Spirits, and giveth heate and
comfort to them. If halfe a dram of the root in Powder be given in Carduus water, and the party laid to sweat thereupon in their bed, it is effectuall as aforesaid and provoketh sweat. The stalkes or roots Candid and eaten fasting, are good helps also in times of infection, and at other times to be warme and comfort a cold stomach. The decoction thereof being drunk before the fit of an Ague, so that they sweat before the fit come, will in twice or thrice taking rid it quite away: it helpeth also digestion in the Stomach, and is a good reme∣dy for a Surfet: It helpeth the Collick, the Strangury, and stoppings of the Urine, procureth womens courses, and expelleth the after-birth, easeth and discusseth all inward tumours and windinesse: it openeth the stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, cureth the bitings of mad Dogs, and all other venemous creatures. The roote taken dry or in any other drinke, will abate the rage of Lust in young prsons. The root being used greene, helpeth such as be short breathed, and be troubled with stuffings in their Stomach. The root also steeped in Vineger, and a little of the same taken fasting, is a good preservative in time of contagion. The decoction taken helpeth inward bruises and congealed blood, and strengthneth the Stomach, and is effectuall for the suffocation of the Mother. The distilled water is good for the aforesaid Diseases, especially if the roots and leaves be steeped in wine, and distilled in a glasse: The Dose is two or three spoonfulls at a time, and doth much ease cold or gripings that come of cold or winde, so as the body be not bound: The said water taken, with a scruple of the root in powder, helpeth the Plurisie being taken at the beginning, as also all other diseases of the Lungs and breast, as Coughs, shortnesse of the breath and such like. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Decoction, in powder Electuary, Potion, &c. In Decoction. Take of the leaves of Angelica a handfull, of Angelica roots two drams; boyle them in a pint and a halfe of water, or Posset drinke, to a pinte, straine it, and give a good draught thereof, Morning and Evening. A Potion against the Pestilence. Take of Angellica root in powder, of London Treacle of each a dram, Angellica water three ounces, wine Vineger halfe an ounce, mixe them together, take it and sweat upon it.
A Potion against faintnesse of the heart. Take of Angellica root in powder thirty graines, Angelica water one ounce, Cinamon water a spoonfull, mixe them together, and give it divers times, if need require. The outward use. The juyce or the water dropped into the eyes cleareth them, & takes away filmes or skins therein, and helpeth deafnesse if dropped into the eares: the juyce put into hollow teeth easeth the paine. The roots in powder made up with a little Pitch into a Plaister, and laid on the biting of a mad Dog, or any other venemous creature, doth wonder∣fully helpe them: the juyce or the water dropped, or tents wet therein, and put into old and filthy deepe ulcers, or the powder of the roote in want of the other, doth cleanse them and cause them to heale quickly by covering the naked bones with flesh: The distilled water applied to places pained with the Gout or Sciatica, doth give a great deale of ease. The root smelled to or held in the Mouth, is a good preservative in the times of contagion. The Dose. The root or leaves are given in powder from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled water. The juyce. The extract thereof. The Stalkes and roots canded. Oyle. Balsam of Angelica. CHAP. 75. De Antimonio, of Antimony or Stibium. The Names. IT is called in Latine Antimonium, Antimonium Hyacinthinum, vitrem Antimonii, Stibium, and Stimi; in English, Antimony and glasse of Antimony. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree. The best kinde. The best is the clearest glasse, without drosse or earthy substance, and of a red colour and brittle, or easy to breake.
The Duration. It will keepe good many years. The inward use. Antimony is a strong Medicine and worketh strongly both by Vo∣mit and Stoole; It is profitable in old paines of the head, Catarrhes or Rumes, paines of the Stomack arising from Malignant humours, in the Dropsey, Green-sicknesse, shortnesse of breath, Palsey, Falling-sicknesse, in the Tertian or Quartaine Ague, in the French-pox, Me∣lancholly and madnesse, in stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, in the Leprosy, Elephansy, Scab, Itch, and foule Diseases of the skin; It is most excellent in the Pestilence especially at the beginning. The manner of administring it. It is given in Substance or by Infusion. In Substance. Take of Stibium or glasse of Antimony in fine powder three or four graines, of Sugar in powder two drams or halfe an ounce, mixe them together and take it in a Morning fasting with Physicall observa∣tion. Or thus, Take of Stibium in fine powder three graines, Sugar of Roses two drams, or as much conserve of red Roses, mixe them togther and take it as before. A Bole good in the Dropsey. Take of Antimony in very fine Powder three graines, London Trea∣cle a dram, conserve of red Roses two drams, being well mixed take it as before. In Pills. Take of Antimony in Powder three graines, Pilula Alephanginae a scruple, make Pills, and cover them with leafe Gold; Sed fraus ho∣nesta latet. By Infusion. Take of Stibium in powder three or foure graines, white wine four ounces, let them stand all night, in the Morning poure off the clearest, and give it. The outward use. Stibium is used in Medicines to cleare the sight, and against Ulcers & Festulas thereof, or also to take away proud flesh in sores, and procu∣reth a cicatrice in Ulcers. Being mixed with sope & used, it helpeth to cure Cankers and the fleshinesse growing in the Nostrills. Plinie saith,
t stoppeth the bleeding of any fresh wound being strewed therein, and singular to heale the bitings of Dogs; but this I conceive is spo∣ken of crude Antimony. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 33. cap. 6. fol. 473. A water to take away spots in the eyes, and to dry up superfluous moysture. Take of cleare Antimony in powder ten graines, red Rose water three ounces, mixe them together, and let them stand foure and twen∣ty houres, then drop foure or five drops of the clearest into the eyes, twice in a day. The hurtfull quality. Stibium is a strong and violent Medicine, and brings Convulsions, Cramps, Faintings of the Spirits, and many times sodaine death, therefore take these cautions. Cautions in the use of Antimony. Give it onely to strong and able bodies. Let it not be given where the body is much bound, till a glister hath been administred. Give it not to women with childe, nor to weake persons, nor to any that are in a Consumption, or to such as spit blood or have bad Lungs. Give it not to any immediately before or presently after bleeding. When any doe take it let them keepe their beds while it workes, and take warme Posset drinke, having a care they take no cold. Fabricius mentions two Matrons, that after the taking of Antimony, the one lost her hearing, and the other became foolish. Cent. 5. Obser. 12. If an desire to know more of the nature of Antimony, let them read these following Authors, Matthiol. in lib. 5. Diascor. cap. 59. f. 837. 838. Massar. lib. 7. de Med. Purg. cap. 30. fol. 485. 486. Schroder. Phar∣macop., Med. Chym. lib. 3. cap. 17. fol. 42. 43. 44. &c. Freitag. Aur. Med. lib. 4. cap. 15. fol. 616. 617. 618. &c. Basil. Antimon. Ham. Poppii Printed, 1618. Crol. Basil. Chym. Printed, 1631. fol. 211. 212. 313. &c. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Hepar Antimonii, or Liver of Antimony. Flowres of Antimony. An∣timony diaphoreticke, Regulus Antimonii. Oyle of Antimony. L quor of Antimony. Tinctura. Salt. Spirit of Antimony, with many others. The Dose. The Dose is from three graines to five or sixe.
CHAP. 76. De Aniso, of Anise-seed. The names. IT is called in Latine, Anisum, in English, Anise and Anise-seed. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree, or hot in the second degree and dry in the first. The Duration. It will keep good two or three yeares, but the newer it is, the bet∣ter operation it hath. The inward use. The seed often taken, helpeth a stinking breath, and to break winde in any part of the body, be it the Head, Stomach, Spleene, Bowells or Mother, and to provoke Urine and sleepe to them that want it: they helpe Nurses to store of milke for their Children, to eate the seeds comfited, or Anise-seed comfits fasting and last at night, and is very good for teeming women, or with childe: they helpe those that are short winded, or have a Consumption, to take the Decoction of them with Figs, Licorish, &c. They helpe to expectorat flegme in them that have a Cough, or straitnesse in the breasts, and is very conducible to the Stomach, and being boyled in wine and taken, it helpeth the stoppings of the Liver, and the Dropsey that cometh thereby. The same stayeth the Hickock and helpeth Digestion. It stirreth up bodily Lust, and boyled in wine it is good against all poison, and biting of all venimous beasts. It availes in Children that have the Falling-sicknesse, being taken. The chymicall Oyle taken in broth or wine three or foure drops at a time, doth helpe the giddinesse of the Head, the straitnesse and paines in the breast and stomach, or the crudities and belchings therein, the much desire to cast, and the rising of the Mother, as also all other griefs and paines inwardly that rise of cold or winde. The Quintessence gives ease to those that are Phran∣tick, or distempered in their braines, and for such as are troubled with the Falling-sicknesse, or have the Cramp or Convulsion. A Decocti∣on of Anniseed is excellent in the Chollick, and easeth the Cough. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder in decoction, or the seeds are eaten whole.
A Decoction against the Collick, and winde in the Belly or Stomach. Take of Anisse foure ounces, Licorish two ounces, boyle them in three or foure pints of water, straine it and drinke thereof a good draught at any time. The outward use. If Anise either green or dry be beaten and laid to their Eyes, that have any hurtfull thing fallen into them, it will soone draw it forth, and likewise take away the venome of any hurt by the biting of vene∣mous creatures, and healeth them quickly: the seeds boyled in Oyle of Roses, and dropped warme into the Eares, easeth the paine and noyse in them: the seeds bruised and mixed with Storax, and the fumes thereof taken, being cast on quick coales, will soone ease the continuall Head-ache. Being boyled with Hyssop, and a little Vineger and Hony added thereto, it helpeth the Quinsey, if the throat be gargled therewith. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water of the hearbe and seed. Confections of Anis-seede, Laxative, both simple and compound. Anisseede comfits. Oyle of Annisseed and Quintessence thereof. Salt of Anisseede. Species Dranisu. Anisseede water hot. CHAP. 77. De Argento vivo, of Quicksilver. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Argentum vivum, from its agility and moving nature, also Hydrargyrum, that is, watery Silver, in English, Quicksilver, or Life-silver, but Plinie saith, it might be called Death-silver, because it is the death of so many. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 33. cap. 6. fol. 473. The Temperament. Some will have it hot and moist in the fourth degree, others say its cold and moiste, others say it is of a mixt quality, partly hot and partly cold. The Duration. It will keepe many yeares.
The inward use. Some commend this to be given inwardly for wormes and against the Chollick, for by the weight thereof the gut is unfoulded, and the Excrements and worms are brought away. Paraus relates of a Gen∣tleman that when he could not be freed from the paine of the Collick by any meanes prscribed by a learned Physitian, at length by the Coun∣sell of a certain German his friend, dranke three ounces of Oyle of sweet Almonds drawne without fire, and mixed with some White-wine, and Pellitory water, and swallowed a leaden bullet besmeared with Quick-silver, and that bullet comming presently out by his fundament, he was wholly freed from his Chollick. Par. l. 17. cap 58. fol. 441. But this must be onely done in desperate cases, and in strong Bodies, for the outward use is dangerous, and must be done with great caution. Others give it to women against hard labours, and to facili∣tate or hasten the birth, and to bring away the secundine or after∣birth,; Paraeus Booke 21. Chap. 38. and Doctor Primrose in his poular errours, Booke 4. Chap. 29. Translated lately into English by Doctor Wittie. But this must be onely used in desperate cases as is before shewed. The outward use. It is chiefly in use outwardly against the Frence-pox, Itch, Scab, and kills Lice and Nits, dissolves hard nodes or bunches of the joynts, and swelling behinde the eares; cures also maligne Ulcers, penetrateth and Purgeth, for it drawes from the center to the circumference, that is, from the inward parts to the outward. An Oyntment against the Itch. Take Quicksilver killed with oyle of Bayes one ounce, Hogs grease twelve ounces, oyle of Turpentine one ounce, red Bole in powder halfe an ounce, the yolkes of foure Egs. Let the yolkes of Egs be rost∣ed very hard, and beaten well with the oyle of Turpentine, then adde the rest, and make an Oyntment. Let the Body be anoynted with it f o divers nights together. Or, Take of Quicksilver killed with Fasting spitle halfe an ounce, of Stavesacre in powder as much, of Butter or Hogs grease sixe ounces, or halfe a pound; beat them well together, and use it as before; this will kill Lyce, and cure the Itch. The hurtfull quality. Quick-silver is counted by most writers a dangerous Medicine to
be given inwardly, because it brings dangerous symptomes, as Cramps, and Convulsions, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Falling-sicknesse, Tremulations, Stupefaction, Torments in the bowells, and paine of the whole body; suppresseth urine, causeth the body to swell, hurts the Stomach and Belly, causeth vomiting, and brings faintnesse of the heart: Petrus Forestus de venenis Observat. 8. in Scholia, mentions an Apothecary who in stead of a glasse of water (being dry) to quench his thirst, he tooke a glasse of Quicksilver and drunke it up, and dyed thereof, and being opened, his heart was found congealed, as also his blood about his throat was congealed and frozen. The like hapned to an Ape that had Quicksilver given him in beere. Others say it is a safe Medicine, & may be taken inwardly without any danger. In a word, tis good, tis bad, it cures, it kills, according as tis used; therefore I advise the vul∣gar not to meddle too much with it, for it hath mastred mighty Gi∣ants, and fool'd the best Artists. See Fabric. Observat. Chin. Cent. 5. Observat. 13. Revodaum de Mat. Med. lib. 2. cap. 15. fol 606. 607. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Ʋnguentum Neapolitanum. Ʋnguentum Enulatum cum mercurio. Ʋnguentum Catapsoras, &c. CHAP. 78. De Artemisia, of Mugwort. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Artemisia, from the Queene Artemisia, the wife of Mansolus King of Caria, being good for womens Diseases; in English, Mugwort. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. It will keep good a yeare. The inward use. The leaves are most in use; The decoction whereof made with water or wine, and drunke, provoketh the courses, bringeth away the birth and afterbirth, and helpeth the inflamation and stoppings of the Mother, as also the stopping of the urine, and is a good helpe against barrennesse in women. It helpeth the stoppings of the Liver and
Spleene from a cold cause, and against the Jaundise, being boyled with centory and taken. Two or three drams of the leaves in powder taken in wine, helps the Sciatica. The juyce taken helpeth the bitings of a mad Dog. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Powder or Decoction. In Decoction. Take a handfull of Mugwort and boyle it in a pint and a halfe of water, or White-wine to a pint, Straine it, adde Sugar thereto, and drinke a quarter of a pint of it Morning and Evening warme. The outward use. A Decoction thereof being set over, doth bring downe the courses, expell the birth and afterbirth, helps paines and stoppings of the Mo∣ther: the juyce thereof made up with myrrhe, and put under as a Pessa∣ry, worketh the same effect, and so doth the roote also; being made up with Hogs grease into an oyntment, it taketh away Wens, and hard knots, and kernells that grow about the Neck and Throat, as also to ease the paines about the neck, and that with more effect if some field Daisies be put with it: The herbe or the juyce taken is a good re∣medy upon the overmuch taking of Opium. A decoction thereof made with Camomill, Agrimony and Sage, and the place bathe there∣with warme, taketh away the paines of the Sinews and Crampe. A Fomentation against the Arthriticall Gout. Take of Git, or Nigella, and Mugwort, of each foure handfulls, boyle them in Sea water to tendernesse, and let the parts affected be bathed therewith warme. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given from half a dram to two drams, in powder. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Syrupe of Mugwort [excellent to bring downe the courses if a spoonfull thereof be taken Morning and Evening.] The distilled wa∣ter. Salt of Mugwort.
CHAP. 79. De Betis, of Beetes. The Names and kindes. THere are divers kindes of Beets, and but two sorts are more ge∣nerally knowne, the white and red Beete, the white is called Beta alba, and the red Beta rubra. The Temperament. The white are temperate in heate and moisture, but the others are dry and abstersive: they have also a nitrous quality whereby they provoke to stoole. The inward use. The white being boyled in broth doth loosen the belly and pro∣voketh to stoole, but nourisheth little or nothing. The juyce of the white Beets cleanseth and provoketh urine, openeth the stopping of the Liver and Spleene, and is good for the Head-ach, the swiming therein, and is effectuall against all venemous creatures. The red stay∣eth the Bloody-flixe, womens courses, and the whites, and helps the yellow Jaundise. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly boyled in broth or in decoction. The outward use. The decoction of Beets is used in Glisters to loosen the belly. The juyce put up into the Nostrills, doth draw forth flgme, purgeth the head and helpeth the noise in the Eares: the same applyed upon the Temples stayeth the inflamation in the Eyes, and helpeth burning be∣ing used with Sallet Oyle, and if a little Allum be put into it, it is good for Wilde fire: the same is good for all Wheales, Pushes, and other Blisters and Blanes in the Skin: the hearbe boyled and laid up∣on Chilblaines on the hands, or Kibes on the heeles, helpeth them: it healeth the Itch if the place be bathed with the decoction of the herbe in water and some Vineger; the same doth cleanse the head also of Dandraffe, Scurfe and dry Scabs, and doth much good for fretting and running sores, Ulcers, Cankers in the head, leggs or other parts. It is much commended against baldnesse and shedding of the haire. The root anoynted with Oyle, and put up as a Suppositary into the fundament, doth provoke to stoole, and soften the Belly. The juyce of Beete killeth Lice if the place be rubbed therewith.
The hurtfull quality. Beets offend the Stomach, and breed ill humours in the body. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled water. The juyce. CHAP. 80. De Betonica, of Betony. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Betonica, and Vetonica, from people in Spaine called Vettones, as Pliny saith: in English Betony and wood Betony. Pliny Nat. Hist. lib. 24. cap. 8. fol. 224. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare. The inward use. It is singular against all paines of the head proceeding from cold, helpeth those that have weake Stomacks, and loath their meat, as also the Jaundes, Falling-sicknesse, Palsey, Convulsions or Cramps, the Gout, and those that are enclining to the Dropsey: the powder mixed with pure Hony availes for Coughs or colds, wheesing and shortnesse of breath, distillations of thin Rhume from the Lungs, which causeth Consumptions. The decoction made with Mede and a little Pennyroyall, is good for those that are troubled with rotten Agues of any kinde arising from the Stomach; and to draw downe and evacuate the blood and humours that by falling into the eyes do hin∣der the sight: the decoction thereof made in wine and taken, killeth wormes in the Belly, is good to open stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, and for stitches or other paines in the sides or back, the gri∣pings of the bowells, and the winde Chollick, and with Hony helpeth to purge the belly: the same helpeth to bring down womens courses, and is usefull for those that are troubled with the falling downe and paines of the Mother, & to cause an easy & speedy delivery for those that are in travaile, and helpeth to break and expell the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, it is commended against biting of venemous Ser∣pents, and mad Dogs, and hinders drunkennesse being taken before
hand, and quickly expels it afterwards: it helps such as pisse Bloud or are brused by falls, and those that are bursten, and have a Rupture, as also for those that have the Sciatica, and have any inward wounds. The Roots have not the same vertue, but provoke vomit being taken. The manner of administring it. It is given in Powder, Electuary, or Decoction. A Decoction there∣of is made, as is before shewed in the Chapter of Mugwort. The outward use. The Decoction with Wine Gargled easeth the Tooth-ach. The greene Herbe bruised, or the Juice applied to any green wound in the Head or Body will soone heale it, and close it up, as also to any Vines or Sinewes that are cut, and will also draw forth any broken Bone, or any Splinter, Thorne or such like gotten into the Flesh: it is no lesse profitable for old filthy Sores and Vlcers, yea though they be Fistulous and hollow; but some do advise to put a little Salt thereto for this purpose: being applied with a little Hogs-lard, it helpeth a Plague Sore, and other Biles, and Pushes: the Fumes of the Decoction while it is warme received by a Funnell into the Eares easeth the paines of them, destroyeth Wormes, and cureth the run∣ning Sores in them: the juyce dropped into them doth the same like∣wise. The Leaves bruised and applied cureth the bitings of mad-dogs and of venemous Creatures, and stoppeth bleeding at the Mouth or Nose. A cerot against wounds of the Head. Take of Betony in powder an Ounce, Turpintine, Rosin, yellow wax of each halfe an Ounce, Mastick and Francumsence of each half an Ounce, Mummy three drams, make all into a cerot, and keepe it for your use. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies, the roots provoke to vomit, and causeth loathing and belchings of the stomack. The Dose. The leaves in powder are given from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water. Conserve of the flowers. Syrup of Betony, both simple and compound. Plaster of Betony. Salt of Betony.
CHAP. 81. De lapide Bezaar, of the Bezar Stone. The Names and Kindes. BEzar-stone is taken out of a Beast like a Hart or Goate. It is called Bezar. from Paser, which signifieth a Goat. Or it is called Belzaar, from Bl, dominus, a Lord, and zaar, venenum, Poyson, the Lord of poyson, as being good against venome and poyson. There are two sortes, the Est and th West, the East is called Bezoar orientalis, and the West Bezar occidentalis: the East is most in use. The best kinde. There is much written by Authors concerning the best choyce of these stones, bu I shall onely say thus much, that the best is that which you fide, by experience, to be most eff ctuall, for I dare say there is scarce one good stone among forty to be found. The temperament. They are hot in the first or second degree, some say temperat, others cold. The duration. These stones will keep many years. The inward use. It is usefull in the swimming of the Head, Falling sicknesse, Jaundes, Collick, Disntery or Flux of the Belly; also against Wormes, the Stone, the Courses stopt, and hard labours of Women; but especially it is used against poyson and venome, the P stilence and P stilentiall Feavers, in the small Pox and Masells, and in many other Diseases, to provoke Sweate, and thereby to expell ill vapours from the Heart and vitall spirits, and for Swouings, and against Melancholly also, and the Diseases that arise from thence, and to preserve strength and youth. Monardus doth commend it in the Pleurisy, and saith it doth much profit such as have taken Arsenick▪ or such like corrasives. Thonerus in lib. 3. obscurat. 5. f. 186. 187. he cured a Maide forty years old, of the Mother fits, by giving her six graines of Bezar in Balme-water. It doth not alwayes provoke Sweat. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly given in powder.
The outward Ʋse. The powder put on the place that is bitten by any venemous Crea∣ture doth free them from danger of death, and likewise put into a Plague-sore that is opened it doth the like. The Dose. I conceive there are two chiefe causes, why Bezar-stone doth not worke and effct, according to expectation; the one is because wee seldome get the right B zar; the other is, because people take too small a Dose thereof, for the ordinary Dose of the Est B zar is not above five or six Graines at the most, nay the vulgar rare y give above two or three Gaines thereof. Whereas wee may safely give of it from three graines to ten or twelve, yea to twenty. Zacutus Lucitanus de pr. med ad mir lib. 3. obs. 86. relates of a Woman that fell into a malignant Fver with dangerous symptomes, who in three dayes brought upwards three score and two Wormes, having Bzar given her in a small quantity; but after the taking of a dram of Bzar at once shee soone recovered, although before she was very dan∣gerous. If any desire to reade more of the Bzar-stone, let them read Monardus in English of the Bezar-stone, and the Hearbe Es∣cuerconera, printed, 1580. Also Doctor Primrose of errors, tra slated by D ctor Witty into Englsh lately. And Paeraeus in English, booke 21. Chapter 38. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Pulvis Beroardicus. Pulvis è ch lis cancrorum compositus, or Gascons powder. Pulvis cardiacus magistralis. CHAP. 82. De bolo Armenio, of Bolarmoniacke. The Names and temperature. IT is called in Latine Bolus Armenius, and Bolus Armenia, and that ecause the best comes from Armenia: in English Bolearmoniack, and Bole-armeny, or red Bole. It is cold and dry in the first degree. The best sort. The best is firme and close, without gravell or stone, heavy, and for the most part wholly of one colour. without discolouring parts, and being put to the tongue it cleaveth very fast.
The Duration. It will keep good many yeares. The inward use. It is drying astringent and strengthning; therefore it is usefull in any Fluxe of the belly, in womens Fluxes, whether white or red, in Rhumes and Catarrhes, in spitting of blood, bleeding of the nose or any inward bleeding: it thickneth humours, resisteth putrefaction, and is excellent in all contagious diseases of the Pestilence, Small-pox, Measells, and against poyson and venome. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder, or in Electuary. The outward use. It stoppeth the bleeding of the nose, or the bleeding of any wound, helpeth Ulcers of the mouth, consolidateth broken bones, and is much used in binding Pultises and astringent powders. Against bleeding of the nose. Take Bole Armoniack in powder an ounce, red Rosewater foure ounces, Vineger of Roses one ounce and a halfe, mixe them well to∣gether, and wet clothes therein and apply it cold into the forehead. The Dose. The dose is from halfe a dram to a dram in Plantaine water, or such like. Of Medicines made thereof. Bole Armony washed or prepared. Ʋnguentum Ophthalmicum. Ʋnguentum rubrum siccativum, &c. CHAP. 83. De Borragine, of Borrage. The Names. IT is called in Latine Borrago, and Borago, in English, Borrage and Borage. The Temperament. It is hot and moist in the first degree. The inward use. The Leaves, Flowers, and Seeds, all of them, or any of them are very cordiall and helpe to expell sadnesse and melancholly, arising
without manifest cause whereof came the saying, Ego Borrago gaudia semper ago; I Borrage bring alwaies Courage. It is good in Pestilen∣tiall Feavers, and to resist any venome and poyson, as also to clarifie the blood and to mitigate the heate in Feavers. The Flowers or Seeds breed and increase milke in Nurses. The syrupe prevaileth for all the purposes aforesaid, and is put with other cooling, opening and cleansing hearbs, to open stoppings, and to helpe the yellow Jaundise, to coole and cleanse the blood, and temper the heate and sharpnesse thereof, especially with Fumitry, and thereby to helpe the Itch, Ringwormes, or other spreading Scabs or Sores that arise from a dust and sharpe humours. The conserve is used to comfort the heart and Spirits, and for such as are weake and in a Consumption. The distilled water is good for the aforesaid Diseases. Borrage must be used while it is greene, for it will not keep dry. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in decoction, juyce and syrup. The outward use. The leaves or ashes boyled in water and hony is available against Inflamations and Ulcers in the mouth or throat. The distilled water being applyed with a linnen cloth dipt therein, helpeth the venome of a Spider or Waspe. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Borrage water. Conserve. Syrupe of Borrage. The juyce. CHAP. 84. De Calamo Aromatico, of Aromaticall reed. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Calamus Aromaticus, and Acorus: in English, Aromaticall reed and the sweet smelling flagge. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin parts. The Duration. Is will keep good two or three yeares. The inward use. A decoction of this root availes to provoke urine, to ease the
paine of the side, to bring downe womens courses, to open the stop∣pings of the Liver, and Spleen, and Breast; and helpeth Convulsions, gripings, burstings, bruises, and such as pisse by drops: It prevailes in the Dropsie and against Poison, and is put into Electuaries for such as have raw, and cold humours in their Lungs or chest. Halfe a scuple thereof in powder, taken in a little beer, doth help the Col∣lick and expell winde. It helpeth the Palsie and swimming of the head. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Decoction, Electuary, and in powder. The outward use. The juice mixed with a little Hony and used, helpeth drynesse. The root boyled in wine stamped and applyed into the Cods, abates the swelling thereof, and helpeth all hardnesse and collections of hu∣mours in any place. The fume thereof used provokes the courses. The fume threof also taken by the mouth in a pipe, alone or with dryed Turpentine, helpeth Coughs. It maketh a sweet breath being chewed in the Mouth, and is used in perfumes. The Dose. The Dose in powder is halfe a dram to a dram, in decoction, from a dram to three drams. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distelled water of the root steeped fi st in wine. The root pre∣served. The Extract. [A scruple of which being taken helpeth the Collick] El. Diacorum O e. CHAP. 85. De Calendula, of Marigolds. The Names. IT is called in Latine Calendula, Caliha, Chrysanthemum, and that from the golden Colour of the flowers: in English Marigolds. The Temperament. The flowers are hot in the second degree. The Duration. The flowers will keep good (being dry) a yeare or two. The inward use. The flowers comfort and strengthen the heart, provoke sweat and
the courses, and expelleth the afterbirth, withstandeth poyson, and venery, good in Pestilent and contagious Fevers, as also in the Jaun∣dise. The conserve made of the flowers taken Morning and Evening, helpeth the trembling of the heart, and is usefull in time of the Plague, or Pestilence and corruption of the ayre. The distilled water is good for the aforesaid purposes. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in decoction. As, Take a small handfull of Marigold flowers, and boyle them in a pint and a halfe of cleare Posset drinke to a pint, straine it and drink off the clearest. The outward use. The juyce helpeth the Toothach being washed therewith, and if warts be rubbed therewith it taketh them away. A fume of the de∣coction used hot helpeth to expell the secondine or afterbirth. The juyce dropped into the eares killeth wormes. The water helpeth red and watery eyes, being washed therewith. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled water. Vineger of the flowers conserve. CHAP. 86. De Chamomilla, of Camomill. The Names. IT is called in Latine Chamomilla, Camomilla, and Chamaemelum, in English, Camomill and Cammomill, and that because the flowers have the smell of an Apple or Quince. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the first or second degree, and is of thin parts. The Duration. The herbe will keep good a yeare, and the flowers longer. The inward use. The decoction of Camomill made and drunke, helpeth all paines and Stiches in the side, the Chollick, Stone and winde in the Belly or Stomach, and expelleth tough and clammy flegme, as also cold hu∣mours, provoketh swat, brings downe the courses in women, and provokes urine. It is very profitable for Agues that come of flegme or melancholly, or from an inflamation of the bowells, and for the
Hypochonders; that is, the sides, and that part where the Liver and Spleene lye. It moderately comforteth all parts that have need of warmth, and digesteth and dissolveth whatsoever hath need thereof by a wonderfull speedy property. The flowers boyled in Posset drinke, provoketh sweat, and helpeth to expell cold Aches, and paines wheresoever. A syrup made of the juyce with the flowers, and White-wine, is a good remedy against the Jaundes, and Dropsie, that comets by the evill disposition of the Spleene. A decoction made with White-wine and taken, expelleth the dead Childe, and brings away the afterbirth speedily, and cleanseth those parts. The manner of administring it. It is used chiefly in decoctions. The outward use. It is used in decoctions for Glisters against winde and the Collick. A decoction thereof being used, taketh away wearinesse and easeth the paines to what part of the body soever it be applyed, and com∣forteth the sinews that are overstrained, mollifieth all swellings, and those that are not over hard, and rarefieth or maketh thin those that are bound together. The flowers boyled in lye is good to wash the head, and to comfort both it and the braine. It helpeth paines in the side and Stiches, as also the Chollick being applyed, and wasteth a∣way raw and undigested humours. The Oyle made of the flowers is used against all hard swellings, and paines or aches, shrinking of the sinews, or Cramps, or paines in the joynts or any other part of the body; and helpeth to dissolve winde and paines in the belly, used in Glysters for that purpose, anoynted also, it helpeth Stitches and paines in the side. A Potion to procure rest and sleepe. Take Camomill and Marshmallowes of each three handfulls, boyle them in a sufficient quantity of water, & let the Patients Thighs, Legs and Feet be washed therewith, for a quarter of an houre before the time orest. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water. Oyle both by distillation and by infusion. Salt.
CHAP. 87. De Capillo veneris, of Common Maidenhaire. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Capillaris, and Capillus Veneris; in English, Maidenhaire and common Maidenhaire. The Temperament. It is temperate in heate and coldnesse, opening and cleansing. The Duration. It will keepe good (being dry) a yeare or longer. The inward use. It is of singular use against the Diseases of the Brest, the Liver and Reines especially: the decoction thereof drunke, helpeth the Cough, shortnesse of breath, the yellow Jaundise, stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, and urine, helpeth to break the Stone, provoketh the courses, and stayeth both bleedings and Fluxes of the Stomack and belly, especially when the herbe is dry, for being green by the thinness of the parts it looseneth the belly, & causeth choller & fleagm to be voided both from the Stomach and Liver, and by freeing the Stomach by spitting it out wonderfully cleanseth the Lungs, and by rectifying the Liver and Blood causeth a good colour to the whole body: it is said also to resist and to cure the bitings of venemous creatures, and to cure Ruptures. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Decoction, or in powder. The outward use. The herbe boyled in Oyle of Camomill dissolveth knots, allayeth swellings, and dryeth up moist Ulcers, the lye made thereof is singu∣lar good to cleanse the head from Scurfe, and either dry or running sores, stayeth the falling of the hayr, and causeth them to grow thick, faire and well coloured, for which purpose some boyle it in wine, putting some Smallage seed thereto, and afterwards some Oyle. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water, Syrupe of Maidenhaire, both simple and com∣pound.
CHAP. 88. De Caprifolio, of Hony Succles. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Caprifolium, and Periclymenum, in English, Woodbinde and Hony-succle. The Temperament. It is hot and attenuating, or making thin, and not colde. The inward use. It is of a cleansing, resolving, consuming and digesting quality, as Hyssope, Origanum and such like; therefore used in decoctions with Figs and Licorish, they expectorat fleagme from the Lungs and Chest wherewith they are filled. The flowers and leaves are of more use then the seeds, which is said to consume the Spleene, and to procure a womans speedy delivery, helpeth shortnesse of breath, and cureth the Hicket: they also cause barrennesse in women, and make men unable to generation. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in decoction, as in the Chapter of Mugwort. The outward use. The leaves or flowers in powder, or the distilled water of them, is commended to dry up foule and moist Ulcers, and to cleanse the face and skin from Morphew, Sunburne, Freckles, and other discolou∣rings of the skin. The Oyle wherein the flowers have beene infused and sunned, is good against Cramps, convulsions of the Sinews, and Palsies, and any other benumming cold griefe. A water for wounds. Take Honysuccle, Sage, Celandine, of each a handfull, boyle them in eight pints of running water to a halfe, then adde to the strained Liquor a pound of Hony, set them on the fire, and take off the scumme so long as any will rise, then adde thereto of Roch Allum in powder foure ounces, graines of Paradise bruised one ounce; boyle them a little, then straine and reserve it. The hurtfull quality. The Decoction thereof being drunke sixe dayes together, will make the urine as blood; although at the first they will but provoke urine onely; neither are they good for inflamations of the mouth and throat, but hurtfull therein, as the burning heate of the leafe doth manifest.
The Dose. The seeds are given from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such things that are made thereof. The distilled water. Syrup of the flowers. CHAP. 89. De Cardamomis, of Cardamomes. The Names and kindes. THere are chiefly two sorts of Cardamoms, the greater called in Latine, Cardamomum majus, and the lesser called Cardamomum minus. The Temperament. They are hot and dry in the third degree. The Duration. They will keep good two or three years, some say ten yeares. The inward use. Cardamomes breake the Stone, provoke urine when it is stop∣ped, or passeth with paine, resisteth poyson and the sting of Scorpi∣ons and other venemous creatures: They are good against the Falling-sicknesse, the Cough; the broad wormes, and the gripings of the bow∣ells, and expelleth winde powerfully both from the Stomach and entrailes, easeth those that by falls or beatings are bruised and broken, those that have loose and weak sinews, and the paine of the Sciatica or Hip gout. It doth wonderfully strengthen the Stomach and helpe Concoction. They are put in many of our compositions, Cordialls, Antidotes and such like. The manner of Administring it. They are given in powder, Electuary. and Decoction. The outward use. Being boyled in Vineger, or steeped therein and used, it is good against Scabs and Tetters. A fume thereof used killeth the birth. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull in very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. They are given in powder from a scruple to two scruples.
Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Oyle of Cardamomes. A confection of Cardamoms. CHAP. 90. De Carduo benedicto, of the blessed Thistle. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Carduus, and Carduus Benedictus, in English Blessed Thistle. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and also cleansing and ope∣ning. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare or longer. The inward use. A Decoction of Carduus being taken helpeth the swimming of the head, strengthneth the memory, and is a good remedy against deaf∣nesse, killeth wormes provoketh urine, and the courses, and driveth out gravell, cleanseth the Stomach, and helpeth the paines of the side. It is most excellent in Pestilent Feavers, and all contagious Dis∣eases, for it expelleth out by sweat all noxious, or ill humours: It is ve∣ry good in any kinde of Ague, either by Decoction thereof taken, or halfe a dram of the powder taken in Posset drinke before the fit cometh for divers fits if need require, and sweat after it. It is very availeable against all venome and poyson. The distilled water is use∣full for the aforesaid Diseases, but the Decoction is far better. The extract thereof is good against the French-pox, and the Quartain-Ague. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Powder, or in Decoction, as in the Chapter of Mug∣wort. The outward use. The greene herbe bruised and applyed, is good against hot swellings, as Wilde-fire, Plague-sores, Botches, and it is good also to be laid up∣on the bitings of mad Dogs, Serpents, Spiders, Bees, or Wasps, or any other venemous creature. The powder stoppeth blood at the nose being applyed. The juyce thereof cleareth the sight, being put
in, and taketh away the rednesse thereof, so doth the water. Being bruised with a little Hogs grease, and a little wheate flower mixed therewith. It cures stubborne and rebellious Ulcers if it be applyed thereto. It is used against the Gangreene also. The Dose. It is given in powder from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Carduus water. Spirit. Extract. Syrupe. Oyle, and Conserve. CHAP. 91. De Caryophyllis, of Cloves. The Names. THey are called in Latine Caryophylli, and Garyophylli, in English, Cloves. The Temperament. They are hot and dry in the second or third degree. The Duration. They will keepe good many yeares. The inward use. Cloves comfort the Head, Heart, Stomach and Liver; help the Memory, the eye sight, and concoction, and strengthen nature: they break winde, provoke urine, and if halfe a dram thereof be taken in milke, they stir up Venery or bodily Lust. They are good against fainting, sounding, as also against the Plague, and any infectious Disease; against all Fluxes of the belly, proceeding of cold humours, strengthen the retentive faculty, and make the breath sweet, they stay also vomiting. They are much used in the Kitchin, both for sauces, and sticking of meate. The chymicall Oyle of Cloves is good in a Quartaine Ague, in long weaknesse and debility of the Stomach, (for it doth take away crudity and expell winde) in Fluxes of the belly, and very usefull for the aforesaid Diseases, if two or three drops be given in beere or wine. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder, and in Electuary. The outward use. Cloves in powder being put into the Eyes, taketh away the web
therein, and cleareth the sight, so doth the chymicall Oyle, and also cleanseth filthy Ulcers, especially such as are moist, being put therein. A few drops thereof put into a hollow Tooth that aketh with a little Lint, doth ease the paine thereof. They are used in sweet powders and sweet waters, &c. The hurtfull quality. They are hurtfull for young people and cholerick complexions: they are profitable for old persons, and phlegmatick, and such as are rheumetick, and that in the winter season. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Oyle of Cloves. Extract. Salt. Aromaticum Caryophyllatum. CHAP. 92. De Castorio, Of Castor. The Names. IT is called in Latine Castorium, and Castoreum, in English Castor, and Bever-cod. The temperament. It is hot in the third degree and dry in the second. The duration. It will keepe good two or three years. The inward Ʋse. It openeth, discusseth winde, strengthneth the Head and Nervous parts, quickneth the animall spirits, resisteth poyson, and provoketh the Courses in Women. It is most excellent in the Lethargy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Swimming of the Head, in trembling of the joynts, and in defluxions of the humours to the joynts, in fits of the Mother, and in the Collick. It helps to bring away the birth and after-Birth. The spirit of Castor is good for the aforesaid Diseases. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder, or Electuary. The outward use. Being smelt to it availes in the fits of the Mother, and put up into the Nostrills, it provokes sneesing, and helps the cold effects thereof. If a piece bee put into a hollow, aking Tooth, it easeth the paine
thereof, and helpeth deafnesse or Noyse in the Eares, comming from colde, being mixed with a little Oyle of bitter Almonds and put therein. Oyle of Castor helpes all cold effects of the Braines and Nerves, as the Palsie, Cramps, Convulsions, Lethargy and such like. It prevents the strong shaking of Agues, if the spine of the backe be therewith anoynted before the fit come. A Pessary to provoke the Courses. Take of Castor in powder halfe a dram, Sage in powder two drams, Myrrhe and Nigella Seede in powder, of each three drams, with the juyce of Mercury, or a little Hony, make a Pessary. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used to very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given from halfe a scruple to a scruple. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Spirit of Castor, Oyle by Distillation, Extract, Electuary of Castor. CHAP. 93. De Centaurio, of Centory. The Names and Kindes. THere are two sorts of Centory chiefly in use, the great and the small: the great is called in Latine Centaurium magnum, and Centaurium majus vulgare, in English great Centory: the small is called Centaurium parvum, and Centaurium minus, in English small Centory, little, or common Centaury. The Temperament. The great Centory is hot and dry in the third degree; the lesser is hot and dry in the second degree, and very bitter. The Duration. They will keepe good a yeare. The inward use. The lesser Centory purgeth Flegme and Choller, and provokes sweate. It is usefull in the Sciatica, in Agues, for it openeth the stop∣pings of the Liver, Gall, and Spleene, helping the Jaundies and easing the paines in the side: making thin both the bloud and hu∣mours, by the cleansing and bitter qualities therein: it helpeth those that have the Dropsy, or Greenesicknesse. It killeth Wormes, and
dryeth up rheumes: A Decoction thereof also is good against the Collick, and to bring downe Womens Courses, helpeth to avoid the dead Birth, and easeth the paines of the Mother, and is very ef∣fectuall in all paines of the joynts, as the Gout, Cramp, or Convul∣sions. A dram of the powder taken in Wine is a good helpe against the biting or poyson of Adder, or Viper. The tops of the stalkes with the flowers are most in use. The great Centory roots, being steeped in VVine, or the powder thereof given in VVine, is good for such as have the Dropsy or Jaun∣des, or are troubled with the stoppings of the Liver: two drams of the root (in powder) taken in VVine, or water, helpeth those that spit Bloud, or that bleed much at the mouth: It is also used for Rup∣tures, Cramps, and Pleurises, and for an old Cough, shortnesse of Breath, Gripings in the belly and paines of the Mother. It helpeth the Strangury and Stone. The manner of Administring them. They are given in Decoction, or in powder. The outward use. The Juyce of the lesser Centory mixed with a little Hony is good to cleare the Eyes from dimnesse, mistes, or cloudes, that hinder the sight, and is singular good for greene, or fresh wounds, and also for old Vlcers and Sores, to close up the one, and clense the other, and perfectly to cure them both, although they be Fistulous and Hollow, the greene herbe especially being bruised, and laid to: the Decoction dropped into the Eares, cleanseth them from VVormes, clenseth the foule Ulcers, and spreading Scabs of the head, and taketh away all Freckles, Spots and markes in the Skin being washed therewith. The Decoction of great Centory, taketh away the paine and dan∣ger of the bitings or stingings of venemous Creatures: it helpeth to sharpen the Eye sight, if it be steeped in water and dropped in to them: the whole plant as well herbe as roote is very availeable in all sorts of wounds or Ulcers, to dry, Sodder, cleanse and heale them, and should be a principall ingredient in all wound drinkes and in∣jections. It helpeth the Strangury and Stone if the juyce bee injected. A Decoction against Arthritcall paines, or the Joynt Gout. Take Centory the lesser, two handfulls, roote of Assarum two Ounces, spring water ten pints. Boyle them to halfe. The Dose is about half a pint in bed, for divers mornings together.
An injection against Wormes in the Eares. Take of Centory the lesser, VVormwood, Harehound and Ca∣lamint, of each an Ounce; Boyle them in a sufficient quantity of wa∣ter, to halfe, add unto a pint of the strayning, half a pound of Hony, or lesse, and keep it for your use. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from halfe a dram to a dram and a halfe. The juyce to halfe an Ounce. Of such things as are made thereof. Centory-water. Extract of Centory. Salt of Centory. CHAP. 94. De Ceterach, of Ceterach. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Ceterach, Asplenum, and Splenium, because it helps the Spleene, also Scolopendrium and Scolopendria, from the likenesse of a VVorme so called, in the English Spleene wort, Milt-wast and Scale-ferne. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the first degree, or second, of subtile parts and somewhat drying. The Duration. It will keepe a yeare or two. The inward use. It is generally used for the infimities of the Spleene, and some re∣port the Swine in Candy by feeding on it are found without spleenes. It helpeth the Strangury and Stone in the Bladder, the yellow Jandes and the Hicket. Matthiolus saith, that if a dram of the dust that is on the back of the Leaves be mixed with halfe a dram of Amber in powder, and taken with the juyce of Purslw or Plantine it will helpe the running of the reines speedily, and that the hearbe and root being boyled and taken, helpeth all melancholy Diseases, and those also which rise from the French disease. The distilled water is good against the Stone both in the Reines and Bladder, and the Lye made of the ashes thereof being drunke for some time together helpeth Splenetick persons.
The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, and in Decoction, but it must not be boyled long, for then the strength doth evaporate. The outward use. It is used in outward remedies for the same purpose, as is before mentioned. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull for Women that desire Children, for it hindereth conception. The Dose. It is given in powder from halfe a dram, to a dram; in Decoction from two drams to half an Ounce. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Syrup of Ceterach. The distilled water. CHAP. 95. De Chinae radice, of China Root. The Names. IT is called in Latine China, China radix, and Chinaea radix, in English China Root, and Chine. The Temperament. It is moderately hot and dry. The Duration. This Roote will keepe good many yeares. The inward Ʋse. It is much commended for the French Disease, and is profitable in Agues, whether quotidian, or intermittent, or pestilentiall, and also Hectickes and Consumptions, to rectifie the evill disposition of the Liver, the inveterate paines in the Head and Stomack, and strengtheneth it, and to dry up rheumes, to help the Jandise and Ruptures in children or others, by drying up the humours which is the cause thereof. It helpeth also the Palsy and all other diseases of the Joynts and Bladder, the Goute, Sciatica, and the Rodes also, and Ulcers of the Yard, Scabs and Leprosy, Scirrous and watery tu∣mours, and is good in all cold and melancholy griefes, and very usefull in the Dropsy and Green-sicknesse. Some say it provokes lust.
The manner of administring it. It is given in Decoction, and some boyle it in broth with a chicken tyed up (in thin slices) in a Linnen-cloath. A decoction of China Roote. Take of China Roote cut in thin slices, one Ounce and a halfe, put it into a gallon of faire water, and let it stand covered a night and day, then boyle it gently till about halfe the water be consumed, straine it, and give about foure Ounces thereof in bed for diverse mornings together if need be. The hurtfull quality. It is not to be used in very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The Dose in broth is from two drams to foure drams, according to the quantity of water you provide. CHAP. 96. De Chamedry, of Germander. The Names. IT is called in Latine Chamaedrys, that is, a small or low Oke, from the likenesse of the Leaves thereof, though lesser: therefore some call it Aevercula minor, in English, Germander, or English Treacle. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin parts. The duration. It will keepe good (being dry) a yeare, The inward Ʋse. Some say it purgeth choller. It is good for coughs taken with Hony, for those whose spleene is become hard, for those that can hardly make water, and helpeth those that are falling into a Dropsey, in the beginning of the disease, especially if a decoction be made thereof, when it is greene and drunke. It brings downe the termes, helps to expell the dead childe, and taken with Vineger doth wast or consume the Spleene; It is effectuall against any poyson, paines of the side, and cureth both Quartaine and Tertian Ague, as also the Cramp, if the Decoction thereof be taken, for some dayes together,
it is good against the Diseases of the Braine, as paines of the Head, Falling-sicknesse, Melancholly, Lethargy, Palsie, Gout, and for those that are Sottish through the dulnesse of the spirits: a dram of the seed taken in powder, doth purge Choller by Urine, and is thereby good for the yellow Jaundise, and killeth wormes, so will the tops of them when they are in flower, steeped a day and a night in a draught of White-wine, and drunke in the morning. It is commended against the Plague and Pestilence. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder and Decoction, you may make the Decoction as of Mugwort. The outward use. It is good against venome and stinging of venemous Creatures be∣ing bruised and applyed: used with Hony it cleanseth old and foule Ulcers; and the juyce mixed with Hony and put into the eyes, taketh their dimnesse and moistnesse, the juyce also dropped into the eares killeth wormes therein. The decoction thereof stayeth the whites in women, if they sit therein while it is warme, and likewise easeth the passions of the Mother: being boyled in Vineger and applyed to the Stomach with a little Leaven, stayeth vomitings, that rise not from hot causes; the leaves and the seed of Nigella, quilted in a Cap, stayeth Rhume: being boyled in lye with Lupines, and the head washed therewith, taketh away the Dandraffe; or Scurfe thereof. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull for hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The Leaves and seeds are given from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water. Conserve, and Syrupe. CHAP. 97. De Consolida majore, of great Comfrey. The Names. IT is called Consolida major, and Symphytum majus; in English, Comfrey, and great Comfrey.
The Temperament. Comfrey is cold, drying and binding in great measure. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare. The inward use. Comfrey helpeth those that spit blood, or that bleed at the mouth, or that make a bloody urine, as also for all inward hurts, bruises and wounds, and helpeth the Ulcers of the Lungs, the roote being boyled in water or wine; the same also drunke stayeth the flowing downe of Rhume from the head upon the Lungs, the fluxes of humours, or blood, by the belly, the reds and whites in women, and the running of the Reines, happening by what cause soever. The Syrupe made hereof is very effectuall for all those inward griefs, so is the distilled water. A Decoction of the roots is most effectuall: Two ounces of the juyce drunke, doth much good in the Lethargy, saith Camera∣rius. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly given in Decoction. The outward use. The roots being outwardly applyed, helpeth fresh wounds or cuts immediately, being bruised and laid thereto, by gluing together their Lips, and is especiall good for Ruptures and broken bones: it is good to be applyed to womens breasts, that grow sore by much milke coming into them; as also to stop the overmuch bleeding of the He∣morrhoides, to coole the inflamation of the parts thereabouts, and to ease paine: the fresh root bruised, and spread upon the Leather, and laid to any place troubled with the Gout, doth give present ease of the paines; and applyed in the same manner, giveth ease to pained joynts, and profiteth very much for running and moist Ulcers, Gan∣grenes, mortifications and the like. The distilled water helpeth out∣ward wounds or Sores in the fleshy or sinewy parts of the body. A mouth water against Ʋlcers in the mouths of Children. Take Comfrey great and small, of each a handfull; boyle them in halfe a pint of White-wine or more, then add to the strayned Liquor, Sal gem two drams, Hony of Roses two ounces, mixe them together and reserve it. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used too frequently in such persons as are much ound in their body.
Of such things as are made thereof. Comfrey water. Conserve. The root Candyed. Extract of Com∣frey-Oyle, made of the dry root. CHAP. 98. De Corallina, of Coralline, or Sea-mosse. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Muscus Marinus, and Corallina; in English, Coralline, and Sea-mosse. The Temperament. It is cold and dry, and astringent, or binding. The Duration. It will keepe good many yeares. The inward use. It is used altogether to kill wormes in Children, or Elder persons, but by what quality it worketh this effect, is not yet declared by any that I have seene; happily it doth it by a specifick vertue. It may be used against hot Gouts, and inflamations. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in powder. A Powder against wormes. Take Coralline, Harts horne burnt, and wormeseede of each two drams, make them in powder The Dose is a scruple or halfe a dram, according to age, in Beere, or Muscadine. The outward use. It may be put into oyntments against wormes. The Dose. The Dose is from a scruple to a dram. CHAP. 99. De Dauco, of Wilde Carrot. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Pastinaca sylvestris, and Daucus; in English, wilde Carrot, and Birds nest.
The temperament. The roote and seeds are hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. The seeds will keepe good a yeare or two. The inward use. It expelleth wine, and easeth Stiches in the sides, it provoketh urine and womens courses, and helpeth to breake and expell the Stone: the seede also worketh the like effects, and is good for the Dropsie, and those whose bellies are swollen with winde, helpeth the Chollick and Stone in the Kidneyes, the rising of the Mother, provoke Lust, and helpeth Conception, being taken in wine, or boyled in wine and taken. It is good against the stinging of venomous creatures. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Powder, or in Decoction. The outward Ʋse. The leaves being applyed with Hony to running Ulcers or Sores doth cleanse them. The Dose. The seeds are given in Powder, from halfe a dram to a dram. CHAP. 100. De Endivia, of Endive. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Intibus, Intubus, or Intubuus, and Scariola; in English, Endive. The Temperament. It is cold and dry in the second degree. The Duration. It will keepe a yeare being well dryed. The inward use. It doth coole the heate in the Liver and Stomach, and is good in hot fits of Agues, and all other inflamations in any part of the body, to use the decoction of the leaves, or the juyce, or distilled water: the same also helpeth to coole the heate and sharpnesse in the urine: the seed is of the same property, or rather more powerfull, and be∣sides is availeable for the faintings and passions of the heart, opens
stoppings and provoketh urine. It is hurtfull for the Palsie and trem∣bling, as also for cold Stomachs. The manner of Administring it. It is given chiefly in Decoction. The outward use. Being outwarly applyed it doth temper the sharpe humours of fret∣ting Ulcers, hot tumours and swellings, and Pestilentiall Sores, and helpeth wonderfully the rednesse of the eyes, and dimnesse of the fight: it is also used to allay the paines of the Gout. The Dose. The seeds are given to a dram or more. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Endive water. Syrupe of Endive, both simple and compound. Syr. Bizantinus simple and compound. Salt of Endive. CHAP. 101. De Enula, of Elecampane. The Names. IT is called in Latine Enula, and Enula Campana, also Helenin, and that because Hellen first found it available against the bitings and stinging of venemous beasts, or from Helena an Island, where the best was found to grow; in English, Elecampane. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, especially being dry. The Duration. It will keep a yeare or two, I meane the root. The inward use. It is good against fleagme, tough and clammy humours, which stick in the Chest and Lungs, against the Cough and shortnesse of breath, provoketh Urine, comforteth the Stomach and helpeth Digestion. A decoction of the root is good against poyson and bitings of Ser∣pents, for such as have Ruptures, Cramps or Convulsions, or have any Member out of joynt, and for the Hip Gout: the same, or the juyce taken, killeth all manner of wormes in the belly or Stomach, and is good for them that spit blood or have inward bruises. The roots canded, or the conserve taken doth warme a cold and windy stomach, and helpeth the pricking and stitches therein, or in the sides, caused by
the Spleene, and to help the Cough, shortnesse of breath, and whee∣sing in the Lungs: the dryed roots made into powder, mixed with Sugar and taken, serve to the same purposes, and is also good for those that are troubled with the Mother, and in the Plague and putrified Feavers very usefull▪ The roots and leaves bruised, and put into Ale or Beere, and daily drunke, cleareth, strengthneth and quickneth the sight of the eyes wonderfully. In the root lyeth the chiefe vertue. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or decoction. A Decoction against Aches in the joynts. Take Elecampane roote, and Avers, of each a handfull; Boyle them in a pint, or a pint and a halfe of sweet wine; when it is neere boyled, put in halfe a dram of Safforn, and boyle it againe gently; straine it and adde Hony and Sugar of each foure ounces, warme it on the fire, or gently boyle it; the Dose is foure ounces in a Mor∣ning, and to sweat after it. The outward use. The root bruised and applyed, helpeth Gouts, Cramps, or Con∣vulsions, loosenesse and paines in the joynts, or those Members that are out of joynt, by cold or moisture happening to them. The roots boyled well in Vineger, beat afterwards and made into an oyntment with Hogs grease, and a little Salt with powder and Vineger added thereto, is an excellent remedy for Scabs or Itch in young or old. Se my helpe for the pore, Pag. 21. The place also bathed or washd in the Decoction doth the some, and helpeth all sorts of old, putrid, or filthy Sores or Cankers wheresoever. The hurtfull quality. It must not be given to hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The root in powder may be given from twenty graines to thirty. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Water from the root and leaves. Conserve of the root. The root Candyed. Extract from the root. Wine of Elecampane.
CHAP. 102. De Eryngi, of Sea hlly. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Eringus, Eryngium, and Iringus▪ in English, Sea Holly, and Sea Hulver. The Temperament. It is temperate in heate, somewhat drying and cleansing. The Duration. The roote will keepe good (being dry) a yeare or two. The inward use. The decoctirn of the root in wine being drunke, is very effectuall to open the stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, and helpeth the yel∣low Jaundise, the Dropsie, and the paines in the Loynes, and Winde-collick in the Bowells, provoketh Urine, expelleth the Stone, and procureth womens courses. It is usually taken to stir Lust, and to help venerous actions, especially the root Canded, as also against the biting of any venemous Creatures, or any poysonous herbes, and is good a∣gainst the French Disease and the Kings evill. The continued use of the decoction for fifteen dayes taken fasting, and next to bedwards, doth helpe the Strangury, the stopping of the Urine and the Stone, and all defects of the Reines and Kidneyes, and if the same be conti∣nued longer, it is said perfectly to cure them that are troubled with the Stone. The distilled water of the young Leaves and Stalkes be∣ing drunke, is profitable for all the purposes aforesaid, and doth help melancholly, the Quartaine and Quotidian Ague, and the Cramp of the neck. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Powder, or in Decoction. In Decoction. Take of Eringo roots dry, one ounce, or an ounce and a halfe, bruise them, and boyle them in a pint and a halfe of White wine, to the wasting of the third part, straine it, and drinke a good draught thereof Morning and Evening. The outward use. The roors bruised and applyed, helpeth the Kings Evill, and also the Sting or biting of any Serpent: Applyed also with old Hogs grease, or salted Lard (being first bruised and boyled therein) to
broken bones, thornes, &c. remaining in the fl sh, doth not onely draw them forth, but healeth up the place againe gathering new flesh where it was consumed, or almost fallen away: the juyce of the leaves dropped into the eares helpeth Apostumes therein. The Dose. The root in Powder, is given from halfe a dram to a dram. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water. The roots Canded. CHAP. 103. De Euphrasia, of Eye-bright. The Names. IT is called in Latine Euphrasia, Eufragia, and Eufrasia; in English, Eye-bright. The Temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. It will keepe good (being dry) a yeare. The inward use. It is chiefly used for all diseases of the eyes that cause dimnesse of the sight, for either the greene herb or the dry, the juyce or the di∣stilled water is very effectuall for the said purpose, to be taken in wine or broth; so is the conserve made of the flowers being taken Morning and Evening. It helpeth also a weake braine or m mory, and restoreth them being decayed, in a short time. Wine or Ale made with Eye-bright and taken, is very good for the same purpose. The powder of the dryed herbe mixed with Mace and Fennell seede is good for the weake sight and memory, being drunke, or eaten in broth. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly given in Powder. A powder to preserve the sight. Take Eye-bright, Betony, of each a handfull, Mace and Fennell seede of each two drams, make them into powder, and give halfe a dram thereof Morning and Evening in Broth or Beere.
The outward use. The juyce of the Eye-bright▪ or the water dropped into the eyes, cleareth the sight, and taketh away the dimnesse thereof. The Dose. It is given in powder from halfe a dram to a dram, in the water thereof, or any other convenient L quor. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Water of Eye-bright. Conserve of the flowers. Wine of Eye-bright. A water to cleare the sight. Take Rosewater. Eye bright water, Celandine water of each one ounce, of Tutia, or Tutty in powder a dram, m xe them together and keep it to wash the eyes with. CHAP. 104. De Ficubus, of Figgs. The Names. IN Latine it is called Ficus, and Carica; in English, Figs. The Temperament. Figs are hot and moist, especially being greene, but dry, they are hot and dry in the second, or almost in the third degree. The Duration. They will keepe good halfe a yeare. The inward use. A decoction of Figs is good for the Cough, Lungs and throat, as also against shortnesse of breath, especially if they be boyled in Hyssop and Licorish. They are good for the Reynes and bladder, and to re∣gaine a good colour to them that by long sicknesse have lost it, and usefull also in the Dropsie, Falling Sicknesse, Quinsie, and for the in∣firmities of the wombe, where cleansing is required: they expell also superfluous humours from the inward parts to the circumference; use∣full therefore to expell Poxe, Measells and such like venemous matter to the skin. Figs stampd with Salt, Rue, and the kernells of Nuts withstand all poison and corruption of the ayre. They are best fasting or when the stomach is empty. Toasted Figs are good for women to facillitate or hasten the birth.
The manner of Administring them. They are eaten as they come to us, or toasted and so eaten, but chiefly they are used in Dcoctions. The outward use. F gs bruised and applyed with Barly-meale, and the powder of Fenugreeke seede, do molifie the hard tumours and kernells under the Throat and Eares, and elsewhere▪ as also the hardnesse of the Mother, and if some Leaven and Salt be put to them, it breaketh Plague sores: They are mxed also with Copperas against old sores of the Leggs, and all other foule running Ulcers: being boyled in wine with Wormewood, and then applyed wth Barly-meale, are very pro∣fitably applyed to the belly of those that have a Dropsie: and beaten with Salt and applyed, taketh away the Itch and Scab, and the Ashes also made up into a salve and applyed, healeth K bes and Chilblanes. Fgs brused and mixed with Fennegreeke Vineger, easeth the hot Gout of the feet. A Figgest and toasted doth often times ease the tooth ach, being appyed. The hurtfull quality. They ingender crude and windy humours in the body, and soone corrupt in the Stomach, whereby they cause the Itch, Scab, and breed Lice also. They hurt such as have the Chollick, and windy diseases, and that have hot Livers and chollerick Stomachs; they are best for old Flegmatick persons, and in cold and moist seasons. CHAP. 105. De Foeniculo, of Fennell. The Names. IT is called in Latine Foeniculum, in English, Fennell. The Temperament. The seed is hot and dry in the third degree; the herbe not so hot. The Duration. The seeds will keep good a yeare or two, the herbe is rarely dryed but used greene. The inward use. It breaketh winde, provoketh Urine, easeth the paines of the Stone, and helpeth to break it: the leaves or seeds boyled in Barly-water
and drunke, is good for Nurses to encrease their milke, and to make it the more wholsome for their children to take: the leaves boyled in water▪ but especially the seedes stayeth the Hicket, and taketh a∣way the loathing of the Stomach, & a layeth the heat thereof. The seed boyled in wine, is good for them that are bitten by Serpents, or have eaten poysonfull herbs or Mushromes: the seed & roots help to open the stoppings of the Liver, Spleene, and Gall, and thereby much con∣duceth to all the diseases arising from them, as the painefull and windy swelling of the Spleens, and the yellow Jaundes, as also the Gout and Cramps: the seede is of good use in pectorall medicines, and those that helpe the shortnesse of breath, and wheesing by stoppings of the Lungs: it helpeth also to bring downe the courses, and to cleanse the parts after delivery: the roots are in most use for drinkes and broths that are taken to cleanse the blood, to open stoppings of the Liver, and to provoke urine, and to amend the evill colour in the face after long sicknesse. Both leaves, seeds or roots are much used in drinkes or broths, for those that are growne fat to abate the same, and to make them more gaunt and lank, the distilled water of the whole herbe is good for the same purposes. The seed taken in powder doth quicken the eye sight, and are often used to correct purging Me∣dicines. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly given in decoction, but the seeds may be taken in powder. The outward use. It is chiefly used outwardly to cleare the sight, as the juyce or wa∣ter being dropped into the eyes to cleare them and to help their dim∣nesse. See my help for the Poore, in Pag. 41. and 43. The hurtfull quality. It is bad for hot and dry bodies. The Dos. The seede in powder is taken in broth or the like, from one scruple to two scruples. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water. A Chymmicall Oyle. Salt of Fennell. Fennell-seed Comfits.
CHAP. 106. De Faenugraeco, of Fenugreeke. The Names. IT is called in Latine Foenum gracum, and Foenugraecum, in English Fenugreeke, and Fenegreeke. The temperament. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first. The duration. It will keepe good many years. The outward use. The powder of the seede taken with Hony driveth forth noysome humours out of the body, mollifieth inward Impostumes and Ulcers of the Lungs and breast, easeth the griping paines of the intralls, and killeth Wormes. The manner of administring it. It may be given in powder, or in Decoction, but it is not usu∣all to take it inwardly; yet many give it in powder with Otes to Horses, for it doth fatten them, and killeth Wormes in their Maw. The inward Ʋse. The meale or powder thereof heated with Vineger and applied to the Region of the Spleene, doth mollify and wast the hardnesse thereof, as also other hard tumours and swellings: the Decoction thereof softneth likewise the hardnesse of the Mother, and easeth the paines thereof, if they sit therein as in a Bath, or receive the hot fumes by sitting over it: the Decoction thereof clenseth the head from scurfe, dandruffe, and the running sores thereof; it helpeth the Dis∣ease called Tenasmus, that is, an often desire to the stoole without doing any thing, as also the Bloudy Flux, when the excrements smell strong. A Pultis made with the meale thereof and Linseede, and the Decoction of Mallowes▪ and a little Oyl, or Hogs grease put there∣to, asswageth the swelling and paines of the Cods, or privy-parts of Women, and generally all other swellings and tumours: the same also helpeth the Gout and other joynt-Aches that come of cold: the Decoction, or muccilage applied to the forehead with clothes dipped
therein stayeth the Flux of humours to the Eyes, and easeth the paines in them, used also in Clysters it is good in the Stone by opening and mollifying the inward parts. A Pultis for the swelling behinde the Eares. Take of the muccilage of Fenugreeke ten Ounces, Cerusse in powder two Ounces, Camphor halfe an Ounce, make all into a Pultis and apply it. The hurtfull quality. Fenugreek taken inwardly doth overturne and breed a loathing in some stomacks, especially if they be weake, therefore onely to be used in strong bodies. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Syrup of Fenugreek. Muccilage of Fenugreeke. CHAP. 147. De Fragaria, of Strawberries. The Names. THe P ant is called in Latine Fragaria, and the berries Fragra, from the Fragrancy of the smell, and taste, in English Strawberries. The temperament. The Leaves are cold in the first degree (some say hot) and drying in the second, the root is more drying and binding, the Berries while they are greene are cold and dry, but being ripe they are cold and most. The inward use. The Berries are good to coole the Liver, the bloud and Spleene, or an hot chollerick stomack, to refresh and comfort the fainting spirits, and to quench thirst, they are good also for other inflamma∣tions: The leaves and roots boyled in Wine and Water and drunke, do likewise coole the Liver and blood, and asswage all inflamations in the reines and bladder, provoketh urine, and allaieth the heate and sharpnesse thereof; the same also stayeth the bloudy Flux and womens courses▪ and helpeth the swelling of the Spleene: The water of the Berries carefully distilled is good in the panting or beat∣ing of the heart, and good for the overflowing of the Gall, the yellow Jandes.
The manner of Administring them. The Leaves and Roots are used in Decoctions. The outward Ʋse. The juyce dropped in to foule Ulcers, or they washed therewith, or with the decoction of the herbe and root, doth wonderfully clense them, and helpe to cure them the Leaves are good to be put into Lotions that are made for so outhes or Ulceers therin, or in the privy parts, or elsewhere, and also to fasten loose Teeth, and to heale foule gums, and to stay flowing of rheume into the Mouth, Throat, Teeth or Eyes: the juyce or water is excellent for hot and red Eyes, beeing dropped therein▪ and also for all wheales, or other erup∣tions or hot and sharp humours into the Face or Hands, or other parts of the body, to bath them therewith, and taketh away rednesse in the Face, and spots or other deformities of the skin. The hurtfull quality. Strawberries are hurtfull to cold watery and flegmatick stomacks, and too many eaten soon putrify in the stomach. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water, or the Leaves and fruit. Syrupe. Spirit, and Tin∣cture of Strawberries. CHAP. 108. De Glycyrrhiza, of Licoris. The Names. IT is called in Latine Glycyrrhiza, Glyzirrhiza, Liquiritia, and Dulcis radix, in English Licoris and Licorice. The temperament. It is temperate in heate and moisture. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare. The inward Ʋse. Licoris is good against the roughnesse and hoarsnesse of the throat, and is helpefull for Ulcers in the bladder, and by its moisture it quencheth thirst, and is excellent for any dry cough to digest flgme and to cause it to be easily spit up, to helpe shortnesse of breath, and all other griefes of the Breast and Lungs, the Tiffick, or Consumpti∣ons
caused by the distillations of Salt humours on them: it is good also in paines of the Raines, Strangury & heat of the Urine, especially boyled with Maidenhaire and Figs. The juyce of Licoris is as effectuall in all the Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, the Reines and bladder, as the decoction. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder, in juyce, and in Decoction. The outward use. The fine powder of Licoris blowne through a quill into the Eyes that have a Pin and Wed, or rheumatick distillations into them, doth cleanse them and help them. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Juyce of Licoris. Syrup of Licoris. CHAP. 109. De Gramine, of Grasse. The Names. IT is called in Latine Gramen, in Enlish Grasse. The temperament. The roots are moderately colde and dry, a little biting and of thin parts, the herbe cold in the first degree. The inward Ʋse. The Medow Grasse and couch Grasse, or quick Grasse are most in use, and open obstructions or stoppings of the Liver, and Gall, and the stoppings of the Urine, being boyled in white Wine, and to ease the gripings of the Belly, and inflammations, and wasteth the matter of the Stone in the Bladder, and the Ulcers thereof: the seede doth more powerfully expell Urine, and stayeth the laske, and casting, or vomiting: The distilled water, or the Decoction alone being taken, killeth Wormes in Children, especially if some Worme-seede be added to it. The juyce of the whole plant being taken helpeth spitting of Bloud. The manner of Administring it. The rootes and seeds are given in Decoction.
The outward use. The rootes bruised and applied, healeth wounds that are fresh, or greene, and ease paines of the head, as also in inflammations and de∣fluxions of the Eyes. Of those things that are made thereof. The distilled water. CHAP. 110. De Guajaco, of Guajacum, or Pockwood. The Names. IT is called in Latine Guajacum, Lignum Indicum, Lignum Sanctum, and Lignumvitae, in English Pockwood and Indiall Pockwood. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and hath a cleansing faculty. The Duration. It will keepe good many yeares. The inward use. The chiefe use of this Wood is against the French Disease, for it provoketh Sweate, resisteth contagion and putrifaction, and clean∣seth the Bloud: It is good also in the Dropsy, Falling Sicknesse, Shortnesse of breath, in Catarrhes, Rheumes and cold distillations of the Lungs, or other parts, Coughes and Consumptions, the Gout and all other joyntaches, and for cold flegmatick humours, for the Diseases of the Bladder and Reines, and for all long and lingring Diseases proceeding from cold and moist causes; it openeth the stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, warmes and comforts the sto∣mack and entralls, and is good in Scabs, Itch, &c. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in Decoction. A Decoction of Lignum vitae. Take of Lignum Vitae, or Pock-wood a pound, of the barke thereof two Ounces, steepe them in twelve or fourteene Pints of spring water foure and twenty houres, then boyle them to seven or eight pints, straine it, and give thereof a good draught morning and Evening, and let the party sweate upon it. If you adde two Ounces of Licoris, or more, and some Anisseede, it will be much
more pleasant to take. The barke may be given in powder from half a dram to a dram. The outward use. The decoction thereof doth make the Teeth white and firme being washed therewith. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used in hot and dry Bodies too frequently. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Extract. Chymicall Oyle. Spirit, and Salt of Guajacum. CHAP. 111. De Hedera, of Ivy. The Names. IT is called in Latine Hedera, and Hedera arborea, in English Ivy. The temperament. Ivy is of diverse qualities, some sharpe and hot, and some moist, others cold, dry and astringent. The inward Ʋse. A dram of the flowers drunke twice a day in red VVine, helpeth the Laske and bloody Flix. The yellow berries are good against the Jandise, and to keepe from Drunkennesse, and helpeth those that spit bloud: the white berries being taken killeth wormes. The juyce of the root is good to be taken against the biting of the Phalangium, or deadly Spider: the berries are held by many to be good against the Plague or Pestilence, being made in powder and taken in wine: they being taken in wine doe helpe to break the Stone, provoke Urine and VVomens courses, and brings away the birth and afterbirth. The manner of Administring it. The berries and flowers are given in decoction, or in powder. The outward Ʋse. A Bath made of the Leaves and Berries, doth bring down the Courses, and bring away the dead birth, and afterbirth, being set in, or a Pessary made and used doth the like, but this must be done onely upon necessity. The Leaves boyled in Vineger and applied warme to the side, helps the Spleene, Ache or Stich in the sides: the same applied with Rose-water and Oyle of Roses to the fore-head and
Temples▪ doth ease the Head-ach although of long continuance: the fresh Leaves boyled in wine and used doth clense old filthy Sores and Ulcers, and is effectuall for greene wounds to heale them quickly, and foder up the L ps thereof: the same healeth scaldings of water, and burnings by Fire, or blisterings in the body. The juyce of the Leaves or berries snuffed up into the Nose purgeth the Head and Braine of thin rheume, and cureth the Ulcers and stench therein; and drop∣ped into the Eares doth helpe the old and running Sores of them: the Berries or Leaves used causeth the Haire to grow blacke. The greene Leaves are commonly used to be laid upon Issues, in the Armes, Legs, or elsewhere. The gum of Ivy is used being dissolved to take away superfluous haire in any place, and to destroy Nits and Lice in any place: the same dissolved in Vineger, and put into hollow aking Teeth doth ease the same, and being often used will cause them to fall out: Some use it as a bait with other things to Kill Fsh: The fume of Ivy branches being burned driveth away Gnats, Battes, and all other hurtfull and noysome creatures. The hurtfull quality. It bringeth barrennesse in Man or Woman, being too often used, and brings weaknesse to the braine and senses: It is an enemy to the nerves and sinewes being taken inwardly, but helpefull to them applied out∣wardly. The Dose. The flowers and berries are given from half a dram to two scruples. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water Oyl of the berries, good against all cold infirmities of the joynts; provokes the termes, breakes and expells the Stone in the Reines, clenseth and health foule Ulcers. CHAP. 112. De Hedera terrestri, of Ground-Ivie, or Alehoofe. The Names. IT is called in Latine Hedera terrestris, and Corona terrae, because it spreadeth and is like a Garland upon the ground, in English Ale∣hoofe, Ground Ivy, Gill creepe by the ground, Cats-foote, Haymaids, and Tunnehoof, because the Country people use it much in their Ale.
The Temperament. It is hot and dry, sharp and bitter in taste, it openeth also, clenseth and rarefieth, or maketh thin. The inward use. It is a good wound herb for all inward wounds, as also for Ulce∣rated lungs, o other parts, either by it selfe or with other the like herbes boyled together, and being drunk by them that have any gri∣ping paines of windy or chollerick humours in the Stomach, Spleene or Belly, doth ease them in a short space: it helpeth likewise the yellow Jaundes by opening the stoppings of the Gall, Liver and Spleene; it expelleth venome or poyson, and the Plague also: it provoketh urine and womens courses, but doth not stay them as some have thought; but the Decoction of the herbe in wine being drunke for some time together helpeth them that have the Sciatica, or Hip-gout, as also the Gout in the Hands, Knees, or Feet, helpeth to dis∣solve & disperse the peccant humours, and to procure ease. The syrupe of Alehoofe is usefull in Ulcers of the Lungs and Consumptions, as also in humes flowing downe to the Stomach. Boyled in broth and taken, it provoketh sleepe, and expelleth ill humours out of the body. Being steeped in Aquavitee, and taken, it doth bring away the gravell and Stone. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in Decoction. See the Decoction of Mugwort. The outward use. A decoction thereof is good to gargle any sore throat or mouth, putting thereto some Hony and a little burnt Allum, as also to wash, the Sores and Ulcers of the privy parts in man or woman; it speedi∣ly healeth greene wounds being bound thereto: and the juyce boyled with a little Hony and Vardigrease, doth wonderfully cleanse Fistulas and hollow Ulcers, and stayeth the malignity of spreading and eating Cankers and Ulcers: it helpeth also the Itch, Scabs, Wheales, and o∣ther breakings forth in the skin in any part of the Body: the juyce of Celandine, field Daisies, and ground Ivie clarified, and a little fine Sugar dissolved therein, dropped into the eyes, is a soveraigne remedy for all the paines, rednesse and watering of the eyes, the Pin and Web, skins or Filmes growing over the sight, or whatsoever might offend them: the same helpeth beasts as well as men: the juyce drop∣ed into the eares doth help the noyse and singing of them, and helpeth also deafnesse. The leaves are used in Bathes and Glisters to dissolve the Stone.
An oyntment to heale burnings. Take ground Ivie, foure handfulls, Plantaine leaves a handfull, Burnet halfe a handfull; Bruise all these together, and let them stand eight dayes; then adde to them a handfull of Goose dung and one ounce of wax; boyle them together till the herbes have almost lost their colour, then straine and reserve it. Or you may boyle them presently after they are bruised. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled Water. Conserve of the flowers. Syrupe both simple and compound. CHAP. 113. De Hordeo Gallico, of French barly. The Temperament. IT is colde and dry in the first degree, or cold and moist, of a clensing faculty. The inward use. It is much used in pectorall diseases, or diseases of the brest, help∣eth the sharpnesse of the throat and increaseth milke, especially boyl∣ed with Fennell. It provoketh urine, and is very profitable in chollerick Feavers. The manner of Administring it. It is used onely in Decoction. As thus▪ Take two ounces of French-barly, boyle it in two fresh waters, then boyle it againe in a quart of water (adding halfe an ounce of Licorish, and a handfull of Violet leaves, and as many strawberry leaves) to a pint or a pint and a halfe, strayne it and put thereto of syrupe of Violets two ounces, or for the poorer sort you may swee∣ten it with a little Sugar. This is good in a burning Feaver. The outward use. It is used outwardly to soften hard swellings, and is good for in∣flamations and sorenesse of the throat, being boyled alone or with other fitting Herbes, and the mouth and throat washed therewith. A bath good against the Scab, Itch, &c. Take Mallowes, Violet, Beets, black Hellebor, Fumi∣tory of each three handfulls, of French barly sixe handfulls,
boyle them in a sufficient quantity of water for a bath. The hurtfull quality. It is bad for cold and windy bodies. We have had of late yeares a Barly called Pearl'd Barly, and is much in use for the forementioned Diseases. CHAP. 114. De Junipero, of the Iuniper-tree. The Names. THe Juniper tree is called in Latine, Juniperus, the berries are called Grana Juniperi, or Baccae Juniperi: the Gum that runneth from the tree being cut is calld Lachrima Juniperi, vernix, or vernia, quasi veris ros, issuing forth in the spring, as also Sandaracha and Sandarax of the Arabians, but not of the Greeks. Yet some will have Vernix to be made of Amber and Linseed Oyle. The Temperament. The Juniper both leaves and wood are hot and dry in the third degrees, the berries hot in the third degree and dry in the first; the Gum hot and dry in the first degree. The Duration. The Berries will keep good a yeare, the wood longer. The inward use. The leaves & young tender branches of the Juniper tree, or the juice of them or of the berries, or the berries themselves taken in wine, are very eff ctuall against the biting of a Vipers or Adders, as also against the Plague or Pestilence, or any other infection or poyson: the same also is profitable against the Strangury and stopping of the Urine, and so powerfull against the Dropsie, that as Matthiolus saith, he hath knowne divers to avoid so much water by urine, by taking foure or five ounces at a time of the lye made of Juniper Ashes, that they have been holpen thereby: it doth also provoke the courses, and help the rising of the Mother, and other paines thereof: the berries are good for the Cough and shortnesse of breath, and other diseases of the Chest an Lungs, and to ease the griping paines in the Belly; they are prevalent also to help Ruptures, Convulsions and Cramps, to procure a safe and easie delivery unto women with Childe: The
berries are very comfortable to the braine, & strengthen the memory and sight, and all the senses, and the heart also, being either drunke in wine, or the decoction of them in wine taken: the same also is good against the Quartaine, and dissolveth the winde in the Belly or Sto∣mach, and in generall is effectuall for all diseases proceeding from any cold cause, if they take of the berryes two or three times a weeke, three, foure or more at a time in wine. The Salt made of the Ashes of the Juniper wood is a singular remedy for the scurvey, the putrified and foule Gums, and generally resisting all putrefaction. The chymi∣call oyle drawne from the beries while they are greene, is as effectu∣all if not more to all the purposes aforesaid: and the oyle drawne from the Juniper wood is good against the Chollick, rising of the Mother, Gout, Wormes, Head-ach, &c. if foure or five drops there∣of be taken in a Morning in Broth, or in Bere. The Gumme of Ju∣niper in powder taken in wine doth stay vomitings, inward bleedings and spitting of blood, womens courses also, and all other fluxes of the belly, and the Piles, also killeth wormes in children. The manner of Administring it. The berries and wood are given in powder, or in Decoction. The outward use. The smoake of the Juniper wood being burned, besides that it yeeldeth a good sent to perfume any house, it is of good use in time of infection, and driveth away all noysome Serpents, Flies, Wasps, &c. the Ashes of the wood or barke made into a lye with water doth cure all Itches, Scabs, Pustules, or other eruptions in the skin, yea and the Lepry also if the places be bathed therewith. The Gum is used to stay cold distillations & Catarrhs that fall upon the eyes or Lungs &c. the fume thereof upon the burning on coals being taken into a Cap (the head also holden in the meane time over the said fumes) at night, & to lye covered therewith: or the powder thereof with other things fit for the purpose, strewed upon flax and to be quilted into a Cap to be worne in the night chiefly, and in the day also as neede shall re∣quire: the powder thereof mixed with some oyle of Roses and Myrtles healeth the chaps of the fundament, Kibes also and Chilblains on the hands and feet: the powder also mixed with the white of an Egge, and applyed to the forehead stayeth the bleeding at the nose: the same also burned upon coals, and the fumes thereof taken through a Funnell upon an aking tooth taketh away the paine: it is effectuall in most Ulcers and Fistulaes, and weeping running sores to dry up their
moisture: The Liquid Varnish is an especiall remedy against scaldings with water, or burnings with fire, and to help the painfull and blee∣ding Piles, and Palsie, Cramps, Convulsions of the nerves and sinews. The chymecall oyle of the wood is good against the Tooth-ach and for the Gout, Sciatica, and resolution of the nerves comming of colde. A bath against the Hip-gout. Take Camomill flowers and Juniper berries of each ten hand∣fulls, boyle them in a sufficient quantity of water for a Bath. A quilt or bag for the same. Take of Juniper berries what quantity you will, bruise them and make two large quilts for the hip; wet them with strong Aquavitee, make them very hot and apply them one after another unto the place affected. The hurtfull quality. They must not be used in hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The berries are given in powder from sixe to twenty. Of such things as are made thereof. Spirit of Juniper. Oyle Chymicall both of the berries and wood. Salt. Extract. Elixer juniperinum. Rob. juniperinum, &c. CHAP. 115. De Iujubis, of Iujubes. The Names. THey are called in Latine, Iujubae, Ziziphae, and Ziziphi; in Eng∣lish, Jujubes. The Temperament. They are temperate in heate and moisture. The Duration. They will keep long, but soon dry away. The inward use. Being greene or dry (say some) they open the body, and purge coller gently, and clense the blood, others deny any purging faculty in them. All Authors agree that they coole the heate and sharpnesse
of the blood, and therefore good in hot Agues, and help them that have a Cough to bring away tough fleagme, and good for other Dis∣eases of the Chest and Lungs, as shortnesse of breath, hot rhumes and distillations proceeding from hot humours: they are also to good purpose used to clense the reines and bladder from gravell, in making the passages slippery; they also stay vomitings procured by sharp hu∣mours. The manner of Administring them. They are chiefly used in Decoctions. See an Example of a Decocti∣on of them in my first part in the Chapter of Dates. The hurtfull quality. They are hard of digestion, nourish very little, and doe not easily passe out of the Stomach, they are therefore alwaies used in decocti∣ons with other fitting ingredients. Of those things that are made thereof. Syrupe of Jujubes, simple and compound, good against the Cough, shortnesse of breath, thin rhumes and hot humours falling upon the Lungs, &c. CHAP. 116. De Lacte, of Milke. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine, La▪ in English, Milke, and is cold and moist. The best Milke. The best milke ought to be white in colour, of equall consistence, which being dropped on the naile standeth round and firme without flowing abroad. And a black or brown Cowes milke is by most esteemed the best. In the spring time, milke is thinnest: and at the fall of the leafe thickest and best, according to that old saying: When Fearne waxeth red, then is milke good with bread. The inward use. Milke doth nourish the body well, breeds good blood, and is very usefull in Consumptions and Ulcers of the Lungs, yea no remedy is found like it for the same: it is excellent in the bloody flix, or any other flux of the body, where there is no Feaver, nor choller abound∣ing.
It mundifieth and cleanseth, taketh away paines of the Breast, Lungs, Reines, Bladder, and Entrailes, and very profitable in Ulcers of the bladder. It is good for temperate bodies, whose stomachs are free from chollerick and flegmatick humours, for in such it is well di∣gested aad engendereth good blood, and maketh the countenance faire: it asswageth heate and scalding of the urine, furthereth Venus, and is very good in times of infection. The outward use. It is used in Glysters against fluxes of the belly, in the Gout to as∣swage paine, and to soften swellings, &c. A Glyster against the Bloody-flux. Take a pint and a halfe of new milke, and adde theteto Barly a handfull, Comfrey root and Linseede of each an ounce; Boyle them therein to about a pint, and being strained, dissolve in it of browne Sugar an ounce, the yolks of two Eggs, and make a Glyster. The hurtfull quality. Milke is hurtfull for those that are troubled with the Head-ach, or Feavers, or Hypochondriacke winde, or thirst, or that avoid cho∣lericke excrments downewards, or have had some plentiull evacu∣ation of blood, as Hippocrates witnesseth. It is also bad for cold windy and weake stomachs. Gouty persons, such as have the Stone and Livers stopt, as also for the Palsie and Cramps, for sore eyes and distillations of rheume; hurteth the teeth and Gums, and is unpro∣fitable for old persons, and such as have the Chollick. Some boyle it and put thereto Salt, Sugar or Hony, others put in Mints. In fluxes of the Belly let it be boyled, or peeces of Steele, quenched therein before it be taken, and you may put some Cinamon therein, or Sugar rosat. Cautions to be observed in taking milke. After the taking of milke the party is to rest, lest by the motion of the body, the heat be drawne from the Center, to the circumfe∣rence of outward parts. After the taking of milke doe not sleepe lest head-ach, heavinesse and drowsin sse follow: onely very weake per∣sons are permitted to slepe after milke. Let milke be taken fasting, and take nothing after till it be concocted in the stomach. Drinke no Wine after the taking of milke, neither mingle any sharpe or soure things with it, nor eate F sh with or after the taking of Milke. Wash your Teeth and Gums well (after the taking of Milke) with Beere or Wine.
Of those things that are made of Milke. Creame, Butter, Cheese and Curde, Whey, &c. CHAP. 117. De Lactuca, of Lettuce. The Names and temperament. IT is called Lactuca, à Lacteo succo, from the milky juyce which issueth forth from the wounded stalkes, and Leaves, in English Lettuce and Lettice. It is cold and moist in the second or third degree. The Duration. It is rarely dryed, for it will not keepe long, but is used green. The inward Ʋse. Lettice is good for a hot stomack, and yeeldeth good nourishment to the body. Ant. Musa did by Lettice ease Augustus of the violence of his disease. It procureth rest and sleepe: being taken raw or boyled it helpeth to loosen the belly, and the boyled more then the raw, which eaten last performeth it the better, and was generally so in ancient dayes. It helpeth digestion, quencheth thirst, increaseth milke in Nourses, and easeth all griping paines of the stomack or bowells that come of choller: it abateth bodily lust, and tempereth the Heate of Urine: the seeds and distilled water are good for the virulnt running of the Reines, and for the heart of the Urine, as also for the aforesaid purposes. It was formerly eaten at the latter end of meales, but now tis eaten at the beginning. The manner of Administring it. It is given onely in decoction, as Take a handfull of Lettice and boyle it in a pint and a half of Posset drink to a pint, straine it and drink a good draught at night thereof. The outward use. The juyce of Lettuce mixed or boyled with Oyle of Roses and ap∣plied to the forehead, and temples, procureth rest and sleepe, and ea∣seth the head-ach of any hot cause: applied with camphor to the Cods it abateth the heat of lust: or applied in the same manner to the region of the Heart▪ Liver or Reines, or by bathing the said place with the juyce or distilld water, wherein some white Sanders and red Roses are put, doth abate the heate and inflammations there∣in, as also comfort and strengthen those parts.
A Fomentation good in the Frensy. Take Lettice, Violets, Plantaine, Night-shade, Housleeke, Purslane, of each a handfull, Violet-flowers, Water-Lillies and red Roses of each a Pugill, that is as many as you can hold in three fingers, or a small handfull, of Mirtle flowers halfe a pugill; make a decoction, and bath the forepart of the head therewith. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull to phlegmatick and melancholicke bodies, dimmeth the sight, quencheth naturall heat, causeth barrennesse, maketh the body sluggish, and weakneth the stomack, being too much eaten; and is bad also for those that are short-winded, or have any imperfection in their Lungs, or do use to spit bloud, and hurts the Teeth. It is good to eate Mints therewith, or to boyle it, and to eat Vineger and Pepper with it. Of such things as are made thereof. The distilled water. Lettice-stalkes canded. Syrupe of Lettuce. Lapis Bezoar, see Bezoar. CHAP. 118. De Lavendula, of Lavender. The Names and temperament. IT is called Lavendula and Lavandula, and of some Lavanda, be∣cause it was much used in washings. It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin substance. The duration. It will keepe good a yeare, being dry. The inward use. It is of especiall good use for all the griefes and paines of the head and braines, that proceede from a cold cause; as the Apoplexy, Falling-sicknesse, Lethargy, Cramps, Convulsions and Palsies, as also those that are given to faint often. It strengthneth the stomack, and freeth the Liver and Spleene from stoppings, provoketh Womens Courses, and expelleth the dead Childe, and afterbirth. Two spoone∣fulls of the distilled water of the flowers taken, doth helpe those that have lost their Speech or Voyce, restoring it them againe. It helpeth also the tremblings and passions of the Heart, and the
swounings and faintings thereof. The Chymicall Oyle is excellent for the Diseases before mentioned, if a few drops thereof be taken in Beere, or the like; So is the Conserve made of the flowers and Sugar. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in Decoction, as Mugwort. The outward Ʋse. The flowers of Lavender steeped in Wine, helpeth them to make water that are stopped; as also that are troubled with the winde-col∣lick, if the places be bathed therewith. It is good to gargle the mouth with the Decoction of the flowers, against the paine of the teeth. The fume or smoake thereof driveth away Lice. A Lotion to strengthen the senses and Nerves. Take of Sene one Ounce, red Roses and Lavender flowers a handfull; Boyle them in water, and make a Lotion for the head. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull for hot and dry complexions, and where the body is repleate, or aboundeth with blood and humours. Of those things that are made thereof. The distilled water. Conserve of the flowers, Chymicall Oyle. Lignum Vitae, see Guajacum. CHAP. 119. De Lupinis, of Lupines. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Lupinum and Lupinus, in English Lupines, o flat Beane. It is hot and dry, and very bitter. The Duration. They will keepe good a yeare or two, or longer. The inward use. By reason of their bitternesse they open, digest, dissolve and clense: being steeped in water, and afterwards dryed, beaten and taken with some Vineger, taketh away the loathing of the stomack to Meate and provoketh the appetite: the Decoction or Infusion of Lupines taken with Hony and Vinegar killeth Wormes in the belly, but if you mixe Rue and Pepper thereto, it will the more effectu∣all; the Meale or Powder taken with Honey and Vineger,
or in Drinke doth the same: the said Decoction taken openeth the stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, provoketh Urine and Wo∣mens Courses: If it bee taken with Myrrhe it expelleth the dead Childe. The manner of administring it. It is used in Decoction, or in powder. The outward use. A Decoction or Lye made of Lupines with Wormewood, Centory and bay-salt added thereto, stayeth the running and spreading of a Gangrene, being applied thereto very hot, with stupes of Cloth or Tow; A Decoction of them clenseth all Scabs, Morphew, Cancers, Tetters and creeping or running Ulcers and Sores, and boyled in Lie it cleanseth the head from Ulcers, Scurfe, &c. breeding therein: it also cleanseth the Face and taketh away the markes that the Pox does leave after their healing, and all other markes, and black and blew spots in the skin: the meale thereof being boyled in Vineger and applied taketh away Pimples, and scattereth the Rodes or Kernells that rise in the body, and breaketh Carbuncles and Impostumes: the burning of the huskes driveth away Gnats, Flies, &c. whatsoever. The powder mixed with Oyle of Sarin, and applied to the belly killeth Wormes. The hurtfull quality. Being steeped some dayes in water, untill they have lost their bit∣ternesse they may be eaten, but they breed grosse and crude humours, are very hard to digest, and slowly passe through the body. Mace, see Nutmeg. CHAP. 120. De Majorana, of Marjerome. IT is called in Latine Majorana, Amaracus, Sampsuchum, and Sampsuchus; in English Marjerome and sweete Marjerome. It is hot and dry in the second, or as some, in the third degree, and of thin parts. The Duration. It will keepe good a Yeare.
The inward use. Sweete Marjerome is comfortable in cold Diseases of the Head, Stomack, Sinewes, and other parts: it digesteth, attenuateth, ope∣neth and strengthneth: the Decoction thereof, being drunke helpeth all the Diseases of the chest, which hinder the freenesse of breathing: it is likewise profitable for the stoppings of the Liver & Spleene, for it not onely cleareth them of those humours that did stuffe them, but strengthneth the inward parts: it helpeth the cold griefs of the Wombe, and the windinesse thereof, or in any other inward part: the Decoction thereof, helpeth such as entring into the Dropsy, and such as cannot make water, and provoketh the Courses in VVo∣men. The Leaves in powder mingled with Honey and taken dissol∣veth congealed bloud in the body after falls or bruises: it is used also against poyson. A Decoction thereof made with Pelletory of Spaine and long Pepper, or with Origanum or Acorus, being taken, helpeth the losse of speech by the resolution of the Tongue. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Decoction, or in powder. The outward use. The powder of the Leaves snuffed up into the nostrills provoketh sneesing, draweth forth flegme, and is very usefull in the Apoplexy, Palsy and cold diseases of the braine: it easeth the tooth-ach being chewed in the mouth, the powder mixed with Honey and applied, taketh away the black markes of blowes or bruises: It is much used in sweet waters, powders, &c. It is put into Oyntments and Salves that are made to warme, and comfort the outward parts or mem∣bers, the joynts also and sinewes. The Oyle made thereof is good against Cramps, Convulsions and all aches proceeding from a colde cause. A Liniment that easeth the Head-Ach, caused by a Bruise. Take the juyce of Marjerome and the juyce of Sage of each halfe an Ounce, of Sack three drams; make all into a Liniment with the yolke of an Egge, and apply it to the part affected. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used in hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given in powder from a halfe a dram to a dram.
Of those Medicines that are made thereof. The distilled water. Oyle chymicall [excellent in the Apoplexy, Falling sicknesse, losse of speech, &c.] Oyle by infusion and boyling. Conserve, Balsame. CHAP. 121. De Malvis, of Mallowes. The Names and temperament. THe wild or common Mallow is called in Latine Malva, and that quasi molva, because it softneth the belly, in English Mal∣low. They are temperate in heate and moisture, of a digestive and softning Nature. The inward Ʋse. The Leaves and the Roots boyled in VVine, or in VVater, or in broth with Parsly or Fennell-roots, doth helpe to open the Body, and is good in hot Agues and other distemperatures of the body; for by the mollifying quality, it not onely voideth hot cholerick and other offensive humours, but easeth the paines and torments that come by stoppings of the belly: the same used by Nurses increaseth Milke in their Breasts: the Decoction of the Seeds made in VVine, Milke or Posset drinke, doth marvellously helpe all the Diseases of the Chest and Lungs that proceeds of hot causes, as Excorations, Pisicke, Pleurisy, and the like, if it bee continued for some time together, the Leaves and the Rootes worke the same effects: they helpe much also in the frettings of the Guts, and harnesse of the Mother, and in all hot and sharpe Diseases there∣of: the juyce drunke in VVine, or the Decoction made in VVine doth helpe VVomen to a speedy and easy delivery. They are counted also good against poyson or venome, so as the poyson be presently voided by vomit. The manner of administring it. It is used chiefly in Decoction. The outward Ʋse. Mallowes are often used in mollifying Glysters. The Leaves bruised and laid to the Eyes with a little Honey, taketh away the impostu∣mations of them: the Leaves bruised or rubbed upon any place stung
with Bees, Waspes or the like, taketh away the paines, rednesse and swelling thereof. A Pultis made of the Leaves of Mallowes, boyled and bruised, whereunto some Beane or Barly-flower, and Oyle of Roses is put, is an especiall remedy against all hard tumours, and in∣flammations of impostumes and swellings of the Cods and other parts, and easeth the paines of them, as also against the hardnesse of the Spleene or Liver, to be applied to the places: the juyce of Mallowes boyled in old Oyle and applied, taketh away all rough∣nesse of the Skin, as also the falling of the Haire, the Scurfe, Dan∣druffe, or dry Scabs, in the Head or other parts, if they be anoynt∣ed therewith, or washed with the Decoction: the same also is ef∣fectuall against Scaldings or Burnings, and to helpe wild fire and all other hot, red and painfull Swellings in any part of the Body. The flowers boyled in water and a little Hony added is a good Gargle for any sore mouth or throat: If the feet be bathed with the Decoction of the Leaves, Roots, and flowers, it helpeth the flowing downe of rheume from the Head, which rose out of the stomack: the greene Leaves beaten with niter and applied draweth out thornes or prickes in the flesh. A Fomentation against winde. Take of the Leaves and roots of mallowes a handfull, of Camo∣mill and Melilot flowers a handfull, Linseede one Ounce, Aniseede halfe an Ounce, Figges in number forty. Boyle them in water, and fill a bladder with the hot Decoction; apply it Once or twice to the side or part affected. Of those things that are made thereof. The distilled water. The conserve of the flowers. CHAP. 122. De Melle, of Honey. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Mel, in English Hony, and is hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. It wil keepe good two or three yeares.
The best Kinde. The best Honey is very sweet, pleasant in smell, of a cleare yel∣lowish colour, indifferent firme and stiffe, yeelding but little scum on the top when it is boyled. The inward Ʋse. Honey is profitable in many Diseases of the breast, as Cough, Shortnesse of Breath, Pleurisy, Cold, Rheumes, and doth cleanse the Breast and Lungs of flegmatick and Rheumatick humours; it helpeth such as are costine or bound, openeth the stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, strengthneth weake Parts, helpeth the Bladder and Reines, and is good in the Dropsey, It resisteth putrifaction, and (as Pliny saith) suffereth no dead Bodies to putrify, and is very profitable for old Age, and flegmatick per∣sons. The Roman Pollio being asked by Augustus the Emper∣our, by what meanes hee had prolonged his Life to an hundred Yeares? Answered, that hee had used Honey within, and Oyle without. It is better boyled then Raw. Pliny Nat. Hist. Lib. 22. Cap. 24. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly used in manner of an Electuary, or mixed with other things. An Electuary for the Cough. Take of pure Honey foure Ounces, o Elecampane in Pow∣der two Drams, of Licoris in Powder a Dramme, mixe them together, and take often of it especially Morning and Eve∣ning. The outward use. It is good in the Quinsie, Sore Mouthes and Throates, being used in Mouth-water or otherwise, but if choller abound, forbeare the use of it. It cures Burnings and Scaldings without Scarre, and healeth Ulcers of the Eares, and good also to cleanse and heale other filthy Ulcers. Being dropped into the Eyes it helpeth the Dimnesse of them, and cureth Cornes in the Feete. If it be mixed with a little Camphor, and used, it taketh away Spots or Pim∣ples in the Face. It is used in Supposittories. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull for hot stomacks, cholerick Bodies, and young persons, for it inflames the Bloud, increaseth Choller, and hur∣teth such as have hot Livers. And though it bee of a clean∣sing
and opening Faculty, yet being too much used, it stoppeth the Body, puffeth up the Stomack, taketh away the appetite to Meate, and must not be used in very windy Bodies. Of such Medicines as are made of Honey. Oxymel simple and compound. Water of Honey. Essence of Honey. Tincture of Honey. Hydromel, that is Water and Honey boyled together. Meade, Methegline, and many o∣thers. CHAP. 123. De Meliloto, of Melilot. The Names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Melilotus, in English Melilot, Kings Claver, and Hearts Claver, because if it grow where Stagges and Deere resort, they will greedilie feede thereon: Now it is called Melilot from a Lotus that smelleth sweete like Honey. It is Hot and Dry in the first Degree, and hath a binding Quality, besides a Wasting, and Ripening Facul∣ty. The duration. The Herbe and flowers will keepe good a Yeare. The inward use. The Herbe boyled in Wine, and taken, provoketh Urine, breaketh the Stone, and asswageth the paine of the Kidnies, Bladder and Belly, and ripeneth flegme. The manner of administring it. It is given in Decoction. The outward use. It mollifieth hard Tumours, and Inflammations that hap∣pen in the Eyes or other parts of the Body, as the Seate or Fundament, and the privy Parts of Man or Woman, being boy∣led in Wine and laid to the place, and sometimes the Yolke of a roasted Egge, or the powder of Fenigreeke, or Linseede, or fine flower, or Poppy-seede, or Endive is added unto it. It easeth the paine of the Side or Stomack, applied either fresh, or boyled
with any other of the aforenamed things. The juyce dropped in the eyes cleareth the sight, and taketh away the Web, Pearle, or spots therein: it helpeth also the paines of the eares being dropped into them, and steeped in Vineger or Rose-water it easeth the Head-ach, the flowers of Melilot and Camomill are much used in Glysters to expell winde and to ease paines, as also in Pultises that are made for the same purpose, and to asswage swellings or tumours that happen in the Spleene or other parts. It helpeth Wens being applyed after it is boyled in water, and also running Ulcers of the head if it be apply∣ed with Chalke, Wine and Galls: The plaster of Melilot dissolveth hard tumours and swellings of the Spleene, and cureth greene wounds. A quilt or bag to ease the paine of the side. Take Melilot flowers, Camomill, Rosemary, and Elder flowers, of each halfe a handfull, of Branne a handfull, of Anisseed, Fennell-seed, and Carawey seed bruised of each two ounces; make a quilted bag for the side, sprinkle it with wine, and being made hot apply it. Of those things that are made thereof. The distilled Water. Plaster of Melilot, both simple and com∣pound. CHAP. 124. De Melissa, of Baulme, or Bawme. The Names. IT is called in Latine, Milissophillum, and Melissa, because Bees delight much in it, and of the effect being good for Bees; in Eng∣lish Bawme, and Baulme, from the singular effects therein, in imitati∣on of the true naturall Baulme. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. It will keep good a yeare. The inward use. It is excellent against the Diseases of the Braine, Stomach, Heart, Wombe, as in Melancholly, troublesome sleepe, Palsie, Apoplexie,
Falling sicknesse, Swimming of the head, and to revive the fainting heart, falling into swimmings: It is good for a cold stomach and to help digestion, as also among other things for the Plague or Pestilence, and the water thereof is used for the same purposes. It provoketh the courses, helpeth a stinking breath, and good for the rising of the Mo∣ther. A decoction of bawme made in wine and drunke, is good against venome and poyson, helpeth the griping paines of the belly, and is good for them that cannot take their breath, unlesse they hold their necks upright, being taken in a lohock or licking electuary. The sy∣rupe of Bawme is a good cordiall, & strengthneth the heart and sto∣mach, resisteth Melancholly, and is very profitable in burning and contagious Feavers. A Candle made with Eggs and the juyce thereof while it is young, putting some Sugar and Rosewater to it, is often given to womin in Childbed, when the afterbirth is not throughly avoyded, and for their faintings upon or after their sore tra∣vells. The manner of Administring it. It is used chiefly in Decoction; See the Chapter of Mugwort. The outward use. The herbe bruised and boyled in a little wine and oyle, and laid warme on a Bile will ripen and breake it: used with salt it taketh away Wens, Kernells or hard swellings in the flesh or throat; it cleanseth foule sores and easeth the paines of the Gout: the juyce thereof used with a little Hony is a good remedy for the dimnesse of the sight, and to take away the mistinesse of the eyes. It is used in Bathes among other warme herbs, to comfort the joynts and sinews. It is a good remedy against the sting of Scorpions, or other venemous creatures, and against the stinging of Bees, as also against the bitings of Dogs: The decoction thereof is good for women to bath or sit in to procure their courses, and for those that have the bloody Flix, as also to wash the teeth therewith when they are full of paine. It is very often put into oyles or salves to heale greene wounds. A quilt or bag against the beating of the heart. Take of Bawme dry foure handfulls, of Roses, Violet, Borrage and Rosemary flowers of each halfe a small handfull, make them in grosse powder, and adde of Camphor two scruples, then with red Silke and Bombace make a quilted bag and apply it to the region of the heart.
The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull in hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given in powder from a scruple to two scruples. Of those Medicines that are made thereof. The distilled water. Extract, Conserve of the flowers; Syrupe both simple and compound. CHAP. 125. De Menthis, of Garden or Spearemints. The Names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Mentha, Mentha hortensis, and Mentha acuta. It is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree, of thin parts, bitter and binding. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare being dry. The inward use. Speare-mints are good against vomiting, weaknesse and rawnesse of the Stomach, the Hickop, and allayeth choller, expelleth winde, easeth gripings of the belly, helpeth stoppings of the Liver, and is good in any cold paine or giddinesse of the head, being taken in powder or a decoction thereof made and taken. The juyce taken with Vineger stayeth bleeding. Mints stir up Venery or bodily lust, killeth wormes, stayeth the courses in women, and helpeth the whites, keepeth the milke from curdling in the breasts, as also in the stomach. It is pro∣fitable against the poyson of venimous creatures. It is good for wo∣men in their hard and sore travailes in Child-bearing, and against the gravell and Stone in the Kidneys and Strangury, and helpeth a stink∣ing breath. The distilled water is much used against vomitings, gri∣pings in the belly, &c. It warmeth and strengthneth the stomach, and dryeth up moist humours therein, and causeth good Di∣gestion. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder or in Decoction.
The outward use. Being outwardly applyed, it stayeth vomiting, and easeth gripings of the Stomach and belly: it dissolveth Impostumes being laid to with Barly meale; it is good to represse the milke in womens breasts when they are swollen therewith, and keepeth them from growing great; applyed with salt it helpeth the biting of a mad Dog, with Water and Hony it easeth the paines of the Eares. Applyed to the Forehead or Temples it easeth the paines thereof, and it is good also to wash the heads of young Children therewith against all manner of breaking out therein, whether Sores or Scabs: and healeth the chaps of the fundament. It helpeth the stinging of Bees or Wasps be∣ing applyed. A quilt against weaknesse and paines of the Stomach. Take Wormewood and Mints dry of each two drams, of Citron pill dry, an ounce, of Galingall, Cyperus root and Cloves of each halfe an ounce, of red Roses two drams; make them all into pow∣der, and let a quilt be made for the Stomach. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull for hot and dry bodies, and for chollerick per∣sons. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from halfe a scruple to two scruples. Of those Medicines that are made thereof. The distilled water. Syrupe. Conserve. Chymicall Oyle. Oyle by infusion. Balsam. Salt. CHAP. 126. De Mili osolis, of Gromell. The Names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Milium solis, and Lithospermum, from the hard∣nesse of the seede; in English, Gromell and Pearle plant: It is hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. The seeds will keepe good a yeare or two, some say ten yeares.
The inward use. The seeds are counted singular good to breake the Stone and gra∣vell in the Reines or Bladder, as also to provoke Urine, to expell Winde and to helpe the Chollick. The same taken is effectuall to procure a speedy delivery to women in travaile. The seedes being taken in Posset-drinke before divers fits cureth the Quartaine Ague. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder or in decoction, The outward use. The decoction or bath thereof, being sit in, helpeth the Stone and Strangury, the Chollick and winde, &c. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The seede is given from a dram to two drams. Of those things that are made thereof. The distilled water of the leaves. Holland powder, &c. CHAP. 127. De Moscho, of Muske. The Names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Moschus, and Moscus, in English, Muske. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. The best Muske. The best Muske is very odoriferous or sweet, of a darke liver co∣lour, or yellowish. The Duration. It will keep good a yeare or two being kept close. The inward use. It comforteth the heart and fainting spirits, and taketh away the passions and trembling thereof, maketh it merry and joyfull, and helpeth to expell sadnesse; it comforteth, warmeth and refresheth the braine and senses, quickning the dulnesse thereof, and is a helpe unto Venery. It is put in many cordiall powders. It is commended in the Chollick, and maketh the breath sweet.
The manner of Administring it. It is given chiefly in powder. The outward use. It helpeth moist and rheumatick eyes, and ease cold paines of the head being mixed with Populean oyntment, and the temples there∣with anoynted. It is much used for all sorts of perfumes and fits of the Mother to the lower parts. It helpeth deafnesse being put into the Cotten wool. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull to weake braines and hot Livers, for the often use thereof burneth up the blood, and maketh the face pale; it is count∣ed bad for such as have fits of the Mother, yet Horstius doth com∣mend it in such fits if it be taken in a small quantity. Greg. Horst. Observat. lib. 1. part. 2. Observat. 24. fol. 49, 50. The Dose. The Dose is from two graines to five or sixe, in any convenient Liquor. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Species Diamoschu dulcis, & amari. Oleum Moschellinum. Muske powder. CHAP. 128. De Mumia, of Mummie. The Names and Temperament. MƲmmie is the body of a man or woman embalmed, and brought chiefly from Aegypt or Syria adjoyning. It is called in Latine, Mumia, in English, Mummie. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The Duration. It will keepe good many yeares. The inward use. It easeth the paine of the head coming of cold and moisture, and is good in Palsie and Crampe, Falling sicknesse, swiming of the head: it is cordiall for the heart and preventeth the danger of poison, or the venome of the Scorpion and other Serpents, dissolveth winde both in the Stomach, spleen and bowells, stayeth the Hickop
and inward Bleedings, or Fluxes of Bloud, dissolveth the congealed Bloud of bruises by falls or otherwise, and helpeth the Ulcers of the Bladder, and stopping of Urine, being taken in Goats Milke, and is good against the Cough. The manner of Administring it. It is given chiefly in powder. A Powder against Bruises or Falls. Take Bole Armoniack, or sealed Earth, Dragons bloud and Mum∣me of each two Drams, of Parmacitty a Dram, Rubarbe halfe a Dram, make them in powder, and give halfe a Dram or more thereof. The outward use: It stayeth Bleeding of the Nose, or the Bleeding of Wounds, and is good to consolidate or close up Wounds: it is used also against Cramps and Distentions of the Mouth, the hardnesse and shrinking of the Sinewes, and Lamenesse in the Feet through cold and wet. The Dose. It is given from a Dram to two Drams. Of those Medicines that are made of Mumme. Tincture, or extract of Mumme. Powder against Bruises. Sympatheticall Oyntment. CHAP. 129. De Nardo, of Spikenard. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine, Nardus Indica, Spica Indica, and Spica Nardi, in English Spicknard. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second. The Duration. It will keepe good many years. The inward Ʋse. It provoketh Urine and brings downe the Courses, as some say, other will have it to stop all Fluxes both of Men and Women, and to stay the loosenesse of the Belly, and thin watery humours:
being Drunke with cold Water, it is profitable to those that have a loathing of their Meate, or having swellings or gnaw∣ings at their Stomacks, as also for them that are Liver-growne, that have the Yellow Jandise, or the Stone in the Kidneyes: it dryeth up the Flux of humours both in the Head and Brest, and is put into Antidotes against venome and poyson. It is very convenient for the Liver and Stomack. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder, or in Decoction. The outward use. It stayeth any Flux of the Belly being applied, and helpeth Watering Eyes by staying the humours, and thickning it also. The Decoction used as a Bath for Women to sit in, or over it, taketh away the inflammation of the Mother. It is good to cause Haire to grow on the Eye-Lids of such as want it, and dryeth up super∣fluous moisture in any part of the Body being strewed thereon. Oyle made thereof is good for all Cold Griefes and Windinesse of the Head, Stomack, Liver, Spleene, Reines and Bladder, and of the Mother. The hurtfull quality. It causeth vomitings, and therefore is left out in many cordiall Medicines; it is hurtfull for hot and dry Bodies, and must not be given to Women with Childe without great caution, because it pro∣cureth them much disquiet, and may force their Courses beyond either their time or conveniency. The Dose. The Dose is from a Scruple to thirty Graines. Medicines made thereof. Oyle of Nardus, Simple and Compound.
CHAP. 130. De Nigella, of Gith, or Nigella. The Names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Melanthium and Nigella, from the black co∣lour of the Seede, in English Gith, Nigella, and Fennell-flower. The Seeds are hot and dry in the third degree. The Duration. The Seeds will keepe good a yeare or two. The inward use. The Seede drunken with Wine is a good remedy against Short∣nesse of Breath, expelleth Winde, provoketh Urine, and the Termes in Women, increaseth Milke in the Breasts of Nurses, killeth Wormes, and is very good against poyson, and the biting of ve∣nemous Beasts, as also against the Quartaine and Quotian Ague if a Dram thereof be taken in Wine or Posset before the fit. It is an ex∣cellent remedy where there is neede of cleansing, drying, and heating. The manner of Administring it. Is is given in powder, or in Decoction. The outward use. It Killeth Wormes being laid to the Navell with the juyce of Wormewood. Being dryed and put into Linnen or Sarfenet, and so quilted in and laid to the Head, it cureth Catarrhes or Rhemes, dryeth the Braine, and restoreth the smelling being lost. It taketh away Freckles, Scurfe and Hard Swellings being mixed with Vineger and applied. The Smoke or Fume thereof driveth away venemous Creatures, and Killeth Flies, Bees and Waspes. The same mingled with Oyle of Ireos, and laid to the forehead, cureth the Head-ach comming from cold. The hurtfull quality. If too much thereof be taken, tis dangerous, and bringeth Death. The Dose. The Dose is from halfe a Dram to a Dram. Medicines made thereof. The distilied water. Oyle thereof.
CHAP 131. De Nitro, of Nitre. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Nitrum, and Sal nitri, in English Niter and Salt of Niter. It is hot of temperature, saith Pliny, in Nat. Hist. Booke 310. Chap. 10. and doth extenuate, or make thin, others say it is cold. The duration. It will keepe good many years, being kept dry. The inward use. It is profitable in burning Feavers, as also in putried and malignant Feavers, in the Calenture at Sea, for it resisteth putrifaction, and cooleth the boyling of the blood; it is usefull also in the Pleurisy, in∣flammation of the Lungs, in the Stone of the Kidneyes and Bladder, in the stoppings of the Liver and Entralls. It stayeth the bleeding of a Veine, or of the Nose. The manner of Administring it. It is chiefly dissolved in some convenient Liquor, and so given, as if to stop bleeding, give it in Plantaine water. The outward Ʋse. It is used in Lotions against the inflations of the mouth and throat, in the Quinsie, against the Gout, and in burnings and scaldings, as also against spots in the Eyes, being mixed with Honey, and put therein. Being boyled with Wine and Pepper, and the Mouth wash∣ed therewith, it easeth the Tooth-ach, and cleanseth the Gums. The powder thereof (being burnt) maketh the Teeth white, being rubbled therewith. It is of excellent use to kill the Itch, Scab, Morphew, or any foule Diseases of the Skinne, if it bee mixed with Fullers Earth and Vineger, and the Skin anoynted there∣with. A Lotion for Tetters, or Ringwormes. Take of Nitre three Drams, of common Salt a Dram, of the distil∣led water of Dockes foure Ounces, Vineger of Squills one Ounce, dissolve and mixe them together; moisten a Cloath or Sponge therein (being warme) and rub the places affected. Or against
the Itch dissolve Niter, and Alume with distilled Vineger, or with Water of Scabions, and therewith wash and rub the places affected. The hurtfull quality. Where the Body is loose, it must not bee given in any great quantity. The Dose. The Dose is from a Dram to a Dram and an half. Medicines made thereof. Spirit of Nitre. Tincture of Nitre, &c. CHAP. 132. De Nuce Moscata, & Maci. Of Nutmeg and Mace. The names and temperament. THe Nutmeg is called in Latine Nux moschata, and Nux myristica, in English Nutmeg. The Mace is called in Latine Macis, in Eng∣lish Mace. They are hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent. The best kinde. The best Nutmegs are the heaviest, fastest, and such as are fullest of juyce, which being pricked with a pin or needle yeeldeth an oyly juyce. The largest Mace is the best. The Duration. They will keepe good many yeares. The inward Ʋse. The Nutmegs are used in all cold Diseases of the Head, for Palsies, shrinking of Sinewes, and the Diseases of the Mother, they stay the Laske, cause a sweete breath, expell winde in the stomack or belly, helpe to quicken the sight, stay vomiting, comfort the spirits and strengthen the stomack. They are profitable for the Liver and Spleen, cause such as are leane to grow fat, help venery and increase sperme: they helpe to procure sleepe being applied to the Temples. Being mixed with Venice Terpintine washed and taken, it helpeth the run∣ning of the Reines. They provoke Urine, say some.
The Nutmeg being greene is preserved in the Indies, and brought over: the which is not so hot and dry as our dry Nutmegs; and therefore very comfortable for the Head and Stomack, eaten Mor∣ning and Evening, or after meales. Mace hath the same property, but somewhat more warming and comforting, and is good against Vomiting, Fluxes and Spitting of bloud. The chymicall Oyle of either is excellent for the cold Diseases of the Head and Stomack, but must be cautelously and sparingly used. The manner of Administring them. They are given in powder, Electuary, &c. The outward Ʋse. They are used outwardly to stop fluxes, to stay vomiting and to make the breath sweet. The thick Oyle that is drawn both from Mace and Nutmegs are good for the Cough, vomiting, to warme a cold stomack, and to dry up Rheume and cold raw humours therein. A Cap or Quilt against the paine of the Head arising from superfluous moisture. Take Galingall, Calamus Odoratus and Cyperus Root, of each three Drams, Nutmeg and Cloves of each two Drams, Betony, and Marjerome of each an Ounce, Rosemary-Flowers, and Stoechados of each half an Ounce. Powder them, and make a Cap. The hurtfull quality. They are hurtfull to hot and dry Bodies, and to melancholy persons. The Dose. The Dose is from a Scruple to two Scruples. Of those Medicines that are made thereof. Oyle chymicall, and oyle by expression of either. Salt of Nutmegs. Balsome of Nutmegs, and Mace. Nimphaea, see the 69. Chapter.
CHAP. 133. De Ocimo, of Bassill. The names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Ocimum and Basilicum, in English Basill and Bassill. It is hot in the second degree. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare. The inward use. It is good for those that are short winded, provoketh Urine, and the Termes in Women, and brings a speedy deliverance to them in travile. The seeds are used to helpe the trembling of the Heart, and to comfort the same, as also to expell melancholy, or sadnesse. A Decoction of the herbe made and taken is good against poyson, and the sting of Scorpions, and helpfull for those that are given to swown∣ings, and it provokes venery or lust. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Decoction, or in powder. The outward Ʋse. Used with Oyle of Roses, or Mirtles, and Vineger, it is good against the paines of the Head, and it is pofitably applied to those that are troubled with the Lethargy, the Jandise and Dropsey. It is good to be put into the Eares of young Children with a little Goose-Grease, to helpe them of paines thereof: the juyce, or seede bruised put into the Nostrills procureth neesing. Mixed with Honey and used, it taketh away the spots in the Face. The juyce put into the Eyes taketh away the dimnesse thereof, and drieth up hu∣mours that fall into them. Hollerius relates of a certaine Italian that by often smelling to Basil, had a Scorpion bred in his Braine, who after vehement and long paines Died thereof. Hollerius Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Fol. 3. The hurtfull quality. It dulleth the sight, troubleth a weake braine, and causetth head∣ache.
The Dose. It is given from a Scruple to thirty or forty graines. Medicines made thereof. The distilled Water. CHAP. 134. De Nymphaea, of Water Lilly. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Nymphaea and Nenuphar, in English Water-Lilly. The Leaves and Flowers are cold and moist, but the root and seed cold and dry. The duration. The dryed Flowers will keepe a yeare. The inward use. The Flowers boyled and taken, coole inflammations, and all inward heats of Agues. The Seedes and Rootes are effectuall to stay Fluxes of Bloud, and Seede both in Man and Woman, as also the running of the Reines, and the involuntary passage of Sperme in sleepe, and is so powerfull that the frequent use there∣of extinguisheth lustfull or venerious actions; the Roote likewise is very good for those whose Urine is hot and sharpe, to be boy∣led in Wine or Water, and the Decoction drunke. The Syrupe of VVater Lilly or Conserve, helpeth much to procure rest, and to settle the Braines of Franticke Persons, for it wonderfully helpeth the distemperature of the Head arising from heate. The distilled VVater of the flowers is effectuall for the Diseases afore∣said. The manner of Administring it. It is used in Decoction. The outward Ʋse. The Leaves and Flowers are used in Lotions, and Bathes against Heate and Inflammations, as in the Frensey and Fea∣vers. The greene Leaves bruised, and applied to the Back help∣eth the running of the Reines. The Distilled VVater used ta∣keth away Freckles, Spots, Sunne-burning and Morphew from the Skin in the Face, or any other part of the Body. The Oyle made
of the flowers, as oyle of Roses is made doth coole hot tumours, and the inflamations of Ulcers, and wounds, ease the paines, and help to heale the sores. Of Medicines made thereof. The distilled water. Syrupe, both simple and compound. Conserve. Oyle and oyntment. CHAP. 135. De Olibano, of Olibanum. The Names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Olibanum, and Thus Masculum, in English, also Olibanum or white Frankumcense. It is hot in the second de∣gree and dry in the first, and binding withall. The Duration. It will keep good many yeares. The inward use. It restraineth bleedings, stoppeth the Laske and running of the Reines, helpeth the memory, sadnesse and melancholly, and com∣forteth the heart, mixed with other things for that purpose: it is also very pectorall and good for the Cough, for thin rhumes and di∣stillatious, and the Pluresie also, mixed with conserve of Roses and taken fasting. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder electuary, or taken whole in the pap of a roasted Apple. The outward use. The fumes thereof when it is burned, being taken at the mouth and nose (the head being covered) is very availeable both for the Cough of the Lungs, and those thin distillations thereon causing it: the fumes thereof taken beneath, or the applycation of it in oyntment, helpeth the Piles, and the Tenasmus, which is a disease provoking noe often to the stoole without doing any thing. It is a singular good medicine for the rednesse and paines in the eyes, or in the eares. Mirrhe and Olibanum mixed with the white of an Egge, being beaten and laid to Temples, helpeth the Megroes and paines in the head: it stoppeth bleeding of the nose or wounds, and is of especiall use and account
in Balmes, Salves, Plasters and Oyntments for Wounds and Ulcers, after their clensing to incarnate, or breed flesh, and heale them spee∣dily, and in Fractures of the Skull most effectually, so that the Pia∣mater (which is thin Skin that compasseth the Braine) bee not perished. It helpeth the falling of the Fundament being strewed there∣on, and the Fume on Coales sit over. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtfull to hot and dry Bodies, and to such as are Frantick. The Dose. The Dose is from halfe a Scruple to a Scruple. Medicines made thereof. Electuary Diaolibanum. ung. Basilicon, &c. CHAP. 136. De Lavendula, of Lavender. The Names. IT is called in Latine Onomis and Anomis, also Aresta Bovis, Resta Bovis, and Remorum aratri, because the roots are so tough that the Plough cannot easily cut them, but cause the Oxen to be at a stand for a time; in English tis called Rest Harrow, Cammock and Petty whin. The temperament. The roote is hot and dry in the third degree, having some cleansing and cutting faculty therein also. The Duration. It will keepe good a yeare. The inward use. The Barke, or Roote it selfe in Powder, taken in Wine, provoketh Urine, breaketh the Stone, and driveth it forth. The Powder taken in Wine for many Dayes together Cures the fleshy Rupture, for it consumeth it by little and little. The De∣coction thereof is effectuall to open the stoppings of the Liver and Spleene, and other parts, and to helpe the Jandise, as also to cure the Blinde Hemorrhoides or Piles. The tender sprigs or stalkes hereof before they come prickly, are pickled up to be eaten
as a sauce, or alone, and are commended against a stinking breath, and to take away the smell of wine in them that have drunke too much. Boyled in Oxymell to the Consumption of the one halfe it is a singular drinke for the Falling-sicknesse. Plini. Nat. Hist. Booke 27. Chap. 4. The manner of Administring it. It is given in powder, or in Decoction. The outward use. A Decoction thereof made with Vineger and gargled in the mouth easeth the Tooth-ach, especially when it commeth of rheume. the powder of the roots strowed upon the hard callous brims of Ul∣cers, or the said powder mixed with any other convenient thing and applyed, doth consume the hardnesse, and cause them to heale the better. The hurtfull quality. Hot and dry bodies must not be too busie with it. The Dose. It is given from a scruple to two scruples. Med cines made thereof. The distilled water from the whole plant. CHAP. 137. De Origano, of Organy, or bastard Marjerome. The Names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Origanum, in English Organy, or bastard Mar∣jerom. It is hot and dry in the third degree. The Duration. It will keep good a yeare. The inward use. The decoction of Organy with wine, is good for those that are bitten with Serpents, or venemous beasts, and to be taken with sodden wine, for such as have taken Hemlock or Opium. It is given with Figs to those that are bursten, or have a rupture, Convulsions or Cramps, or have the Dropsey. The dryed herbe, or juyce taken in honyed water, purgeth downwards choller and melancholly humours. It provoketh the courses, and taken with Hony it helpeth those that
have a Cough. It provoketh those that have an Itch, or are Scabbed and Mangy, and those that have the Jandes, are much holpen by a De∣coction thereof taken, when they are in a bath. The Decoction there∣of with a few Cloves and Sugar, helpeth those that have the Hickop exceedingly, it helpeth the stoppings of the Liver, Spleene or wombe, and all other stoppings, provoketh Urine, and is good for such as have soure belchings, and Squamish Stomachs. The manner of Administring it. It is given in Decoction or in powder. The outward use. It healeth the Scab and Itch being used in a Bath, and taketh away the yellow colour of the Jandise. The juyce of the greene herbe healeth the swellings of the Almonds of the throat, and the Ulcers of the mouth; it draweth forth fleagme by the nostrills, if it be infused in the oyle of Flower-de-luces. It easeth the paines of the eares, be∣ing used with Milke. The powder thereof mixed with a little Salt-peter and Hony, made into the manner of a thin electuary, and there∣with the teeth being rubbed often, will make them white and firmer. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. The Dose is from halfe a dram to a dram. Of those Medicines that are made thereof. The distilled water. Oyle. Salt. CHAP. 138. De Orobo, of bitter Vetch. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Orobus, because Oxen are fat therewith, and Ervum, in English, Orobus, and bitter Vetch. It is hot in the first degree and dry in the second, and by the bitternesse cutteth clenseth and openeth stoppings. The inward use. The meale or powder of Orobus mixed with Hony and taken is a
good Medicine to clense the brest and Lungs of thick humours that offerd them; the manner of the ancients preparation of the meale hereof was in this manner: being steeped in water a good while, they after fryed or parched them untill the rindes broke, which then being ground and passed through a boulter, they keepe this meale as of great use, both to move the belly downwards and to provoke urine, and to cause them that use it to be of a good colour. If it be taken divers Mornings together fasting, it consumes the Spleene, and taken in Wine or Vineger, it helpeth the bitings of Serpents and mad Dogs, and Men, and taken with Vineger, it helpeth the Strangurie, and that disease when one doth oft desire to goe to stoole but can doe no∣thing: The said meale mixed with Hony and taken, helpeth those that relish not their meate, and are ready to fall into a Consumption. The manner of Administring it. It is given chiefly in powder, with Hony, or any Conserve. The outward use. The Meale hereof mixed with Hony clenseth foule Ulcers, and take away the spots, freckles, and other discolourings of the face or other parts of the body: it suffereth no Cankers, Gangreens, or spreading eating sores to breed in the body; it mollifieth the hard∣nesse of the breasts: The decoction thereof helpeth the Itch and Kibes being bathed therewith, and made into a Plaster with wine; it will break Carbunkles if it be laid thereon. The hurtfull quality. If too much thereof be taken, it causeth head-ach and pains in the belly, and causeth bloody urines. The Dose. The Dose is from a scruple to two scruples. Medicines made thereof. The Meale of Orobus.
CHAP. 139. De Passulis, of Raisons. The Names and temperament. THey are called in Latine Passulae, & Ʋvae passae, in English Rai∣sons and Raisins. They are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second. The best kinde. The best are those we call Raisons of the sun. The duration. They will keep good a yeer. The inward use. They are much used in decoctions and drinks, to help coughs, hoarsness of the throat, shortnesse of winde, toughnesse of flegme, causing it to be more easily spit out, and do lenife sharp and nause∣ous humours that offend the mouth of the stomach: they open the stoppings of the liver, spleen, and bladder, and taken by themselves, they nourish much by reason of their thick, sweet and temperate sub∣stance, whereby also they stay not long, nor putrefie in the stomach. The manner of administring them. They are used only in decoction. The outward use. Being bruised and applied (the stones taken out) with Rue in man∣ner of a Poultis, it helpeth Warts, Carbuncles, Corns in the feet, the Gangrene and the Gowt. They take away loose nails being applyed. Being mixed with a little Cummin-seed in powder and Oile of white Lilies, it asswageth the swelling of the Cods. The hurtfull quality. Hot and cholerick persons must not eat too largely of them, lest for their sweet meat, they have soure sawce. Medicines made thereof. Lohoch de Passulis. Mel passulatum.
CHAP. 140. De Poeonia, of Piony. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Poeonia and Pionia, from Poeon that famous Physician, in English Piony; or Peony. It is hot and dry in the se∣cond degree, and of thin parts. The duration. The root or seeds will keep good a yeer or two. The inward use. Peony procureth Womens courses if it be taken in honeyed Wine, and it is good to open the stoppings of the Liver and Kidneys, helpeth the Jaundise and Stone: the root also made into powder and taken helpeth the Falling Sicknesse, the body being first well purged and prepared: it is effectuall for Women that are not sufficiently cleansed after childe-birth, and for such as are troubled with the Mother, for which likewise the black seeds being beaten to powder is given in Wine, the red seeds being taken for Fluxes, espe∣cially if they be boiled in red Wine, and the same drunk; the black also taken before bed-time, and in the morning also is very effectuall for the Night-mare: it is also good for melancholy dreames, and re∣storeth speech to those that have lost it, if thirty grains husked be made into powder and given in Wine. It is good against the bitings of Serpents, and helpeth Convulsions in children. The root of the male is to be chosen, and to be taken before and after a full Moon. The distilled Water and Syrup are used for the same Diseases. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or in decoction. The outward use. It is usually hung about the neck of children or others against the Falling Sicknesse, either the root green or the seeds. A Cap or Quilt against the Falling Sicknesse. Take Orris, Cypresse and Peony-root, of each two drams, Peony-seed, and the skull of a dead man, of each a dram, Mace and Nut∣meg, of each a scruple, of Camomile-flowers as much: Powder them all, make a cap, and let it be worn continually.
The Dose. The root is given from half a scruple to a scruple and a halfe, and seeds from ten grains to thirty. Of Medicines made thereof. The distilled water of the flowers. Syrup both simple and com∣pound. Extract of Peony, conserve of Piony, Salt, Oile. CHAP. 141. De Pentaphyllo, of Cinquefoile. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Pentaphyllum and Quinquefolium, from the number of leaves being five, in English Cinquefoile, Cinquefield, and five-finger-grasse, or five-leaved grasse. It is moderately hot, but dry in the third degree. The duration. It may be kept a yeer. The inward use. It is used in diseases proceeding from Rheume, in the Palsey, con∣sumption of the lungs, joynt-gowt, and to correct the moistnesse of the Wombe, against spitting of bloud, or any flux of bloud, bleeding of the Piles, or bleeding at the Nose, and any loosenesse of the body: It is profitable in the cough, jaundise, stoppings of the liver & spleen, where sharp choler doth abound. It is good against venome and poyson in all inflammations and Feavers, whether infectious or not, to cool and temper the bloud and humours in the body: the juice hereof drunk about four ounces at a time for certain dayes together, cureth the Quinsie and yellow Jaundise, and to be taken for thirty dayes together cureth the Falling Sicknesse and all Fluxes; the roots boiled in milk, and drunk is held most effectuall of any other reme∣dy, and is good also against ruptures, and bruises or falls: the juice or the decoction is good to help the hoarsness of the throat, taken with a little Honey. A decoction of the root or leaves in Mead or honeyed water, being taken before divers fits cureth the quartane Ague. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or decoction.
The outward use. It is used in lotions, gargles and injections for sore mouthes, ulcers, cankers, sistulaes, and other corrupt and foule or running sores: the roots boiled in vineger, and the decoction held in the mouth, ea∣seth the tooth-ach. The root boiled in vineger helpeth all Knots, Kernels, hard Swellings and lumps growing in the flesh in any part applyed thereunto; as also all inflammations and Saint Anthonies fire, all Impostumes and painfull sores, with heat and putrefaction, the Shingles also, and all other sores of running and foul Scabs, Sores and Itches: the same also boiled in Wine and applyed helpeth any joynts full of pain and ach, the Gowt of the hands or feet, as also the Sciatica. The juice dropped into the eies helpeth the inflammation thereof. The root or leaves applyed to the Nose stoppeth the bleed∣ing thereof, as also of any Wound that bleedeth. A Water to kill an Itch. Take Cinquefoile and Plantain, of each half a handful, Roch-Allome half an ounce; boil them in a quarter of a pinte of strong Wine Vineger, to the wasting of half, then add to the strained li∣quour a spoonful of Honey, and two drams of white Mercury, boil them a little and reserve it. The Dose. The Dose is from half a dram to two scruples. Medicines made thereof. The distilled water. Extract of Cinquefoile. CHAP. 142. De Pimpinella, of Burnet. The Names and temperament. IT is call'd in Latine Pimpinella and Sanguisorba, in English Burnet, & Pimpinell. It is hot and dry in the second degree say some, others will have it to be cold in the second degree, and dry in the third. The duration. It will keep good a yeer, being dry. The inward use. It is a friend to the Heart, Liver and other principall parts, two or
three of the stalks with leaves put into a cup of Wine especially Cla∣ret (as all know) give a wonderfull fine relish to it, and besides do quicken the spirits, refresh the heart, and make it merry, driving a∣way melancholy: it is a speciall help to defend the heart from noy∣some vapours, and from the infection of the Plague or Pestilence, and all other contagious diseases, for which purpose 'tis of grear ef∣fect, the juice thereof being taken in some drink, and they either laid to sweat thereupon, or wrapped and kept very warm. It is available in all manner of fluxes of bloud or humours, to stanch inward bleed∣ings, laskes or scourings, the bloudy flix, Womans too abundant courses, and the Whites also, and cholerick belchings, and castings of the stomach, and is singular good for inward Wounds. The powder of the herb taken in Comfrey-water, is excellent for such as have falne or are bruised. The Water hath the same effects, being taken. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, in powder, or in Electuary, An Electuary against the Consumption of the Lungs. Take of Burnet in fine powder two ounces, fine Sugar an ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Pimpinel-water make an Electuary, of which take morning and evening the quantity of a Nutmeg. The outward use. It is an excellent herb for all sorts of Wounds, both of the head and body, for all old Ulcers or running Cancers, and moist sores which are of hard curation, either the juice, of decoction of the herb, or the powder of the herb used, or else made into Oile or Oint∣ment by it self, or with other things to be kept. The seed dryeth up moist sores being put therein in powder. The distilled Water ma∣keth the face and hands fair being washed therewith. An ointment to dry over moist Wounds. Take four good handfuls of Burnet, of May-butter or fresh But∣ter a pound, cut the Burnet, and boil them gently at the fire until the herb wax black, then strain and reserve it. The Dose. Take half a dram of the herb or root at a time. Of those Medicines that are made thereof. The distilled water, conserve made of the seed, the root candied, Oile, Salt of Burnet.
CHAP. 143. De Pipere, of Pepper. The Names and sorts. THere are three sorts of Pepper chiefly in use, white Pepper, called Piper album, long Pepper, called Piper longum, and black Pepper, called Piper nigrum, and this last is most in use. The temperament. It is hot and dry in the third degree, or neer the fourth degree, of a heating and resolving quality. The duration. They will keep good many yeers. he inward use. The black pepper is most in use for sawce and meats. They are all usd to warm cold stomachs, and to stirre up an appetite, and to con∣sume rude and moist humours therein, or distilling from the head: they also help to break and dissolve winde in the stomach, or bow∣els, to provoke urine, to help the cough and other diseases of the breast, and are effectuall against the bitings of Serpents, and other poisons, & are therefore put into the great Antidotes. They are given before the fits of Agues, to abate the rigour and shaking thereof, and are used in the Quinsie with Honey. They strongly heat the si∣news and musles, and all cold parts. Pepper must not be too small beaten for fear of inflaming the bloud, and other profitable humours of the body. hey help the dimnesse of the sight, and stirre up Ve∣nery. If five or six grains of black or white Pepper be taken for cer∣tain dayes together, it doth help a cold and raw stomach, and such as are subject to the Collick. The chymical oile of Pepper is good for the aforesaid diseases, and especially against a tertian Ague if three drops thereof be taken with a scruple of Myrrhe two houres before the fit commeth. Pepper is best for cold, moist and grosse meats, for cold and moist seasons, for the aged and flegmatick, for such as have cold, weak, and windy stomacks, and that are subject to distillations. The manner of administring them. They are given in powder or in Electuary.
An Electuary against winde in the stomack and belly. Take black, white and long Pepper, of each a dram and a half, of Ginger, Amse-seed and Thyme, of each half a dram, make them in∣to a grosse powder, and with six ounces of Honey, or conserve of red Roses make an Electuary, and take often of it as much as a Nut∣meg. The outward use. It is used outwardly against Agues mixed with Honey and laid to the Wrists, and against the Quinsie, and disperseth the kernels as well in the throat as in any other part of the body: it easeth the tooth-ach being put into a clout, tied up and chewed on, and snuffed up into the nostrils, it provoketh neesing. A Medicine to help the tooth-ach. Take of Mastich an ounce, Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, of each a dram and a half, make them in powder, and with Honey make a paste, of which take about the bignesse of a small Bean, and hold in the mouth by the space of half an houre fasting. The hurtfull quality. Pepper is hurtful to hot cholerick and dry bodies, in hot weather, and hot Countreys; consumeth the seed and burneth the bloud, if it be immoderately used. The Dose. It is given from half a scruple to thirty grains. Medicines made thereof. Species Diatrion pipereon. Chymical Oile. Oile by decoction. CHAP. 144. De Plantagine, of Plantaine. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Plantage, in English Plantaine. It is cold and dry in the second degree. The duration. It will keep good a yeer. The inward use. The juice of Plantaine clarified, and drunk for divers dayes toge∣ther,
either of it self, or in other drink, prevaileth wonderfully a∣gainst all torments and frettings in the guts, helpeth the distillations of Rheume from the head, and stayeth all manner of fluxes in man or woman, even the courses also in Women: it is good to stay spit∣ting of bloud, and all other bleedings at the mouth, by having a vein broken in the stomach, and that maketh bloudy or foul water by any Ulcer in the Reins or Bladder; it is held also an especial reme∣dy for those that have the consumption of the Lungs, or Ulcers in the Lungs; or have coughs that come of heat. The greatest Plantain is counted by some the best. The decoction or powder of the roots or seed, is much more binding, for all the purposes aforesaid then the herbe, and helpeth A∣gues. The seed made into powder and mixed with the yolk of an Egg and some wheat-flower, and made into a cake and baked, doth stay any flux of the stomach and vomiting. It is a singular good wound-herb. The herb, but especially the seed (which is of more subtile parts) is likewise held to be profitable against the Dropsie, Falling Sickness, yellow Jaundise, and the stoppings of the Liver or Reins: the pow∣der of the dried leaves taken in drink, killeth the Worms in the belly. It must be eaten warm for certain dayes together. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, or in powder. The outward use. The juice, or the herb stayeth the bleeding of the Nose, or the bleeding of Wounds: the clarified juice or the water thereof drop∣ped into the eyes cooleth the heat thereof, as also cureth the Pin and Web therein, & dropt into the eares easeth the pains thereof, & help∣eth deafness: the same also is very profitably applyed, with juice of Housleek against all inflammations & breakings out in the skin, & a∣gainst burnings or scaldings by fire or water: the juice or the decocti∣on is good for old or hollow ulcers, for Cancers & sores in the mouth, or privy parts of man or woman, and helpeth also the pains of the Piles and Fundament: the juice mixed with Oile of Roses, and the temples and forehead anointed therewith, easeth the pains of the head, proceeding from heat, and helpeth frantick and lunatick per∣sons very much, as also the bitings of Serpents, or of a mad Dog; the same also is profitably applyed to all hot Gowts in the hands or feet, especially in the beginning, to cool the heat; and represse the humours; it is also good to be applyed where any bone is out of
joynt, to hinder inflammations, swellings, and pains, that presently rise thereupon. A decoction of the leaves killeth Worms that breed in old and foul Ulcers. The roots of Plantaine and Pellitory of Spain, beaten together and put into hollow teeth taketh away the pains therein: one part of Plantaine-water, and two parts of the brine of powdered beef boiled together and clarified, is a most sure reme∣dy to heal all spreading cabs and Itch in the head or body, all man∣ner of Tetters or Ring-wormes, the Shingles, and all other running and fretting sores. The leaves are very good to heale fresh or old Wounds and Sores, as also to make a water or lotion for a sore mouth or throat, or for sores of the privy parts of Man or Wo∣man. A Pultis to ease the pains of the Hemorrhoides. Take a handful or two of green Plantain-leaves, bruise them well, and with Linseed-oile make a pultis, and apply it. An ointment against Burnings, or Scaldings with fire, Water, Lead, Tinne, &c. Take of the juice of Plantain, Housleeck and Comfrey the lesser, of each four ounces, sheeps dung (dessolved in the foresaid juices) two ounces, sheeps suet a pound. Boil them together at a gentle fire into due height, then strain and reserve it. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtful for cold constitutions. The Dose. The leaves, roots and seeds are given from halfe a dramme to a dramme. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled Water. Syrup of the juice. CHAP. 145. De Portulaca, of Purslane. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Portulaca, in English Purslane and Porcelane. It is cold in the third degree, and moist in the second.
The duration, It is rarely dried, but used green. The inward use. It is good to cool any heat in the Liver, Bloud, Reines and Sto∣mach, and in hot Agues nothing better: it stayeth also hot and cho∣lerick fluxes of the belly, as also of Womens courses, the Whites, and Running of the Reines, the distillations from the head, and the pains therein proceeding of heat, want of rest, or the Frensie: the seed is more effectuall then the herb, and singular good to cool the heat and sharpnesse of urine, and the outragious lust of the body, venereous dreams and the like: the seed bruised and boiled in Wine, and given to children that have the Worms expelleth them, the juice of the herbe is held as effectuall for all the purposes aforesaid, as also to stay vomitings, and taken with some Sugar, or Honey help∣eth an old and dry cough, shortnesse of breath and the Tissick, and to stay an immoderate thirst taken upon extream heat. The distilled water of the herb is used with Sugar, and worketh to the same effect. The herb is generally used in Sallets, in the heat of the yeer, to cool and temper the bloud, and hot and fainting stomachs, and is good for them to use that have the Falling Sicknesse, and also for those that have their teeth on edge by eating sowre Apples or the like. The juice helpeth spitting of bloud. The syrup of Purslane is good for the a∣fore-said disease. The juice made into pils with the powder of Gum Tragacanth and Arabick, and taken, prevaileth much to help those that make a bloudy water. The manner of administring it. It is given in juice, or the feeds in powder, or in decoction. The outward use. The juice is singular good in the inflammations and ulcers of the secret parts in man or woman, and for the Piles being applyed there∣to. The herb bruised and applyed to the fore-head and tem∣ples, allayeth excessive heat therein, causing want of rest and sleep, and applyed to the eyes, taketh away the red∣nesse and inflammations in them, and those other parts where Push∣es, Wheals, Pimples, Saint Anthonies fire, and the like break forth, e∣specially if a little Vineger be put to it; and being laid to the neck with as much of Galls and Lindseed together, taketh away the pains herein, and the crick in the neck; the juice also is used with Oile of
Roses for the said causes, or for Blastings by Lightning, and for burn∣ings by Gunpowder, or otherwise, as also for womens sore breasts upon the like hot causes, and to allay the heat in all other sores or hurts: it is said also to stay the spreading of venomous Serpents bi∣tings, and to draw forth the poyson: Applyed also to the navel of children that stick forth it helpeth them; it is good also for sore mouthes and sore Gums when they are swolne, to fasten loose teeth. The distilled Water (saith Cameraius) used by some took a∣way the pain of their teeth, when all other remedies failed. The herb bruised and applyed, easeth the hot Gowt: the juice put up into the fundament with a Glister-pipe, helpeth the ulcerations and flux of the guts. It taketh away Warts being bruised and applyed. The hurtfull quality. The over-frequent use of Purslane extinguisheth the heat and ver∣tue of natural procreation, weakneth the stomach, and hurteth the sight: it is hurtful also to aged persons, and to cold and flegmatick persons. The Dose. The seed is given from half a dram, to a dram. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water, syrup both simple and compound. CHAP. 146. De Prassio, of Horehound. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Prassium & Marrubium, in English Horehound. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. The duration. It will keep good a yeer, being dryed. The inward use. A decoction of the dried herbe with the seed, or the juice of the green herb taken with Honey, is a remedy for those that are pursie and short-winded, for those that have a Cough, and for such as, by long sicknesse, or thin distillations of Rheume upon the Lungs are
wasted and faln into a Consumption: it helpeth to bring away tough flegme from the chest, being taken with the dried root of Orris. It is given to women to bring down their courses, and to expel the after-birth, as also to them that have sore and long travels; and is good also against poison, or stinging of venomous beasts; it helpeth the pains of the side, openeth the stoppings both of Liver and Spleene, kils Wormes, and is good for such as have the Itch, Scab, or running sores. The syrup of Horehound is used for old Coughs, to bring away tough flegme, as also for old men and others, whose Lungs are op∣pressed with thin and cold Rheume, and for those that are short-winded. The manner of administring it. It is chiefly given in decoction; see the first Chapter. The outward use. The leaves used with Honey do purge foule ulcers, stay running sores, and the growing of the flesh over the nails: the juice thereof with Wine and Honey helpeth to cleer the eye-sight, and snuffed up into the nostrils helpeth to purge away the yellow Jaundise; and ei∣ther of it self, or with a little Oile of Roses being dropped into the eares, easeth the pains of them: the green leaves bruised and boiled with old Hogs Lard into an ointment, healeth the bitings of Dogs, abateth the swellings of womens breasts, and taketh away the swelling and pains that come by any pricking of thorns, or any such like thing. Used with Vineger it cleanseth and healeth Tetters: the decoction thereof is a singular help for women that are troubled with the Whites, if they sit over it while it is warm: the same also healeth any Scabs, whether dry or moist, if the places be bathed therewith. The hurtfull quality. It hurteth the Bladder and the Reins, and must not be used in hot and dry bodies; if Raisons and Licorish be used therewith, it is lesse hurtful. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to thirty grains. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled Water thereof. Syrup of Horehound▪ Species Dia∣prassii.
CHAP. 147. De Pulmonaria, of Lung-wort. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Pulmonaria, of the likenesse of the form which it hath with Lungs or Lights, and also Lichen arborum, in English Lung-wort, and Wood-Liver-wort. It is cold and dry. The inward use. It is used against the diseases of the Lungs, & for Coughs, Wheesings, and shortnesse of breath, & also against spitting of bloud and pissing of bloud: it stayeth the Reds in Women, and stoppeth the fluxes of the belly, and stayeth vomiting. The shepherds do give it to their sheep (with Salt) that be troubled with the Cough, and be broken-winded, and they give it also to other cattel for the same purpose. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or in decoction. The outward use. It is commended for bloudy and green wounds, and is very profi∣tably put into Lotions that are made to stay the moist humours that flow to Ulcers, and hinder their healing, as also to wash all other Ul∣cers in the secret parts of man or woman. The Dose. The Dose of the powder is from half a dram to a dram. CHAP. 148. De Raphano, of Radish. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Raphanus, in English Radish and Reddish. Gar∣den-Radish is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second: the Horse-Radish is hot and dry in the third degree. The duration. Radish-roots (especially Horse-Radish) may be kept a yeer or two.
The inward use. The Garden and horse-Radish are in use, but chiefly the latter, and is excellent against the paines of the Reines, Bladder and Stone, provoketh much Urine, and helpeth to separate the gravell from the stone, and to expell it, being boiled with Honey and Vineger into an electuary: it is also a good remedy in strong bodies, both for the Cough, the Tissick and other diseases of the Lungs, as also to provoke womens courses. The same steeped in Oxymel three dayes, causeth vomit, and is commended against the quarta ne Ague: the juice given in drink is held to be very effectuall for the Scurvey: it killeth Wormes, helpeth the Collick and Jaundise, and bringeth away the after-birth. The distilled water of the herb and roots is often taken with a little Sugar for all the purposes afore∣said. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction or in powder. The outward use. The roots bruised and applyed to the belly of Children killeth wormes: the same also laid to the place grieved with the Sciatica, Joynt-ach, or the hard swellings of the Spleen and Liver, doth wonderfully help them all: the root stamped with the meale of Darnell and a little White Wine-Vineger, taketh away all blew and black spots of the face, being thereto applied. The hurtfull quality. Radish hurteth the Braine, causeth sharp and soure belchings, op∣presseth the stomach, ingenders raw humours and much winde, rai∣seth up noisome fumes which are hurtful to the Eyes and head. Being often eaten it wasteth the teeth. The dose. The root in powder is given from a scruple to thirty graines. Medicines made thereof. The distilled water, Syrup of Radish. CHAP. 149. De Rapis, of Turneps. The names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Rapum & Rapa, in English Turnep and Rape. They are hot in the second degree, and moist in the first.
The inward use. Turneps well boiled and eaten moderately, nourish meetly well, increase milk in womens breasts, and naturall seed, provoke Urine, and sharpen the sight. A decoction of Turneps being taken, is good against the Cough, Consumption and hoarsenesse, being taken morning and evening with Sugar, or clarified Honey; but espe∣cially if the liquor be made into a syrup and so taken morning and evening. The seeds of Turnep resisteth poyson, (therefore are used in Antidotes) provoke Venerie and expell out the malig∣nity of the small Pox and Measels. The oile of the seeds is given to women against their after-paines, and to children against the worms. The manner of administring them. They are used in decoction, Syrup, or eaten with Butter and Vineger. The outward use. Oile of Roses put into a Turnep made hollow for the purpose and then rosted in Embers, healeth the kibed-heels, being thereto ap∣plied: the decoction also of Turneps is good for the same purpose. Being boiled in milk, it easeth the Gowt being laid thereto. A de∣coction thereof helpeth the Leprosie and Malignant scab, as also the Palsey, if the parts affected be bathed therewith. The Oile of the seed is used against the ruggednesse of the skin. The hurtfull quality. Turneps breed winde, trouble a weak stomach, being hard of di∣gestion, cause stopping in the Veines and pores, and annoy the sinews, and are hurtfull for those that have the Collick. The Dose. The seeds are given from a scruple to thirty graines. Medicines made thereof. The distilled water. Syrup of Turneps. CHAP. 150. De Rosis, of Roses. The names and kindes. THere are chiefly three sorts of Roses in use, the Red, Damask and White, the two first being principally used, the Red Rose is
called in Latine Rosarubra, the Damask, Rosa Damascena, and the white Rosa alba. The temperament. Roses are counted by most cold in the first degree, and dry in the second, or cold and dry in the second degree, others say they are partly cold and partly hot; others again will have them hot be∣cause of their bitternesse, fragrancy, and purging faculty. See Sen∣nert. Paralipomen. fol. 158, 159. The Damask Roses have more airy and spirituall parts in them, the Red Roses are more earthy and binding. The duration. The leaves being dry will keep good a yeare. The inward use. Red Roses do strengthen the heart, Stomach, Liver, and the re∣tentive faculties; they mitigate the paines that arise of heat; as∣swage inflammations, procure rest and sleep, stay womens courses both White and Red, the running of the Reines, and the Fluxes of the Belly: the juice of them doth purge and cleanse the body from choler and flegme. The conserve of Red Roses is binding and cordiall, good for those that have rheume falling from the Braine to the Nose or Lungs, comforteth a weak stomach and a fainting heart; being ta∣ken morning and evening. The yellow threads in the middle of the Red Rose being pow∣dered and taken in the distilled water of Quinces stayeth the abun∣dance of womens courses. If it be mixed with the powder of Mastich & taken, it is very good for running of the Reines and other loosenesse of humours in the body. he Syrup of red Roses strengtheneth a weak stomach given to casting, cooleth an over-heated Liver, and the blood in Agues, comforteth the heart and resisteth putrefaction and infection, and helpeth to stay fluxes of the belly. Sugar of Roses is a good cor∣dial to strengthen the heart and spirits, to dry up rheume, and to help the Hectick Feaver. The heads with seed being used in powder or in decoction stayeth the lask and spitting of blood. The Damask Rose is more purging, the juice of which doth gently and safely purge choler and hot humours; the syrup of Ro∣ses laxative doth also purge choler and flegme gently and loosen the belly, taken from one ounce to three or foure; but the syrup of Roses with Agarick openeth the body more then the former, and
purgeth as much flegme as choler; if you take one ounce of it or two at the most: the compound syrup is more forceable in working on melancholy humours, and available against the Lepry, Itch, Scab, Tetters, &c. The conserve hereof doth also gently loosen the body: the distilled water of the syrup of Damask Roses being taken doth binde the belly; yet Costaeus saith, that if ten ounces of Damask Rose-water be drunk in the morning, it doth open and purge the belly. The manner of administring them. They are given in powder, in decoction, in juice, in electuary, &c. An Electuary to comfort the stomach, and to dry up rheume. Take of Conserve of Red Roses two ounces, of the species called Aromaticum rosatum a dram, mix them together, and take often of it. The outward use. The decoction of Red Roses made with Wine and used, is very good for the head-ach and paines in the Eyes, Eares, Throat and Gums, the fundament also and lower bowels and the Matrix, being bathed or put into them: the same decoction with the Roses remaining in them is profitably applyed to the region of the heart to ease the inflammation therein, as also Saint Anthonies fire, and all other diseases of the stomach. Red Roses are used with o∣ther things for sore Eyes, and to dry up rheume: the huskes of the Red Roses with the beards and the nailes of the Roses are binding and cooling, and the distilled water of either of them is good for the heat and rednesse of the Eyes, to stay and dry up the rheumes and watering of them, so is the water of the leaves if the Eyes be wash∣ed therewith, Vineger of Roses is of good use against paine and heat of the head, as also to procure rest and sleep, if some thereof and Rose-water together be used to smell unto, or the nose and tem∣ples moistned therewith, but more usually to moisten a piece of Red Rose-cake, cut fit for the purpose, and heated between a double-folded cloth with a little beaten Nutmeg and Poppy-seed, strewed on that side that shall lye next to the forehead and temples, and so bound thereto for all night: the oyntment of Roses is much used against heat and inflammations in the head to anoint the fore∣head and temples, and being mixed with some Populeon ointment to procure rest, as also it is used for the heat of the Liver, of the back and reines, and to coole and heale Pushes, wheales and other red pimples rising in the face and other parts. Oile of Roses is not only
used by it selfe to coole any hot swellings or inflammations, and to binde and stay fluxes of humours unto sores, but is put also into many other compositions both ointments and plaisters, that are cooling and binding and restraining the flux of humours. Rose-leaves and Mints heated and applied outwardly to the stomach, stayeth castings and strengtheneth a weak stomach very much, and applied as a fomentation to the region of the Liver and Heart, doth much coole and temper the distemperature of them. The distilled water of Damaske Roses, and the distilled oile or spirit are much used for outward perfumes; and the leaves are used also in sweet powders. Honey of red Roses is used for sore mouths and throats either alone or with White Wine. A Quilt or Bag to strengthen and comfort the stomach. Take of red Roses dryed two drams, of Mastick and red Corall, of each halfe an ounce, Anise-seed and Fennell-seed, of each a dram, Cloves and Nutmeg, of each a dram and a halfe, Wormewood and Mints, of each a handfull Make them all into a grosse powder, and make a quilted bag according to art, to be laid to the stomach. A Pultis against the bleeding of the Nose. Take of the seeds of red Roses an ounce, Dragons-blood, Sealed earth, & Bole-Armoniack, of each a dram: make them into powder, and with the white of an Eg and the haires of an Hare make a Pul∣tis and lay it to the temples and nod of the neck; also make some of it stiffe, and put up into the Nose. The hurtfull quality. It is not safe to give the juice of Damask Roses to women with childe, because it provokes their courses, and the water also thereof is hurtfull to such as are troubled with the head-ach. The dose. The leaves and seeds are given from a scruple to two scruples. The juice is given from one ounce to two ounces. Syrup of Roses laxative is given from one ounce to 3. or 4 ounces. The electuary of the juice of Roses is given from two drams to six drams. Of those Medicines that are made of Roses. The distilled water of Damask, red and white Roses. Conserve both of Damask, and red Roses. Sugar of Roses, or Sugar-roset. Oile chymicall, and spirit of Roses. Species Aromaticum Rosatum. Diarrhodon Abbatis. Rosata novella. Syrup of Roses solutive. Sy∣rup of the juice of Roses. Syrup of Roses with Agarick. Syrup of
Roses solutive with Hellebore. Syrup of Roses solutive with Sene. Syrup of red Roses dry. Honey of Roses. Tincture of Roses. Oile of Roses by infusion, Ointment of Roses. Vineger of Roses. Balsam, &c. CHAP. 151. De Rosmarino, of Rosemary. The names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Rosmarinus, & Rosmarinum, quasi Rosa marina, English Rosemary. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and also of an astringent or binding quality, yet of subtil or thin parts: it is best for cold and moist seasons, for the age flegmatick and rheu∣matick. The duration. It will keep good a yeare or two being dryed. The inward use. It helpeth all cold diseases of the head, stomach, Liver, belly and wombe; A decoction thereof in Wine helpeth the cold distillati∣ons of the braine into the eyes, and the giddinesse or swimming of the braine, drowsinesse, or dulnesse of the minde and senses like a stupidnesse, the dumbe Palsie, or losse of speech, the Lethargie, Apoplexie, and Falling Sicknesse: it helpeth the paines in the Gums and teeth by rheume falling into them, or by putrefa∣ction causing an evill smell from them, or a stinking breath: it help∣eth a weak memory by heating and drying up the cold moistures of the brain, and quikening the senses: It is a good remedy for windi∣nesse in the stomach or bowels, as also the Hypochondriack passion, and winde in the spleen: It helpeth those that are Liver-growne, by opening the stoppings thereof, by warming the coldnesse, & making thin the grossenesse, and afterwards binding and strengthening the weaknesse thereof: it helpeth dim Eyes, and to quicken the sight, as also the yellow Jandise, and the whites in women, and the rising of the Mother, if the flowers or leaves be daily taken, in decoction or in powder. The dried leaves shred small and taken in a Pipe as Tobacco is taken; help the Cough or Tissick, and Consumption, by warming and drying the thin rheum, which causeth those diseases.
The Chymicall oile is good for the aforesaid diseases, if two or three drops thereof be taken in Beere, or other Liquor. The flowers and the conserve made thereof doth comfort the braine and heart, and is good to expel the contagion of the pestilence. If you steep or infuse a few Cloves, Mace and Anise-seed in the distilled water of the flowers for certaine dayes, and take morning and evening thereof, it helpeth a stinking breath and mouth. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, or in powder. The outward use. It helpeth the cold diseases of the head, if a decoction thereof be made, and the temples and neck bathed therewith. The leaves are much used in bathings; and made into Ointments or Oiles is singular good to help cold benummed joints, sinews or members: the herb burned in houses and chambers in time of infection, is good to correct the aire in them. The Herb is much used in powders and quilts, to dry up rheume, and to strengthen the wombe. The Chy∣mical oil is good for the cold diseases of the braines, if the temples, nostrils, and nape of the neck be anointed therewith. An Epitheme for the cold head-ach. Take Rose-mary, Sage, Camomil, Melilot, Betony and Bryonie-root, of each a handfull; Boile them in water, and with a spnge, or soft linen clothes, made wet therein, apply it hot to the forehead. The hurtfull quality. It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is gven in powder from a scruple to two scruples. Of such Medi ines as are made thereof. The distilled water. Chymical Oile. Conserve of the flowers. Spe∣cies Dianthos. Balsame. CHAP. 152. De Rusco, of Knee-holme. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Ruscus, Ruscum, and Bruscus, in English But∣chers Broom and Knee-holme. It is hot in the second degree, and dry
in the first with some tenuity or thinnesse of parts. It is one of the five opening roots. The duration The roots will keep good a yeer or two. The inward use. A decoction of the roots made in Wine, and taken, openeth stop∣pings, provoketh urine, and amendeth the strong smell thereof, help∣eth to expel gravel and the Stone, Strangury and Womens courses: the same also helpeth the yellow Jaundise, and the Head-ach, and with some Sugar or Honey put thereunto helpeth to bring away flegme, and to cleanse the chest of much clammy humours gathered therein. The juice of the leaves taken with Sugar helpeth spitting of bloud, and cleanseth the wombe. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, or in powder. A Powder against Winde, and gripings of the belly. Take the roots of Knee-holme, Anise-seed and Fennel-seed, of each half an ounce, make them in powder, and mix therewith half an ounce of Sugar; take every morning thereof as much as will lye on a shilling in White Wine, or Posset-drink. The outward use. The juice thereof taketh away the stink of the mouth, and Gums being washed therewith, and the powder of the root cleanseth Wounds, and preventeth a Gangrene being strewed therein. The Dose. It may be given from half a dram to a dram. CHAP. 153. De Ruta, of Rue. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Ruta, and Ruta hortensis, in English Rue, and Herb-grace, or Herb of Grace; it is hot and dry in the third de∣gree. The duration. It will keep good a yeer.
The inward use. Rue provoketh urine and womens courses, expelleth all venome and poyson, and is most excellent in time of the Plague or sicknesse: the seed also taken in Wine is an Antidote or Counterpoison against all dangerous Medicines, or deadly poisons. A decoction made there∣of with some dried Dil-leaves and flowers, easeth all pains and gripe∣ings in the body. The same being drunk helpeth the pains both of the chest and sides, as also Coughs, hardnesse, or difficulty of breathing, the inflammations of the Lungs, as also the shaking of Agues, to take a draught before the fit come. It killeth Wormes being boiled in Wine and Honey, and taken. The juice taken with Wine, purgeth women after their deliverance, bringeth away the dead childe and after-birth. It dryeth up the milk, and the naturall seed of genera∣tion, and quickeneth the sight. The leaves of Rue first boiled & then laid in pickle, is by some eaten as sawce, for the dimness of sight, and to warm a cold stomach. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, in decoction, and electuary. Mithridates his Antidote against Poison. Take twenty leaves of Rue, a little Salt, a couple of Wal-nuts, and a couple of Figs; beat them together into a masse. This is for every day. The outward use. It helpeth tht swelling of the cods, if it be boiled with Bay-leaves, and they bathed therewith. The juice mixed with Honey, and the juice of Fennel, helpeth dim eyes being dropped therein: being boiled or infused in Oile, it is good to help the winde-collick, or the swelling hardnesse, or windinesse of the Mother, and freeth women from the strangling or suffocation of the Mother, if the shares and parts thereabouts be anointed therewith: It helpeth the Gowt or pains in the joints of hands, feet, or knees, and also the Sciatica ap∣plied thereunto: the same with Figs helpeth the Dropsie. It cureth the Morphew, and taketh away all sorts of Warts on the Hands, Face, Nose, or any other parts, if it be boiled in Wine with some Pepper and Nitre, and the places rubbed therewith: and with Al∣lome and Honey, helpeth the dry Scab, or any Tetter. The juice dropped into the eares, easeth the pains thereof. It is good against the bitings of venomous beasts, and to be laid to Carbuncles.
A fomentation against the running Sores of Childrens heads. Take of green Copperas two ounces, of Rue and Sage of each a handful; boil them in a quart of water to half, and wash the head therewith. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtful for women with childe, and destroyeth the ability of getting children. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple, to thirty grains. Medicines made thereof. The distilled water, Chymicall Oile, Oile by infusion, Salt, Vine∣ger of Rue, and Balsame. CHAP. 154. De Saccharo, of Sugar. The Names and temperament. IT is called Saccharum, Sacchar, Succharum, Mel Arundinaceum, & Mel Cannae, it is Honey of the Cane, because it grows in Canes, in English Sugar. It is hot and moist in the first degree, or tem∣perately hot and moist, and is abstersive or cleansing. The best sort. Some commend the coarsest, or brownest Sugar before the other; but sure the whitest refined Sugar being made up without adulterati∣on or deceit, is the best, and most wholesome for nourishment. The duration. It will keep good many yeers. The inward use. Sugar is good for the diseases of the breast, cleanseth and streng∣theneth the Lungs, is convenient for the stomach, helpeth the rough∣nesse and drinesse of the mouth and throat, also thirst and drought in Feavers, especially being mixed with water, and so taken, and it is very profitable for the Reins and Bladder. The outward use. Sugar, or white Candy being put into the eye, taketh away the
dimnesse thereof, and the bloud shotten therein; and strewed into foul sores it cleanseth them. A Water against an Ulcer in the Bladder. Take of the water of Milk distilled half a pound, of white Sugar five ounces: mix them at the fire, and inject it hot with a Syringe. A Water against rednesse of the Eyes. Take of white Sugar and Aloes, of each five drams, Tutia, or Tut∣ty in powder half a scruple, White Wine, Rose-water, and Fennel-water, of each half an ounce. Put them together in a glasse vessell, and let them infuse six or seven houres, then use it as need requires. The hurtfull quality. Sugar soon turns to choler, causeth thirst, and is hurtful to hot constitutions; being over-much used, it produceth dangerous effects in the body; for it heateth the bloud, breedeth the Jaundise, Stop∣pings, the Green-sicknesse and Consumptions, rotteth the teeth, and maketh them black withall, causing also many times a loathsome stinking breath. And therefore let young persons especially beware how they meddle too much with it, lest they have for their sweet meat sower sawce. I knew a young maiden whose mother was so in∣dulgent over her, that she gave her all the sweet meats she desired, and that for many yeers together, till at length her teeth were so cor∣rupt, and her breath so stanck that she was loathsome to company; then followed Apostumation of her teeth and gums, the Kings Evil, and so continued a long time. Of such things as are made thereof. White Sugar-Candy▪ Red Sugar-Candy, or Brown Sugar-Candy. Sugar-Pellets. Sugar of Roses. Sugar of Violets. Oil and Salt of Sugar. CHAP. 155. De Sale, of Salt. The Names and temperament. IT is call'd in Latine Sal, in English Salt, it is hot in the second de∣gree, and dry in the third: it is of a cleansing, digesting, attenua∣ting, drying, consuming, and somewhat also of an astringent fa∣culty. The duration and kindes. Salt will keep good many yeers. There are two sorts in use, White and Bay Salt.
The inward use. Salt may most justly be called Condimentum condimentorum, Sawce of sawces, as being necessary for seasoning and preserving of meats, that we cannot well live without it. For it is a custome among us to set it first at the table, and to take it away last. It maketh thin, grosse, and clammy humours, resisteth venome, preventeth and correcteth putrefaction, by drying and consuming all crude and moist super∣fluities, stirreth up Venery, strengtheneth weak and loose parts, help∣eth digestion especially in a cold and moist stomach, consumeth all corrupt humours, and is very profitable in stoppings of the urine and belly, as also in the Collick. The manner of administring it. It is used chiefly in powder. A powder to help concoction. Take of common Salt one ounce and a half, Pepper six drams, Cummin-seed half an ounce, Caraway-seed, Cynamon, Zedoarie, of each three drams, Ginger and Mace, of each two drams and a half: make all into a fine powder, and let it be eaten with meat. The outward use. It is used in rotten and putrid Ulcers, as also in creeping Ulcers and simple Tumours, in the Itch, Scab, Tetters, or Ringworme, in the Gowt, cold Aches, pain of the Teeth, Head-ach, Collick, and to take away the skin growing over the Eye. It is good also in Gan∣grenes, and in Burnings to draw out the heat. A Lotion against the Gowt. Take of common Salt three or four handfuls; boil it in water to the consumption of half, with which bathe the parts affected warm. Against pains of the Eares. Take Salt and dry it, make it in powder, and being put into a bag, apply it warm to the eares. A Suppository gently to provoke siege. Take of Honey half an ounce, of common Salt a dram; boil it gently to a due light and form, and being cold anoint it with Oile or Butter, and put it up. The hurtfull quality. Salt used too much, dryeth up the humours of the body, wasteth seed, burneth the Liver and Bloud, ingenders sharp and biting hu∣mours, causeth Itch and Scabs, annoyeth the stomach, dimmeth the
sight, destroyeth the radicall moisture, corrupteth and spoileth the habit of the whole body, making persons soon look old and wrink∣led, as may be seen in young maidens that eat much thereof. It is very hurtful for lean, dry, and cholerick persons. Of such things as are made thereof. Oile of Salt, or Spirit. Tincture of Salt. Flowers of Salt. CHAP. 156. De Salvia, of Sage. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Salvia, because it maketh men safe and sound in health, in English Sage. It is hot and dry in the second or begin∣ning of the third degree. The duration. It will keep good a yeer. The inward use. A decoction of Sage made and drunk provoketh urine, bringeth downe the courses, easeth paines of the head that proceed from cold and rheumatick humours, as also all paines of the joynts, and there∣fore helpeth such as have the Falling Sicknesse, the Lethargy or Drowsie Evil, such as are dull and heavy of spirit, and those that have the Palsey, and is in much use in all distillations of thin rheum from the head, and for the diseases of the breast. The juice of Sage is much commended for women that have moist and slipperie wombes, and not able to conceive by reason thereof, if they take a quantity of the juice with a little Salt, for foure dayes before they company with their Husbands, and it is good to prevent miscarrying in women. If three spoonfulls of the juice be taken fasting with a little Honey, it doth stay the spitting, or casting up of blood. It stoppeth the whites and reds in women. It is of excellent good use to help the memory by warming and quickening the senses, and the Conserve made of the flowers is used to the same purpose, as also for all the former recited diseases. It is of good use in the time of the Plague, and good also against the Cough, hoarsenesse, paines of the side, and Dropsie.
The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, in powder, in Pills, Potions, &c. A Potion against Arthriticall paines. Take of Sage and Hyssop, of each two ounces, infuse thereein (for a nights space) of Agarick trochiscated two drams, Rubarbe foure scruples, Cynamon halfe a dram; then strain it, and dissolve therein of the Electuary Diacarthamum two drams, Syrup of Stochodas halfe an ounce, make a Potion. Pills against a Comsumption. Take of Spicknard and Ginger, of each two drams, of the seed of Sage a little dryed at the fire one ounce, Long pepper twelve drams, all these being made into fine powder, make it up into a masse with the juice of Sage; the dose is a dram every morning and evening. The outward use. A decoction of Sage taketh away the itching of the Cods if they be bathed therewith: it stayeth the bleeding of wounds, and clean∣seth foule ulcers or sores: The leaves of Sage and Nettles bruised together and laid upon the Impostume that riseth behinde the Ears, doth asswage and help it much. The leaves boiled in Wine, and the place bathed therewith, helpeth the Palsey, Cramp, cold joints, paines in the side comming of winde, if the grieved place be bathed warme therewith▪ and the Herb after the boyling be laid warme al∣so thereto. Gargles for mouth-waters are made with Sage, Rose∣mary, Honey-sackles, and Plaintane boyled in water or Wine, with foine Allom put thereto, to wash Cankers, sore mouths and throats, or the secret part of man or woman as need requireth. It is also commended against the biting of Serpents. The often chewing of Sage in the mouth, is profitable for the Teeth, and sinews, for it strengtheneth the one, and preserveth the other from putrefaction. The hurtfull quality. The frequent use of Sage is hurtfull to leane and dry bodies, and in hot and dry seasons. The dose. The dose in powder is from a scruple to thirty graines. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. The distilled water. Chymicall Oil. Conserve, and Salt of Sage.
CHAP. 157. De Sassafras, of Sassafras. The names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Sassafras, in English also Sassafras, and Ague-tree, of his vertue in healing Agues: It is hot and dry in the begin∣ning of the third degree. The duration. It will keep good many yeers. The outward use. The decoction of Sassafras is given in all cold diseases, and stop∣pings of the Liver and Spleen, as also in cold Rheumes that fall on the teeth, eyes, or lungs, warming and drying up the moisture, and strengthening the parts afterwards, and therefore is available in Coughs and other cold diseases of the breast, stomach and lungs, and restraineth castings and helpeth digestion, breaketh and expel∣leth winde, the gravel and stone in the Kidneys, and provoketh urine, and Womens courses; it also warmeth, heateth and dryeth up the moysture of Womens Wombes, which is the cause of barrennesse, and causeth them to be more apt to conceive: it is of good use in tertian and quotidian Agues, that are of long continuance. It is ge∣nerally used in all diseases that come of cold and raw, thin, and cor∣rupt humours, the French Disease, and other of the like foule na∣ture. The manner of administring it. It is given chiefly in decoction as thus. Take of Sassafras foure ounces, steep it in a gallon and a half of water foure and twenty houres, then boil it close covered, till it be neer half consumed, then being strained, give a good draught there∣of morning and evening for the diseases before mentioned. The outward use. It is thought to be good in the time of the Pestilence, to weare some thereof continually about them, that the smell of it may ex∣pel the corrupt and evil vapours of the Pestilence. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtful to very hot and dry bodies.
The Dose. It is given in powder from a scruple to two scruples. Medicines made thereof. Extract of Sassafras. Chymicall Oile. CHAP. 158. De Sarsaparilla, of Sarsaparilla. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Sarsaparilla, Salsaparilla and Zarzaparilla: it is hot and dry in the first or second degree, of thin parts, and pro∣voketh sweat. The duration. It will keep good many yeers. The inward use. It is chiefly used in the French Pox, in Rheumes, Gowts, cold dis∣eases of the head and stomach, expelleth winde both from the sto∣mach and mother. It helpeth all manner of aches in the sinews and joynts, all running sores in the legs, all cold Swellings, Tetters or Ring-wormes, and all manner of spots and foulnesse of the skin. The hurtfull quality. It is bad for hot Livers and cholerick persons. The manner of administring it. It is given chiefly in decoction; see the fore-goin Chapter. The Dose. The Dose in powder is from half a dram to a dram. CHAP. 159. De Scordio, of Water-Germander. The names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Scordium, because it smels like Garlick, in Eng∣lish Water-Germander, and Garlick-Germander. It is hot and dry in the second degree, bitter in taste, harsh and sharp.
The duration. It will keep good a yeer, or two. The inward use. It is effectuall to provoke urine, and Womens courses, killeth Wormes in the belly or stomach, is also a safe and sure remedy for falls and bruises, and for such as are bursten, either the decoction, or the leaves in powder being taken. It is excellent good against all poy∣sons and infections, either of the Plague or Pestilence, or other epi∣demicall diseases, as the small Pox, Measels, faint Purples, or spotted Feaver, and also against the gnawing pain of the stomach, and pains of the side, that come either of cold or stoppings, and for the blou∣dy flix also; it is good against an old Cough, and to bring away rot∣ten flegme in the brest, and good for the Cramp, and for the stop∣pings of the Liver and Spleen. It is a good cordiall to comfort and strengthen the heart, and cures the quotidian Ague, by an occult quality. The Electuary Diascordium is of the same nature. The manner of administring it. It is used in decoction, or in powder. The outward use. The dried herb being used with a little Honey cleanseth foule ul∣cers, and bringeth them to cicatrizing, as also closeth fresh Wounds: the dried herb made into a Poultis, and applyed to Wens and such like, helpeth both to constrain the matter from further breeding of them, as also to discusse and disperse them being grown It being u∣sed with Vineger or Water and applyed to the Gowt, easeth the pain thereof. The green herb laid or bound to any Wound (first bruised) healeth it, be it never so great. A Liniment against Wormes. Take of Scordium, or Water-Germander and Aloës in powder, of each a dram, of the juice of Worm-wood and Southernwood, of each two drams, of common Oil one ounce, Wax two drams; make a Li∣niment, and anoint the belly and stomach therewith warm, morning and evening. The hurtfull quality. It is not safe to use it in hot, dry and cholerick bodies. The Dose. It is given from half a dram to a dram and a half. Of those Medicines that are made thereof. The distilled Water. Syrup, both simple and compound. Conserve. Salt. Diascordium.
CHAP. 160. De Sebesten, of Sebesten. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Myra, Myraria, Sebesten, and Sebestena, in Eng∣lish Sebesten, or Assyrian Plum. They are temperately cold and moist, and have a thick clammy substance. The duration. They will not kep long, but soon grow dry. The inward use. They open the body as Prunes do, especially being green. They serve to cool any intemperate heat of the stomach or Liver, and are good in hot Agues, and to purge choler whereof they come: they are very effectual also to lenifie the hoarsenesse and roughnesse of the throat: they help the Cough and Wheesing of the Lungs, and distil∣lations upon them, by making smooth the passages, and causing much flegme to be avoided: they also give ease to them that are troubled with pains in their sides, and marvellously help them that are troubled with the sharpnesse of their urine, proceeding from choler or salt flegm; they also drive forth the long Wormes of the belly. The manner of administring them. They are given in decoction, or in pulp; see Jujubes. The hurtfull quality. They stop the intrails, and stuff up the narrow passages, and breed inflammations. The Dose. The pulp is given from half an ounce to ten drams. Medicines made thereof. Electuary of Sebestens. Pulp of Sebestens. CHAP. 161. De Sinapi, of Mustard. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Sinapi, and Sinapis, in English Mustard. The common seed is hot & dry in the fourth degree, but the white seed, and the other small sorts are not so hot.
The duration. It will keep good a yeer, or two. The inward use. A decoction of the seed made in wine, and drunk, provoketh u∣rine, resisteth the force of poysons, the malignity of Mushromes, and the venome of the Scorpion, or other venomous creatures, aba∣teth the fits of Agues, and doth mightily prevail to stir up bodily lust: it helpeth the spleen and paines in the sides; and gnawings in the bowels, shortnesse of breath, and provoketh the terms. Mustard made with strong Vineger, is good to bring down Womens courses, and for fits of the Mother, for the Falling Sicknesse, Lethargie, or Drowsinesse of the brain; for by the sharpnesse thereof it pierceth to the Brain, and purgeth it by sneesing and drawing down rheume and other tough humours which by their residence do much offend, or by their distillation upon the Lungs and Chest procure coughing. It doth much help concoction in a cold stomach, and drieth up the su∣perfluous moisture thereof, and is good for the Palsie. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, in powder, in Electuary, &c. The outward use. It helpeth the uvula or palate of the mouth, when it is faln down, and fasteneth it, being used as a Gargle; and also dissolveth tumours and Kernels about the throat being applyed, and helpeth the tooth∣ach being chewed in the mouth. It easeth the Sciatica and other Gowts, pains in the side or loines, the shoulders or other parts of the body, upon the applying thereof to raise blisters, and by drawing the pains to the place from the inward or more remote, cureth the dis∣ease, or diverteth it to those outward places where locall Medicines may help. It helpeth the falling of the haire, and mixed with Ho∣ney and applyed, it taketh away the black and blue marks that come of bruisings, the roughnesse of the skin in any place, as also the Le∣prosie, Lowsie Evill, and Crick in the neck. Applyed with Figs to the head (first shaven) it avails against the Lethargie, and Falling Sick∣nesse. The powder of the seeds put into the nostrils, causeth sneesing, and raiseth women sick of the Mother out of their fits. A Cataplasme against Rheume. Take Mustard-seed and Olibanum, of each half an ounce, Nigella-seed dried one ounce, Mastich two drams, of Pigeons dung and Bar∣ley-meal of each an ounce, with Oxymel of Squills, make it in form of a Pultis, & apply it to the coronall suture, or forepart of the head.
The hurtfull quality. It is offensive to cholerick and dry bodies. The Dose. The seed is given from half a dram to a dram. Medicines made thereof. The distilled Water. Oile of the seed, good in cold diseases of the Nerves. CHAP. 162. De Sperma Ceti, of Parmasitty. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Sperma Ceti, Spuma Maris, & Flos Maris; also Ambra subalbida, in English Parmasitty, It is cold and moist. The best kinde. The best is that which is white and fatty, not yellow and rancid or stinking. The duration. It will keep good a yeer or two, but it loseth much in keeping. The inward use. It is chiefly used against falls and bruises, and to dissolve clotted bloud in the body, and for women that are newly delivered: it is also used in the Collick, and in pains and torments of the belly both of children and others. It easeth the Cough, and provoketh sweat. The manner of administring it. It is chiefly given by it self, in Sack or Beer. The outward use. It taketh away the marks of the small Pox, cleers the skin from spots and morphew, helpeth bruises being applyed warm, and cleer∣eth the sight. It is also used in spreading and eating Ulcers. The hurtfull quality. It offendeth weak stomachs, and causeth an inclination to vomit, if it be often taken. The Dose. It is given from half a dram, to a dram and a half.
Medicines made thereof. Oile of Parmasitty, good against bruises, spots and strains in any part. Stibium, see Antimonie. CHAP. 163. De Staechade, of Stickadove. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Staechas, and Stichados, from the Islands cal∣led Staechades where it groweth, in English Stickadove, Steckado, Cassidony, and French Lavender. It is hot and dry in the second de∣gree, or hot in the first degree; and dry in the second. The duration. It will keep good two or three yeers▪ The inward use. It is chiefly used in cold diseases of the brain and nerves, as in the Swimming of the head, Apoplexie, Palsie and Lethargie. It is also as ffectuall for Colds and Coughs as Hyssope: and for the diseases of the breast, and provoketh urine, and the courses in women, resisteth poyson, and helpeth the affects of the Hypochondres, or windy Me∣lancholy. A decoction thereof openeth the stoppings of the Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Mother, and of the other inward parts, and strengthen∣eth them also. The syrup made thereof is effectuall for the afore∣said diseases, and for the quartane Ague. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, or in powder. The outward use. It is very useful in Baths or Lotions for all cold griefs of the head, wombe and other parts. It killeth Wormes, and the fumes thereof taken into the nostrils open them when they are closed. A Lotion against cold diseases of the Brain. Take of Steckadove half a handful, Sage, Rosemary, Organy and Calamint, of each a handfull, of Bay-leaves half a handful, make a decoction to wash the head withall, in the morning fasting, and after to rub it dry.
The hurtfull quality. It hurts those that are hot, dry, and cholerick, offends the sto∣mach, and causeth thirst and fainting: but because it worketh slow∣ly, some Sal-gem is added unto it to quicken it. If it be boiled or steeped in Whey, with a few Raisons of the sun it is lesse hurtful. The Dose. It is given in substance from half a dram to a dram and a half, in infusion or decoction to half an ounce. Medicines made thereof. Syrup of Stechados both simple and compound. CHAP. 164. De Sulphure, of Brimstone. The Names and temperament. IT is called Latine Sulphur, in English Brimstone, and is hot and dry. The duratihn. It will keep good many yeers. The inward use. It resisteth putrifaction and venome, therefore very useful in the Pestilence and pestilentiall Feavers, as also in the Cough, Defluxions of Rheume, Consumption, shortnesse of Breath, Collick, Itch and Scab, and killeth Wormes; it is good in the Jaundise taken in an Egg. The flower of Brimstone is much better for the aforesaid Dis∣eases. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or in Electuary. The outward use. It is of good use against the Itch, Scab, Leprosie, and all foul Dis∣eases of the skin, being mixed with Vineger, or Hogs-grease and u∣sed. It dissolveth all hard tumors and nodes in the body, and easeth the Gowt being mixed with Niter and Water, and the place affected bathed therewith: it helpeth also pains of the eares being mixed with Wine and Honey, and dropped into the eares. The fume thereof stirreth up such as have the Lethargie.
An Ointment against Scab or Itch. Take of quicke Brimstone and Salt, of each halfe a pound in fine powder, of Hogs-grease two pound, make them into an Ointment. Or Take of yellow Brimstone in powder foure ounces, of white Ginger and Salt in powder, of each two drams, of the juice of three Lemons, of sallet-Oile half a pound, mix them well together, and make an Ointment. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtful to such as have hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given from a dram to two drams: flower of Brimstone is gi∣ven from half a scruple to a dram. Medicines made thereof. Flower of Brimstone, Milk of Brimstone, Oil of Brimstone, Bal∣same, Essence af Sulphur, &c. CHAP. 165. De Valeriana, of Valerian. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Valeriana and Phu, in English Valerian▪ and Caporis-tail. It is hot and dry in the first or second degree. The duration. It will keep good a yeer, especially the root. The inward use. It provoketh urine, and courses in Women, helpeth the Strangu∣ry, easeth pains of the sides, and is used in Antidotes. The root boiled with Licoris, Raisins, and Anise-seed, is singulat good for those that are short-winded, and have the Cough, and helpeth to open the passages, and to cause flegme to be easily spit out. It is given to those that are bitten or stung by any venomous creature, being ta∣ken in Wine, and is of special vertue against the Plague, and expelleth winde in the belly. It helpeth the Jaundise and stoppings of the Li∣ver, Spleen, and Wombe.
It cleereth the sight, and helpeth Ruptures, or any inward wound or bruise. The extract of the roots is a good medicine against the difficulty of making water, and the yellow Jaundise. The manner of administring it. It is given in decoction, as the root is given in powder. The outward use. The green herb bruised and applyed to the head taketh away the pains and prickings therein, stayeth Rheumes, and thin Distillations, and being boiled in White Wine▪ and a drop thereof put into the eye, taketh away the dimnesse of the sight, or any Pin, Haw, or Web therein. It is excellent to heal as well green as other wounds, and draweth any splinter or thorn out of the flesh. The distilled water cleereth the eyes being washed therewith. The Dose. The root is given in powder from half a dram to a dram: Medicines made thereof. The distilled water, and extract of Valerian. CHAP. 166. De Visco, of Misselto. The names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Viscum & Viscus, in English Misselto: It is hot and dry in the second or third degree. The duration. It will keep good a yeer or two. The inward use. The Misselto of the Oke is counted the best, but that is rarely to be got, and therefore we use that of the White Thorn or Chesnut-tree. It is chiefly used against the Falling Sicknesse, Apoplexie, and Giddinesse of the head, but it must be used thirty or fourty dayes together. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder or in decoction.
The outward use. It is hung about the neck of such as have the Falling Sicknesse, to mitigate their fits; and the juice of the fresh wood drawn forth, and dropped into the eares that have Impostumes in them, doth help and ease them within a few dayes. The Bird-ime that is made of the Berries hereof doth mollifie hard knots, tumours and impostumes, ripeneth and discusseth them, and draweth forth thick as well as thin humours from the remote places of the body, and being mixed with equal parts of Rosin and Wax doth mollifie the hardnesse of the Spleen, and healeth old Ulcers and Sores: being mixed with Sanda∣rack and Orpment helpeth to draw off foul nails, and if quick lime and Wine-Lees be added thereunto, it worketh the stronger. It help∣eth strains, aches, or bruises being spread on leather and applyed. The Dose. It is given in powder from a scruple to a dram. CHAP. 167. De Urticis, of Nettles. The Names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Urtica, ab urendo, of his burning and stinging quality, in English Nettle. It is moderately hot, and dry in the se∣cond degree, of thin and subtile parts. The duration. The seed will keep good a yeer. The inward use. The leaves boil'd in Wine and drunk, are said to open the belly and make it soluble. The roots or leaves boiled, or the juice of either of them, or both made into an Electuary with Honey or Sugar, is a safe or sure Medicine to open the pipes and passages of the Lungs which causeth shortnesse of breath, and helpeth to bring away tough cold flegme sticking in them, or in the stomach, as also to raise the impo∣stumated pleurisie, and spend it by spitting. The decoction of the leaves in Wine and drunk is singular good to provoke Womens courses, and to settle the strangling of the mother, and all other
diseases thereof, also provoketh urine, and expelleth gravel and the stone in the reins or bladder, killeth Wormes in children, and is said to ease the pains in the side, and to expel winde in the body; but others think it to be windy of it self, and therefore not so powerful to ex∣pel winde, but only to provoke Venery: the juice of the leaves taken two or three dayes together stayeth bleeding at the mouth, which riseth from the stomach: the seed being drunk is a remedy against the stinging of venomous creatures, the bitings of mad Dogs, the poisonful qualities of Hemlock, Henbane, Nightshade, Mandrake, or such like, that stupifie and dull the senses, and helpeth them that have taken Quicksilver, or those that have eaten evil Mushromes, or surfet of the good. A Decoction of Nettles is profitable for such as have the Gangrene and Chin-cough, as also to expel the small poxe. The Roman Nettle is held to be most effectual. The roots are com∣mended against the Jaundise. The manner of administring it. It is given in Decoction chiefly, the seeds are given in powder, or in Electuary. The outward use. They help the Almonds of the throat being swolne, to gargle the mouth and throat therewith; the juice also is effectuall to settle the palate of the mouth in its place, and to heal and temper the inflam∣mations and sorenesse of the mouth and throat. The seeds or leaves bruised and put into the nostrils, doth stanch the bleeding of them, and taketh away the flesh growing in them called Polypus: the juice of the leaves, or the Decoction of them, or of the roots, is singular good to wash either old, rotten, and stinking sores, or Fistulaes and Gangrenes, and such as are fretting and eating Scabs, also Maunginess and Itches in any part of the body as also green Wounds, by wash∣ing them therewith, or putting the juice into the sores, yea, although the flesh were separated from the bones, the same applied to over-wearied members refresheth them, or to places out of joynt, after the joynt is set in its right place, it strengtheneth, dryeth and comforteth them, as also to those places troubled with Aches and Gowts. The Dose. The seed is given from half a dram to a dram▪
CHAP. 168. De Vvis, of Grapes. The Names and temperament. THe Grape is called in Latine Uva, in English Grape. The sweet Grapes are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second. Sower Grapes are cold and moist. The inward use. Sower Grapes being eaten do quench thirst, and mightily extin∣guish the overmuch heat of the Stomach and Liver, represse the sharpnesse of choler and cholerick vomitings, stirre up the appetite, help to stay spittings of bloud, and strengthen the stomach that is weakened through abundance of choler. They are excellent in burn∣ing Feavers, especially where choler abounds, and provoke urine and Venus. The juice is very profitable to coole and represse cholerick vomit∣ings, and too often going to stool, so is the syrup thereof. The sweet Grapes nourish most, and do fatten the body, but the flesh procured by that nourishment is soft and foggie, and not firme and solid; they make the body soluble also. Grapes are best to be eaten when the stomach is empty, and not after meat; for so they hinder the concoction, and hurt the stomach: the skins and stones must not be swallowed down. The outward use. The juice of Grapes is used to coole all inflammations, and Saint Anthonies fire, or wildefire, being used alone, or with coole herbs. The hurtfull quality. Grapes immediatly used cause thirst, and breed wind, trouble the stomach and belly, bring the Collick and Gripings, puffe up the Spleen, increase Rheume in old persons, and are only profitable for the cholerick. Medicines made thereof. Syrup of Grapes.
CHAP. 169. De Zedoaria, of Setwall. The names and Temperament. IT is called in Latine Zedoaria, Zurumbet & Zerumbet, in English Setwall. It is hot and dry in the second degree. The duration. It will keep good two or three yeers. The inward use. It is effectuall against poysons of all sorts, and venomes of veno∣mous creatures, and is of much use and profit in the Pestilence and other contagious diseases, as also to warm a cold stomach, and to ex∣pel Winde marvellously, to stay Vomitings, to dry up and consume Catarrhes and defluxions or flowings down of Rheume, and to dissolve the impostumes of the Matrix, and to stay loosnesse of the belly, and is also very powerful to stay or disperse the unsavoury belchings of those spirits, that Garlick, Onions, &c. or Wine have caused. It provoketh the courses in women (say some, others will have it to stop them) and is effectual against the rising of the Mother, hel∣peth the Collick, and the pains of the stomach, killeth all sorts of Wormes, and is much used in Antidotes. The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or in decoction. The outward use. It is used to chew on, in times of infection. The hurtfull quality. It is hurtful for very hot and dry bodies. The Dose. It is given in powder from a scruple to two scruples. Medecines made thereof. The roots Candied as Ginger is. Extract. Chymicall Oile. Bal∣same▪ The distilled Water of Setwall,
CHAP. 170. De Zinzibere, of Ginger. The names and temperament. IT is called in Latine Zinziber, Zingiber, & Gingiber, in English Ginger. It is hot and dry in the third degree. The best kinde. The best Ginger is the newest and the whitest. The duration. It will keep good two yeers. The inward use. Ginger is good to help digestion, and to open stoppings, to cut and make thin grosse and tough flegmatick humours, to discusse winde, and helpe to expell it out of the body; it heats the joynts, sharpeneth the sight, and provoketh sluggish husbands. It is very profitable in the swimming of the head, and in all cold diseases of the head and stomach, as also in the cold Gowt. Canded, or Green Ginger is very useful for the same diseases taken often of, especially morning and evening, and doth help weak sto∣macks and bad memories, and such as are subject to Rheumes. Ginger doth much resist the putrefaction and malignitie of hu∣mours, The manner of administring it. It is given in powder, or in Electuary. The outward use. It is chiefly used outwardly in Ointments for the Itch, Scab, Tet∣ter, and such like. See the Chapter of Brimstone, 164 Chapter. It is used also against the tooth-ach. The hurtfull quality. It inflameth hot Constitutions, and is very hurtfull to young and cholerick persons, and to be much used in hot seasons.
The Dose. The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples. Of such Medicines as are made thereof. Canded Ginger. Green Ginger in syrupe. Diazinziber Nicolai Confectio Zinziberis cocti. Ginger laxative. Oile of Ginger made by distillation. FINIS.
An Alphabeticall TABLE of those Diseases for which the Simple Medicines are set down in this TREATISE. A ABortion, see miscarrying Aches to cure, chap. 39 Adder stinging, chap. 11. 56. 93. 114 After-birth, chap. 6. 7. 11. 33. 54. 55. 59. 62. 69 73, 74. 78. 85. 86. 92. 111, 118. 146. 153 After pains, chap. 5. 149 Agues to cure, ch. 12. 32. 33. 48. 50. 56. 62. 67 70. 74. 80. 86. 90, 93 95. 143. 144. 158 Agues, to take away the shaking thereof, chap. 41. 92. 153 Agues of long continuance, chap. 2. 7. 34. 46 47. 53. 60. 65 Ague tertian, chap. 8. 39. 47. 64. 66. 75. 96 157 Agues to cool, chap. 24 57. 134 Ague quotidian, chap. 3. 16. 41. 102. 130. 157 Ague quartane, chap. 2. 7. 8. 27. 29. 34 36. 37 39. 42. 47. 48. 51. 55. 66. 75. 90. 91. 96. 102. 114 126. 130. 141. 148 Agues in children, chap. 27 Almonds inflamed, chap. 137 Appetite to procure, chap. 1. 32. 56. 74. 76. 80 100. 119. 125. 129. 143. 168 Apoplexie, chap, 11. 17. 28. 37. 39. 42. 43. 62 92. 118. 120. 124. 151. 166 Apostume to ripen, chap. 4, 11, 21, 26, 28, 31 37, 52, 56, 67, 119, 125, 141 Apostume behinde the eare, chap. 71, 77, 104 156 Arm-holes stinking, chap. 14 Arm-holes chafing thereof, chap. 48 Arthriticall pains, or joynt-gowt, chap. 23▪ Astma, see Breath short. B BAck pained, chap. 5. 80 Back hot, chap. 12. 63 Back weak, chap. 24 Baldnesse, chap. 17. 79 Barrennesse to help, chap. 62, 78, 156 Barrennesse to cause, chap. 88 Bats to drive away, chap. 33. 111 Belly pained, chap. 31, 33, 37, 45, 71, 121 Bees stinging, chap. 71, 121, 125 Bees to kill, chap. 130 Belching, chap. 76. 137 Bile, or botch, chap. 50, 80, 124 Belly to loosen, chap. 16, 79. 117, 138, 150 Birth to bring away, chap. 6, 11, 14, 18, 21, 23, 25, 31, 33, 48, 54, 62, 69, 77, 78, 80, 88, 92, 104, 111. 121, 133 Birth to destroy, chap. 36 Blacknesse and spots, chap. 11 53, 162 Bladder stopt, chap. 22. 139 Bladder pained, chap. 19, 24, 49▪ 116 Bladder itching, chap. 50 Bladder, ulcer thereof, chap. 107, 116 Bladder inflamed, chap. 107 Bleeding inward, chap. 10, 23, 128. 135, 142 Blister to draw, chap. 28, 161 Bloud-spitting, chap. 2, 5, 10, 18, 19. 24 39, 45 50, 53, 62, 64, 82, 93, 97, 101, 109, 114, 132 141, 144, 145, 146, 150, 152, 156 Bloud-pissing, chap. 64, 69 Bloud-vomiting, chap. 144. 156 Bloud congealed, chap. 10, 11, 29, 33, 39, 50, 54, 64, 74, 120, 128, 159 162 Bloud to purge, chap. 1, 18, 27, 29, 37, 42, 53 60, 105,, 110, 115
Bloud ot to cool, chap. 15, 131, 141, 145 Bones to scale, chap. 28 Bones broken, chap. 45, 82, 97 Bones out of joynt, chap. 23, 24, 51, 55, 71 101, 144 Bones broken to draw out, chap. 6, 11, 23, 28 31, 80, 102 Bones naked to cover, chap. 48, 50, 74 Botches, chap. 50, 55, 90 Bowels inflamed, chap. 86 Brain to refresh, chap. 12, 14, 45, 47, 62 Brain cold, chap. 2, 7, 23, 30, 37, 91, 92, 120 151, 163 Brain weak, chap. 1, 8, 14, 43, 48, 60, 72, 92 103, 114, 127 Breast to cleanse, chap. 5, 23, 56, 66, 138 Breast pained, chap. 71, 116 Breasts of women inflamed, chap. 52, 97, 145 Breasts of women swolne, chap. 4, 52, 71, 97 125, 138, 146 Breasts of Maids to abate, chap. 57 Breath short, chap. 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 17, 21, 23 26, 31, 33, 41, 42, 46, 50, 55, 58, 62, 69, 71 74, 75, 76, 80, 87, 88, 93, 101, 104, 105, 108 110, 114, 115, 120, 122, 124, 125, 130, 133 139, 145, 146, 147, 153, 165 Breath stinking, chap. 1, 14, 30, 33, 41, 45, 48 62, 76, 84, 91, 127, 132, 136, 151 Bruises and fall, chap. 2, 10, 11, 28, 32, 33, 50 53, 54, 55, 64, 66, 69, 71, 74, 84, 89, 97, 101 120, 128, 141, 142, 145, 159, 162 Burning and scalding, chap. 39, 56, 62, 71, 79 111, 114, 121, 122, 131, 144 C CAlenture, chap. 131 Callous slesh in Fistulaes, chap. 37 Callous knobs, chap. 16 Cancers to cure, chap. 11, 27, 36, 37, 42, 64 66, 68, 75, 79, 101, 112, 119, 138, 141, 142 144, 156 Cancers in the nose, chap. 6, 10 Cankers in the mouth, chap. 68, 144 Cancerous Ulcers, chap. 8 Carbuncles, chap. 7, 16, 119, 138, 139, 153 Catarrhe, see Rheume Cattel stung; chap. 33 Chaps of the fingers; chap. 51 Chaps of the fundament; chap. 114, 125 Chastnesse to procure, chap. 67 Childe dead to bring away; chap. 4, 6, 9, 25 31, 33, 36, 48, 86, 93, 96, 118, 153, 157 Chin-cough; chap. 71 Chilblanes; chap. 23 Choler to purge; chap. 1. 3. 6. 8. 11. 14. 16. 17 26. 29. 32. 34. 39. 40. 41. 44. 47. 51. 52. 53. 56 59 63. 93 95. 115. 121. 137. 150. 160 Choler, flegme and water ro purge; chap. 11 Choler adust to purge; chap. 27. 37. 4 Cicatrize to procure; chap. 70 Cholerick vomitings; chap. 168 Clifts of the fundament; chap. 67 Clifts of the fingers; chap. 62 Clifts of the hands and lips, chap. 14. 62 Cod swoln; ch, 41, 67, 84, 106, 139, 153, 165 Collick; chap. 1. 6. 13. 14. 17. 19. 20. 22. 30, 31 41 46. 48. 49. 51. 55. 56. 62. 66. 69. 71. 74. 76 77▪ 80. 81. 84. 86. 92. 99. 102. 114. 118. 126 127. 143. 148. 153. 167 Conception to help; chap. 18. 20. 48. 99. 156▪ 157 Concoction; chap. 30. 45 91 Consumption; chap. 24. 49. 83. 108. 110▪ 112 116. 138. 146. 149. 151 Consumption of the Lungs; chap. 2. 37. 69 108. 112. 141. 144▪ Contusion, see Bruises. Convulsion & Cramps; chap. 6. 9. 11. 18, 20 27. 28. 31. 33. 36. 37. 39. 41. 50, 55. 56. 62. 71 76. 78. 80. 84. 92. 93. 96. 101. 105. 114. 118 120. 128. 137. 139. 140 Corn; chap, 4. 7. 16, 122. 139 Cough; chap. 2. 5. 7. 9. 13. 14. 17. 24. 25. 33. 41 44 45. 46. 48. 49 50. 52. 55. 56 58. 62. 66▪ 69 71. 76. 80. 84. 87. 89 93. 96. 101. 104. 108 110. 115 122. 128 137. 141. 143 145. 146 147. 148 149. 151, 156, 157, 159, 160, 565▪ Courses to provoke; chap. 1, 3, 4▪ 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 11, 14, 17, 20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 29, 31, 33, 36 37, 39, 41, 43, 48, 49, 50, 54, 55, 56, 59, 67 69, 73, 74, 78, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 90, 92, 93 99, 102, 105, 111, 112, 114: 118: 120: 124: 129: 133: 137: 140: 146: 148: 152: 153: 159 157: 161: 165
Courses overflowing to stop; chap. 9, 10, 18, 24, 49, 57, 64, 107, 114, 125, 142, 144, 147, 150, 156. Cramps, see Convulsion. Crudities; chap. 1, 76. D DAndrasse; chap. 2, 19, 69, 70, 79, 96, 106, 121. Dead child to bring away, see childe. Dead flesh to eat out;, chap. 3, 4, 23, 65, 68, 70, 75. Deafnesse; chap, 5, 21, 23, 26, 62, 90, 92, 144 Dog biting; chap. 71, 74, 75, 124, 146. Dog mad, biting thereof, chap, 5, 33, 50, 56, 62, 66, 69, 74, 78, 80, 90, 125, 138, 144. Dropsey, chap, 1, 2, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 41, 46, 47, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 61, 65, 67, 69, 76, 80, 84, 86, 93, 95, 96, 99, 102, 104, 110, 114, 120, 122, 133, 137, 144, 153. Dreames, chap, 51. Drinesse to help, chap, 84. Drunkennesse to resist, chap, 5, 21, 80, 111. Drunkennesse to bring, chap, 21, 23. Dysentery flux, chap, 43, 81. E. EAres pained, chap, 1, 25, 31, 54, 56, 70, 76, 80, 123, 133, 135, 137, 144, 146, 150, 153 Eares running, chap, 1, 48, 52, 111 Eares, Ulcers thereof, chap, 53, 58, 111, 122 Eares, wormes therein, chap, 52, 93, 96 Eares, noise and singing thereof, chap, 5, 17, 23, 36, 37, 41, 62, 69, 79, 92, 112 Eares, Impostumes thereof, chap, 52, 66, 102 Elephansie, chap, 17, 27, 36, 37, 60, 65, 75 Eruptions of the Skin, chap, 15, 52, 63, 64, 107, 114, 144 Expectoration to belp, chap, 5, 41, 76 Erysipelas, see wilde fire Eyes dim, chap. 1, 5, 29, 36, 42, 45, 47, 50 62, 74, 93, 96, 103, 105, 112, 122, 123, 124, 133, 143, 146, 151, 153, 154, 165 Eyes red, chap, 2, 12, 18, 21, 22, 33, 47, 55, 56, 57, 58, 64, 79, 90, 100, 107, 109, 123, 135, 141, 144, 145 Eyes blood-shotten, chap, 56, 151 Eyes rheumatick, chap, 18, 24, 41, 47, 48, 56, 75, 85, 107, 127, 129, 150 Eyes, Ulcers thereof, chap, 48, 68, 75 Eyes, spots therein, chap. 3, 4, 7, 23, 33, 41, 47, 48, 55, 58, 74, 91, 112, 123, 131, 144 Eyes to preserve from the Pox, chap, 21 Eyes impostumated, chap, 121 Eyes hurt, chap, 76 Eyes pained, chap, 22, 135 F. FAce pale, chap. 14, 21, 47, 51, 54, 87, 104, 105, 116, 138 Face, spots thereof, chap, 14, 19, 26, 107, 119, 122, 133, 148 Face to make faire, chap, 12, 48 Falling sicknesse, chap, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 17, 18, 25, 26, 27, 31, 33, 36, 37, 39, 42, 45, 46, 50, 55, 60, 62, 72, 75, 76, 80, 81, 89, 92, 96, 104, 110, 118, 124, 128, 136, 140, 141, 144, 151, 156, 161, 163, 166 Falls, see Bruises Fatnesse to abate, chap, 56, 105 Feaver burning, chap. 15, 19, 44, 52, 57, 63, 113, 131, 141 Feaver putrid, chap, 19, 53, 101 Feaver pestilent, chap, 18, 19, 64, 81, 83, 85, 90, 95, 124 Feaver hecticke, chap, 95150 Fever erraticke, chap, 37 Felon, chap, 7
Fig in the fundament, chap. 2, 16, 68 Fish to kil, chap. 16, 111 Fistulaes, chap. 2, 6, 16, 23, 36, 37, 64, 112, 114, 141 F stulous ulcers, chap. 33, 56, 80, 93 Fleas and Gnats to drive away, chap. 1, 114, 119 Flies and Gnats to kill, chap, 36, 130 Flegme to purge, chap, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 23, 26, 27, 28, 32, 34, 37, 38, 40, 41, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 93, 150 Flegme to bring away, chap, 101, 139 Flegme touh to expel, chap. 28, 65, 69, 139 Flesh in wounds to procure, chap, 6, 18, 38, 48, 50, 61, 102, 135 Flux of the belly, chap, 1, 5, 10, 14, 19, 45, 47 48, 49, 52, 53, 62, 63, 64, 66, 71, 81, 87, 91, 97, 109, 114▪ 116, 129, 132, 135, 140, 144, 147, 150, 169 Flux bloudy, chap, 1, 43, 62, 64, 66, 70, 79, 106, 107, 111, 116, 124, 134, 141, 242, 158 Fluxes in women, chap, 79, 82 Foule diseases of the skin, chap, 36, 37, 51, 60, 75, 131 For Maungie, see Haire falling. Freckles, chap. 11, 14, 16, 26, 31, 32, 33, 48, 54, 56, 67, 93, 130, 134, 138 Frenzie, chap. 44, 49, 60, 63, 76, 134, 144, 145 French Pox, chap, 1, 27, 28, 29, 34, 46, 56, 65 75, 77, 90, 94, 95, 102, 110, 157, 158 Fundament pained, chap, 21, 24 Fundament faln down, chap, 23▪ 135 Fundament inflamed, chap, 123 Fundament, Impostumed thereof, chap. 73 G GAll stopt, chap, 8, 21, 22, 27, 54, 93, 105, 107, 109, 112 Gangrene, chap, 11, 48, 65, 90, 97, 119 138, 139, 152 Genitals, Apostumes thereof, chap. 9 Gnats to drive away, chap, 1, 111, 119 Gonorrhaea, see Running of the Reins Gowt, chap. 4, 6, 11, 14, 15, 20, 21, 26, 28, 29, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 46, 49, 50, 52, 56, 57, 65, 69, 74, 80, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 100, 101, 104, 106, 110, 114, 116, 124, 131, 139 141, 144, 145, 149, 153, 159, 167 Gravel, chap, 14, 32, 71, see Stone Green Sicknesse, chap, 1, 8, 22, 26, 40, 53, 66, 75, 93, 95 Gripings of the belly, chap, 1, 27, 52, 71, 80, 84, 89, 93, 109, 114, 117, 121, 124, 125 Gripings of children, chap, 5 Gums bleeding, chap, 144 Gums sore, chap, 10, 14, 18, 45, 48, 70, 107, 114, 131, 150, 151, 152 Guts fretting, chap, 71, 121, 144, 145 H HAire of the eye-lids to take away, chap, 42 Haire to take away, chap, 16, 22 Haire rough, chap, 52 Haire falling, chap, 17, 23, 28, 47, 48, 70, 79, 87, 121, 161 Haire black to cause, chap, 24, 47 Haires of the eye lids to cause to grow, chap, 129 Hands to make faire, chap, 5, 142 Head-ach to cure, chap, 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 17, 22, 27 37, 46, 49, 52, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 67, 72, 75, 76, 79, 80, 96, 109, 111, 114, 123, 127, 133, 135, 144, 150, 151, 152 Head cold to warm, chap, 118 Head inflamed, chap, 52, 134, 150 Head-ach from cold, chap, 1, 26, 69, 118, 127 128, 130, 132, 156 Head scald to cure, chap, 37 Head scabbed, chap, 69, 121 Head running sores thereof, chap, 64, 106 Head hot, chap, 12, 117, 150 Head to purge of flegme, chap, 36, 41, 111 Heart to comfort, chap, 14, 18, 19, 21, 43, 64, 72, 85, 91, 100, 114, 128, 135, 142, 150, 158 Heart trembling, chap, 14,30, 42, 43, 47, 57, 62, 107, 118, 124, 127, 133
Hemorrhoides to provoke, chap, 3, 23, 26, 42 Hemorrhoides bleeding to stay, chap, 3, 24, 47, 64, 97, 114, 141 Hemorrhoides painfull, chap, 33, 37, 41, 47 51, 52, 56, 114, 144, 145 Hemorrhoides blinde, chap, 136 Hickock, chap, 1, 6, 53, 73, 76, 88, 94, 105, 125, 128, 137 Hip-gowt, see Sciatica Hoarsnes, chap, 5, 7, 13, 24, 44, 48, 52, 71, 107, 139, 141, 149, 156, 160 Hot humurs to purge, chap, 44 Hypochondres affected, chap, 27, 29, 37, 51, 60, 86, 151 Hystoricall fits, see Mother fits I JAundise to cure, chap, 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 35 37, 39, 41, 46, 51, 53, 54, 63, 64, 66, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 85, 86, 87, 93, 94, 95, 96, 102 107, 111, 112, 129, 133, 136, 137, 140, 141, 144, 146, 148, 151, 152 Jaundise black, chap, 29, 32 Iliack passion, chap, 16, 49 Impostume, see Apostume Incarnate, see flesh to procure Inflammation, chap, 12, 49, 56, 57, 63, 71, 98 100, 107, 113, 123, 134, 141, 144, 150 Joynt Gowt, chap, 4, 6, 56, 57, 62, 110, 112, 141, 148, 153 Joynts pained, chap, 32, 36, 37, 45, 46, 52, 56, 57, 64, 93, 101, 106, 110, 141, 156 Joynts trembling, chap, 55, 92 Joynts colde, chap, 41 Issue to keepopen, chap, 56 Itch to help, chap, 6, 21, 27, 29, 35, 36, 54, 60, 63, 64, 70, 75, 77, 79, 101, 104, 110, 114, 131, 138, 141, 144, 146, 150, 155, 157, 16. K KErnels to dissolve, chap, 4, 33, 78, 119 124, 141, 161 Kibes and Chilblanes, chap. 23, 70, 79, 104, 114, 149, Kidnies hot, chap, 14, 63, 117 Kidnies stopt, chap, 5, 140, 144 Kidnies, ulcers thereof, chap, 44, 144 Kidnies pained, chap, 45, 116 Kidnies weak, chap, 44 Kibes in Cattel, chap, 68 Kings evill, chap, 4, 11, 23, 26, 31, 32, 33, 37, 41, 46, 50, 55, 58, 64, 71, 102 Knee, ach thereof, chap, 32 Knots and tumours, chap, 28, 33, 50, 55, 64, 77, 87, 141, 166 L LEan persons to fat, chap, 5, 24 Legs sore, chap, 56 Leprosie, chap, 1, 11, 17, 27, 29, 36, 37, 42, 47; 59, 60, 63, 65, 70, 75, 95, 114, 149, 150 Lethargy, chap, 28, 36, 43, 46, 62, 67, 92, 96, 97, 118, 133, 151, 156, 161 Lice to kill, chap, 1, 32, 36, 69, 70, 77, 79, 111 118 Lips, Apostume thereof, chap, 3 Liver stopt to open, chap, 1, 4, 5, 8, 11, 20, 21 22, 23, 26, 27, 29, 33, 34, 35, 46, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 61, 63, 66, 67, 74, 75, 76, 78, 79, 80, 84, 87, 93, 102, 105, 109, 110, 112, 118, 120 122, 125, 129, 136, 137, 139, 140, 141, 144 146, 148, 151 Liver hot, chap, 12, 14, 18, 57, 63, 100, 107, 145, 150 Liver to strengthen, chap, 40, 43, 46, 47, 150 Liver colde, chap, 53 Loathing of meat, chap, 7, 72 Lump of flesh in the womb, see Mol
Lungs to clense; chap, 5, 13, 138 Lungs hurt; chap, 64 Lungs inflamed; chap, 5, 15, 44, 131, 153 Lungs, consumption thereof; chap, 2, see Consumption Lungs stopt; chap, 21, 48, 51, 52, 64, 71, 74 80, 84, 87, 88, 100, 105, 115, 121, 147, 148 159, 160 Lungs impostumated; chap, 106 Lust to provoke; chap, 69, 76, 91, 95, 99, 102 Lust to abate; chap, 12, 74, 88, 117, 145 M MAdnesse; chap, 27, 36, 37, 42, 60, 63 65, 75 Maligne Feavers; chap, 1 Manginesse; chap, 11, 137 Marks of the Poxs and Measels; chap, 119 Matrix faln; chap, 10, 31, 62 Matrix pained; chap, 14, 21 Matrix, impostume thereof; chap, 169 Measels and Pox to drive out; Chap, 10, 19, 64 81, 82, 104, 149, 158 Meat, loathing thereof; chap, 129, Melancholy to purge; chap, 16, 27, 29, 37, 40 47, 51, 60, 137, 150 Melancholy to help; chap, 21, 29, 36, 37, 42 54, 57, 60, 62, 75, 81, 83, 94, 96, 102, 124 133, 135, 142 Melancholy Dreams; chap, 140 Memory to quicken; chap, 8, 21, 62, 72, 90 91, 103, 114, 151, 156 Megrim, see swimming of the head Mice and Rats to kill, see Rats Milk in womens breasts to dry up; chap, 4, 8 153 Milk to increase; chap, 67, 76, 83, 105, 113 117, 121, 130 Milk curdled in the breasts; chap, 4, 7 Miscarrying to hinder; chap, 10, 24, 42, 64 Mola, or lump of flesh in the Wombe; chap, 31, 50 Morbus Gallicus; see French Pox Morphew; chap, 11, 16, 17, 29, 41, 42, 54, 56 65, 69, 71, 119, 131, 134, 153, 167, Mother-fits; chap, 7, 11, 12, 20, 31, 33, 50, 55 62, 72, 74, 76, 81, 92, 96, 99, 101, 114, 124 127, 132, 140, 153 Mother pained; chap, 2, 45, 67, 80, 93 114 Mother hard; chap, 9, 48, 104, 106 Mothes and Wormes to preserve from; chap, 1 Mother, windinesse thereof; chap, 30, 31, 45 62, 67, 73, 75, 78, 129, 153 Mother inflamed; chap, 129 Mouth sore; chap, 6, 10, 14, 23, 29, 37 64, 66, 67, 70, 107, 121, 122, 131, 141, 150 152, 156 Mouth bleeding; chap, 93, 97, 141 Mouth dry; chap, 52 Mushromes eaten; chap, 1, 105 N NAils, fleshinesse thereof to take a∣way; chap, 70, 146 Navel going out; chap, 52, 145 Navel swoln; chap, 27, 145 Neck, crick thereof; chap, 145 Nerves, cold to warm; chap, 7 Nerves bruised; chap, 6 Night-mare; chap, 3. 42, 62, 140 Nipples sore; chap, 52 Nits to kill; chap▪ 69, 70, 77, 111 Nodes of the joynts; chap, 9, 28, 50, 55, 77 95, 119 Nose bleeding; chap, 10, 12, 18, 23, 52, 56, 58 62, 63, 64, 80, 82, 90, 114, 125, 128, 131 135, 141, 144, 167 Nostrils stopt; chap. 79, 137 Nostrils, stench thereof; chap, 41, 111 Nostrils, fleshinesse growing therein; see Polypus O.
OBstructions to open, chap, 14, 19, 22, 69, 83 Opium too much taken, chap, 78, 137 P PAine to ease, chap, 49 Pale colour to help, chap, 2, 3, 47 Pallat of the mouth fallen, see Uvula. Palsey, chap, 11, 16, 20, 26, 28, 39, 43, 47, 50, 54, 55, 56, 60, 66, 69, 75, 80, 84, 92, 95, 96, 114, 118, 120, 124, 128, 131, 141, 149, 151, 156, 159, 161, 163, 166. Pestilence, chap, 1, 10, 12, 18, 21, 25, 29, 33, 34, 37, 62, 64, 66, 69, 74, 75, 81, 82, 85, 96, 111, 124, 142, 151, 153, 159, 157, 169 Pestilent feaver, see Feaver: Phlegmon, see Inflammation. Piles, see Hemorrhoides. Pip in poultery to help, chap, 69 Pimples and wheales, chap 12, 15, 59, 63, 79, 119, 145 Pissing blood, see blood-pissing Pissing by drops, chap, 84 Plague, chap, 10, 21, 64, 77, 80, 91, 96, 101, 111, 112, 114, 142, 153, 156 Plague-sore, chap, 7, 50, 81, 90, 100, 104, 165 Plurisie, chap, 5, 14, 21, 39, 43, 44, 48, 51, 52, 55, 62, 71, 74, 81, 93, 121, 122, 131, 135 Polypus, chap. 6, 1023, 51, 68, 75, 167 Pox and Measels to expell, chap, 10, 19, 21, 64, 81, 82, 104, 149, 159 Pox, marks thereof to take away, chap, 119 Poyson, chap, 1, 6, 7, 10, 14, 23, 25, 31, 50, 55, 64, 69, 74, 76, 81, 83, 84, 85, 89, 92, 96, 101, 104, 112, 120, 121, 124, 128, 129, 130, 133, 141, 145, 146, 149, 158, 161, 165 Privy parts inflamed, chap, 106, 123, 144, 145 Purples, chap 10, 64, 159 Pustules, chap, 37, 80, 114, 145, 150 Putrefaction to restist; chap. 3, 6, 12, 14 19, 33, 34, 43, 48, 54, 82, 110, 114, 122, 131 150 Q Quartane Ague; see Ague Quinsie; chap, 1, 4, 15, 26, 48, 56, 69, 76 104, 122, 131, 141, 143 R RAts and Mice to kill; chap. 36 Reds in Women; see Courses Reins pained; chap, 39, 108, 116 Reins cold, chap, 30 Reins hot; chap. 14, 107, 117 Reins to cleanse, chap, 5, 32, 53, 115 Rheume to purge; chap, 3, 17, 46, 48, 75 Rheume to stay; chap, 2, 6, 10, 14, 43, 45, 48 49, 52, 57, 58, 62, 63, 64, 80, 82, 93, 95, 96 97, 107, 110, 121, 122, 130, 135, 141, 144 146, 150, 151, 157, 169▪ Rheume hot; chap, 15, 115 Rheume cold; chap, 80, 114, 122 Ring-wormes; see Tetters Running of the Reins; chap. 10, 12, 15, 18 45, 53, 57, 62, 63, 64, 94, 97, 117, 132, 134 135, 137, 145, 150 Ruptures; chap, 2, 6, 9, 10, 20, 31, 33, 51, 64 71, 84, 87, 89, 93, 95, 97, 101, 114, 136, 141 159 S SAdnesse; chap, 42, 60, 83, 127, 133, 135 163 Salt humours to purge; chap, 29 Scab; chap, 1, 6, 16, 17, 22, 27, 29, 35, 36, 37 51, 54, 59, 60, 63, 64, 69, 75, 77, 79, 83, 93 95, 101, 104, 110, 112, 114, 119, 121, 131 137, 141, 144, 146, 149, 150, 153, 155, 157
Scal'd head, chap, 31 Scaldes, see Burning S ciatica, chap, 2, 4, 8, 17, 20, 23, 26, 28, 31, 32 34, 36, 39, 41, 50, 52, 54, 56, 62, 64, 71, 74, 78, 89, 93, 95, 101, 112, 114, 141, 148, 153, 167 Scobute, or Scurvy, chap, 3, 29, 34, 46, 51 56, 114, 148 Scurfe, chap, 2, 5, 17, 19, 28, 37, 54, 69, 87, 106, 119, 121, 130 Secondine, see After-birth Scorpions, stinging thereof, chap, 31, 89, 124 133 Sed, see Sperm Senses to quicken, chap, 3, 60, 151, 156 Serpents to drive away, chap, 67, 114 Serpents, the biting thereof, chap. 8, 9, 16, 32 66, 67, 80, 90, 101, 105, 137, 138, 140, 143, 144, 145 Shingles, chap, 141, See Wild-fire Side pained, see Stitches Sight weak, chap▪ 8, 14, 50, 91, 114 Sight to clense, chap, 4, 5, 7, 27, 42, 60, 62, 90 91, 101, 132, 149 Sinews cold, chap, 20, 23, 48, 60 Sinews shrunk, chap, 60, 128, 132 Sinews cut, chap. 80 Skin, foule diseases thereof, chap, 20, 23, 24, 28, 29, 93 Skin rough, chap, 5, 15, 121, 149 Skin to mundifie, chap, 5, 16, 28, 56 Skin black, chap, 2, 41 Skull broken, chap, 135 Sleep to provoke, chap, 5, 18, 21, 41, 49, 67, 76, 117, 132, 145, 150 Smelling lost. chap. 12. 130 Sneesing to provoke. ch. 36. 41. 92. 120. 143. 161 Saint Anthonies fire, see Wild-fire Sores old and rotten, chap, 16, 34, 66, 80, 101 111, 106 Sores old and running, chap, 16, 23, 36, 68, 79, 80, 111, 119, 138, 141, 146 Sores of the head, chap, 23, 79, 87, 125 Speech lost, chap, 28, 62, 118, 120, 140, 151 Sperm to increase, chap, 5, 13, 58, 132 Sperm passing away to stop, chap. 62, 134 Sperm to dry up, chap, 67, 69 Spirits to strengthen, c, 14, 21, 24, 27, 42, 57 Spider, against the venome thereof, chap, 67, 90, 111 Spleen stopt, or hard, chap, 1, 4, 5, 8, 11, 18, 20, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 42, 46, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 60, 63, 66, 67, 70, 74, 75, 78, 79, 80, 84, 87, 88, 93, 94, 96 102, 105, 106, 110, 111, 118, 120, 121, 122, 136, 138, 139, 141, 146, 148 Spleen pained, chap, 27, 31, 32, 123, 137 Spleen, windinesse thereof, chap, 9, 27, 101 112, 129, 151, 167 Spleen to strengthen, chap, 40 Splinters to draw out, chap, 11 Spots to take away, chap, 1, 3, 11, 20, 32, 41 69, 134, 138, 161 Stitches in the side, chap, 6, 9, 20, 31, 32, 33 41, 48, 50, 51, 55, 56, 71, 80, 84, 86, 90, 93, 96, 99, 101, 111, 123, 146, 153, 158, 167 Stomach stopt, chap, 1, 22 Stomach crude or raw, chap, 3, 14, 30, 33, 69 76, 91, 101, 124, 125, 143, 153, 169, 160 Stomach to purge, chap, 1 Stomach hot, chap, 107, 117, 160, 168 Stomach to strengthen, chap, 1, 3, 14, 18, 40 45, 47, 62, 74, 80, 118, 132, 150 Stomach gnawing, chap, 6, 30, 129 Stomacb pained, chap, 45 Stomach cold, chap 43 Stone to bring away, chap, 5, 9, 14, 18, 25, 32 39, 71, 80, 81, 89; 93, 99, 102, 105, 106, 109 111, 112, 126, 129, 131, 140, 148, 152, 167 Strangury, chap, 8, 27, 50, 66, 74, 44, 102, 108 114, 125, 126, 138 Suffocation of the Mother, see Mother Sun-burning, chap, 11, 56, 134 Surfet, chap, 32, 74 Super-purgation, chap, 9; 52 Sweat to provoke, chap, 8, 9, 19, 56, 64, 74 80, 85, 86, 90, 93, 110, 159 Swellings to abate, chap, 11, 16, 32, 52▪ 59 67, 116 Swellings hard to cure, chap, 4, 14, 23, 116 121 Swimming of the head, chap, 11, 17, 27, 30 31, 36, 37, 45, 55, 62, 76, 79, 81, 84, 90, 92, 124, 125, 128, 151 Swounings, chap, 81, 91, 118, 133 T
TEmples pained: chap, 8, 125 Tenesmus: or a desire of often going to stoole: chap, 48, 52, 58, 106, 135 138 Terms to provoke, see Courses Tetters: chap, 4, 11, 14, 37, 48, 69, 83, 119 144, 146, 150, 153 Teeth loose: chap, 10, 45, 48, 70, 107 Teeth on edge: chap, 145 Teeth to breed: chap, 18 Teeth to white: chap, 6, 18, 19, 45, 51, 62 110, 111, 137 Thirst to quench: chap, 15, 44, 52, 63, 107 108, 117, 145, 168 Throat sore: chap, 10, 113, 122, 131, 150 Throat swoln: chap, 9, 15, 62 Throat, roughnesse thereof: chap, 24, 69 108, 154, 160 Thorns and Splinters to draw out: chap, 4, 6, 23, 25, 31, 55, 66, 80, 102, 121 Throwes: see After-pains Tissick: chap, 108, 121, 145, 148, 151 Tooth-ach: chap, 1, 12, 16, 17, 23, 31, 36, 37 41, 49, 50, 62, 64, 69, 71, 74, 80, 85, 91, 92 104, 111, 114, 118, 120, 131, 136, 141, 143 145 Tough humours to take away: chap. 69 Travels sore of Women: chap, 111, 124, 125 126, 153 Trembling of the heart, see Heart Tumours hard to dissolve: chap, 14, 21, 31 45, 64, 71, 73, 104, 106, 121, 123 V VEin broken: chap, 23, 131 Vein cut: chap, 80, 131 Venery to provoke: chap, 7, 20, 21, 24 41, 62, 69, 72, 91, 102, 116, 125, 127, 132 133, 143, 149 Venery to extinguish: chap, 12, 41, 67, 73 134, 145 Venome to expel: chap, 2, 6, 7, 10, 12, 18, 20 23, 31, 39, 64, 74, 81, 83, 96, 112, 121, 124 128, 129, 141, 153, 159, 169 Venomous beasts, stinging thereof: chap, 2, 6, 7, 10, 20, 23, 25, 31, 32, 33, 39, 41, 50, 54 55, 67, 69, 74, 76, 79, 80, 81, 87, 89, 90, 93 96, 99, 102, 124, 125, 130, 137, 146, 153 167, 169 Vertigo: see Swimming of the head Vipers: stinging thereof: chap. 11, 93, 114 Viscous humours to purge: chap, 1, 17 Viscerous parts to open: chap, 2 Viscerous parts to strengthen: chap, 19 Ulcers to cure: chap, 11, 14, 23, 45, 47, 56, 62 64, 66, 69, 79, 93, 136, 141, 147 Ulcers of the leg: chap. 36, 56 Ulcers maligne: chap, 6, 27, 77 Ulcers creeping of the genitals: chap. 6, 64 73, 107, 112, 144, 147 Ulcers of the mouth and throat: chap, 6, 11 54, 64, 66, 82, 83, 137 Ulcers old: chap, 39, 50, 96, 142 Ulcers hollow: chap. 18, 37, 45, 112, 144 Ulcers to dry: chap, 73, 87, 114 Ulcers creeping: chap, 8, 24, 119 Ulcers of the Matrix: chap, 67 Ulcers, heat thereof: chap, 12, 134 Ulcers stubborn: chap, 90 Ulcers of the head: chap, 119 Ulcers of the Yard: chap, 95, 107 Ulcers running: chap, 10, 33, 97, 104, 119 Vlcers eating: chap, 16, 24, 100 Ulcers of the Bladder: chap, 108, 116, 128 144 Ulcers of the Lungs: chap. 97, 112, 116 144 Vlcers to cicatrize, chap. 24, 75 Vlcers to cleanse, chap, 16, 23, 31, 74, 91, 93 107, 122, 138, 146, 156, 159 Vlcers putrefied or rotten, chap. 11, 32, 33 39, 52, 70, 80, 111, 114, 144 Vlcers of the eyes, chap. 19 Vlcers, Fistulous, chap. 6, 33, 56, 93
Vomiting to stay, chap, 1, 10, 14, 24, 45, 57 62, 63, 64, 73, 91, 96, 109, 114, 115, 125 132, 144, 145, 147, 168, 169 Vomit to provoke, chap, 8, 13, 16, 32, 34 35, 41, 56, 74, 80, 148 Urine flowing to stop, chap, 10, 64, 69 134 Urine sharp, chap, 100, 107, 108, 116, 117 134, 145, 160 Urine to provoke, chap, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 14 18, 20, 21, 23, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 37, 39, 41 44, 45, 46, 50, 54, 55, 56, 62, 67, 69, 73, 74 76, 78, 79, 84, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 96, 99, 100 101, 102, 105, 107, 109, 111, 112, 113, 114 118, 126, 128, 129, 130, 132, 133, 136, 137 138, 148, 149, 152, 153, 157, 165, 167 Urine stinking, ch. 152 Vrine bloody, chap, 66, 97, 144, 145, 146 Vterine parts to cleanse, chap, 1, 6, 3 Vvula swollen, ch, 62 Vvula fallen, ch, 25, 56, 161, 167 W WArts to take away, chap, 16, 37, 66 139, 145, 153 Waspes to kill, chap, 36, 130 Waspes, stinging thereof, chap, 90, 125 Water to purge, chap, 11, 13, 16, 23, 26, 28, 32, 34, 35, 41, 46, 53, 55, 56, 59, 61, 65 Water yellow to purge, ch, 17 Water running between the flesh and the skin, ch, 1, 63, Wearinesse after travail, chap, 33, 66 67 Wens to take away, chp, 24, 78, 123, 124 Wheales and blanes, chap, 52, 59, 63, 79, 107, 112, 150 Wheesing, chap, 80, 105, 147, 160, 167 Whit-flaes, chap, 7, 11, 19, Whites in women, chap, 18, 19, 57, 62, 64, 82, 96, 97, 125, 142, 145, 146 Wilde fire, chap, 8, 12, 13, 21, 48, 52, 56, 63, 69, 90, 121, 141, 144, 145 Winde to expell, chap, 1, 6, 7, 20, 30, 33, 43, 56, 69, 73, 76, 84, 91, 92, 101, 112, 114 123, 126, 128, 130, 132, 143, 151, 165 169 Winde in the belly, chap, 33, 50, 86, 157 160, 169 Wine, to take away the smell thereof, chap, 169 Wombe, diseases thereof, chap, 6, 7 Wombe to cleanse, chap, 1, 11, 20, 23 152 Wombe, cold diseases thereof, chap, 30, 31 43, 151 Wombe windy, chap, 5, 76, 120 Wombe stopped, chap, 11, 14, 22, 23, 48 56 Womb, impurity thereof, chap, 6, 11, 20, 23 104 Wombe moist, chap, 9, 10, 19, 141, 157 Wombe, hard tumours thereof, chap, 48 56 Wombe pained, chap, 46 Women newly delivered to help, chap, 5 105 Women not sufficiently cleansed after Child-birth to help, chap, 140 Wormes to kill, chap, 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 17 19, 20, 23, 25, 29, 31, 33, 34, 39, 41, 43, 48 53, 56, 61, 64, 66, 69, 77, 80, 81, 85, 89, 90 93, 96, 98, 101, 106, 109, 111, 114, 119, 125, 130, 144, 145, 146, 148, 153, 159, 160 167 Wormes called Ascarides to kill, chap, 4 Wounds to cure, chap, 14, 23, 25, 28, 39, 54 67, 93, 144 Wounds bleeding to stop, chap, 10, 58, 75 82, 128, 135, 141, 144, 147, 156. Wounds, heat thereof, chap, 12, 134 Wounds green, chap, 3, 32, 33, 34, 39, 80, 93, 97, 109, 111, 112, 123, 142, 147, 158, 165 Wounds to incarnate, chap, 135 Wounds inward, chap, 112 Wounds of the head, chap, 6, 48, 80 Wounds to cleanse, chap. 3, 8, 31, 34, 38, 64 152
Wounds of the Testicles and Privities, chap. 3. Wounds moist, chap. 20 Wounds, dead flesh therein to take away, chap, 3, 4 See more in dead flesh, in Wounds Wounds to inlarge, chap. 33 Wounds inward to cure, chap. 10, 97, 142 Wounds to close up. Y YOuth to preserve, chap. 47.
An Alphabeticall TABLE of those Diseases for which the Compound Medicines are pre∣scribed in this TREATISE. A ABortion, or miscarrying to hinder, an Ointment: chap. 10. a Powder 64 a Plaister 64. After-birth to expel, a Potion, chap. 6 Pils 6 Ague, a drink: chap. 1, 8 Ague tertian, a Potion, chap, 35 Ague quartane, a Potion, chap, 1. a Pow∣der, 7. Pils, 55 Ague quotidian; a decoction, 16 Arthritical paines, a Powder, chap. 6. 32 a Potion, 29. 35. 93. a Poultis, 49. a Fomen∣tation; chap, 78 B BElly, winde therein, see winde in the stomach and belly Birth to bring away, Pils, chap, 6. 14 a Potion, 14, 21. a Powder, 14. 21. 25 Bladder ulcerated, a water, chap. 154 Bloud to purge, a Potion chap. 29 Bloud-vomiting, an Electuary, chap. 18 Bloud-spitting, a Potion, chap. 39. an Ele∣ctuary, 45. a Lhoch, 49 Breast to clease, a Potion, chap. 2 Breath short, a Potion, chap. 2. Pils, 4. 6. a Potion, 21. a Syrup, 11 Bruises, a Cataplasme, chap. 56. a Powder, 128 Burning to cure; an Oyntment, chap. 112 144 C CHaps of the hands and lips, an Oynt∣ment, chap. 45 Choler to purge, a Bole, chap. 2. 15 Pils, 3. a Potion, 53 Collick, an Electuary, chap. 69. 28. a Potion 44. 76. Pils, 31 Cough, Pils, chap. 6. 55. a Decoction, 24 an Electuary, 122 Courses in women overflowing, Pils, chap. 9 Courses to provoke, a Potion, chap. 6. Pils, 6 8. an Electuary, 10. a Decoction, 54. a Pessary, 93 D DEad childe to bring away, a Potion, chap. 6 Dog mad, biting thereof, a Drink, chap. 33 Dropsie, a Potion, chap. 34 41 46. a Pow∣der, 46. Pils, 17. 46. a Bole, 42. 46. 56. a Plaister, 17. Pils, 16. 55. a Potion, 16. 29 32. a Powder, 16. 56. 61 E EAres, wormes therein, chap. 37 Eares swoln; a poultis. chap. 146 Eyes red, a water, chap. 12. 21. 103. 154 Eyes, spots therein, a water, chap. 12 F
FAce, spots thereof, chap, 5. 17 Falling Sicknesse, a powder, chap. 6 Pils, 6. an Oyntment, 6. a Syrup, 11 a potion, 49. A Quilt, 140 Fig in the fundament, chap. 2 Feaver, an Epitheme, chap. 57 Fistula, chap. 2 Flegme to purge, Pils, chap. 2. a potion, 2 Flesh to produce in ulcers, an Oile, chap. 6 a Cerot, 50. a powder 48, 58 Flux of the belly, a Decoction, chap. 45. a potion, 47. 53. an Electuary, 14. 18. 19 Flux bloudy, a Glister, chap. 116 Frensie, a Fomentation, chap. 117 G GReen sicknesse, a potion, chap. 8 Gowt, a poultis, chap. 38. a Liniment, 15. a plaister, 50. a powder, 32. a Cerot, 49 H HEads of children sore, a Fomentation, chap. 153 Head-ach, chap. 21. Pils, 49 a Lini∣ment, 120. a Quilt, 132. an Epitheme, 152 Heart faint, a potion, chap. 42. 30. 74 Heart-beating, a Quilt, chap. 124 Hemorrhoides, pils, chap. 9. a poultis 144 Hickop, pils, chap. 49 Hip-gowt, see Sciatica I JAundise, a decoction, chap. 1▪ 66, 39. a Bole, 35. a potion, 13. 29. 53. 55.. a pow∣der, 19 Iliack passion, pils, chap. 17 Joynt-ach, a decoction, chap. 101 Incarnate, see flesh to procure Itch an oyntment, chap. 77. See Scab. K KIdneys hot, an emulsion, chap. 5 Knots and tumours to dissolve a Ce∣rot, chap. 4. a plaister, 9 L LEannesse to help, a Marchpane, chap. 5 Legs fretting sores thereof, chap. 11 Leprosie, a potion, chap. 29 Liver stopt, pils, 4▪ 6 Liver hor, chap. 12 Lungs to cleanse, an emulsion, chap. 5 Lust to abate, an Electuary, chap. 67 M MEasels to expel, chap. 21 Melancholy, a potion, chap. 1. 27, 29 Pils 42. a Syrup, 51. a decoction, 47 Miscarrying, see Abortion Mother-rising, pils, chap. 31. 50. a plaister: 31 N NErves to strengthen, a Lotion, chap. 118. Nodes, see Knots Nose bleeding, a poultis, chap. 18. 83. 150 P PAlsie, pils, chap. 6. 50. an oile 6. a Lini∣ment 28 Pestilence, a potion, chap. 11. 12. 64. 74 an electuary, 10. 12. a powder 12. 57. 64 Piles, see Hemorrhoides R RHeume, a potion chap. 21. an Elect. uary, 45. 150. Pils 49 Ring-wormes or Tetters, a Lotion, chap. 131 Rupture, a powder, chap. 18 S
SCab and Itch, a potion, chap, 29. a Bath 113. a water, 141 Sciatica, or Hip-gowt; Pils, chap, 4. a Plaister, 31. a Bath; 114 Scurf of the head, chap, 37 Scurvie, a Potion, chap. 29 Senses to strengthen, a Lotion, chap, 118 Side pained, a Potion, chap. 6. a Bag, 123 Sight to preserve, chap, 103. a water, 103 Sleep to procure, a Bole, chap, 49. a Lotion 86 Spleen, hardnesse thereof; a Plaister, chap, 4 a Potion, 6, 31, a Cerot, 11, a Linimen, 31, an Oyntment, 56 Stomach weak, a decoction, chap. 30. Pils 49 an Electuary, 150 Stomach pained, Pils, chap, 3. a Potion, 6 an Electuary; 62. a Quilt, 125, 150 Stone and Gravel, chap, 5. Pils, 50. a de∣coction Sweat to provoke, a Potion, chap, 56 T TErms to provoke, see Courses Temples pained, an oyntment. chap, 45 Testicles swoln, a Plaister, 31 Teeth to white, a Poult's, chap, 45. a Powder 18 Tooth ach, chap. 2. 10 144 Tumours hard to dissolve, a Cerot, chap, 4. a Plaister, 9 V VEnome, an Electuary; chap, 25. 153 Vlcers of the Privities; a water and oyntment, chap, 68 Vlcers, heat thereof; a Plaister, chap, 62 Vlcers to dry, a powder, chap, 58. a water, 1 Vomiting to stay, Pils, chap. 49 Vlcers in the mouth, a water, 97 Vrine stopt, see Stone and Gravel. Vrine sharp, an emulsion, chap. 5 W WAtery humours to purge, a drink, chap. 38 Weak to strengthen, a Jelly, chap, 19 Winde in the stomach, a decoction, chap, 1, 30. an Electuary, 69. a potion, 6, 74 a Fo∣mentation, 121. a powder, 152 Whites in women, an Electuary, 57 Wombe impure, a potion, chap. 6 Wormes, a plaister, chap. 1, 3, 4. a potion, 2, 31. a powder 19, 98 Wormes in the eare, an injction, chap, 93 Wounds, an oile, chap, 39. a water, 88 Wounds in the head, a powder, chap. 58. a Cerot, 80 Wounds hollow, a Powder, chap, 48 Wounds to dry, an oyntment, chap, 142.
