P515 E409_17 R32694 99872331 161196
THE PARLIAMENTS LETANIE, FOR The more speedy composure of Diffe¦rences, between them and the City, between the City and the Army, and between them all, and the King: That when they have ruined one another, the Royall Party may not by that meanes be Triumphant. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
The Parliaments LETANY. VVEe O Lord, have sate seven yeares, And yet done nothing as appeares, But set the Nation together by the eares, For which with teares. From driving the King away, from his own right, And arming his Subjects, against him to fight, From persecuting him with deadly spight, Libera nos. From innocent blood, as when Straford was slaine, Who died for his truth to his Soveraigne; From seeing fierce Rupert and Hopton againe, Libera nos. From forcing new Vowes, and Protestations, From unheard of Orders, and strange Declarations, From plundering  goods, or any such fashions, Libera nos. From driving the Queen again, from her dear Lord, A crime that is cursed, and damn'd by Record, From doing wrong, and maintaining by the sword, Libera nos. From sending againe, for the blew Capt Scots, That they may ayde us in all our Plots, Who came (for our goods) most Brotherly Sots, Libera nos. From contriving Stratagems, and then giving out, That bloody Varlets were bringing about To destroy us, and all ours without doubt, Libera nos.
From notorious Sacriledge, or selling the Land The Bishops enjoyed by Royall Command, From countenancing Knaves, good men to withstand, Libera nos. From defacing Churches, and pulling down Crosses, From forcing the poore to live by their losses, From Iohn Presbyters horns that Religion tosses, Libera nos. From seasing upon the Land of the Crown, And making infamous a Prince of Renown, From Covenanting to pull Mornarchy down, Libera nos. From living to see a Committee mans name, Even loathed by all men unto our great shame, From being scorched to ashes by our own flame, Libera nos. From writing in blood the Edicts we make, From forcing the Souldiers halfe pay for to take, From giving the rich and from the poore to rake, Libera nos. From being expulsed by those are our own, Who, cause Independents, most great are grown, From being clapt up in prison each one, Libera nos. From sequestring mens states unto their bare skin, From not caring who looses so our selves may win, From a pretended holinesse to cover our sin, Libera nos. From the peoples curses, that have hated our Acts, Our cunning glosses, and close compacts, And from the reward that is due to our Facts, Libera nos. From Prince Charles his fury, whom we have abus'd Aswell as his Fathe  disloyalty us'd,
From a Forraign foe, while we now are confus'd, Libera nos. From Sir Thomas and his Army, who now will purge The House of ill Members, & intends them to scourge, O now some one, help us petitions to forge, Libera nos. From our own black Consciences that still will cry, And teare us for our disloyalty, From being tormented eternally, Libera nos. From tumultuous noises our eares to fill, From Voting what the Apprentices will, From any that would not have us rule still, Libera nos. From joyning with the Common-Counsel men To oppose the Army, and raise warres agen, From Hoptons sword, and Berkenheads pen, Libera nos. From consumption of our Members, a strange disease, From Voting what the Army please, From giving account for our breach of peace, Libera nos. From imprisoning wise men, and exalting fooles, From pulling down Churches, & demolishing schools, By Votes, Ordinances, and such damnable tools, Libera nos. From His Majesties hate, that may justly lie on us, From all Christian Kings, that they fall not upon us, From those were of our part, and now are gon from us, Libera nos. From those crimes and others, more then the world knows▪ Whom we have deluded with specious showes, And so have occasioned the Kingdome's great woes, Libera nos Domine.
THat it may please thee, we now at lastThe Parl▪ that Voted a new War. May us repent of what is past, Before we to Abysse be cast, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee if be thy will, We as we wonted may sit still, The only way our bags to fill, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee we may Raigne, And still be drivers of Charles his waine, And he near hold the reines againe, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, we still may devise To foment Discords and Jealousies, And foole the people with egregious lies, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, all may comply With us, to make one Monopoly, And engrosse to our selves the Monarchy, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, we may make new Elections, And to whom we list give our Protections, And ore three Kingdoms blow our infections, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, he thats worth a groat May be made a Dilinquent by our Vote, And for compounding money sell his Coat, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, we may advance Schism, sedition, and ignorance, Its for the Kingdomes good perchance, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, we may goe on To perfect our reformation,
How else shall we ruine the Nation? Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, since 'tis so, When the Army listeth, we must goe, That they may follow after to, Quaesumus te. This it may please thee, this famous City, Who are such Coxcombs (as 'tis pitty) May buy their peace, which will make them witty, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee to blind mens eyes, That while we practise our disguize, Fooles with our words we may surprize, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, Sir Iohn Geyer Who but till this day was Lord Mayer, May live to disturbe another Faire, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee his Brethren foure, Who now are quarter'd in the Tower, May have the company of twenty more, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, the Citizens may Open their bags the Army to pay, We shall scape the better (as some say,) Quaesumus te. But O! Those that Voted the late Warre. we now must sit no more, And those whom we despised before, Are those that thrust us out of doore, O Deus bone. (Therefore may it please thee) we may no more, Trample on our Soveraign as before, But now his mercy may emplore, Quaesumus te.
That it may please thee, as Subjects now We to our Lord King Charles may bow, And him what is his own allow, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, the grievious Curse,The par∣ting of the Queene from the Kig. That's due to those that doe Divorce, A man and's wife may not plague us worse, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, we may now repent, The wrongs we did when prevalent, And also without the Kings consent, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, on our submission, Our hearty sorrow and contrition, We may have life by his permission, Quaesumus te. That it may please thee, those behind May learne to him to be more kind, Else they undoe themselves they'l find, Quaesumus te. POSCRIPT. Argumentum à Majore. Who ever knew the ruine of a Prince, But that those caus'd it, the same brunt did beare? All old Records of ancient time long since, Vnto the world doth make the same appeare; Take heed, take heed then, how you wrog the King, He cannot fall but must your ruine bring. FINIS.
