R1040 E150_8 R14786 99859733 156748
A Renowned VICTORY Obtained against the Rebels on the first day of June, neere Burros the Duke of Buckinghams Castle, by the valour of these noble and valiant Commanders. The Earle of Ormond. The Earle of Eastmeath. The Lord Don-Luce, Earle of Antrim. Sir Thomas Lucas. Sir Patricke VVymes. Sir Richard Greenvill. Colonell Iohn Barry. Captaine Armestrong. Against The Lord Mountgarret. The Lord Dunsany. The Lord Plunket. The Lord Muskro. The Lord Dunbowin with 18000. Rebels. Wherein is manifested how the Lord Don-luce tooke the Lord Dunsany prisoner, with five of the grea Commanders, which are now prisoners in the Castle at Dublin. Likewise a true Relation that the Rebels have sent a Petition to the Parliament, desiring to lay downe their Armes up∣on condition of Peace. London, Printed for I. Horton. Iune 9. 1642.
Most Admirable Newes from JRELAND. THe Rebels have conti∣nued in their blood-insisting Tyranny, not adding a Period to their inhumane cruel∣ty. But God hath look't downe from Heaven upon them, and hath dispatched them by his just indignation, giving his Servants Victory over them. Knocknemease a Castle in Jreland was taken by the Rebels, and there they kept many English Captives long time, almost famishing them, being destitute of reliefe and sustenance, but Sir Thomas Lucas and Sir Richard Greenvill re∣lieved it about sixe weekes since; and held it in possession, till of late within these 12.
dayes and lesse, the Rebels came with great Forces, and recovered it under the command of the Lord Viscount Mountgar∣ret, and the Lord Dunsany, but the next day, the Lord Livetenant Generall, the Lord Pore, and Sir Thomas Lucas, with their severall Troopes, redeemed it againe and 37. Englishmen, that the Rebels had imprisoned, but the Lord Pore, with the other, tooke 55. Rebels, which are now detained in the Castle, there have beene many other Battails fought betweene the Protestants and the Rebels, but the Protes∣tants have beene lately most part Vctori∣ous over them, the Castle of Cloughgrenan, by the Helpe of Sir Patricke Wymes, Cap∣taine Armestrong, and Sir George Wenworths Troope, under the Command of Captaine Harman was overcome, and divers of the Rebels slaine, and they tooke nine priso∣ners, which being brought before Sir Pa∣tricke Wymes, at their examination they confessed that they had taken a second co∣venant amongst themselves, and that they
had intended to depose King Charles, and would not be subiect to any Parliaments in England, neither would they submit to any authority sent by them, but that they would have a King of their owne, a native Jrishman, whom they would crowne their King, and acknowledge their Sove∣raigne, Sir Patricke seemed to be highly displeased thereat, and commanded in his passion to have them all hanged as Trai∣tors, then he put them to their Oath, and afterward committed them to the Castle, where they now remaine. The Lord Viscount Jkerin, the Lord Barron of Dunbony, with 7000. Foote and 200. Horse at the Territorie of Clanmalee∣ro, who being discovered by Cornet Ma∣grah and divers others of our Comman∣ders, who marched on with undanted courage towards them and immediately, gave them a Valley of shot, which unex∣pected greeting amazed the Rebels and strucke such terror to their frozen hearts neverthelesse they withall speed inconti∣nently
armed themselves in speedy prepa∣ration to meet us, and at the first we had a very hot skirmish, but afterwards their flame was suddenly extinguished, for the English followed close with such Magna∣nimity, and inestimable courage, that in a short time they slew seaven score, then the other fled, and they slew many in the flight, and diverse also they tooke Prisoners. Burros, the Duke of Buckinghams Castle was lately taken of the Rebels, formerly recovered by the English Army, and at the River Noare, neere unto Florence, Fitz Patricke, there lay a great Army of the Rebels, the most in number that have beene lately discovered, with Lord Viscount Mount-Garret, Lord Barron o Loghmoe, the Earle of Carr, the Lord Musgro, the Lord Leopane the Lord Dunbowin, the Astry, the Lord Dunsane, with others of the Rebels, but we being on Hopni Hill, had the great advantage of them, in our Army was the Earle of Ormond, Earle of Kildare, the Lord Brahazon, the Lord
Don-luce, Sir Patricke Wymes, Sir Thomas Lucas, Sir Richard Greenvill, with many other Noble and valiant Commanders, which with their severall forces marched against them, they likewise stood prepa∣red to give us a churlish welcome. The Rebels displayed their Banners immediately with great confidence, and came upon the English with great vio∣lence. Three great drove of Cattell the Rebels had on their left side, which they had formerly taken from the English, with an undanted Resolution both Armies met, the Ratling Drums and Trumpets, fill'd the Army with warlike Ecchoes, which added to the courage of the En∣glish, so that they flew like lightning, on the Rebels, and shooke their maine Batta∣lia, each Commander shewing such valor, wisdome, discreet care, for to assault, up∣on the least advantage, that it seem'd plea∣sant to assault, not fearefull, the Lord Don-luce obtained a wreath of Fame, which never shall wither, for he with two bare Troopes of horse attempted to recover a
Drove of Cattell that the Rebels had ta∣ken from the Inhabitants, and drove them after the Army with the luggish, which being discovered by the Lord Dusany, the Lord Muskro, and others, they immedi∣ately drew off a Squadron from the left wing, & went to intercept them, but at the first assault the Lord Dunsani horse was shot, and he dismounted, but having re∣covered another horse he charged the Lord Don-luce up to the face, betwixt whom grew a hot Combat, but in the end Dun∣saney lost his Weapon and yeelded to his mercy, so did five other Rebels that had command. These were sent to Dublin and remaine in the Castle till it b determined what shall be done to them. The Rebels sent a Petition to the Par∣liament under their owne hands with their Names subscribed, desiring to lay downe their Armes, upon condition of Peace, which Newes hath so encouraged the English, that they are in oe in a short time to bring the Rebels into Sub∣jection. FINIS.
