S2461A 36282454 150275
Mat. 2 S. V. 1. &c. F. H. Van. Hove Scuil Printed for William Freeman in Fleet Street.
THE WHOLE DUTY OF A Christian. CONTAINING All things Necessary, both as to what He is to Know, and Do, for the obtaining a HAPPY ETERNITY. To which is added, More particular Directions, How to Prepare for a Comfortable Death. If ye Know these things, Happy are ye if ye Do them, John 13.17. LONDON, Printed for W. Freeman at the Bible, over∣against the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet∣street, 1699.
TO ALL Young Persons. THE ensuing Collection was made for your Information, and Assi∣stance, in the whole course of your lives. The Design of this Preface to perswade you to be wise, to be good be∣mes, without delay; to beware of Compli∣ce with a careless Age, or depending upon late Repentance, so common and pernicious. In order to which, (1.) Set your selves with full purpose of heart  serve God, though you have very few to bear u company. Get a Spirit of Fortitude, Courage, well-grounded, undaunted Resolution to go a∣ainst the stream of corrupt Nature, Satan's Temptations, and carnal Reasoning; in a way posite and contradictory to the greatest Num∣er, who are Children of the Devil: Christ's  a little Flock Lu. 12.32.. The whole World lies in wickedness 1 Joh. 5.19.. ollow not a Multitude to do il Ex. 23.2.. Eat not of their Dain∣ties
Ps. 141.1., lest you drink of the Cup Ps. 75.4., and fall with them in to the Infernal Pit. The mo Epidemical and Infectious a D∣sease is, 'tis not the more taking or inticing, b dangerous; be you the more cautious and ci∣cumspect. Fear not the Name of Scrupulou or Precise, wherewith the Devil in his Discipl frights so many from their Duty, so eviden obvious, and convincing, that they are forc to run away from themselves to get rid of th Obligation and Conscience of it; and to impl their wit to find out Evasions for it; to smoth and stifle the Convictions of a future Recko∣ing; while their best Reason is unable to ensu their Presumption, or to give them such Ass∣rance as Men ought to have in a Case wher in to be mistaken is to be remedilesly undo Caleb (was of another Spirit) encouraged th People of God in their March, whilst all h Companions dampt their Hopes, stopt the Progress, brought an evil Report upon the Lan of Canaan. Upright-hearted Micajah, thoug he knew he should make himself ridiculous being singular, and 'twould cost him Impriso∣ment at least, to be sincere, goes against t Advice of four hundred false Prophets. Noa walked with God, when all Flesh had corrupt their ways. Lot held fast his Integrity, wh he only was found Righteous in Sodom. Th true goodness was left alone in the person of o single Eliah (as he once supposed) even then
e Pious, was to be Wise, and his Duty. Hea∣en's worth all our pains of getting thither, hough we could see none go before or after us in he way, and that every where spoken against. The Sons of God are blameless and harmless, without Rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and erverse Generation; and hold ast Christ's Name even where Satan's seat is Ph. 2.15. Rev. 3.17.. They are Fools indeed, who are contrary-minded to the Infallible determination of the ex∣press Word of God, which is able to over∣allance the Suffrages of all the World, (though ll men's minds in it were perverted;) and hall stand immoveable as a Rock in all Ages o the End of the World. Nothing that's prodi∣ally loosed on Earth in compliance with a li∣entious Generation, shall be therefore loosed in Heaven, nor the Conditions of obtaining that Happy place, easier, though most live as if hey had found out a nearer way to it than ever God revealed. Not one Iota of his Law, which makes the way narrow, and the gate strait, hall pass away, notwithstanding the looseness of he Times we live in. The Heavenly Trea∣sure abates nothing of its price, whether men hink good to give it, or whether they will for∣bear. True Wisdom hath no meaner Esteem f it self, because Folly entices, gains, and en∣ertains the multitude and grandure of the World, which neither Justifies Crimes, nor will Alle∣viate Punishment: The old World sinned to∣gether,
and were drowned together: Th wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all th Nations that forget God Ps. 9.17. Let's have but the Approbatio of a good Conscience on our side and we may well despise the Censure, and Dis∣sent of all Mankind; who will e'er long be o the same mind with us, that the saving ou Souls, and being happy for ever, is so supreamly Necessary, that nothing else, compared with it is so besides. And we need no Teacher to inform us, that we must do necessary Things; Ne∣cessity justifies the Wisdom and Honour of do∣ing all that it commands, and usually gives A∣bility to do it; making us confess Powers tha we thought not our selves to have, and to excee all our known Abilities. Is it not wiser and safer, to follow the dire∣ction of a known undoubted Friend, who is Wis∣dom, Love, and Goodness it self, as impossible t advise us ill, for our wrong or loss; to perswad us into a course of life of which we shall eve have cause to complain, or repent of, as to deny himself? or to give ones self to the Conduct o the Devil, a professed malicious Enemy to God Goodness, and the Souls of Men; and believed to be so, as universally as he is believed to b at all? Sin is his standing Counsel, recommen∣ded to the World by his Instruments. His wiles we are sure are devised for our Perdition: There¦fore to hearken to Him, is wilfully to tread in a snare, which we know is laid for our life.
Sin will everlastingly be Folly; and Per∣verseness in it Madness, in spite of Number, Custome, Fashion, or Example. Can President change the Nature of Things? Is there any Prescription against Reason? Will publick Vogue justifie, or pass? or Multitude of Voices carry it against God? force him to alter his mind? to remove the Pillars of the World? to repeal his Laws? to revoke his Threatnings? shall we follow their Example, who thwart him? contradict and endeavour to deface the Principles of their own minds, and consciences? whom all men at least tacitly condemn, even those that bruitishly and sillily are led by them? shall we make them our Guides, who have ne∣ver sincerely tried to be truly Religious? that speak evil of the things they know not? that can be so sottish as to think, they can go on in sin, and not be punished? have so little of men in them; as to live like Beasts, and to wish they may die so too? that have so bad Memo∣ries, as to forget they have Immortal Souls? and so little Reason as to think there is no God? Intirely adhere to him, without any Respect to the Eye and Esteem of the perverse, deceived World, notwithstanding the Envy and Hatred you incur thereby. The Purity and Holiness of Religion in the truly good, is by the scurrilous Reflections, and bitter Sarcasms of the profane, made contemptible; which is as foolish and ma∣licious, as if a Slave should reproach the Son of a King, for being like his Father. But oh, how
will these abject wretches be confounded (they will chuse rather to be covered under the Ruins of the World) then, to be a Spectacle of Ab∣horrence and Scorn before that Ʋniversal glori∣ous Confluence, when the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels Mark 8.38.. Sin carries with it so much Shame and Hor∣rour, that many of the Poets believed there was no Fury like the Conscience of having done Evil: To avoid the worm of which, so insupportable many have found it, as to cast themselves into the Fire that is not quenched. And the Ease the obdurate gain, by being delivered from the Remorse and Regrets, the Reproaches, and Re∣bukes of Conscience, is far over-ballanced by the Loss that cannot be divided from it; Namely, the Loss of the Joys of Innocence, and of the Sense of God's Favour, and Hopes of a happy Futurity. There's not an eminent Man among the Grecians (saith one of the Ancients) that dies an Heathen, or an Infidel, though they lived so. If there be Atheists in company, there are none in Hell, or alone. They tremble at that in private, and at Death, which they laugh at among the Jovial Crew. All sorts of men in all Ages (that have gone before us into an Eter∣nal State) of all Conditions, Perswasions, Opi∣nions, Tempers, Ages, Dispositions; upon Expe∣rience have found, that, whatsoever vain thoughts men in the Heat of their Youth, and Lust en∣tertain of Religion; when they come to leave
the World, they give Testimony unto it. They confess at last, that it had been their Prudence and Interest to be good betimes; and not to stay till Necessity or Experience force them to it. And that a strict and serious Life, is not the Hu∣mour of some conceited singular Persons; but, the opinion of all men, when they are most im∣partial, and serious. That they are wise indeed, who make hast and delay not to keep God's Com∣mandments, though they expect to save no more by it, but their Souls. Religion abridges us of nothing but sin, which is Rank poison to our Souls: and exchanges the momentary Pleasures of it, for the perpetual peace of a good Conscience. The Pleas sinners use for their vitious Lives, are all such, as any man who will be but faithfull to his own Soul, may as easily answer, as invent; and see a∣bundant Reason to be singular rather than sin∣full and careless. Ask them if they ever knew any carry the Comfort of his sins out of the World with him; and what themselves will be like to think of their doings, when they shall think them over at Death, and in Eternity. If the plea∣sures of sin for a season, be worth the venturing endless Torments; and if the number of sinners that run so great a hazard, are well satisfied in their minds, that it will moderate all their Suf∣ferings, to remember what they have enjoy'd; That Hell is not so hot, nor so lasting, as to keep them out of it; and to be preferr'd before the necessary means of their prevention,
which would bring them as near Immortal Joys as their next Heir is to their Earthly Inheri∣tance; and is the better Estate for being out of this World, which is of so uncertain, so short a continuance. Did Heaven but stand in the same account with them now, as it will when that great Gulph shall obstruct their passage, they would pursue it with such vigorous and conti∣nued Endeavours, as never proved unsuccesfull. The difficulties of Religion are insuperable only to the slothfull, the coward, the inconsiderate, who are not to be consulted with, in our Christian warfare: who have never made a thorough Trial of it, nor duely considered its Reward; who would attain the end, without the means; go to Heaven by descent, without discomposing themselves, in putting off Dispositions and Affe∣ctions incompatible to that Holy place. There is no Lion in the way to a resolved mind; and if there were, little David grappled with, and slew both a Lion and a Bear; and from thence was encouraged to enter the List with the Un∣circumcised Philistin, and overcame him. (2.) Beware of that infinite hazard of a Death-Bed-Repentance; of venturing Eternity upon your last Breath. Makè Religion your early, your continual Business, your Duty, your Obliga∣tion; which will administer a delightfull Refle∣ction on your following years, prove the truest Frugality and Improvement of Time, the greatest ease, quiet, comfort, and safety both of Life and Death. Those that now load themselves with
guilt under the delusion of Pleasure, that gives them secret disquiet while they are laying it on, treasure up shame and sorrow for the time to come, horrour and despair for a dying-hour. All men seek the Lord some time or other; only wise men betimes, while he may be found. Old Age is the Lot but of a very few, grievous and burthensome enough of it self; but disconsolate and opprest indeed, when men come to possess the Diseases, and Infirmities of it, together with the Iniquities of their Youth; bitter, if not fruitless Repentance for their mispending it. Yet Death observes not the Course of Nature, but the De∣termination of God. Boast not thy self of to Mor∣row, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth Prov. 27.1.. Possibly this day may bring forth thy Death, how then shall to Morrow bring forth thy Repentance, or make thee another Tender of this day's rejected Salvation. Every day puts a Period to many Lives, as well secured as ours, and who have had the same Reason of Hope with our selves. No man ever miscarried because his life was short, but bad: 'twas no loss to Gi∣deon, that he returned from Victory before the Sun was up Jude 8.13.: There's no dan∣ger of being wise and good too soon; but all the wisdom to be learnt in another World, comes too late to re∣medy any final miscarriage in this. We may be instantly surprized by Death, or a Disease that incapacitates us to call for Mercy in general;
much more to make our selves meet for the Inhe∣ritance of the Saints in life. Such as delay shall have more cause to repent hereafter, but less power and will: Preparati∣on for Death, which requires the whole of man in his best vigour is (oh how sad and deplora∣ble!) usually delay'd till the melancholy Even∣ing of Age, or Twilight of Death. The Trifles of this World divert them from that main Bu∣siness, to which all others should be subordinate: No man hath a lease of his life as Hezekiah had Isa. 38.5.. In Golgo∣tha are Sculls of all sorts, and sizes: We see few Hoary Heads; most Children die before their Parents. The old Cammel (saith the Arabian Proverb) carries the young Cam∣mels skin to the Market. A Thousand Blos∣soms fall to the Ground, for one Ripe fruit ga∣thered into the Basket. The Glass runs whilst we are idle. The swiftest things in the World have been staid, but the life of man; that went a Days Journey forward, while the Sun stood still Jos. 10.12, 13.; we ought therefore to be always ready, else, when we are most unready, or least think of it, our Lord may come Matt 24.44.. Righteous Abel is slain by his bloody Bro∣ther, whilst friendly talking with him in the Field Gen 4.8. Zimri, and Cozbi died in the Act of Lust Num. 25.8.; sud∣dain Death, seases upon Eglon, sitting in a Summer-Parler which he had for
himself alone Judges 3.15, &c., Sampson dies upon a Theatre, making sport, and Thousands with him, seeing it Judges 16.. Rebellious Absolon meets with his Gallows, a Tree in the Forrest, which heard not his Father's Caveat for his Life 2 Sa. 18.8, 9.: Elah slain drinking himself drunk in his Steward's House, by his Servant Zimri, who finishes his own Royalty by Fire, burning the House over his own head, and dies 1 K. 16.8, 9.18.: Job's Children give up the Ghost, eating and drinking in their Elder Brother's House: His Table became their snare Job 18.19.. In the Time of our Saviour's grea∣test Joy and Glory; when the Fashion of his Countenance was altered, and his Rayment white and glistering, Moses and Elias appear, and talk with him about his De∣cease Lu. 9.29.. Elijah walking with Elisha, is taken up into Heaven 2 Kin. 2.11., and St. Stephen, while he's preaching Jesus, and calling up∣on God Acts 7.. Moses is called a∣way whilst busie about what God had set him; bringing the Children into Ca∣naan Deut. 32.49.. John Baptist's Head is given away at a grand Festi∣val Matt. 14.6.. The Ten Virgins are summon'd at Midnight, when all was silent, and at rest Matt. 25.6.. The Rich Fool's Soul, that Night was required
of him, when he dream'd of many Years; and that nothing could prevent them but starving L. 12.16, &c.: Herod, while glutting his aspiring Humour with popular Applause, gives up the Ghost, in the Midst of his vain-glorious Harrange Acts 12.21.. Thou shalt be King over Isra∣el, and I shall be next unto thee, said true hearted Jonathan to David, not knowing he was to die in the next Battle 1 Sam. 23.17, &c.. The great Arbitrer of all things, needs not Death's usual Messenger (Sickness) to prepare his way, who can thunder the proud Emperour under his Bed. And write the great King at 3 or 4 Words into trembling Dan. 5.5, &c.: send a Fly, to fetch the Tripple-Crown before his Tri∣bunal: Make a small Scratch, or Bone, a Crum, a Hair, or the Kernel of a Grape, or Raisin, as mortal as Goliah's Spear: Un∣speak the whole World into nothing. Blow down a great Bubble, the stateliest Building with an easie Breath; undress our Souls, by unpinning one Pin. By withdrawing his Hand, take a∣way the Aiery difference between Sleep, and Death. And oh! what a sad Appearance will the Face of Death have to those that have loiter∣ed, unthriftily trifled away their Time, that never knew the worth of it until their last hour, and then have their Work to do. Eternity at
Hand, gives value to all Holines and Sense of God in spite of the World; and lessens all things else into less than nothing, and Vanity; imprints a ghastliness and horror upon wicked∣ness and sensuality. The Thirty pieces are no∣thing worth, and the Innocent Blood above all value, when Men suffer in the Agonies of Con∣science, and fears of the approaching Judge. An House-full of Silver and Gold will not buy a Man to resist God, when the Terrible Majesty appears to him: nothing is so precious then, that a man will not fling to the Bats and Moles. When the Breath is going out of the Nostrils, how precious is sincere Holiness to those that have slighted it as a thing of nought. As if the great Truths of God's Word were never true till a day or two before we die. But these things are always so rich and valuable. True Wis∣dom is always so precious, that it disdains to borrow Esteem from a Minute of Extremity. And therefore, it mostly falls out, that those who would have none of its Counsel, and despi∣sed all its Reproofs, when they come to seek it now, cannot find it, but it laughs at their Ca∣lamity, and their Misery confutes their Confi∣dence. A good Death is the natural consequence of a Holy Life; else, there's no such thing in Na∣ture, nor Grace neither, except by a Miracle of Grace. The most profligate and obdurate, can∣not but think that they must repent; and ac∣knowledge the Prudence and Safety of the Reli∣gious,
whom they contemned. They own their own folly and mistake, when it's too late to re∣medy: They desire to die the Death of the Righ∣teous, and promise to live their life too, if they recover from sickness. And if a Holy life be then looked upon necessary to be lived, it cannot be sufficient meerly to resolve it. Religion ne∣ver gave any a Dispensation to Sin, that's one thing. We have entered into a Covenant with God to forsake the Devil and all his Works. The Conditions of our Salvation, are our giving up our selves, Bodies and Souls, not a dying but a living Sacrifice unto God Rom. 12.1.. To deny ungodliness and world∣ly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World Tit. 2.11, 12.. The wicked must not only forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; return from all his wickedness that he hath committed, unto the Lord; but keep all his Sta∣tutes, and do that which is right Isa. 55.7. Ez. 18.21. And 33.14.: acquire and exercise the Ha∣bits of everlasting Grace, as well as mortifie and overcome all cor∣rupt Affections, and vitious In∣clinations. Christ gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works Tit. 2.14.. He bare our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness 1 Pet. 2.24.. And
is it reasonable that this should be wholly fru∣strate by those supposed to be redeemed by him? we dishonour, and endeavour to make void the purpose and design of his Sufferings, and Re∣demption, if we think them to be a shelter for our ungodly Living. The Gospel (the highest display of Mercy) is not a Salvation of men, in, but from Sin; and by Repentance means a Reformed course of life; and only by very si∣lent Intimations (the Tract of which is hardly discerned) leaves it possible that he should pluck some as brands out of the Fire, by giving them Repentance at last; whereas, this is now be∣come the only Repentance in use, the universal Refuge. But, the goodly price of a Death-Bed-Repentance, at which God is prized by most, even then when Religion is at the lowest, is re∣jected with Indignation, and the Everlasting State purchased by it, may be sadly called an A∣celdama, a Field of Blood. It's in vain to ask whether God cannot save a Man after a vitious life, since his own Will seems to restrain his Power; that he will not save men without a recovery to Holiness. He is Holy, Just, and True, as well as Merci∣full. The same word that informs us, He is mercifull and gracious, likewise tells us, He will by no means clear the guilty Ex. 34.6, 7.. That, if we live after the flesh, we shall die Rom. 8.13.. That He cannot lye, nor deny Himself. I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dieth, saith the Lord; wherefore turn your selves and live Ez. 18.34.; Implying, except we turn to him, his Mercy will do us no good. What Reason have we to expect it, which we have used to evil purposes, and his dishonour? that he should work Miracles for us, while we despise the means? Cause the Sun to stand still for us, because we have trifled away our day? Turn Stones into Bread, for us who have been slothful, and are ready to perish? That he should stand ready for us with that grace at last, which we have so long refused, and rejected. God is as peremptory for the Time, and Season, as for the Duty it self. There's a Time when he will not be found, nor accept our Offering. The Day of Grace, lasteth not so long as the Day of his Patience: The fruitless Fig-tree stood still in the Vineyard, uncut down, but presently withered away under that fatal Curse, Never fruit grow on thee more Matt. 21.12.. Though he will pardon the Infirmities of the sincere, yet there's a certain Period set for the return of Sinners, be∣yond which, all their Industry is ineffectual Gen. 6.3. Isa. 6.9, 10. Ez. 24.13. Rom. 11.8. Rev. 22.11.. Jerusalem neglected the day of her Visitation, and the things of her Peace were irrevocably hid from her Eyes: Esau found no place of Repentance (in his Father) though he sought it care∣fully with Tears: The foolish Virgins saw, and
were troubled, that they wanted oil, and endea∣voured after it, but too late, the door was shut, and no knocking powerfull enough for their admission. The design of the Parable of the Vineyard Matt. 20.1, &c., (so grosly abus'd) where those that went into it at the last hour, were rewarded equally with those that bore the burden and heat of the day; was to teach the Jews, that, though God had chose them first to be his People, yet at the Eleventh hour (i e. in Gospel Times, or end of the World) He would call in, accept of, and reward, the Gentiles as largely as they, not∣withstanding their repining and murmuring at this his Grace and Mercy; the Reward being to all of Grace, and not of Debt. At least it's no Advantage or Encouragement to those that are early call'd upon and ingaged, yet refuse and delay coming in, till old Age: Adjourn their serving God, to their going out of the World; for those that went in at the Eleventh hour, (a time rather to discharge than admit Servants) were not call'd before, but found standing idle, because no man had hired them. And, for the Thief upon the Cross (that hath stole away so many Souls for the Devil) it's a bare Ex∣ample, Lu. 23.33, &c. not confirm'd by any Pre∣mise: It's a fingle Example, without a paral∣lel in the whole Word of God: It's an extra∣ordinary Example, ranked among the Miracles
Christ wrought when he left the World: It's an Example impertinently alledg'd to war∣rant delay in us, who have the sound of the Gospel continually in our Ears, yet wretchedly cheat our selves of the Remedy of our miserable Condition, by adjourning the use of it to a late and uncertain Futurity, which seldom or ne∣ver succeeds well. Vain Men! to conclude an Ʋniversal Law, from one single Instance; a personal Grace and Privilege, extended to that one Person, that stood close to that Sacrifice, that was offering it self up to God; when the Conqueror was Triumphing over Principalities and Powers, and making a shew of them openly upon the Cross; Col. 2.15. and displaying the Power of the dying Mediator, to forgive Sins in his lowest Hu∣miliation. The Scriptures, that are an History of more than Five Thousand years, have but this one Instance of one accepted upon a Death-Bed-Repentance; and in that, such an extraor∣dinary Conjunction of Circumstances, as will never fall out again. No man professing Chri∣stianity, hath any Reason to expect to fare as this Thief did, till Christ come into the World, and suffer again, and that between two Thieves, and he be alive at that time and place where he suffers, and be one of the Thieves, and the good one too: exercising so many Acts of a true Repentance and lively Faith in Christ, when (probably) first preached to him; when he saw him in so despicable a state, a∣midst
insulting Infidels, under all the Infamy and Misery of a shamefull and painfull Death, and nothing to make such a greatness as he ascri∣bed to him, probable; which will never be. They dreadfully mistake themselves, that crowd up Repentance into so narrow a Room, as a Sick-Bed, when men have scarce time to reckon up all the particular Duties that make it up. That imagine the Tree that hath been al∣ways Barren, should bring forth good Fruit now it is a cutting down: That a man should live a life of Holiness, when he is just a dying: That a weak infirm Person, of disabled, disturbed fa∣culties, should build that in Three days, which others, notwithstanding all their Abilities and Diligence, find hard enough to do in Forty years: That those who have had the knowledge of God, and been call'd upon all their lives, to give up themselves to him, should be accepted when they pour out to him, instead of the gene∣rous Spirits of life, the Lees and Dregs of it. When the Blood cools in the Veins, and the Spi∣rits are ready to stand still, the Season of the Pleasures of Sin are over, and a man is no lon∣ger to live where they are; to cast himself up∣on Religion, when there's nothing else to vie with it, when all things else fail: That he must take us in at Night, though he hath in vain stretched out his hand to us all the day long. As if this state were prepared only for a Stage for Men to act their Vices and Exorbitances upon, and then God should remove them to Heaven, that have but just begun to acknowledge him by
some weak Devotion extorted even out of Neces∣sity, and given the Bulk of their Time to Sin: That have sacrificed the Male of their Flock to Lust, and even with impious Designs, kept the corrupt thing for him. That the easie Yoak, the light Burden, which cost the Son of God his life to obtain Heaven upon, an intolerable Load, and to be had on easier Terms. That God should have only the faint and feeble Services of our last Hour, for his Mercies vouchsafed to us all our Days. That he should accept of such a Commutation for the Obedience due to him, as a Death-Bed-Repentance, a few Sighs and Groans, Tears, Promises, Scatterings of Devotion, in ex∣change for all our Duties, sufficient to expiate a whole life of Impiety; with a Breath to retract all the dishonour we have done him in it. As if he had made us to take the delights he most ab∣hors, and after all to give us such a stupendious Reward. From the Word of God Men have no Promise to warrant such a Confidence; if they have, let them shew it; if they have not, they must thank (or rather condemn) them∣selves, for bringing themselves into a Condition without the Covenant, without a promise, hope∣less, and miserable. And oh! how miserabl must he needs be, that lies upon the brink of E∣ternity, incountering the throws and horrors o an imminent Dissolution, the doubts of what wi become of him in another World, the fears o Hell, the uproars of a guilty Conscience; whom God hath left to the Boiling Sea of his own Ter∣rors, and thrown him out no Anchor of Hope?
THE Whole Duty OF A CHRISTIAN, &c. Of the Scriptures. THE Scriptures contain a Conti∣nued History of the Church, from the beginning to the end of the World; and all things necessa∣ry to be known, believed, and ractised: for Moses and the Prophets deli∣ered whatsoever God requi∣ed them, Deu. 4.2 Mal. 4.4. and Christ made nown the last and full Will f his Father Mat. 28.20. John. 14.26. & 15.15. to his Apostles, who faithfully delivered what hey received of Him. Act. 20.27. 1 Joh. 1.3. As to he substance of it, 'twas ever he same; The Apostles saying
none other things, than thos which the Prophets and Mos did say should come. Act. 26.22, An a woe is denounced against thos that shall add to, or take awa from it. Gal. 1.8.9. Rev. 22.18.19. Their Divine Authority appears, from thei wonderful preservation; the Testimony an constancy of Believers in all Ages; th Heavenliness and Efficacy of the Matter  the simplicity, sincerity, and agreement  the Pen men; Miracles wrought to co∣firm them; their Antiquity (being muc Antienter than any other writing;) th malice of the Devil, and wicked men a∣gainst them; together with the testimon of the Spirit in the Hearts of the Faithful. At first Moral duties to God and Ma were Engraven on Mens Hear Rom. 2.14.15. and other things carried dow by faithful tradition. But whe Men were much multiplied, the lives shortened, and greatly degenerated that the Divine Will might be an Infallib standard of true Doctrine, and preserv'd u corrupt to the end of the World, it was co∣mited to writing, by God hi∣self, Ex. 31.18. by Moses at Gods co∣mand, Ex. 34.27. by Holy men, who he stirred up and inspired 2 Pet. 1.21. o after another according to the necessity
he times, by degrees, so much in all Ages s was sufficient, until the whole Canon was nished. The Old Testament is divided into Moses or the Law) and the Prophets Mat. 7.12. Luke 16.29. and 24.27. because penned by them, nd delivered to the Church of e Jews. The New Testament as writ by the Evangelists and Apostles: e Originals kept in the Churches they lanted, and compos'd into one Volume (as  suppos'd) by St. John, the last of the Apo∣les; as the Old Testament, by Ezra, Nehe∣iah, Malachi, the last of the Prophets. They were writ in Hebrew, the mother nguage of the Jews; and Greek the most ommon language of the Gentiles. And as e first Edition, so after-Translations ought  be in the vulgar Tongue, to be under∣ood, and read of all, who are to Live, and e Judged by them. They were written for our Learning and Comfort, Ro. 15.4. to be a Lamp nto our Feet, and a light unto ur Paths, Ps. 119.105. to give wisdom nd understanding to the sim∣le Ps. 19.7. are profitable for Do∣trine, for reproof, for corre∣tion, for instruction in Righteous∣ess. 2 Tim. 3.16. Ignorance of them is he mother of error, not of de∣votion
Mat. 22.29. hid only to those th are lost. 2 Cor. 4.3. We are the fore to give attention to rea∣ing, 1 Tim. 4.13. to search the Scripture Joh. 5.39. to have them dwell rich in us in all knowledge, Col. 3.16. delight and meditate in the day and night, Psal. 1.2. such as  are commended, Act. 17, 11. 2 Tim. 3.15. 2 Pet. 1.19. and bl∣sed is he that readeth, and  that heareth the words of t Prophesie. Reve. 1.3. Of God. THat he is, appears from the wond of Creation and Providence, the H∣mony, and regular order of the World, ∣cay and corruption of things in it, the ∣veral vicissitudes of Night and Day, Summ and Winter; the production, natural A∣ons, agreement, and Instinct of Irration Creatures, the unanimous consent of Natio the practice of Satan, the admirable cont∣vance and offices of the Body, the hopes a fears, troubles and peace of the Soul, in t we are not satisfied with the knowledge a possession of any thing below; but are  thirsting after something, the knowledge a enjoyment of which gives satisfaction.
God is a Spirit, Omniscient, Omnipre∣nt, alone in, of, and to himself; Self-suf∣cient, All-sufficient, Invisible, Omnipo∣ent, Incomprehensible, Unchangeable, Eter∣al, Infinite in Glory, Blessedness, Wise∣ome, Power, Holiness, Mercy, Justice, oodness, and Truth: having most Sove∣ign Dominion over us, and to whom is ue the obedience of all his Creatures. Many things are spoken of him and ascri∣ed to him in Condescention to our weak apacities, after the manner of men, but ust be understood according to the nature f God. As, by his Eye is meant his knowldge, watchful providence, Favour. By the Apple of is Eye, that which is dear unto him. By his rm, Power and Strength. By stretching out his and, putting forth his Power to help or de∣roy. By his being weary, that he cannot en∣ure Sin. By sleep, his silence, forbearing to elp or punish. By his being a Rock, &c. his rotection, &c. His Attributes are several representati∣ns of that one perfection which is himself. nd are either Incommunicable, such as can∣ot be given to any Creature; as Omni∣esent, Omniscient, &c. or Communicable. cause some parts or resemblances of them e found in his Creatures, as Wisedom, oodness, Mercy, &c.
Of the Trinity. THe Trinity is one God in three distin persons, or three persons in the Go head, yet but one God; none before, n greater than another: They are not three s∣veral substances, but three distinct sub stences; or three divers manner of being of one and the same substance, and Divi Essence. Consider the Divine Essence, as t Fountain and Principle, (not as the Caus of the Deity, so it is the first person; con∣der it as begotten of the Father, so it is t second person; consider it as breathed for or proceeding from the Father and the S so it is the third person: begetting and p∣ceeding, respects not the Divine Natu but Person. the Divine Nature of the Go head, is not begotten, doth not proceed but the Divine person of the Son is beg∣ten, and the Divine Person of the Ho Ghost proceedeth. These Three are  One in Nature, Essence, Will, Conse Virtue; what the One doth, the Other do also. Yet, how in that most simple sin Essence there be several subsistences of Perso truly subsisting three in one, and one in th differing, but not divided; several, yet t same; all one for their Nature, all distin for their Persons, is a Mystery rather Reve ently
to be believed and adored, than Curi∣ously searched into. Of the Creation. GOD in the Beginning of Time, by the Word of his Power, in Six Dayes made all things of nothing, for himself, and ll very good. He made the First Day, Hea∣ven, and Light. The Second, The Firmaments. The Third, Earth, Grass, Plants, and Trees. The Fourth, Sun, Moon, and Stars. The Fifth, Fish, and Fowl. The Sixth, Beasts, Creeping Things, and Man. Thus in three Dayes the Parts or Body of the World was gradually laid: As, The First Day, He made he Highest Heavens, and came down so low s Light. The Second, lower, The Firma∣ments, and the Ayr. The Third, lowest of All, He separates Earth and Water. In three Dayes more, and in the same order, they are finished: For, on the Fourth Day, The Heavens which were made the First Day, are decked with Sun, Moon and Stars. The Fifth Day, the Firmaments which were made the Second Day, are fill'd with Fish and Fowl. The Sixth Day, the Earth which was made the Third Day, is Replenished with Beasts and Man. He provided for his Irrational and Rational Creatures, Habitations and Food, before he made them: fills the Earth with
plants and nourishment, before he brough them into it; abundantly furnished with a things for necessity and delight. He first produced a Rude undigested formless Mass; and out of it drew the  Elements, by fetching one contrary out o another; as Light out of Darkness; Th Firmament out of Emptiness; dry Earth out of Water. Then the compounded Bo dies out of the same Elements. At first the confused Heap: Then things without Life, as Light, Firmament, dry Land, Seas Then things that had Life but no Sense, a Grass, Herbs, Trees: Then things tha had Life and Sense, but no Reason, as Fow Fish, Birds, Beasts, Creeping Things: last∣ly, those that had Life, Sense, and Reason as Man, the Perfection and Compendium of all. In simple Bodies, he began with th most perfect, but in mixt Bodies, with things more Imperfect. Of Providence. PROVIDENCE is the constant Influence of the Divine Being upon the who Creation, preserving and upholding the se∣veral Beings and Faculties of all his Crea∣tures; perpetuating their several kinds b a continual Succession; providing the agreeable Provision; permitting, directing
and governing their several Motions, and Actions, to the great end of his own Glory, and other ends of their Creation, subordi∣ate to that End. It reaches to Insensible Ps. 135.7. and 147.18. and 148.8. Mat. 6.30. and Irrational Creatures Psal. 36.6. and 104.21, 27. and 147.9. Mat. 10.29. s more concern'd for Man, for whom next to his own Glory, e made all things Gen. 1.28. Re∣gards, Manages, and over-rules all things in the World Psa. 97.1. and 103.19 Ec. 5.8. Dan. 4.35. nd all the Actions of men in t, whether Natural Act. 17.28. Casual Exod. 21.12.13. 1 Sam. 9.16 and 14.42.2 Ch. 8.33. Ps. 16.33. and 18.18. Joh. 1.7. Act. 1.26, Good Ezr. 7.27. Jo. 15.15. or Evil 2 Ch. 10.15. Ez. 14. 2 Th. 2.11. Of the Angels. ANGELS are Intellectual Spirits, cre∣ated by God, good, but utable Job 4.18 the first day Job. 38.7. o do his pleasure. The good Angels are secur'd from falling y Gods unchangeable Decree, nd Christ their Head. 1 Tim. 5, 21. Col. 1.20. Eph. 3.15. They ave degrees and orders a∣ong them, Col. 1.16. readily execute e Will of God, especially in
praising of him, and attend∣ing upon his Servants. Ps. 91.11.12. Mat. 18.10. Heb. 1.14. The Evil Angels were, and continued good (it's suppos'd) until the seventh day. Ge. 1.31. I their fall they had a Ring leader, call'd the Devil, Satan, the grea Dragon, the old Serpent, Belzebub, th Prince of Devils. Ever since their fall they have been Enemies to all Good, and promote of all Evil. Their malice is a gainst all mankind, especially those that are most like God Ge. 3.15. Joh. 1.6. &c. Zac. 3.1. Re. 12.10.17. their power is limited by him 1 Ki 22.22. Job 1.12. and 2.6. Mat. 8.31. greater over the wic∣ed than the good. Ma. 12.29. 2 Tim. 2.26. 1 Joh. 4.4. The present punishment is, loss  Heaven, which they see other enjoy; utter despair of eve being happy; fearful expecta∣tion of the dregs of Gods wra for ever, which shall co∣pleat it. Mat. 8.29. and 25.4. 2 Pet. 2.4.
Of Man by Creation. MAn was made, 1. With Deliberation, Consultation, and Advice of the Blessed Trinity, Ge. 1.26. by God the Father Job 10.8. Psal. 100.3. Son Col. 1.16. and Holy-Ghost, Job 33.4. none ought to be proud of their Comli∣ness, or despise others for their defects, or dissatisfied with their own, all are Gods workmanship. 2. The last work of the last Day; as a Compendium of the whole, and for whom he found the World furnished to his Hand. But hath no reason to boast of his Antiqui∣ty, the meanest Creature was made before him. 3. Out of Paradise: shewing, he had it not by Birth-right, as his natural posses∣sion; his Country is elsewhere; God did him no wrong to dispossess him when he sinned; A Land-lord turns out his Tenant that pays not his Rent. 4. Of Dust, or Red-Earth, shewing, 1. Gods absolute Au∣thority and Soveraignty, as the Potter over the Clay. Ro. 9.21. 2. Our worth∣lessness, and fitness to be re∣jected; who regards a Clod of Earth? 3. The groundless nature of Pride; considering the meanness and base∣ness of our original; we're made of that up∣on
which every Creature may set his Foot, and lay his dung: which we should always remember, especially in our Addresses to our Maker. Behold now I have taken upon me to speak, who am but Dust and Ashes. Gen. 18.27. 4. Our frailty and mor∣tality: Dust, in our original, nourishment, motion, dissolu∣tion. Job 4.19. 5. The power, and Wisdom of our Creator, who made such a Curious piece out of such indisposed, mean materials. The Woman was made of Man; so of the same dust, mould, and model, of a reasonable immortal Soul, stampt with the same Image of God. In the same Spiritual Condition. Subject to the same Lord, Bound to the same Law. Capable of the same Felicity, and by Sin liable to the same Punishment. The Happiness of his Estate consisted in his Being. 1. Made after the Image and like∣ness of God, in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness: Enjoying uninterrupted Peace and Communion with him. 2. In Pa∣radise; a Place of God's own planting: So delightfull, as, is set out by it not only the pleasantest; goodliest places on Earth, (tho' the whole Earth was Garden-like, in Com∣parison of what it is now Gen. 13.10. Isa. 51.3. but Heaven it self Luc. 23.43. Rev. 2.7. 3. Made Ru∣ler
over all the Creatures Gen. 1.26. Psal. 8.6. who submitted to him, to be Gover∣ned and Ruled by him at his pleasure Ge. 2.19, 20.. In this Estate God Entered with him into a Covenant of Works; i. e. God's gracious A∣greement with Adam (as the Head of) and all his Posterity, to give them Eternal Life and Happiness upon Condition of Perso∣nal, Perfect, Perpetual Obedience; by that strength wherewith God had endowed Him in his Creation, to which he left him. This Covenant was (1) an Act of Conde∣scension, Grace and Favour; not of Debt, for God as Creator might have dealt with him only in a way of Soveraignty, and re∣quired obedience, without promising a Re∣ward, which Adam could not have expected by perfect obedience, having but done his Duty, 2. an Agreement with him, that he should obey the Moral Law written in his Heart, which was the general Rule of his obedience, and the positive Law, of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shalt not Eat, which was the special Trial of it, (3.) with all his posterity; which appears, from the miserable Event of Adam's breaking this Covenant, both as to the guilt, filth, and punishment. Psal. 51.5. John 3.5, &c. Rom. 5.12, &c. 1 Cor. 15.21, &c. Eph. 2.3. And by God's usual way or course in all other Covenants, i. e. To
take in Head and Members Root and Branch; The second Adam and his Posterity. Gen. 3.15. No ah, Gen. 9.9. Abraham, Gen. 17.7, 8. David 2 Sam. 7.16. Israel. Isa. 59.21. Acts 2.39. Their Seed, and their Seeds seed. 4. To give them Eternal Life; or the con∣tinuance of them in that good Estate; under the Threatning of Death for Disobedience was promised Life for Obe∣dience; assured and confirmed by the Tre of Life. The Tree of Knowledge was so called, no from the Nature of the Tree, but fault of Eating; In respect of 1 God's Command. Things are therefore Good or Evil, because he allows, or forbids them. 2. The Event o Eating. Thereby he should experimentally know, to his sorrow, Good by the loss of it; and Evil, by the feeling of it. Eating of it self, was not Morally or Intrinsecally Evil; only in respect of God's prohibition, which was for 1. Clearer Discovery of his Absolute Soveraignty over Man, and Trial of his Obedience and Subjection: Whether he would obey, meerly because God com∣manded; 2. Greater Aggravation of Man's Sin; if he should offend in so small a matter; so easie to be obey'd; Especially, having Li∣berty to Eat of all the Trees else: So direct∣ly against God's Authority, by doing that
which was to be forborn, meerly because He had forbidden it. Of the Fall of Man. OUR First Parents being left to the free∣dom of their own Will, through the Temptation of Satan, Sinned in Eating the Forbidden Fruit. And thereby, lost their In∣nocency, Paradise, Communion with, and the Favour of God; brought a Curse upon the Earth; became Slaves of Satan; lay un∣der the Curse of the Law; Died the same day they sinned: In their 1. Souls; Dead spiritual∣ly to all good. 2. Bodies; In Respect of the Desert, guilt, sentence, and inevitable Neces∣sity of Dying, Contracted: Dead in Law, as a Condemned man is, before Execution. They then became Mortal: Dissolving by degrees: Liable to the Symptoms, and Har∣bingers of Death. 3. Bodies and Souls; be∣ing then under the Arrest of God's Justice, Wrath, and Curse; liable to Eternal Death, the Wages of Sin Rom. 6.23.. The Hainousness of the Sin, appears, by con∣fidering, 1. The Person that sinned, Adam, an Innocent, Happy, Publick Person. 2. A∣gainst whom, the great Creator and Sove∣raign of all the World. 3. The Time when, the same Day (as supposed) He was crea∣ted,
and commanded. 4. The Place where; in Paradise, where God familiarly conversed, and entered into Covenant with him; where no Sin, Sorrow, or Want was. 5. The Pe∣nalty threatned upon the Breach, and the Promise implied. 6. The great Ease and Fa∣cility of keeping it. In it was, Incredulity, Diffidence, Pride, Ambition, vain Curiosity, Ingratitude, Idolatry, Contempt of God's Word and Soveraignty, Rebellion, Murther, Intemperance, Theft, Discontent with their present Condition, assenting to false Witness, unworthy Accusations against God; the Transgression of the whole Law of Nature. Adam being the Root, Representative, and Head of all Mankind (being in his loins,) the Guilt, Corruption, and Defilement of this Sin, is imputed and convey'd to all his Poste∣rity, descending from him by ordinary ge∣neration; and is called Original Sin, because, 1. We have it from our first Parents the Original of all Mankind. 2. 'Tis in us from our Original, as soon as we have a Being. 3. 'Tis the Original of all other Sins. Of Man's Recovery. ALL Mankind being fallen into an E∣state of Sin and Misery by the Breach of the First Covenant, and unable to help themselves; God out of his meer Love,
Mercy, and Compassion, for recovering and restoring us to his Favour, makes another Co∣venant with us through a Mediator; where∣in he promises us Grace, Glory, and all good things; and obliges us to Repentance, and Faith. 1. Repentance, i. e. A sincere Sorrow for, and forsaking of all our Sins. Or, a thorough Change of our Mind, and Pur∣pose of Heart and Life, from Evil to Good. 2. Faith, i. e. Such an unfeigned Belief of all that God hath revealed, as engages us to a sincere Endeavour to do all that he hath commanded. Firmly to rely on all his Pro∣mises, and faithfully to obey all his Com∣mands. Or, an Acceptance of our Media∣tor as he is offered unto us in the Gospel, as our Priest, Prophet, and King: not only to Satisfie, and Intercede with God, but to Teach and Guide, Rule and Govern us. This Mediator is the Second Person in the Trinity: who being true God, became true Man, by taking upon him our Nature: God and Man united in One Person: That so, having Interest in both, he might be a a fit Mediator, or middle Person, to recon∣cile and bring together God to Man, and Man to God, whom Sin had separated. The God-head did not assume a Humane Person; for then only the Person h assumed had been the better for it. But the Divine Per∣son assumed to himself the Humane Nature.
So that the Manhood subsists in the God∣head; and they are so inseparably united, that the same Person which is God, is also Man. Thus, as God, he is Eternal; born in Time, as Man: Creator, as God; a Crea∣ture, as Man: Invisible, as God; visible, as Man: Immortal, as God: Died, as Man. Had he not been God and Man in One Person the Sufferings of his Humane Nature, could not have derived that Infinite Value and Merit from the Divine; nor his Bloud been called, the Bloud of God Acts 20.28. i. e. It was the Bloud of that Man that was God. He was 1. God, That he might bear the Wrath of God without sinking under it. Give Worth and Efficacy to his Sufferings, Obedience and Intercession. Satisfie Divine Justice. Pur∣chase his Favour, and Eternal Happiness for his People. Overcome Death and the De∣vil. Be the Head of his Church. Recom∣mend Infinite Love in the Abasement of himself for us. 2. Man, that he might obey, suffer, and intercede for us in our Nature; have a fellow-feeling of our Temptations, Passions, Infirmities; that we might have Ac∣cess to the Throne of Grace, and receive the Adoption of Sons. As Creatures, we were bound to the Pre∣cepts of the Law, which we had broken▪ and were (without strength) unable to per∣form:
And as Transgressors, under, (liable to) the Curse of the Law, the Wrath of God, which we were unable to bear. Christ by his Active and Passive Obedience (of In∣finite Merit) fulfilled all Righteousness, pur∣chased for us Pardon, Grace, and Eternal Life, satisfied Divine Justice, paid our Debt, wrought out our Redemption, procur'd our Liberty, by giving a satisfactory Ransome to the Justice of God for our Life and Deli∣verance, from the Captivity of Sin, Satan, and Death; according to the Covenant made between the Father and Him from Eternity. Of the Sacraments. THE Two standing Sacraments of the Church of God of Old were Circum∣cision, and the Passover. Under the Go∣spel, we have Baptism, and the Lord's Sup∣per: wherein by visible signs, the Benefits of the New Covenant in Christ's Bloud is re∣presented, sealed and applied to those that are within the Covenant, who partake of them as Pledges of his Love; and profess themselves thereby bound to all thankfull Obedience. Baptism confirms and signifies, 1. Our publick Initiation, Entrance, or Admission into the visible Church and Covenant of
Grace; distinguishing us from those out of it. 2. Our being sprinkled, washed and cleansed by the Bloud and Spirit of Christ from the guilt and filth of Sin: our Dying to it, and rising again unto Righteousness. 3. Our having taken upon us the Badge and Livery of our Christian Profession: That we have listed our selves as Soldiers to fight under Christ's Banner, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; which we have hereby renounced; and resigned up our selves to Him and his Government, to be∣come his faithfull Subjects and Servants un∣to our lives End. By the Minister's baptizing us In, (or into, or unto) the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; is meant, his doing it by the Au∣thority and Command of the Three Per∣sons in the Divine Essence; to be in and by this Rite publickly consigned, devoted, or consecrated unto the Faith, Profession, and Obedience of Them; or separated unto their Service. We ought to improve our Baptism in the whole Course of our Lives (especially, in the Time of Temptation, and when we see others baptized) by frequent Consideration of the Nature, Use, and Ends of it: Insti∣tution, Priviledges, and Benefits sealed by it; and our solemn Vow and Engagement made therein. Endeavouring to live in new∣ness
of Life, and brotherly Love, as those that have given up their Names unto Christ, and been baptized by the same Spirit into one Body. The Lord's Supper. Of that, afterwards. The Apostle's Creed. SO called, either because, 1. Made by the Twelve Apostles; every one an Article, and the whole approved of by all of them before they separated themselves to Preach the Gospel. Or 2. Agreeable to, and a Sum∣mary of their Writings, and collected out of them. Article I. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Ma∣ker of Heaven and Earth. I Believe in one Eternal most glorious Being; infinite in all Perfections: The Fountain, Soveraign, and Disposer, Creator, Sustainer, and Gover∣nor of Heaven and Earth, and all things therein. II. And in Jesus Christ, The Second Person of the Trinity; Called, 1. Jesus, which sig∣nifies a Saviour, or Salvation; because he saves his People from the guilt, defilement, dominion, and punishment of their Sins. 2. Christ, which signifies Anointed, as of
old were Priests, Prophets, and Kings, when consecrated for those Offices, which he took upon him, was Anointed, set apart unto, fully furnished with all Authority and Abi∣lity. As a Prophet, he made known all things necessary for our Salvation by his Word and Spirit. As a Priest, he offered up himself a Sacrifice for our Sins, and makes continual Intercession for us. As a King, he governs, provides for, rewards his People, reduces them to his obedience, rules in them by his Spirit, restrains, subdues, or destroys their Enemies. Jesus is a Hebrew; Christ a Greek or Gentile Name or Appellation: which Names he obtained by becoming the Saviou of both, i. e. the whole World. Jesus, point out and imports his Mediatorship; Christ, his Offices: Jesus, that he became our Saviour Christ, which way; i. e. by being our Priest Prophet, and King. His only Son, By Eternal inconceivable Generation. Begotten of the Father before all Time. Our Lord, By Right of Creation, Prese∣vation, Dominion, Purchase, Redemption, and particular Covenant. III. Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost Born of the Virgin Mary. I believe, that H came down from Heaven, and was by th Power of the Holy Ghost, after a wonder∣full
manner, conceived and made Man, in the Sanctified Womb of a Virgin, and born of her; so (being not begotten of the cor∣rupted finfull Seed of Adam) free from Ori∣ginal Sin; and as foretold, he Seed of the Woman Gen. 3.15., of the Tribe of Judah Heb. 9.14., of the House and Family of David Luc. 1. 27.. IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried. He endured many Bit∣ter Things in the whole Course of his Life; but the Weight and Extremity of his Suf∣ferings, were immediately before, and by his Crucifixion, a painfull, shamefull, accur∣sed Death; to which he was adjudged by Pontius Pilate, Governour of Judea under he Roman Emperour (Tiberius) to whom he Jews were then subject. He died, to edeem and ransome, satisfie and make a∣onement for us, to take away Sin the sting nd fear of Death; to take from us upon himself, the Curse of the Law, to confirm he Testament or Covenant of Grace; for where a Testament is, there must also of ne∣cessity be the Death of the Testator Heb. 9.16. He was Bury'd, s prefigured and foretold Ps. 16.9, 10. Isa. 53.9. Matt. 12.40. o sanctifie our Burial; to weeten, and perfume the
Grave to us; that in the strong Holds and Fortress of Death, He might overcome and loose the Sor∣rows and Bonds of Death Acts 2.24. 1 Cor. 15.55. &c. V. He Descended into Hell, the third Day h Arose again from the Dead, Christ so humbled Himself, that he was deprived of his Natural Life; in the Estate of the Dead, and under the Power of Death for Three Days; that it might appear he was truly Dead; but no longer that his Body might not se Corruption Matt. 12.40. & 17.23. John 2.19. Acts 2.31.. He arose (the third Day, being the First Day of the Week) for our Justi∣fication, and quickening i Grace, as our Head, as a Pledge and Means of our Resurrection; as an Evidence Divine Justice was fully satisfied, the De paid, in that the Judge released him out o Prison. VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth on the Right Hand of God, the Father Almighty, Having continued upon Earth forty Day after his Resurrection, to assure his Disciple of it, and instruct them in all things per∣taining to their Preaching the Gospel Having finished his Work on Earth; over
come, and Triumphed over His and our Enemies; Before many Witnesses he was isibly taken up into Heaven; where, in ur Nature, and as our Head, he is Advan∣ed by the Father, to the Height of all Majesty, Power, Dominion, Honour, Dig∣ity and Glory; next unto Himself: Ha∣ing Authority to Rule as King over all ings in Heaven and Earth: making Con∣nual Intercession for us, that for his Ple∣ary Satisfaction, all his Members, Persons nd Services may be accepted of God, who eing the Father Almighty, is both Willing, nd Able to grant the same. VII. From Thence He shall Come to Judge the ick and the Dead. At the last Day, He all Descend from Heaven, in great Power d Glory: when He shall sit upon his hrone, and all then alive and that Dyed efore, shall be summon'd and stand before im, and be Judged by the Law of Nature, d Covenant of Grace. When Sentence all be pronounced, of Absolution to the ghteous first, then of Con∣mnation upon the Wick∣ Mat. 25.41, &c.. VIII. I Believe in the Holy Ghost, Or, Holy irit, who proceedeth, or is as it were eathed forth from the Father and the
Son. Who Inspired the Prophets, and Ap stles; works in us, and assists us in th which is good. IX. The Holy Catholick Church, the Communi of Saints.] I Believe, that Christ hath a S∣ctified People, Dispersed through, and ∣parated from the Rest of the World: styl the Catholick (General or Universal) Chur Called out of an Estate of Sin and Mise into an Estate of Grace and Salvation; a Engaged to Holiness in Heart and Lif Being that Body whereof Christ is t Head; Militant on Earth, Triumphant Heaven. X. The Forgiveness of Sins.] I believe the is Pardon to be obtained; Reconciliati to an offended God, and Satisfaction ma to a Just God; a Discharge from the G of all Sin, Acquittance from the Challe of the Law, and Constituting us Righted before God, through the Undertaking a Merits of our Redeemer, for all who R∣pent, forsake their Sins, Believe in him, a thankfully subject themselves to all the P∣cepts of the Gospel. XI. The Resurrection of the Body.] I Belie that at the Day of Judgment there sh be a general Resurrection, both of the J
d Unjust. Their Bodies raised up, and united to their Souls. (1.) The Just the Spirit of Christ, and by virtue of Resurrection, their Union with him as eir Head, and as their Merciful Saviour d Redeemer. Their Bodies shall be rai∣ Spiritual, Incorruptible, and like unto  Glorious Body out of their Beds of st, with great Joy and Triumph, to be own'd with Everlasting Glory; and shall ne as the Sun in the Firmament. (2.) The dies of the Wicked, shall be raised in disho∣ur, by him as an offended Judge; and all come forth as out of their Prisons, th great Fear and Trembling, Horrour, d Astonishment; as so many Malefactors  Execution; as so many ugly loathsom rcasses to look upon: Their Faces ga∣ering Blackness and Darkness. They shall ise to Everlasting Shame and Confusion of ce, as well as to Everlasting Condemnation d Torment. XII. And the Life Everlasting.] I Believe there a future State after this Life, of Endless appiness or Misery, according to mens oce here of Good or Evil; Life or Death; hich God hath set before them; either to turn and live, or go on and perish ever∣stingly.
Amen.] I thereby acknowledge and ∣fess stedfastly to believe the undoub Truth and Certainty of this Creed in ∣neral, and of every Article thereof in ∣ticular; and to live answerable to this ∣lief. The Ten Commandments. THey are a perfect Platform, Summa or Abridgement of the Law of Nat or Moral Law, at first writ on Man's Hea expounded by the Prophets and Apost and are divided into Two Tables, The (1) ∣spects our Duty immediately to God; wh to be worshipped for the true God; in w manner; how we are to use, and hon his Name; the set Time of his publick W∣ship. The Summ of this Table is, Thou sh love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,  with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. I (2) respects our neighbour, his Honour a Dignity, Life, Chastity, Wealth, good Na Propriety. The Summ of this is, Thou sh love thy Neighbour as thy self; or, whatsoe you would that Men should do you, do you e ven so to them; this is the Law and the ∣phets Matt. 7.12. and 22, 37, 39.. For understanding Them, we must ∣serve, (1) The Law is Spiritual; read
the Powers of the Soul, as well as Acti∣on of the Body. (2) Where any Duty is manded, the contrary Sin is forbidden;  where any Sin is forbidden, the contra∣ Duty is commanded. 93.) In all Duties manded, and Sins forbdden, all of the e kind, together with all the Causes, ans, Occasions, Appearances, Provocati∣ thereunto, are also commanded and for∣en. (4) What's forbidden and com∣ded our selves, we ought to endeavour ay be avoided and eprformed by others. [Thou] is used in every PRecept; shew∣ [God speaks to All, and to all alike; to y one in particular, as if he named him Name. he Preface contains the Reasons of our ing them. s, 1. His Surpeam Soveraignty over [I am the Lord] so we owe him all dience as we are his Creatures and Sub∣ His Interest and Propreity inus, [Thy ] particular Engagern ent, and En∣ment. In such a manner as to none rs; by taking us into (Covenant, a al Relationto himvelf. His redeeming and delivering us out hraldom, [Which brought thee out of nd of Egypt.] A Place h of Servitude.  by how much Sin is worse than Suf∣fering;
the Devil and his Angels power a∣malice surpasses Pharaoh's, and his Ta masters; everlasting Troments in Hell, ∣ceed Temproal pains in the Brick-kill F∣nace; so much our Deliverance exceeds the which was a Type and faint shadow of th And therefore we being delivered ut of Hands of our Enemies, must serve him w out fear, in Holiness and Righteousness be him all the Days of our Life. Commandment I. THE First Commandment, require That we have the only true God, a none other, for our God; and that  worship, and glorifie hima ccordingly. T we acquaint our selves with him; th frequently of him; love and highly Este him; delight, rest satisfied in him; o∣mit all unto him; trust, and depend u him; place our whole Happiness in  looking upon all things as nothing w out him; honour and adore, fear and verence him; yield all Praises and Tha Obedience and Submission unto him;  and acnoweldge him; be zealous for h walk humbly with him; be carefull in things to please him; and sorrowfull w in any thing, he is by our selves, or oth offended.
II. The Second, forbids us worshipping, or gi∣ving any Religious Adoration to any Crea∣ture in Heaven, Earth, or Water (which particular Places are named, besides which there are none other) or the true God, In, or before, or by any Representation, Like∣ness, or Image: who being infinite and in∣visible, is not to be represent∣ed by any visible thing Deut. 4.12, 15, &c. Isa. 44.10, &c. Rom. 1.23.; and enjoyns the serving him by such means, and in such a manner as is agreeable to his Nature and Word. And this because he is our Soveraign and Proprietor; tender of his own Worship; will severely punish Ido∣aters, and their Posterity, as those that hate him: and be mercifull to true Worshippers, as those that love him, to many Generati∣ons. III. The Third, forbids us thinking or speak∣ing prophanely, vainly, slightly of him: careless, irreverent Attendance upon him, in his Worship: unadvisedly crying, O Lord! or O God! &c. without a due sence of him: Cursing our selves, or others: Swearing by any Creature, or by himself except before a Magistrate in weighty and true Cases, which cannot otherwise be de∣termined.
And requires of us, a Holy and Reverent Respect unto, and Use of his Name, Attributes, Ordinances, Word, Works, all things whereby he makes him∣self known. And this, because, the great Soveraign is most highly provoked by Pro∣phaneness and Contempt of him: and will deal with those that are guilty of it accord∣ingly. IV. The Fourth, requires us, with those un∣der our Charge, to consecrate, keep Holy the Sabbath-Day. That we bear it in mind, to fit our selves for it: Rest from those Works which are properly called Ours: Set our selves apart for the Duties of it: Spend it, not in Idleness, Worldly Recreations, or Imployments, (except of necessity and mercy) but in the publick and private Wor∣ship and Service of God; in Prayer, Hear∣ing, Reading the Word; Religious Medi∣tation and Discourse: accounting the Sab∣bath, the holy of the Lord, honourable and honouring him therein Isa. 58.13. And this from (1.) the Equi∣ty of it; God's allowing us s days of seven for our own warrantable Im∣ployments, and reserving but one for Him∣self. (2.) His challenging a special Pro∣priety in it; setting it apart from common to holy Uses; so, it's Theft, and Sacriledge
to alienate it to any others than he allows (3.) His own Example; resting on it; not from doing good, or preserving what he had made, but from creating any more diversi∣ties, or kinds of Creatures. And (4.) from that Blessing he hath put upon it; in advan∣cing, preferring, inriching that Day above the rest; in choosing, ordaining, setting it a∣part, sanctifying it to be a Time for his Ser∣vice, and a means of Blessing to us in sancti∣fying it. Which is, not upon the Seventh, but First Day of the Week, from the Resurrecti∣on of Christ on that Day, the Practice of the Apostles, Primitive Christians, and Church of God in all Ages since; together, with the Command of our Rulers in Church and State. V. The Fifth, requireth (under the sweet Relation between Parents and Children) the preserving the Honour, and performing the Duties, belonging to every one in their several Places, Stations, and Relations. That Inferiors reverence and obey their Superiors; that Superiors carry themselves worthily towards, and be carefull of those under them; that Equals render due Re∣spect towards each other! More particu∣larly, as to our Superiors in Family, Church and State; that we pray for them, honour and reverence them, chearfully submit to,
and obey them, not envy or grudge the Pre∣heminence God hath given them, that we do not neglect or despise them for their wants or weaknesses, but rather sup∣port, assist them, cast a covering of love over them, stand up and plead for them against those that abuse, disparage, or speak evil of them. To which obedience, prosperity and length of days (as God sees good) is pro∣mis'd in the Old Testament, and not reversed, but rather confirmed in the New Ep. 6.2, 3.. VI. The Sixth, condemneth any hurt done, threatned, or intended, to our own or o∣ther's Soul or Body. Forbiddeth our being actually guilty of, or of whatsoever tendeth to our own, or others death. Together with all sinfull Anger, Strife, Malice, Hatred, Revenge, denying necessary means for pre∣servation of life; but not lawfull War, ne∣cessary Defence, or the Execution of publick Justice. And requireth our Endeavours to ender all men's lives as safe and comforta∣ble as we can. VII. The Seventh, forbiddeth all Impurities and fleshly Pollutions, in Thought, Word, and Deed: unchastity in Mind, Speech, Behavi∣our. And withall, enjoyneth the shunning and avoiding all Occasions, Provocations,
Temptations thereunto; as to our selves, or others. VIII. The Eighth, forbiddeth all defrauding, o∣ver-reaching, dishonest Actions; or what∣soever Abuses, unjustly lessens, or hinders our own or others Estate; and requireth the lawfull procuring, and furthering of the same. IX. The Ninth, forbiddeth all false or evil speaking, or surmising; lying, slandering, back-biting, dissembling, reviling, tale-bear∣ing, detracting from, or prejudicing ano∣ther's Esteem, or good Name. And requi∣reth our defending, preserving, promoting, advancing the same. X. The Tenth, forbiddeth dissatisfaction with our own Estate; envying, repining at, de∣siring of any thing that is another's. And requireth a full Contentment with our En∣joyments; furthering of, and rejoycing in our Neighbours. The Lord's Prayer. SO called from the Author, our Lord Je∣sus Christ. It's a compleat Directory, and Summary of all Prayer; And contains, (1) A Preface, of Compellation; the Per∣son
we pray to, not Saints or Angels, but God, described by our common Interest in him, our Relation to him, his Habitation. (2) Six Petitions. The three first more especially respect God's Glory, Advancement of his Kingdom, Obedience to his Will; which must be first sought. The three last our own and others Temporal, and Spiritual good. (3) A Doxology, or Conclusion, for Confir∣mation, containing Praise and Thanksgiv∣ing; and Arguments for our Petitions; for, Thine is the King dom, which we desire to come; thy Power alone can effect these things; the grant of them tends unto, and will end in thy Glory. Our Father,] Implies, We ought to call upon him as Children on a Father. (1) With Filial Affections of Reverence, Love, Sub∣mission, Gratitude; dependance on his All∣sufficiency, and willingness to help; Father∣ly Goodness, and Compassion (and our In∣terest therein) towards us, (that he loves us) as his Children; who is more ready to hear us, than any Earthly Parent, their dearest Off∣spring, Lu. 11.13. and persorms all the parts of a Father, in a higher and more excellent Degree, as far as Heaven is above Earth. (2) With an Universal Charity for others. He being a common Father by (Cre∣ation, Regeneration, Provision) to all his
Children; That they all pray for us; and that it's our bounden Duty to pray for them, as well as for our selves. As the word [Our] minds us of that Relation be∣tween us and them; so [Father] of that Relation between him and us. Both express our Faith, and total plenary Reliance on him as ours, and without whom we can hope for nothing. Which art in Heaven.] Not that he is ex∣cluded from Earth, or included in Heaven, or any place, who filleth all Jer. 23.24. whom the Heaven of Hea∣vens cannot contain. 1 King. 8 27. But there (1) is his Throne Isa. 66.1. where he Rules and Over∣rules all things in Heaven and Earth; and from thence sends down his Mer∣cies and Judgments. (2.) He more eminent∣ly manifests and communicates his Love, Goodness, and Glory. So it teaches us to draw near unto him, with (1) all Holy Reverence and Humili∣ty; because of his excellent Majesty, so high above us; we wretched Creatures be∣ing as Worms crawling upon the Earth, and he sitting in great Maje∣sty in the highest Heavens. Eccl. 5.2. (2) Holy Confidence he being both rea∣dy and able to do all things whatsoever he will for us. Ps. 115.3.
(3) Zeal and Fervency; with our Hearts and our Hands lifted up unto God in the Heavens La. 3.41.. Hallowed be thy Name.] Here acknow∣ledging the inability and indisposition that is in us and all Men to honour God aright, we pray, that God would Glorifie and Magnifie himself in the World, by directing and disposing all things for his own Glory, and remove whatsoever hinders it. That, as he is glorious in himself, he may be decla∣red, known, and owned so by all Men. In∣cline and inable us, and all Men, to acknow∣ledge and highly esteem him, his Attributes, Ordinances, Word, and Works: and to glo∣rifie him in Thought, Word, and Deed, by confessing and forsaking our Sins, which rob him of his Glory, by admiring and adoring him in his glorious Perfections; by belie∣ving, loving, obeying his Word; attend∣ing on him in his Ordinances, magnify∣ing him in his Works; using his Creatures for his Glory, sincere Endeavours to pro∣mote it, preferring it before our own Inte∣rest. Thy Kingdom come.] By Kingdom is meant, not so much, that Universal Soveraignty which as Creator he exercises over all his Creatures, disposing them all to their pro∣per Ends, for his own Glory, as King of
Nations Ps. 95.3. as his special go∣verning & ruling his Church, and all things for the good of it, as King of Saints; Re. 15.3. so that, acknowledging our selves and all Mankind to be by Nature under the Do∣minion of Sin, and Satan; we here Pray, that his Kingdom (1) of Power and Provi∣dence, may be manifested, and made appa∣rent, that all things are guided by him. That he would govern all Creatures, both in the Natural course of things, and in the Civil and Domestical Government of Men, as may best serve his own Glory, and his Churche's good. (2) Of Grace, may be erected; the exercise of his Spiritual Regal Power in our Hearts, advanced and en∣larged; the Power of Sin whereby Satan hath Dominion, may be subdued, and de∣stroyed in us and others, all the world over. That he would set up his Throne, Reign in our Hearts, bring us into intire Allegiance unto himself. (3) Of Glory, may be hast'ned; when all his Subjects shall be Crowned, all his and their Enemies van∣quished. Thy Will be done,] Here acknowledging our inability and unwillingness to know and do his Will, our proneness to repine, and murmur against it, we Pray, as to the will of his (1) Providence, or that which he
doth with us, and to us; that our selves and others may patiently submit to it, chearfully comply with it, and thankfully accept of it. (2) Precept, or that which he requires of us; that our selves and others may have all blindness, weakness, indispo∣sedness and perversness taken away, and may be inclin'd, inabled, and made willing to know and understand, obey and do it [on Earth as it is in Heaven] (by Saints and Angels) voluntarily and chearfully, without Con∣straint or Repugnancy: readily and speedily, without delay: sincerely, without Hypocrisie: Zealously, without Indifferency: Impartially, without Reservation: Constantly, without Intermission. Give us this Day our daily Bread.] Where∣in, we acknowledge (1) We have forfeited our Right unto, and deserve not the least Crum of Bread; nor can procure it, or be re∣freshed by it without him; whatsoever, or whosoever be the Instruments to convey it, he gives it us, and blesses it to us; else it becomes unholy, polluted Bread, hurtful to us. (2) Our daily dependance on his fatherly Care and Providence, without be∣ing over-solicitous for to morrow, or super∣fluities: desiring (for our selves and others) only a daily Allowance of necessaries, agree∣able to our nature, charge, and station, as he sees meet for us; with our purpose eve∣ry
day in the use of Lawful means, and by Thankfulness for what we have, commiting our ways to him, to seek at his Hands; that we may enjoy them as gifts of his Fatherly love, a sanctified use of, and Contentment with our Allowance; without Envying o∣thers Plenty, seeing God gives to whom, and what he will. (3) That we must possess and use every Creature as from God, and to him: Else our own Prayers will condemn us, if we be beholden to Satan (any unlawful means) for Bread; or use the good things we ask against the Giver of them. (4) That God's Children ought not to desire other Mens Bread. That none Eat their own Bread, but They; our Bread, is that which comes to us by his Blessing on our Honest Endeavours; so that God nor Man can Implead us for it. That's woful Bread which comes not from Him. And forgive us our Trespasses.] We Here Pray, That God (for his Mercy, for his Son's sake) would Pardon all our Sins; and afford us the Conditions, Evidences, and Effects of it, i.e. Faith and Repentance; and keep us from whatsoever may obstruct the same. As we forgive them that Trespass against us.] Which is, (1) A prevalent Argument to press him to Pardon us; we plead notfrom Merit, but from the Model of God's Mercy and Grace in us, which being Infinitely Inferiour
to that in him, yet disposing us to forgive, may both move his Compassion towards us, and assure us of it. If we wretched Crea∣tures can forgive others, much more will the Father of Mercies forgive us. (2) A necessary Qualification if we would be pardoned. Mat. 6.14.15. Although we cannot forgive in the same mea∣sure and equality, yet we must in the same likeness and quality, i.e. freely, fully, truly, as Imperfect Creatures; as he doth perfectly, as an Infinite, merciful God. (3) As an Encouragement to ask forgiveness from Him, when he hath enabled us by his Grace to forgive others. And as a Comfortable sign that we are forgiven, Mat. 5.7. & 7.2. Luk. 6.35, &c. which none can have, unless he find in him∣self a Disposition to forgive his Brother; for else, he Prays not for the Pardon, but Re∣tentment of his Sins, and for the Vengeance due unto him for them; that himself may be no otherwise forgiven, i. e. not at all. This shews, that we are to be Importunate for a merciful loving spirit towards our Enemies, and those that injure us; and how beneficial they may be unto us, unless we be greater Enemies to our selves than they; In that, they afford us the happy opportunity of doing that which assures us of Pardon; by fol∣lowing the mercifulness and lenity of our
Heavenly Father, we shew our selves to be his Children Mat. 5.44, &c.. And lead us not into Temptation.] Restrain (1) Satan and his Instruments from Tempting us by inward suggestions, outward objects or perswasions. (2) Us, from running into Temp∣tations, Occasions, Provocations to Sin, or yielding to them; or from such a Condition as may be a Temptation to us, Pr. 30, 8, 9. let us not be Tempted; or assist us so as we may resist and overcome. Leave us not to the Tempter, nor to our selves. Let nothing be a Temp∣tation to us, or no Temptation too hard for us; withdraw not thy Help and Succour, thy Grace and Spirit; and tread down Satan, and all our spiritual Enemies under our feet. But deliver us from Evil.] From whatso∣ever may be evil to us. Deliver us from (1) The evil one, Satan the grand Author of Evil from Tempting us, or having his Power upon us. (2) The Flesh, our own Evil Hearts, Sin, and all the Consequences and Punish∣ments of it. (3) The Blandishments, Allure∣ments, Inticements, Evil Customs, Exam∣ples, and Corruptions of the World. (4) From Tryals in our Minds, Bodies, Estates, good Names, &c. or support us under Them. Rescue us out of Sin and Danger, who are
neither able, nor sufficiently willing to help our selves. Free us from whatsoever is Evil, within or about us. Increase and perfect the work of Grace in us. In thy due Time de∣liver us out of all our Troubles. For thine is the Kingdom, &c.] Therefore (1) grant us these things, (2) we assure our selves that thou wilt; not for any desert in our selves or others, But [Thine is the King∣dom,] Therefore we are assur'd thou art as a King concern'd to advance thy own Name. Glorifie it in thy Church; let thy Kingdom come to it; Advance thy will in it. Sustain us Thy subjects: Pardon our Sins; Protect us from all Evil. [Thine is the Power,] To Exalt thine own Name; To extend thy King∣dom over all; to inable us to do thy Will; To minister to our Necessities; to keep us Faithful unto Thee; to Preserve us from de∣served Sufferings. [Thine is the Glory,] When Thy Name is Hallowed, thy Kingdom the chief place of it Enlarged. Herein art thou glorified, when we obey thy Will, when thou providest for thy Subjects, when thou preservest and defendest Them from Disobe∣dience, and their Enemies. It implies, (1) There is but one Kingdom, one Power, one Glory, worthy of deserving the Name. (2) It's no worthiness in our selves, but the Ho∣nour of his Name, that commendeth our Suits to him. (3) The End of our Petitions,
why we would have them granted, i.e. to have him glorified; that his Kingdom, Pow∣er, and Glory may be advanced. (4) How our Faith is strength'ned in the Hopes to obtain our Petitions, i. e. because he cannot neglect the Glory of his Name, the Honour of his Kingdom, which so much depends up∣on the Performance of his Mercy towards his Servants that call upon him. (5) A Special part of Worship and Service, i.e. Thanksgi∣ving, whensoever we do, or would receive any Benefit, 1 Tim. 1.17. now unto the King Eternal, Im∣mortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be Ho∣nour and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.] So be it. So let it be. Or, so it shall be. A Testification of our hearty Assent, Attentiveness, Faith and Confidence, Earnest Desire, and full Assurance of the grant of whatsoever we ask according to his Will. As I have made these Requests unto thee, O Lord, so I unfeignedly desire, and believe the Performance of them, in thine own good Time, so far as shall stand with thy glory and my good; and in full perswasion there∣of, I rest, and say, Amen.
The Mutual Duties of Husbands and Wives. LEt the same mind be in you which was in Christ, who in taking his Spouse, looks not at outward adorning. Nothing makes this Relation so Happy as true Religion; the pleasantest, strongest Tie, leads to the obser∣vance of all good Duties mutual and perso∣nal; Eases, lightens all Crosses and Dis∣contents; sweetens, sanctifies all Societies, Companies, Comforts. Labour to see and love that in one another; for the more you love one another, the more you will love that; and the more you love that, the more you will love one another: Happy that love wherein there can be no excess. Look upon Marriage as an Ordinance, not only for the Natural Comfort of Man and Wife, but for the Spiritual good of one anothers Souls; and for that End let the Husband make Christ the Example of his love to Her, and the Wife the Church, the pattern of her Obedience to Him. Take one another as Adam took Eve, im∣mediately out of God's Hand: 'Twill make you Dutiful, and Thankful. He that loves the Giver, will love the Gift. Fix your Hearts in the good liking of each other (notwith∣standing any Deformity, or Infirmity) as the
best, most suitable, and only fit match could be found for you; in token of your Submis∣sion to God's Disposition, Contentation with your Portion, and truth of your Affection to each other. You may lawfully think ano∣ther a better Man or Woman, but not a better yoke-fellow; for that admits of a Desire of Change, or upbraiding with past Matches you might have had, which cannot stand with Love. The Persian Lady at Cyrus Wed∣ding, being asked afterwards, How she liked the Bridegroom? answered, I know not, for I saw none there but my Husband. Love sea∣sons, sweetens all Estates; breaks off, com∣poses all Controversies; over-rules all Af∣fections; makes good all Actions; supplies what's wanting in all other Duties; makes Marriage Indeed, i.e. a pleasant Combina∣tion of two, in one Home, Purse, and Heart. Love to God, makes his Service pleasant, as well as acceptable: Love to Wife, makes his Power not Lordly, but Paternal: Love to Husband, makes subjection Delight∣ful: Love to Children, makes it a play, a pleasure to Tend them, which others judge Burdensom. Prepare for the worst. If it come, the labour's well bestow'd; if not, well lost. Think not every day will be a wedding-day. In Matrimony, God marries Comforts and Crosses together, as well as Man and Wife;
such shall have trouble in the flesh 1 Cor. 7.28.. Study to please, not to be pleased; then all the fault you find will be with your selves. Let all your strife be, which shall love and please God and one another most; and upon any diffe∣rence, who shall first seek for Reconcilia∣tion. Construe words and Actions in the best sence. Stifle little things. Abstain from whatsoever is found contrary to each other: A Prudent observation of each others Tempers, and forbearance of what may provoke, will prevent many fallings out. Think not, much less do any thing that may tend to lessen (but whatsoever may knit) what God hath Tied with his own Hand. If Passion arise in one, let the other be silent. If Satan hath sown Discord, sleep not until the Tares be pluck∣ed up. Two Cholerick Persons living to∣gether many years, were never heard to fall out, because (said one of them being asked) when one was angry, t'other had the wis∣dom to forbear. Cross not each other in the spring Tide of Passion, but stay till eb∣bing Water; then mildly argue it, and that, not so much to condemn one ano∣ther, as to acquit your self: we are more Tractable in Cold, than Hot Blood; it portends Ill luck, when two Fire-Balls meet.
Be helpfull to each other's Health, Com∣fort, and Advantage, as to your Bodies, Estate, good Names, Souls. Bear one anothers Bur∣dens, Personal and Domestical. Discover not, but bear with one anothers Infirmities: yet so, as to quicken one anothers Graces, and not to suffer Sin upon you. Share in each others Joys and Sorrows. Jointly en∣deavour to make the Weight of the Family the more tolerable; the Load is lightned by carrying it evenly, equally. Speak one to, not one of another: It ought to be so amongst Christians, much more York-fellows. Debate it between your selves, not before your Fa∣milies, or Strangers: 'Tis a lessening of your selves, when standers-by take notice of your Grievances. Dissents between Man and Wife, are uncomely, Differences intolerable: I would suffer much, before I would make my Complaint to another: They are ill Birds that defile their own Nests. In case of Correction or Rebuking any of the Family; though there be an Errour in the Application, let not one Yoke fellow contradict the other before the offending Party, but debate the Mistake when you are alone; least you abate due Fear and Reverence, and teach others to despise your Discipline, and your selves. 'Tis not safe for one Yoke-fellow to receive an Appeal from
any of the Family, nor to take the Rod out of the other's hand. Improve your Conjugal Converse for Spi∣ritual Ends. Let not the Body Rob the Soul; nor the Elder serve the Younger. Re∣deem the Time; that you may bless God you ever met, (and not as too many do, Curse one another for silently advancing each o∣thers Ruine.) So, when the Land-flood of youthfull violent Affections is dried up, the Fountain of Spiritual Love, will still run with a more sober and moderate, but more constant and lasting stream. Sea∣son your Natural Society, with Spiritual Communion, in secret serving God, and you'll avoid the Surfeit of Society, which choaketh Love. Reckon your selves one anothers more than your own, and the Lord's more than one anothers. Let your Fellowship toge∣ther be such, as you both in it may have Fellowship with the Father and his Son Je∣sus Christ, whose Image and Superscription this Relation bears. Be holy in all manner of Conversation. Possess your Vessels in Sanctification and Honour. Defile not the Marriage-Bed. Be not drunk with your own Wine. All things are sanctified by the Word and Prayer. Be much in Prayer for, and with one another: you will then blame your selves, not one another; and be asha∣med
to jar, considering you must shame your selves before God for it. As to Children, pray, not only for due Parts, Proportion, and safe Delivery, but Children sanctified; that your Families may be the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, and of the Houshold of Faith. As God encreases your Relati∣ons, enlarge your Requests for every one in particular: Those Petitions will not suf∣fice when you are many, that did when you were one. Make God's House as yours, and yours as God's: Join with Elkanah and Han∣nah in giving up your Children to God's Service, and in going together to sacrifice, 1 Sa. 1.21.28. Account that the greatest Riches, not which you lay up for your selves or yours, but out for God; He is mercifull and lendeth, and his Seed is Blessed Ps. 37.26.. Their Prayer. O Thou that art the great Creator and wise Disposer of us, and all things in Heaven and Earth: who hast ordained Marriage for our good; and made us two, one Flesh. We give thee all humble and hearty Thanks for preser∣ving us in our single State so innocent and chast, so free from Shame and Re∣proach:
For conducting us through the Temptations of this Life, so mercifully, so wisely: for keeping us from the effects of thy Wrath, and our own Infirmities. O forgive whatsoever might cause thee to Imbitter this state unto us, and accept us in the Beloved. Indue us with a Spirit of Love, of Kindness, of Conde∣scension; and prevent whatsoever might Disturb our Happy Union. Let our chief love and delight be grounded upon the Hopes we have of being Heirs together of the grace of Life. Let us walk Hand in Hand, to our Father's House, in a chear∣ful, and faithful discharge of our respective Duties to each other, and those Com∣mitted to us; and be still provoking one another to Love, and to good Works. That, after Death (which shall e're long separate us for a little while) we may with Comfort meet together, where they neither Marry, nor are given in Marriage, but are as the Angels, per∣petually praising thee for all the Instances of thy Kindness and Endless Love; Through Jesus Christ, to whom with thy Blessed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be
all Honour, Glory and Praise, now and evermore, Amen. Another. WE come unto thee most gracious God and merciful Father; who in Infinite Wisdom and Goodness hast brought, and united us together: and do prostrate our Souls before thee in all Humility, under a deep sense of our un∣worthiness, and unbecoming Demeanure in thy sight. O Pardon it unto us, that we have liv'd no more to the great Ends of our coming into the World, and into this state, which thou Institutedst in Innocency. Let it not be a state of Tem∣ptation, or Sorrow, by occasion of our Sins and Infirmities; but of Holiness and Comfort, as thou intendedst it, to all that love and fear Thee. Allay in us, all sensual Bruitish love; Purifie and sanctifie our Affections, that we may not Dishonour or Pollute the Bed thou hast called Unde∣filed: But use it so, as Carnal Lust may be slacked and subdued, not provoked, increased, or inflamed: that thy self
and others may see our Chast Conver∣sation coupled with Fear. Let us keep up the Honour and Ends of Marriage. Be linked together in one common Care, and live together in one Spirit, to thy Glory, the Edification, and Benefit of others, the real Comfort, Advantage, and Contentment of each other, the Promoting and Advancing thy King∣dom; that we may together enjoy thee Eternally, through Jesus Christ, Amen. The Husband's Duty. TO be the Head, bespeaks, not only your Dignity, but Duty; to study and design your Wife's Comfort and Welfare; to be the Seat and Fountain of Reason, Understanding, and Discretion to her: to excel her in Knowledge, Patience, Christian Courage and Resolution; Chief in bearing Trials and Infirmities: with all privacy, love, and mildness, guiding, dire∣cting, reproving her. Let love sweeten your Speech, Carriage, Actions, and Advices to her. Let not your Commands be unreason∣able, or imperious: but lawfull, managed with Meekness, Gentleness, Familiarity, and Discretion; that she may see, as well Love and Reason, as Relation, binding her to Obe∣dience.
Avoid all bitter Language; or such as may argue disaffection, which sinks deep into the Mind, and is hardly obliterated with any after-excuse; giving Cause to suspect 'twas the Issue of a festered Heart, and that a precipitated Passion did not produce, but discover it. In her Houshold-affairs, if you interpose, let it be rather by Advice and As∣sistance, than Superiority. Avoid Passion, Frowardness, Austerity, and Reservedness towards her. Stand by and for her on all Occasions. Keep up her due Authority, and Honour in the Family; Chearfully, and willingly, not grudgingly, or by constraint; allow her Ne∣cessaries, and Conveniences, according to your Place, and Ability. Render her life as comfortable as may be. She is thine own flesh, so is to be nourished and cherished: hath forsaken all for thy Love, and is come under thy Roof for Protection. Love and respect her as your Yoke-fellow, not as a Slave or Servant. The Woman was taken out of the Side, near the Heart: The Wife of thy Bosome, to be valued as far more excellent than any other Member un∣der the Head, and almost equal to it. Hus∣bands love your Wives, and be not bitter against them Col. 3.19.. Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, let her Breasts satisfie thee at all
Times, and be thou Ravished al∣ways with her Love Pr. 5.18, 19. His Prayer. MOst gracious and merciful Father; who hast been my God and Guide from my Birth; and by thy dis∣posing Providence, brought me into this state. Forgive whatsoever I have done or thought displeasing unto thee, before and since my entrance into it. Mortifie in me every Inordinate Affection and Desire. Give me Grace still to Remem∣ber, that those that have Wives should be as if they had none. Let not my love unto her, swallow up greater unto thy self. Let me not prize the Spouse of my Bosom, above the Bridegroom of my Soul. Now I have Married a Wife, let me give a Bill of Divorce to all other Lovers but true Goodness; and make it appear thou hast given me a Help-meet, not a hinderer therein, now I have most need of it. As her faithful head Indeed, let me guide and instruct her; see and speak to and for her, nourish and cherish
her; love her, not only as my self, but as Christ the Church; Bear her Burdens, defend her in Danger; cover her Infir∣mities, sympathize with and Comfort her under Crosses: that I may be better to her than Ten Sons: that she may find all those Relations (and far more) she hath left, to cleave unto me, in me. That when I am, (as I trust I shall e'er long be) happy in Heaven; my other part, may not through my sin, unworthi∣ness, or neglect, be miserable on Earth. But after we have enjoy'd the Comfort of a sweet Society here, and been a Blessing to each other, and all near unto us; we may be translated to a place of perfect Love and Joy to all Eternity. Through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Another. ALmighty God, who of thy great Goodness hast given Man domi∣nion over the Works of thine hands; putting all things in Subjection under his feet: and Man to be the Head of the Woman. Furnish me with suitable Abi∣lities
for the place thou hast set me in. Make me a Teacher and an Example of well doing. Give me a right Judgment in all Things, and a perfect Command over my Passions and Affections; that I may not be amazed at Trifles, nor dis∣compos'd at every Contrariety of Ac∣cidents, and Disappointments; nor passionate for the things of this world, nor discontented if thou should'st smite me in any part; nor suffer any Unde∣cency, or violent Transport. But may pass through all the Accidents of my life, with meekness and a sober Spirit, Pa∣tience and Charity, Prudence and Holi∣ness; and with an even mind do my Duty in all things. Comply with every variety of thy Providence; be useful to and careful of mine; ever approving my self to thee, in a holy, hearty, obedient Piety and Devotion, Wisdom and Hu∣mility, Chastity, Purity, and a Holy Conversation. Preserve me and mine from all Danger; accept of us in and through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; to whom with thy Blessed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be all Glory, Honour
and Praise, now and ever, Amen. The Wife's Duty. GIve to your Husband due Honour, sweetned with Love and Familiarity; and expressed by an inward Esteem, and outward Reverent Respect, Speech, and Carriage towards him; in regard of his Su∣periority by Creation, and God's Instituti∣on; thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he shall Rule over thee Gen. 3.16.. Be voluntarily subject to his Will in all lawfull things, as unto the Lord Ep. 5.22. Col. 3.18.: From which, Noble∣ness of Birth, Greatness of Por∣tion, Excellency of Parts, can∣not exempt: A Son may have more wit than his Father, and a Subject than his Prince, yet both must obey. They may advise, per∣swade, intreat; not be sullen, scornfull, dis∣dainfull, scold, reproach, taunt, or disobey. The Place, if not the Person is to be regar∣ded. Live in a chearfull Contentedness with your Condition. Avoid tedious, curious gau∣dy Dressing; all lightness and immodesty in your Behaviour, and Attire: Affect not Va∣nity in Apparel, or Curiosity in any thing about you. Be willing and diligent in your
proper part of the Care and Labour of the Family. Be a constant meet Help both as to his Person, Estate, Houshold, and Holy E∣ducation of Children. Dispose not of his Estate, without his Consent: Consider not only, whether the Work be good you lay it out upon, but what power you have to do it. Avoid an impatient, murmuring, unquiet Disposition; and maintain a holy, peaceable, meek and quiet Temper; which is in the sight of God of great Price. Her Prayer. IN all Humility of Soul and Body I Prostrate my self before thy Divine Majesty, most gracious and merciful Father. It's of thy great goodness, (for which I render unto thee all possible Praise) that though I have deserved no∣thing but Trouble and Affliction, thou hast been so careful of me, so good unto me all my dayes. In particular, as to the Choice thou hast made for me. O Pardon the Vanity, the Follies, the Er∣rors, the Miscarriages of my younger, and riper years; and punish them not upon me with those extream Troubles, Disquiets, Dissatisfactions those find in
this state who have provoked thee. Give me Prudence and Discretion to know and do my Duty, with a chearful Heart and willing Mind. Let it be my study and delight to please Thee, and Him thou hast set over me: To bear with his Infir∣mities: To Help and do Him good all his days. Free us from all peevishness, sinful passions, mistakes, causless Jealou∣sies: and endue us with such meek, quiet, chast Dispositions, as may encrease each others Joy, and lighten each others Sor∣rows. That in all the Changes and Alterations of our Condition, we may preserve a sincere love unto Thee, and one another. Make us always mindful of the sacred Vow and Covenant where∣in we stand engaged to Thee and each other, and to stir up one another to the love of Thee and our Neighbour. That in the sence of a good Conversation, we may leave the world, under well ground∣ed hopes of dwelling together with Thee in Heaven, Through Jesus Christ, our Lord and Saviour, the Head and Husband of his Church, to whom with thy Bles∣sed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be all Ho∣nour,
Glory and Praise, now and for ever. Amen. For Safe Child-bearing. MOst great and only wise God: who sanctifiedst Marriage in Innocency for the Propagation of Man∣kind: If it be thy good Pleasure, make me Partaker of that Blessing. Prevent a Barren, a miscarrying Womb, and dry Breasts. Make me a Joyful Mother of Children, That I may serve Thee in increasing and bringing up thy Faithful ones. Deny not due Parts, Senses, Rea∣son, and Comfortable use of the same in thy own due Time. Mitigate and As∣swage the sharpness of that Curse and inevitable pain upon my Sex, for the Offence of our first Parents. Be not far from me when Trouble is nigh, O Lord, make hast to help me. Give me Patience, Submission, Resignation to thy Will: a seasonable, easie, safe Delivery. Keep me from all sad Accidents, and Passions; from all Undecency of Deportment, and unquietness of Spirit, Impatience, or
Distrust: from doing any thing sinful, or feeling any thing intolerable. Give me the expected fruit of my Womb, and a thankful Heart to Consecrate it, and my self to thy Service. Punish us not in or by it, nor it for our Sins; assure us of the Pardon of them. Increase my Faith; support and strengthen me by thy Holy Spirit; vanquish my Fears and Sor∣rows. But, I wholly submit all unto thy Holy Will and Pleasure, whose Wisdom is Infinite, whose Counsel is secret, and knows what's best for me; and hast pro∣mised all Things shall work together for my good. However thou dealest with me; Give me not up to a Barren unfruit∣ful heart. Beget, Preserve, Encrease, Confirm in me good Purposes and Re∣solutions: Let them not prove Abortive, but bring forth continually the fruit of good Living. Give me Contentment in every Condition; and Grace to Dis∣charge the Duties I am, or shall be cal∣led unto; to my own and others Com∣fort, the Credit of Religion, the Praise of thy great Name, thorough Jesus Christ, Amen.
Thanksgiving after Deliverance. ALL possible Thanks and Praise be given unto thee most gracious God and Heavenly Father; for all the Instances of thy Goodness unto me all my Days. Particularly, for not turning away my Prayer, nor thy Mercy from me; for supporting me in the time of my Distress and Extremity, when I might have perished in it. O Sancti∣fie this great Deliverance, that it may be in Love and Mercy unto me. Keep me from all evil, and further Danger of Childbed. Give me a quiet Spirit; in∣crease of Strength, a healthful Body, ability for my Duty, stedfast Confidence in thee, a lively and lasting sence of thy Mercy, a thankful Heart, inlarged Affe∣ctions to Praise thee, to be joyful in thee, to speak good of thee, chearfully to serve thee all my Days. Let this Ex∣perience of thy Power, Mercy, and Good∣ness; learn me for ever to Trust in thee; to rely, cast all my Burden upon thee, in a sincere observance of thy Holy Com∣mandments. Let me be as solicitous to
glorifie thee for delivering of me, as I was in calling upon thee for it. That this great Mercy may not be in vain un∣to me; but a fore-runner of my Delive∣rance from the pit of Eternal Destruction; through my Lord and Saviour, who was Born, and Suffered the pains of Death for me; to whom be Glory, Ho∣nour, and Praise, now and ever, Amen. Parents Duties. BE deeply sensible of the miserable state your Children have derived from you, and of the gracious Terms offered by God for your and their Salvation. Resign and De∣dicate them to Him, and Solemnize the same by Baptizing of them. Nothing but the want of Milk, or Ability, excuses the Mother from Nur∣sing them upon her own Breast. Ce. 21.7. 1 Sa. 1.24. Ps. 22.9. Lu. 11.27. The neglect of which is a great wrong to the Child, who too often inherits the Diseases, Humours, and Dispositions of the Nurse; and occasions less love to her who ought to have done it. Lay not too much stress on the forward beginnings of wit, and memory; which of∣ten fail in their Age of all their Childhood
promis'd. But we can never hope too much of the timely Blossoms of Grace; whose spring is perpetual, and whose Harvest be∣gins with our End. Check the first appearings and buddings forth of Sin in them, and encourage all good beginnings of Virtue; when they are able to learn any thing, it's high time to reach them that which is good. Stop their little Unde∣cencies; keep them from the Confines of Evil. Train them up to those things which are Immediate Dispositions of Virtue and Reli∣gion; As, Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, Modesty, Diligence, Pity, Compassion, Mer∣cifulness, Government of their Tongue and Passions, Silence, Sobriety, Comly speech; to speak the Truth at all times; which are great Preservatives against Impudence, Un∣chastity, Idleness, Malice, Hatred, Revenge, Oppression, Injustice, and all kind of Vices; when we see a Child strike a Servant rudely, jear the poor or silly Person, Cheat his Play-fellow, talk light Things, little Boldnesses, wrangling and lying for Trifles, &c. we encourage, laugh at, and are delighted with his wanton Wit and Confidence, please our selves to see him displease God: not consi∣dering these beginnings are growing up to Impudence and Revenge, Injurious Actions, false Witness, Perjuries, Tyranny, Treason. Education even alters Nature, and moulds a Man a-new.
Instill Goodness betimes into them as they are capable. Learn them (and see they under∣stand) the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and all the Principles of the Christian Religion in a familiar way, ac∣cording to their Capacities. Teach them to Pray constantly, and uncustomarily. Put such Books into their hands as are meetest for them. Imprint upon their Minds the greatest things: not uncertain Opinions, for Damning and Saving Points; or uncharita∣bleness, hatred, prejudices as to Parties: but such solid substantial Principles, as may have the largest, greatest influences on the future Conduct and Government of their Lives, ac∣cording to their particular Tempers, Dispo∣sitions, Inclinations. Possess their Minds with the fear of God, and their Obligations to him as their Creator, Redeemer, Preserver, Go∣vernor. Speak always before them with great Seriousness, Honour, Reverence and Praise of the Holy Scriptures, Holy Men, and Holy things: and with displeasure and loathing of every Vice, and of vicious Men. So soon as capable, bring them to publick Ordinances, appointed for begetting and encreasing Grace, and to which God hath promised his special Blessing Ps. 133.3.. Teach them to do, rather than to talk of Virtue, and Reli∣gion; put them upon the Practice and Ex∣ercise
of it; that gives the best, the truest, the perfectest Knowledge of any thing. Intice them with Kindness and Rewards; the way to Indear your Persons and Instru∣ctions. Labour to make all sweet, easie, and pleasant to them. Commend, allure them into Goodness, with all Attractive Encou∣ragements; that they may know and love, not know and hate Goodness at once, by thinking of the Severities wherewith it was accompany'd in their Minority. Make Ho∣liness appear to them the most necessary, ho∣nourable, gainful, delightful, amiable course of life; and principal thing. Win them to a liking and love of it: and keep them from looking upon it, as needless, dishonourable, hurtful, or uncomfortable; and from such Company as may encline them to think so. Inure them to speak always with Honour, Respect and Reverence to your selves and others. Break them of their own wills. Suf∣fer them not to carry themselves Irreverently, or Contemptuously towards any. Tell them lovingly of the Excellency of Obedience, Humility, Submission, Condescention, and how it pleases God and man. Let Necessary Correction be according to their Tempers, and with Discretion; Not in Passion; that they may see, not your Anger, but Reason is the Cause. Not so seldom as to make them fearless, nor so frequent as to dis∣courage
or harden them. For offending God, rather than your selves. Always shew them the Tenderness of your Love, and that you do it for their good. Take heed of an over-fondness or visible partiality. If Nature make a difference, it's natural to help the weakest, and a Virtuous carriage to increase Respect. 'Tis good to incourage Ingenuity, but not to provoke Pride, or Envy. The over-Indulgence of Pa∣rents, is the refuge of Vanity, the bane of Chil∣dren, and provokes God to take them away. Give them Countenance, and convenient maintenance, that they may not be tempted to indirect courses, nor your Life be their Bur∣den. Keep things in your own power to Re∣ward Duty, that they may be beholden to you, not you to them: yet so gotten, that a Blessing, not a Curse, may go along with them. Train them up in a life of Diligence and Labour, use them not to Ease and Idleness. Chuse them such a Calling and Course of life as tends most to the good of Church and State, and their own Souls: Place them with those that may not hinder that, nor undo your Care of them while with you. Look out such a Match for them (when you find it need∣ful) as is Pious and Prudent, rather than Rich. Observe their Inclinations, and counsel them by Arguments drawn for their own good, rather than by your Authori∣ty.
Affections are rather to be led than driven: Forced Marriages and Callings seldom Prosper. Let your own Example teach them that holy, heavenly, blameless Tongue and Life you desire them to practice: 'twill be hard to perswade them against that; their young fancies, from drawing after your own Resemblance. Great Reverence is due to Children. Infancy that understands not words, are led by Imitation of those that gave them being, and on whom they depend. Pra∣ctice not what's not Prudent or Expedient before them. Such as they see your beha∣viour is, will theirs be behind your back. Woe to them who make their Children wit∣nesses of their Impieties. Every President of yours, is as a Monument and Motive to Posterity. In all this, use great Care and Diligence. Think not that God will make them wise and good, because they are yours. Young Plants must be often watered: Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept. Good Principles must be Distill'd into these narrow Vessels that can∣not take in much at once, by degrees, as they are capable. It's easie to palliate Na∣ture, but it requires long, and constant At∣tendance thoroughly to cure and conquer it. Joyn constant earnest Prayer for accom∣panying your Endeavours with the Divine Assistance and Blessing: without which all's
Ineffectual. Children of many Prayers sel∣dom miscarry: But whatever the success be, you will have the Comfort of discharging your Duty. Their Prayer. MOst gracious and merciful Fa∣ther; who shewest Mercy to Thousands of those that love Thee and keep thy Commandments: We give thee hearty Thanks, for thy Tender Care of us all our Days; and for so early pre∣venting us by thy Grace, and Inclining our Hearts unto thy Service. Oh, go on to be gracious to us, and ours: For∣give us all our Sins, and lay them not to our, to their Charge. Take them in∣to the Protection and Guidance of the same good Providence, which hath been so bountiful to us, so watchful over us all our dayes. Implant in them all the graces of thy Holy Spirit; and accom∣pany all Instructions and Endeavours to that End with thy Blessing. Mercifully provide for, dispose of, and place them
in this world, so, as may further them in, and render the ways of Virtue, easie and pleasant to them. Preserve them from the Dangers, Allurements, and Evils of the Age. Let them be sanctified even from the Womb, and fear thee from their Youth, all their Days. We recom∣mend them to thy never-failing Mercy and Compassion. Be our and their God. O let them live in thy sight; and us be able at last to say, Behold we and the Children God hath graciously given us, thorough Jesus Christ, to whom with thy Blessed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be all Honour, Glory and Praise, now and for ever. Amen. Another. ALmighty God, who hast promised thy Spirit to us and our Children, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call; deny it not to us and ours. Give us grace by good Counsels and Ex∣ample to lead and bring them up in thy Faith and Fear. Make us Spiritual, as well as Natural Parents; Let us see the
Travel of our Souls in them, and be satisfied. Let them be Born again of Water and of the Spirit. Season their Tender Age with thy Grace; let it have early possession of them. Take them into thy Care, Charge, and Covenant; into the Bosom of thy true Church, in∣to the Arms of thy Mercy, into a Right of the Promises, into the Service of Christ, into the Communion of Saints. Keep them from the Loss or Injury of any Sence or Member; from every sad Accident, from Evil Temptations or Examples prevailing upon them, from being useless, unprofitable, or vitious; that they prove not a Curse, but a Blessing and Comfort to us and others; and attain what thou hast promised to those that Honour and Obey thee and their Parents; and not provoke thee to visit the Iniquity of their Fathers upon them. Give us grace to carry our selves so, as we may be able with Confidence so leave our Fatherless Children with thee, and bid them trust in Thee. O thou that hast sent forth thine Angels for Ministring Spirits to the Heirs of Sal∣vation,
give them Charge over us and them for Preservation and Safety, tho∣rough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Childrens Duties. LOve and Honour your Parents, in your Thoughts, Speeches, and Behaviour; be they never so mean in the World, or Understanding: though you cannot as Rich, Wise, or Religious; you must, as Parents. Think not contemptuously of them, speak not dishonourably, irreverently, saucily to them, or of them, Deride not their failings, or miscarriages; but conceal, lament, cover them. Bear with their Infirmities of Mind and Body, when old Age makes them Trou∣blesome to others, let them not be so to you. Carefully lay up all their wholsome Precepts. Imitate them in all that's good, while they live, and when they are dead. Remember what Grief of Mind your Miscarriages will be to them, and how much your Happiness will be theirs. Make not their lives misera∣ble by undoing your selves. Bear with them when froward, and twice Children, as they did with you, when you were theirs. Murmur not, but willingly and thank∣fully be instructed and reprehended by them. Obey them in all lawfull things. Chearful∣ly submit to any labour they injoyn you, or
Correction they lay upon you. Be content with their Allowance and Provision for you, and disposal of you. Marry not without their Consent: Children are so much their Parents Goods and Possessions, that they cannot (without a kind of Theft) give a∣way themselves, without their Approbation that have a Right in them. If they be in want, relieve and maintain them: and that, not as Servants, or Inferi∣ours, but Superiours. See they fare as well, or better than our selves. Though you got not your Riches by them, you can never requite them for what you have received of them. Pray and do what in you lies for their Health and Life, Peace and Comfort: Re∣member how much you owe them for all their Cares and Fears; their Cost for you, and pains with you. Be far from those who imbrue their Souls in bloody Wishes for their Parent's Death: Though they wish them in Heaven, it's not so much that they may have Ease and Rest at their Journey's End, as because they must needs take Death in the way. If long Life be promised as a Reward for honouring Parents, such may expect un∣timely Death as a Punishment on the contra∣ry. Reverence, Kindness, and loving Re∣spects to them, never went unrecompensed even in this Life.
Their Prayer. MOst Merciful and Heavenly Fa∣ther, who Invitest little Children to come unto Thee, and lovest those that do. O take me into the Arms of thy Mercy, and Bless me, who am de∣dicated to thee in Baptism. Make me always mindful of my Vow and Promise, to forsake the Devil and all his works, to believe in thee and to serve thee; to be Dutiful, Obedient, and Thankful to my Parents and Instructers; Humble, Re∣verent, and Meek to my Superiors; gentle, sober, and Temperate all my Dayes. Keep and defend me from all Evil, lead me into all Good; Bless me and my Parents, O my Heavenly Fa∣ther. The longer I live, the better let me be: Let me increase in Wisdom and Stature, and favour with thee and men, to the Glory of thy great Name, the Delight of my Relations, my own Hap∣piness in this World and that which is to come, thorough Jesus Christ; in whose Holy Name and Words I fur∣ther
Pray. Our Father which art in Hea∣ven, &c. Another. MOst Gracious and Merciful Father, who madest, preservest, and providest all Necessaries for me. Pardon whatever I have done amiss, and grant I may do so no more. Give me Grace to obey Thee and my Parents; to be helpful and a Comfort to them: Keep me from slighting of them, Irreverence, Undutifulness, Disobedience to them. Let me never forget, or slightly Re∣member my many Bonds and Obligati∣ons of Duty, Obedience, and Thank∣fulness to them; their Sorrows, Pains, and Care for me; that I may never make their Hearts sad, or bring down their grey hairs with Sorrow to the Grave. Increase the Number of their Dayes, and thy Graces in them, to thy Glory in their Generation. Watch over us for good all our Dayes, through Jesus Christ, who hath Taught me when I Pray to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, &c.
The Masters Duties. LEt your first Care be to admit none into your Service, but such as will serve God with you Ps. 101.4, &c.. A wicked Person, is a dangerous Infection in a Family. Dis∣obedience is from Irreligion. There can be no true Fidelity and Subjection but out of Conscience. Keep your Servants from Evil Company, and from being Temptations to one another. Watch over them for their good. Encourage the Obedient; Rebuke, convince, admonish the Contrary, so as their own Consciences may Condemn them; without Bitterness, Re∣viling, Sharpness, which oftner hardens than Reforms. Defend and Protect them in doing their Duty. Bear them not out in wronging any, but right them when they are wronged. Refuse not their just Apologies, Hearken to, and Redress their Grievances Job 31.13.. Deny not necessary, wholsom, sufficient Food and Rayment (if the Contract be so) Physick, Lodging, Wages. Think not much of maintaining them, when by Providence disabled from serving you. Oppress them not with too much Labour. Let your Commands be lawful, feasable, necessary, convenient,
that they may Obey with chearfulness: Your Reproofs and Admonitions, short, plain, material, prudent, sober, private, seasonable, familiar, with good Advice, according to their different Tempers; when it's most like to do good, and to convince them of it: with such winning Mildness and Concern, as they may see you're more ingag'd for their welfare than themselves. Rule with Wisdom and Discretion, Love, Gentleness, Tenderness; not Rigour, and Severity: Looking on them, not as Slaves, but fellow Pilgrims, fellow-Servants, fellow-Christians, and Brethren Phil. 1.. Knowing you have also a Master in Hea∣ven. Ep. 6.9. Col. 4.1. An austere Master, makes Eye-Servants, his Per∣son hated, his Business neglected. No Ser∣vant will do his Duty, except out of Con∣science, or Love to his Master. Fairness sweetens Advice, and purchases Love, with∣out which, there can be no true Fidelity and Respect Constraint is for Extremity, when all other ways fail. Let your Corrections be prudent, moderate, unpassionate, joyn'd with Instruction, proportionable to the Per∣son's Temper, and hainousness of the Crime. Forgive them often in things not sinful. Take not notice of every small Offence. Passion makes Severity look like Revenge, Reforms not, but provokes and exasperates. Be ra∣ther
lov'd than fear'd; a Master than a Ty∣rant, a Lion in thy Family. Let your Do∣minion be that of the Soul over the Body, not for its hurt but help, advantage, edi∣fication, guidance, and instruction. Reward, allure them, praise them openly, reprehend them secretly. Be chearful and pleasant with them, that they may love, not avoid or be weary of your Company. Have a great care of your Carriage. No∣thing will please from one, whose Person is distasted. Give them good Example, by a Prudent, Pious, Honest, unblameable Con∣versation; which much tends to the better∣ing of them, and maintaining your Respect, Esteem, Authority over them. Betray not your Natural weaknesses, by Passion, or Im∣prudent words and deeds. Command your selves, if you expect they should obey you. Suffer not that in your selves, which you dis∣countenance in Them. Conscience of our own Crimes, Choaks the Accuser, and not like to amend the Offender. An Inferior cannot but stoop in Heart to that Superior in whom God's Image appears. The heaviest work is made light by seaso∣nable enjoyning it. As much as possible, settle a constant order in your Family, and of your Business; that every ordinary work may know its Time; and Confusion and Distraction may not shut out, or hinder
Godliness; which is much furthered, and made easie, by skill and foresight. Be in your Family, as a Prophet to Teach and In∣struct them; as a King to govern, and take care of them; as a Priest to offer up the daily Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving, with, and for them. Always Remembring, who hath committed them to your Charge; and that at your Hands it will be Required. His Morning Prayer with his Family. MOst Holy and Infinitely glorious Lord God; who art in thy self a Consuming Fire, but in thy Son a Re∣conciled Father. We desire in all Humili∣ty to Prostrate our Souls before thee, ac∣knowledging our selves far less than the least of all thy Mercies, unworthy to breath in thy Air, to tread upon thy Earth, to lift up our eyes to Heaven, to have any thing to do with thee in a way of Grace and Mercy. Thou hast nou∣rished and brought us up, and we have Rebelled against thee; Requited thee Evil for Good, and Hatred for thy good will. It's a wonder of thy Patience and Forbearance, that we are alive before
thee, Praying unto thee, and Praising of thee, and not spending a sad Eternity in that place of Torment from whence there is no Redemption. O glorifie thy Mercy in the Pardoning and Saving of us, and not thy Justice in our Destru∣ction. Justifie us freely by thy Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; and sanctifie us by thy Holy Spirit. Let the time past of our lives be too too much, that we have been so Careless in serving thee, and saving our Souls; for the Time to come let us work out our Salvation with fear and trem∣bling, and give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. And in our several Relations and Places, give us Grace to behave our selves as becomes thy Children and Servants, with Care and Conscience, and Soberness of Mind; as having thy Law writ upon our Hearts, and thy fear always before our Eyes, and a sence of thine Omniscience and Omnipresence, that thine Eye runs too and fro through the whole Earth, that thou art the Witness, and wilt be the Judge of all our Thoughts,
Words, and Actions. And seeing thou hast been pleased to Encourage us to our Duty by many great and precious Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; per∣fecting Holiness in thy fear. Let this be our great Care, notwithstanding all Temptations, that we never leave thee nor forsake thee, and this our great Comfort in all Conditions, that thou hast said, thou wilt never leave us nor forsake us. Let us not be weary of well∣doing, knowing, in due season we shall reap if we faint not. Let the End of our Dayes be often at the End of our Thoughts: Give us Grace so to live now, as we shall wish we had done when we come to Die; that then we may be able to Reflect upon a well-spent life, and on good Grounds to resign up our Souls into thy Hands, as into the hands of a Faithful Creator and Merciful Re∣deemer. Remember all Mankind in much Mercy. Send thy Gospel where it is not Preached, make it very successful where it is. Pardon our Crying Sins
in these Three Nations. Reform our wicked Lives, Continue our forfeited Mercies, prevent our deserved Judgments. Let our Soveraign and all our Magi∣strates be Terrors to Evil Doers, In∣couragers of those that do well. Make the Ministers of thy Gospel, faithful, painful, religious, their labours success∣ful. Let all our Relations be related to thy self, and all thine afflicted Servants relieved by thee according to the multi∣tude of thy tender Mercies. We Praise thee for our last Night's Preservation, and Refreshment; and for all the Instances of thy Goodness to us all our Dayes. Go along with us this Day, Bless us in all our ways, preserve us from all Evil, especially from the Evil of Sin. Work in us a greater Care of pleasing, and fear of offending thee; that living this Day, and all our Dayes in thy fear, we may dye in thy favour, thorough thy Son, who hath taught us when we Pray to say, Our Father, &c.
His Evening Prayer with his Family. ETernally Blessed and Infinitely glo∣rious Lord God, the great and terrible Majesty of Heaven and Earth; at whose Dreadful Appearance, all Im∣penitent Sinners shall e'er long in vain call to the Rocks and the Mountains to cover them, for fear of thy Wrath, and for the glory of thy Power. So often as we come into thy Presence, we have abundant Cause to be covered with Shame and Confusion of face, for the vileness, and sinfulness of our Natures, Hearts and Lives. We are by Nature Children of Wrath, and by our Lives Children of Disobedience; have broken all thy Holy Laws in Thought, Word, or Deed; so that it were Righteous with thee to make us miserable in this World, and that which is to come. But O deal not with us according to the multitude and hainousness of our Pro∣vocations, but according to the multi∣tude, and tenderness of thine own Com∣passions;
for thy Goodness sake Remem∣ber us O Lord. And for the Time to come make us to amend our Lives ac∣cording to thy Word. Enlighten our dark Understandings, subdue our Wills and Affections wholly to thy self. Let us know, and do the things that belong to our Peace before they be hid from our Eyes: Let us chearfully perform what thou requirest of us, and patiently bear what at any time thou shalt lay up∣on us: Be stedfast and unmoveable, al∣ways abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much as we know our labour shall not be in vain in thee. Let us walk Circumspectly, not as Fools but as Wise, Redeeming the Time because the Days are Evil. Make us more and more sen∣sible of our frailty and mortality; see∣ing these Earthly Tabernacles, our Bodies, shall be dissolved, let us frequent∣ly, and seriously consider what manner of Persons we ought to be, in all Holy Conversation and Godliness. Pity the Degeneracy of Mankind. Visit the dark Corners of the Earth with the light of thy glorious Gospel. Purge
out of thy Church whatsoever is an offence, and dishonour unto thee, and indangers the Souls of Men. Bless us in these three Nations, by turning every one of us from our Iniquities. Indue our Soveraign with those Gifts and Graces of thy Spirit, that are necessary for him as a King, and as a Christian. Let us, and all his Subjects live under him quiet and peaceable lives, in all Godliness and Honesty. Make all our Ministers and Magistrates faithful and successful, in encreasing and encouraging Holiness, and Discountenancing Vice. Let none of our Relations be Strangers unto thy self; nor any of thine Afflicted Servants be forgotten by thee; Relieve them as thou knowest best for them. Recompence those that have shewed us Kindness, do good to those that have done us Evil. We Praise thy holy Name for all thy Mercies, for thy Care of us, and Goodness to us this Day and all our Dayes. Take Care of our Persons, and of all thou hast Committed to us this Night. Let us lye down in a sence of thy daily Kind∣ness unto us, and awake in asence of
thy continual Care of us; and do abundantly for us above what we can ask or think, for the sake of thy Son Jesus Christ the Righteous, who hath taught us to Pray, Our Father, &c. Servants Duties. INwardly Esteem, outwardly (in works, gesture, and behaviour) Honour and Re∣verence your Masters. From which, nei∣ther Age, Sex, Birth, Breeding, Condition, Gifts, or Means, can free you. Reveal not their Secrets, and Infirmities. Dishonour them not behind their backs. Stand up for them, speak respectfully to them, and to others of them. Preserve their Reputation, and the Families. Talk not to others of what is said or done at Home. Give them no just occasion of distast. Let as many Ser∣vants as are under the Yoke, ac∣count their own Masters worthy of all Honour 1 Tim. 6.1.. Readily and sincerely obey their Com∣mands; please them well in all lawful, and indifferent things; not an∣swering again Tit. 2.9.. The Ma∣ster's place is to dispose of, and order his own Business, and the Servant to submit unto his will in it, chearfully, with∣out
grumbling at it, or at their work, or, that they are Servants, and not as those they serve. 'Tis uncomfortable to your selves and them, that you go about your Business with heavy sowr looks, and discontented Spirits; forgetting you are serving the Lord, while you are doing their work. Be not slothfull, care∣less, negligent; but faithfull, diligent, indu∣strious in it: not loytering, or minding your own ease and pleasure. A Burdensome Im∣ployment, is made easie by Custome; and to a willing mind, doth it self. Labour to preserve, and encrease their Estate; to further and advance their Inte∣rest, by all good and lawfull means. Be pro∣vident, frugal, and wary for their Advan∣tage: and see nothing be lost, damaged, wa∣sted, or consumed, through your default. Beware of secret Theft; of purloyning, stea∣ling, giving, lending, making away any thing without their Consent. Remember your Father Jacob, and the Blessing upon him when a Servant; who served with all his power, was carefull Night and Day, of what was committed to him, and made good what was torn or lost Gen. 31.39.. And how those that improved their Ma∣ster's Talent, were commended and reward∣ed; while the idle and unpro∣fitable was cast into outward darkness Matt. 25.14, &c.. Do your work
well, and as soon as you can; knowing, you and your Time is not your own. Be as thrif∣ty and carefull, as if it were your own Con∣cern: and serve, as you would have others serve you. Let your Answers be true, direct, dutifull; not sullen, muttering, saucy, irreverent, con∣tradicting, or disputing with them. Beware of excusing any unwarrantable thing, or ad∣ding one Sin to another, by telling a Lye, which is an Abomination to the Lord, which his Soul abhors, which he punishes in this World, and that which is to come. Bear with meekness, patience, and submission, the sharpest Reproofs and Corrections; though wrongfully inflicted without Cause. God will vindicate your Cause if wronged, and reward you. Look upon your Condition as chosen for you by God; and your selves, as his Ser∣vants; and your Work, Allowance, Provisi∣on, and Restraints, as his; and do all as to him. Pray daily for a Blessing upon him, his Affairs, the whole Family, and your La∣bours. A Godly Servant hath been an Emi∣nent Blessing where he hath lived. They are not worthy to partake of the Mercies of the Family, that pray not, endeavour not for them. Servants be obedient unto them that are your Masters according to the Flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of Heart,
as unto Christ: not with Eye-service, as Men∣pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the Heart. With good-will doing service as to the Lord, and not to Men: knowing, that whatsoever good thing any man doth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Ep. 6.5, &c. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward: for this is thank-worthy, if a man for Consci∣ence towards God, endure grief, suffering wrong∣fully: For what glory is it, if when ye be buf∣fetted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when you do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is accepta∣ble unto God, for even hereunto were ye called, &c. 1 Pet. 2.18, &c. Their Prayer. ALmighty, Omniscient, Omnipre∣sent Lord God, in all Humility I prostrate my Soul before thee: acknow∣ledging, and adoring the Wisdom and Goodness of thy Providence, in appoint∣ing every one his Station; and dispo∣sing all things and Persons into their se∣veral Ranks, Orders, and Degrees; some to command, and others to obey, for
their mutual Help and Benefit. I hum∣bly submit to the State and Condition thou hast placed me in; beseeching Thee to forgive me all my failings, and diso∣bedient Carriage towards thee, and those thou hast set over me, for his sake, who though he was Lord of all, took upon him the form of a Servant, that by Obe∣dience and Suffering, he might procure the Salvation of all his Servants, whe∣ther bond or free. Give me a humble, obedient, contented Heart, to serve thee, and those thou hast obliged me unto; diligently, faithfully, carefully, with all chearfulness and gladness of Soul, with∣out repining, murmuring, envying, or unwillingness: Remembring I deserve not a Being upon Earth, much less to be thy Servant: Let me think my self happy therein; and that I am brought out of the base Bondage of Sin and Sa∣tan, to partake of the glorious liberty of thy Children, thorough Jesus Christ, in whose Holy Name and Words I fur∣ther pray unto thee, saying, Our Fa∣ther, &c.
Another. MOst gracious God, and mercifull Father, who art no Respecter of Persons, but in every place and station, he that feareth thee, and worketh Righ∣teousness, is accepted of thee. In an humble Sence of thy Soveraign great∣ness, and my own meanness and unwor∣thiness, I cast down my self at the Foot∣stool of thy Grace, begging Pardon and Forgiveness of my manifold Sins and Iniquities: That I have no more chear∣fully and faithfully obey'd thy Com∣mands, and theirs thou hast set over me; Give me Grace for the future to be thy and their faithfull Servant. Let me dis∣dain no Office, but shew all mildness, pliableness, reverence, and fidelity to him, though harsh and froward; ac∣counting him worthy of all Honour, as bearing the Image of thy Soveraignty, a Contempt of him being a Contempt of thy Majesty. Bless him, and his, and all his Affairs. Make me so carefull and circumspect in all the Particulars of my
Duty, that neither he nor any other may suffer through my Ignorance or Neg∣lect; and that at the last Day, when the Servant shall be free from his Ma∣ster, thou may'st say unto me, well done good and faithfull Servant, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord; for his sake who to set me free from the slavery of the Devil, humbled himself, made himself of no Reputation, and is now exalted at thy Right-hand, in whose holy Name and Words I further pray, Our Father, &c. Duties of the Aged. BE Examples of Wisdom, Gravity, and Holiness to the Younger; and draw forth those Treasures of Knowledge and Ex∣perience which you have been so long in laying up, to instruct the Ignorant, and warn the Unexperienced and Ungodly that are a∣bout you. Tell them what you have or might have suffered by the Deceits of Sin, the Danger of Temptation, and Delay: what Comfort you have found in God, the Scri∣ptures, and a Holy Life; and how good he hath been unto you.
Be not peevish or froward to those about you; but patient under all the Infirmities and Inconveniences of Old Age. Be bles∣sing God for your former days of strength, health, and ease; and for that endless undi∣sturbed Rest he hath provided for you. Let the Ancient Mercies, and Experiences of God's Love through all your Lives, be fresh upon your Minds, and inkindle your Love and Thankfulness, Delight and Comfort, and help you to submit to Uneasiness and Death. Be accurate in examining the state of your Soul, and making your Calling and Election sure. Be frequent and particular in reflect∣ing upon your past life; that you may be deeply humbled for all your Sins, and thank∣full for being preserved from those you might (and others) have fallen into. Re∣deem with double Diligence your little Re∣mains of Time; set a great value on every moment of it; lose none in Idleness, or un∣necessary things; being always doing, or getting some good, and that with all your might. Let your Thoughts of Death and Preparation for it, be, as if it were just at Hand.
Their Prayer. OFather of Lights, and of all Consola∣tion; from Everlasting to Everlast∣ing thou art God, a never-failing Support, an Eternal Reward to thy persevering Followers, thy old Disciples; I have lived upon thee and by thee all my days; thou hast been my help from my Youth, cast me not off now in the Time of old Age, forsake me not when my strength fail∣eth. O pardon the Follies of my Child∣hood, the Miscarriages of my riper Years; that I have done, and receiv'd so little Good, spent so little Time in it, and so much in Vanity: Give me grace to husband and improve the Remainder of my few Sands, for my Eternal Ad∣vantage. Amidst the Infirmities of my Body, preserve me from Covetousness, Frowardness, Impatience; whatsoever Vices are so frequently found in old Age. Grant I may be sober, grave, temperate, sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience, a Teacher of good things. Let my former Experiences of thy Good∣ness,
learn me still to trust in thee; not to be distrustfull of thy Providence, nor negligent of my Duty. Let not my Graces wither, but flourish more and more with my declining Days: nor my Zeal for thy Glory cool, but be infla∣med with the decay of my bodily Heat. That bringing forth fruit in old Age, I may go to my Grave, as a Shock of Corn in its Season, meet for Glory, and in the joyfull Expectation of a happy Resurrection, thorough Jesus Christ, to whom, be all Glory, Honour, and Praise, now and for ever, Amen. Another. I Humbly prostrate my self before thee, who art the High and Lofty one, that inhabitest Eternity, in a deep Sence of my manifold Sins and Iniquities; that I have lived so unprofitably unto others, so careless of my own Soul, so much with∣out Thee my God in the World. It's a Wonder of thy Mercy, that thou hast not cut me off in the midst of my days, that have so long cumbered the ground;
but afforded me so much space to pre∣pare my self for a happy Eternity. O wash away all my Sins, in and by the Blood of Jesus, the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, and that lives for ever to make intercession for us. And help me to spend my short Span of Time to the best Advantage. So quic∣ken, and actuate (O Spirit of Life) this sluggish Soul, that the last part of my Race may be run with more Vigour, likelier to the Heavenly Imployment, than all the rest have been. The more my outward Sences decay, vouchsafe the quicker and livelier Sence of thy past-loving Kindness, and endless Love; and of those good things thou hast laid up for me; to support and refresh me now all the Comforts of this Life fail, and the years are come wherein I have no pleasure in them. That having no other Burden, but that of old Age, my Soul may be still magnifying of thee, and my Flesh also may rest in Hope. When this crazy, earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, let me have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eterna
in the Heavens; through Jesus Christ; in whose Holy Name and Words I con∣clude my Imperfect Prayers, saying, Our Father, &c. Duties of the Young. LEarn to understand the Covenant and Vow which by others you made in Baptism with God the Father, Son, and Holy-Ghost, your Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier; and Renew it in your own Per∣sons. Resolvedly renounce the Devil, and all his works, and absolutely resign up your selves to God. Openly with Thankfulness own so great a Blessing, and your Duty thereupon, the Happy Covenant you are en∣gaged in, and live in the Comfort and Per∣formance of it all your days. Remember, God demandeth his Right so soon as you are capable of understanding it; and that you are entered into a place not of Happiness or Continuance, but of Tryal and Preparation for an Eternal state, which will be happy or miserable, according to your Carriage Here. Make it therefore (without delay) the design of your whole lives, with a resolved Chearfulness, to be happy for ever, and to escape those endless
pains, which are the Portion of the slothful, careless, and secure. Rest not until you are Born again, your Corrupt Natures changed into a love of God and Goodness; your wills and desires sub∣dued into the Will of God, and your Supe∣riors; and not eagerly set on any thing they deny you. Be serious, sober-minded, humble, modest, chast; avoid the occasions, Provocations, and Temptations to Sin; especially, evil Company, that great Snare of the Devil, which hath ruin'd Thou∣sands; And acquaint your selves with seri∣ous, sober-minded, experienced Christians. Wast not your precious time in reading vain Romances or other Obscene, Prophane, or Blasphemous Books or Plays: Neither Spend it (as too many do) in Alehouses, Tayerns and Debauchery with Lewd Women; Which courses will destroy Body, Soul, Estate, and good Name: Remember the difference which you will shortly find between Serving the Lord from your youth, and daily making Work for Sorrow in old Age; at Death, for Repentance, or Despair. Beware of and avoid their Mischief, Sin, and Folly, that Delay a Holy Life; that think it time enough to prepare for Death when they are Arrested by Sickness, or withered by old Age. That think tho' they neglect God in
their Youth, they shall be Happy after Death, if before it they Repent and Call for Mercy. They consider not the terrible Doom denounced against the negligent and dis∣obedient; and that the Absolutely necessary Condition and qualification for a Happy Eter∣nity, is a Holy Life, without allowing any liberty to Sin. If there be any single Instance of God's Receiving late Penitents, they are back'd with no Promise; we may not live to old Age, or may not have space, or grace to Repent, or not be accepted. God saith, to day if you will hear my Voice, (we limit no certain day;) God saith, now is the accepted Time, we say we shall be accepted at any Time. The longer we delay, the more unfit, unable, indispos'd, discouraged; the more sin hardens the heart, the World and the Devil gets stronger possession; the more we provoke God to give us up to our selves, to leave us, to become our Enemy, to take from us that which we have (abused,) instead of giving us any extraordinary assistance at last. Is it Prudence to expose our precious Im∣mortal Souls, to so many hazards as there are Accidents and Diseases to surprize our Bodies? to lay the greatest Burden upon the weakest Back? to put off our main Bu∣siness to that Instant when we have least Time and Strength to do it in? to begin our
work, when it should be finished, and we en∣tering upon our Reward? To have our Oil to Buy when the Bridegroom comes? To trifle away our precious hours, and neglect our main Errand for which we came into the world; whenas we may be hurried away without any space between our Health and Death, or, when we shall have enough to do to Conflict with a Disease, and to bear up under it? To trust to a Death-bed Repen∣tance, which will not be in our Power, ex∣cept God follow us with his grace, when we have given him so much Cause to forsake us; and he hath no where promised that if we neglect him in our health, he will Remem∣ber us then, but protested the contrary. Be∣cause I have Called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man Regarded; but ye have set at nought all my Counsels, and would none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear Cometh: when your fear cometh as Desolation, and your Destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when di∣stress and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not Answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, &c. Pro. 1.24. to the end. The Foolish Virgins, when they should have entered, their Oyl was to get; and when they would have entered, he door was shut. How can we think it e∣nough
for God, to ask him forgiveness with the Remainder, and last drawing of our Breath? To serve him when we have no In∣clination or Temptation to Sin, can follow it no longer? To present him only with the Ruins and Spoils of Vice, the leavings of the Devil, the World and the Flesh? with that on∣ly which we know not where else to bestow? Consider further, Is not he a Fool that withstands his Market? neglects his Seed-time? sows Tares, and expects to reap Wheat? learns not to Trade, goes not to School, till Old and Blind of Age? That hath received a Mortal wound, or drunk deadly Poison, and saith, he'll endeavour Recovery next Winter? That hath a long Journey to go, and sets not out till the Sun is setting; his strength spent, his vigour ex∣hausted? That intends to do the work of a whole life, in one Day? That begins the Christian Race, when that of Nature is al∣most finished; to fight the good fight of Faith in old and decrepit years, under Aches and Infirmities which attend the Ruins of Nature? That thinks not of drawing Water out of the Wells of Salvation, till the Silver Cord is loosed, and the Pitcher broken at the Cistern. That lays not up in Harvest because of Heat; so starves in Winter, when others live upon their hoarded Store. That expects Heaven should meet him, and save him the
labour of a long Pilgrimage; That God should be so fond of him, as to be always working Miracles for his sake; and that when he will not be saved, God should save him whether he will or no? They dislike the Punishment, not the Sin; grieve, not so much because they are wicked as that God is just; and when they see they are Condem∣ned, Repent. Think, Is it Reasonable to give unto Sin, Satan, the World; the Flower, the Fruit, the Strength of our Age? A quick Understand∣ing, lively Affections, a tenacious Memory, subtilty of Wit, solidity of Judgment, an Eloquent Tongue, active Hands, clear Eyes, nimble Feet? and reserve for God, only the old, withered, dry, sapless, decayed leaves; a baffled, benummed Understanding, broken Intellects, flat and low Affections, a slippery Memory, a dull Wit, a tired Judgment, a stammering Tongue, paralitick Hands, lame Feet, feeble Knees, trembling Joints, putri∣fied Lungs, dazled Eyes, a fainting Heart, that Age which is the sink of Life, a Center of all Misery, i. e. what the World hath cast off? May he not justly say, offer it now un∣to thy Prince, see if he will accept it: per∣swade him to turn his Court into an Hospital; to make up his guard of Cripples, to be attended by nothing but Infirm Diseased Age and Impotency. As if the Service of
the great God was nothing else but the Re∣fuse of Sin, and Satan's leavings; only then to be done when we can do nothing: and Repentance so easie a work, that he who is disabled from all other things, is fit to Com∣pleat that. There's little support, and less satisfaction in declining years; besides a sober Reflection on our former Innocency; our leaving Sin, when so much Temptation and vigour to Commit it. Nothing can sweeten that Sower and Crabbed Age, like the savour of a past good Life: That Religion hath been the Imployment, that God hath had the Strength and Affections of our first and best Age. As Virtue and Goodness is the Ex∣cellency of Youth, so is it the Comfort and Crown of grey Hairs, which are only Hon∣ourable and Comfortable when found in the way of Righteousness. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, as a man Sows, that shall he also Reap: for, he that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption, but he that soweth to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting Gal. 6.7, 8.. Their Prayer. ALmighty and most merciful Fa∣ther, the great Creator of all things, and Judge of all Men; and of purer
Eyes than to behold Iniquity with Ap∣probation. I am altogether unworthy to speak unto thee, or to receive any good from thee: yet thou maintainest, and preservest me, and affordest me means of being Eternally Happy with thee. O Pardon all my Sins for thy Mercy sake, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake: A new Heart and a new Spirit do thou give me that I may love and de∣light in that which is Good, and hate that which is Evil, and cleanse my ways by taking heed thereto according to thy Word: Let me make that my Rule and Counsellor. Settle in me a constant Desire and Endeavour to fear, serve, and remember thee my Creator in the days of my youth: to give thee the chief and strength of my Time and Affections. Root out of my Soul all Pride and Haughtiness, stubbornness, wantonness, and uncleanness. Plant in me Reverence and Obedience to those that in Age, or Authority are before, or above me. Give me a good understanding to keep thy Commandments at all times, even unto the end. Prepare me for every
Condition, for whatsoever thou hast de∣signed for me; and give me Grace to behave my self well-pleasing in thy sight in every Station and Relation. Let me run with Patience and Chearfulness the Race that is set before me, without be∣ing dismay'd or drawn aside from thee by whatsoever Temptations or Discour∣agements I shall meet with in thy Ser∣vice; looking unto Jesus who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despised the Shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Majesty on High; in whose Holy Name and Words, I further Pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. Another. O Thou that art the Author of my Being, and the Foundation of my Happiness; by whom I am Maintained and Preserved, and without whom I am unable to Continue a moment alive in the Land of the living. I desire to hum∣ble and loath my self in thy Presence, for the degeneracy of my Nature, the
vileness of my Heart, and sinfulness of my Life; that I have so much forgotten and neglected thee, and my Duty to thee; and provoked thee to forsake me, and to make me Eternally miserable. It's of thy Infinite mercy I am not con∣sumed; that as yet I have time and space to make my Peace with thee. O Pardon me, and be reconciled unto me in and thorough my Lord and Saviour; and give me Grace to spend the Re∣mainder of my days, in thy Fear to thy Glory. Make me more and more sensible of the shortness and uncertainty of this Life, and of the Eternity of the next; that e're long thou wilt bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil. Let the Consideration there∣of stir me up not to delay but to make hast to keep thy Testimonies: to be Religious to purpose, to serve thee in good Earnest; not to live as most do, but as thou requirest and obligest me to do, and as e're long I shall wish I had done. Let me not in a short life make way for Eternal misery, but make
it my Business to prepare my self to be happy for ever with thee; that when so many Millions of careless Souls shall stand Trembling before the Judge of all the World, I may be found in the number of those to whom he shall say, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World; in whose Holy Name and Words, I further Pray unto thee, saying, Our Father which art, &c. Duties of the Rich. DErive your Pedegrees and Dignities higher than Adam, from Heaven. The Body of Nobility consists in Blood; the Soul, in the Eminency of Virtue: your Titles are vain if in that Inferiour to others. Value not, Rate not your selves by what God gives to his foes, and denies his chiefest favourites; the root and occasion of all our Miseries. Esteem a great Estate, less than a good Heart to use it; and to be God's Servants, a greater Ho∣nour than to have Potentates serve you. Look on Prosperity as a Motive, Engagement, and Encouragement to Piety; not a Privilege of loosness, to satisfie Lust, or display Vanity;
but of being better, because more observ'd, and your offences Exemplary. You cannot be good or bad alone. Hate Sin though grown into Credit and Fashion; Cobwebs are never the more esteemed, that grow over a Chair of State. Beware of Pride, Sloath, Idleness, fulness of Bread, Time∣wasting Sports and Recreations, Curiosity, Wantonness, Tyranny, and Oppression Let Lust fare never the better for all your Riches: you are called to Self-denial, Mor∣tification, Fasting, and humbling your selves, as well as the meanest. Labour to see God's special love in Com∣mon Mercies: often look up to, and think of him with Praise, and Thankful∣ness; as the Author and Donor of all the goods you enjoy: wean your Hearts from them; be sensible of their short Continuance, and secure to your selves true spiritual, durable Riches. Live as Dying Men, with your Graves and Windingsheet always in your Eye. Frequent the Indigent, Sick, and Dying; and consider how insignificant the world is to them, and will be to you. Thoroughly understand the Dangers, Temptations, and snares of Riches; and how much you have to answer for: That you are but Stewards, not Owners; accoun∣table for all your Comings in, and Layings out. Let your fruitfulness to God, and the
Publick, be proportionable to your Posses∣sions. Do as much more good than others, as you are better furnished: Let your Ser∣vants be more religiously Instructed, and Governed, and have more time for serving God, and your selves more Imploy'd there∣in, than those that work for their daily Bread. Be Sober and Temperate in using your Estates. Invade not the right of the Poor; suffer not Riot and Covetousness to feed upon their Portion: Cut off all superfluous and exorbi∣tant Expences, that the stream of Charity may run the fuller into that one Channel the Providence of God hath cut out for it, the Poor; who are your Care, and Charge; your Coffer is their Treasury. Succor most, where least means to support, or possibi∣lity to Requite. Let more Grace, and Need, challenge your favour, before private Obligations. Stay not till provoked or ne∣cessitated by others to Works of Charity; but consult, and contrive the most proper and effectual ways for it: And upon the first sug∣gestion of a fitting Occasion, freely comply with it; preventing being asked, exceedingly inlarges a kindness. An ingenious man may pay dear for it, when put to buy it with So∣licitation. To be liberal on all good Occa∣sions, is your Duty; and may of Right and Justice be required of you. For your En∣couragement,
God is pleased to stile them Gifts and Loans, which he engages to requite. But they are Rent, Tributes, Debts; upon the due Payment of which you hold your Possessions: and upon the neglect, or non∣payment, you forfeit your Right to them. When there's any good Occasion offered for your Bounty, that's the Time of paying your Rent, your Tribute; and God requires it of you. Indeed, the Help we afford any man is given to our own Flesh: And 'tis the com∣mon Interest of all Mankind to unite all their Endeavours in chasing away the Trou∣bles and Discomforts of Humane Life: To remove the Thorns and Briers that are upon the Face of the Earth, and to turn it into a Paradise. And, think not a few Scraps will serve the Poor, while you heap up for your Children, and fare deliciously every day. It's part of a good Steward, to see all in the Family liberally provided for: He's a Nig∣gard to himself, that scants his Beneficence to those, whose very cold Water shall not go unrewarded. He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly. 'Tis basely sordid, not to remember his Servants, by more than a mean Distribution, who loads us daily with his Benefits; With what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. Inconsiderate men, that let fall only a few drops of Charity upon famished Poverty: God gives them Hun∣dreds
by the year, and they carry single Pence in their Pockets, or Farthings to buy off the Clamours of Conscience, or to be seen of Men. Hypocritical Alms is gilded Coin, and shall be nailed to the Post of Deri∣sion, and pronounced base in the Day of Judgment, by him who values our Affections more than Gifts. The Common Friend, as well as Father of all Men, is not so partial to provide Pomps and Luxuries for some, while he leaves others destitute of the necessary supports of life. Though he hath not dispen∣sed so immediately to the Poor, he gives them Bills of Assignment upon the Plenty of the Rich; a Right to be supply'd by them: And it's much better to want, than with hold from the Owner. This Honour and Happiness is not every one's, to have God his Debtor, who saith to every Charitable Person, If that Poor Man or Woman owe thee any thing, set it on my Account, I have writ it with mine own Hand; He that hath pity upon the Poor lendeth unto the Lord Pr. 19, 17.. I will repay it. When we are dead and gone, our Posterity gather wealth buried in the ground of Piety, or cast upon the Wa∣ter of Adversity. Alms never wasted any man's Estate to himself or his, but encreased and secured it. I never met with any that could say he was the Poorer, nay, not the Richer for it; but that, such Distributions,
like our Saviour's Loaves among the four Thousand, leaves behind them more Baskets of Fragments for their Heirs to give away, than their Principal was in quantity, which the Father so expended. Do good to your selves, (saith the Italian Proverb) 'twill be better for you to have the Poor follow your dead Corps with their Acknowledgments of your Charity, than to have the Town talk, that you left Thousands behind you in your Chest. A Gift to the Poor, is a Loan to a sure Pay-Master, a Child's Portion put into God's Hand to keep for it; He will enquire for your Children, that he may shew Kind∣ness to them for your sake. O their cruel Hard-heartedness, that will rather suffer the Temple of God to be ruined, than supported by necessary Portions. It shall be e'er-long upbraided to them by their Judge, that himself was hungry, and they gave him no meat, who gave his Body and Blood to feed them, and quench their Thirst: Denied a Rag to cover his Nakedness, who would have cloathed their Souls with the Robe of his Righteousness, that they might not be naked in that Day. This is it he takes so tenderly, that his Brethren, for whom he died, whom he lodges in his Bosome, the Partners of his Spirit, and Coheirs of his In∣heritance, should be denied Relief, and suf∣fered to go away ashamed, unpitied. It's a
sufficient Reward to relieve any of his Mem∣bers, yea Christ himself, who observes every hand stretched out to his Relief; and will at last make no difference between the good Usage he receives in his Natural, and My∣stical Body; and punish with as much Se∣verity those that persecute him in the Poor, as that nailed him to the Cross. Their Payer. ALmighty Lord God, the great Pro∣prietor and Soveraign of the World, unto whom all the Inhabitants of the Earth, are as nothing, less than nothing, and Vanity. Thy Service is perfect Free∣dom, and in keeping thy Commands is great Reward. In all Humility I bow down my Soul before thee, in the Sence of that Infinite Distance that is between thy Blessed Majesty, and thy worthless unworthy Creature. Thou art the great God, and I a despicable Creature, and so thou mayest justly despise me; thou art a Holy God, and I a sinfull Creature, and so thou may'st justly condemn me. But O glorifie the Freeness of thy Grace in pardoning all my Sins, and the Power
of thy Grace, in turning me wholly to thy self, and inabling me to serve thee faithfully all my Days, with a Holy In∣differency as to the things of this Life, and a hearty Endeavour to secure Heaven; let nothing divert me from making that, not only my Refuge, but my Choice; and to improve to thy Glory, what I have received from thy Bounty. Let me con∣temn whatsoever is vile, and honour those that fear thee: Let my delight be with the Saints, and those that excell in Virtue. Keep me from the Snares, Tem∣ptations, and Dangers of Riches; from having my good things, my Portion in this life: Amidst the Affairs of it, let me reserve the Zeal and Fervour of my Affections for thy self: And labour not for the Meat that perisheth, but for that which endureth to Eternal life; so use the World, that I may enjoy thee my God, and so pass thorough things Tem∣poral, that I lose not the Joys that are Eternal. Make me a faithfull Dispenser of what thou hast committed to me; and ever mindfull of my great Account; that whilst others shall be surpriz'd with
Horror and Astonishment for their mis∣improving Earthly things, I may be found to have made unto my self Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness; and when they fail, be received into e∣verlasting Habitations, through Jesus Christ, to whom with thy Blessed Ma∣jesty, and Holy Spirit, be all Honour and Glory, now and ever. Amen. Another. MOst glorious Creator of all things, and liberal Benefactor to all thy Creatures. That art pleased out of the Freedom of thy Bounty to deal out so largely to me of those good things, which many others want: Give me Grace to be duly sensible of, thankfull for, and to make a right Use of them. Let them not be occasions of my Sin and Ruine, but Incentives, and Encourage∣ments to love and serve thee. Keep me from Pride, Haughtiness, Intemperance, Covetousness, Remisness in thy Service, despising others, loving the World, tru∣sting in uncertain Riches. Give me Hu∣mility, lowliness of Mind, love and an
open-handed Charity, a fellow-feeling of others Necessities, and to relieve them as I ought. Let me not be of the num∣ber of those Fools, that lay up Treasures for themselves, and are not Rich towards thee. But to make a true Use of all thy Blessings; that when the Judge of all the World shall call me to give an Account of the same, he may say unto me, Well done good and faithfull Servant, thou hast been faithfull in a little, I will make thee Ruler over much, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord: In whose Holy Name and Words I further pray unto thee, saying, Our Father, &c. Duties of the Poor. BE truly Religious; and bring up your Children so too; that you may leave them with God (who will take Care of them) when you can leave them nothing else: And that you may not be miserable for ever, as well as Poor here; miss of both the good things of the Life that now is, and of that which is to Come. Be Diligent, and Painful, Frugal, and Provident. Repent of, and avoid those Sins that have brought you, or tends to Poverty;
as Pride, Idleness, Intemperance, Falshood, Deceit, unjust getting, &c. without which you can never expect your Condition should be Sanctified unto you. Be not more Cruel to your selves than uncharitable men are; if they keep you Poor, keep not your selves ungodly, and miserable. The less Comfort you have, or hope for here, the harder the World uses you, the more fervently seek after the Heavenly Treasure; those that want that, are Poor indeed, and none but those. Envy not, but give due Respect to those above you: let not your Eye be Evil, because God's is Good. Let your low Condition teach you to Contemn the World, to be Humble, Holy, Heavenly-minded. Take heed of Murmuring and Repining against the Will of God. Bring, and keep your Minds in a chearful contented frame with your present state; well pleased with the Station and Condition he hath placed you in, who must Dispose of us and ours; and should be our Rest Learn to depend contentedly upon him alone, for a comfor∣table supply of all needful things, without Anxiety or Distrust. Study his Provident Care, Goodness, Faithfulness, and All∣sufficiency. When you have not a place, or Friend on Earth, Comfortably betake your selves to him for Relief, who hath obliged himself to give Necessaries to all his
faithful Servants, his Dependent Children. Those that follow Christ, pro∣fess they want nothing Lu. 22.53.. Bethink how unfit you are to be choosers of your Condition; That's best for you, which brings you to Happiness; which he knows better than you, and how dan∣gerous, what a great hinderance the world would be to you; How few of the Rich, and Rulers of it are Humble, Heavenly, Self-denying, Mortified men; and no wise man hath Reason to long for a hinderance of his Salvation; or to Pray to God to make it as hard a Thing for him to Enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as for a Camel to go thorough the Eye of a Needle Mat. 19.24.. Remem∣ber your Fore-runners, Christ, and many of his faithful followers, chose or were con∣tented in a life of Poverty, that had not where to lay their Head: A state so Tole∣rable and Advantageous, that it hath been Courted and Elected by many, before ever any particular Providence pointed out the Necessity, or lay'd the Constraint; and Recommended by such as have dedicated their lives to Wisdom and Philosophy. Nor hath Christ spoken a much harder thing in the Gospel, than what relates to a Confidence in Riches; allowing only a possibility with God for the Refuge and Salvation of the
wealthy; as it were, not Receiving them within the ordinary Extensions of his love and tenderness, but referring them to the Omnipotency, and last reach of his Mercy Mat. 19.26. You little know the Troubles, Cares, Fears, and Vexations of the Rich, who in a little while dye as Poor, as Naked as you; but usually with more guilt, unwillingness, discomfort, and regret. The Thirst of Great∣ness and Riches, is the Root of Wars, Fa∣ctions, Slaughters, Disguises, Disquiets, Toils, Dangers, Hazards, and Ruin. You have no Cause to fear the Rumors of Wars, unfaithful Servants, the sly Thief, crafty Lawyer, abuse of Flatterers, bloody Designs, spiteful Machinations; no Man whets his Ax to cut down a shrub. Be not sorry that your Condition sub∣jects you to Contempt rather than Envy, Flattery, and those Temptations, oppor∣tunities, and assistances to be wicked; Pride, Intemperance, oppressing and despising o∣thers, abusing God's Creatures, trouble, and noise of Company, Vanity, and loss of Time by Impertinent Ceremonious Visits, Mutual Entertainments, perpetual Dreads and Sus∣pitions, Sutes and Turmoils of a great Fami∣ly, declension of Estates, Impatience of Losses and Disgrace; the neglect or scorn of some great one, makes all their grandure
unsatisfying. Your Condition Exercises you in man-like Labour, renders you, and yours more healthy, strong, able to abide Cold and Hardship: furnishes you with a pleasant Appetite, sweet unmolested Rest; brings you acquainted with Truth and Plainness; teaches you to place your Hopes only in God, and to Contemn all other things; frees you from Surfeits and many Diseases; presses you to be more certain in your Devotion, more resolved in Danger, more undaunted to maintain the Truth: fitter to flie in Times of Persecution, better disposed at all times to welcom Death, without casting a back look upon the World, having nothing to lose, or leave, but trouble; no Lands to settle, no Executors to mistrust, no answerable Portion to raise, no Cry of Orphans, Widdows Tears, Complaints of the Oppressed to dis∣quiet you in your passage, which use to follow the Oppressor to the Gates of Hell. Their Prayer. MOst Gracious, and All-sufficient Lord God, who art the Maker of the Rich and the Poor, and no Re∣specter of Persons. In an humble sense of my own vileness and unworthiness,
prostrate my self before thee, acknow∣ledging it thy Infinite Mercy and Good∣ness, that I am on this side Hell and the Grave, and have any of the Necessaries of this Life. O Pardon my unthank∣fulness for so many Mercies that I have forfeited, and yet enjoy: and for the Time to Come suppress in me all inor∣dinate Desires and Cares as to the things of this World, all Repinings at, or dis∣trust of thy good Providence; not doubt∣ing of thy Fatherly Affection to those that study in all sincerity to approve themselves unto thee. Let me count all things as Loss and Dung in Comparison of the Excellency of the Knowledge and Service of thy blessed self. Work my Evil unbelieving Heart to a stedfast Faith in thy faithful Promises, that I shall want nothing that is good, and that thou wilt never leave me nor forsake me. Let me consider more how little I deserve, than how little I have; that no∣thing is due unto me but perpetual shame and misery; that thou knowest, and art able to supply my wants; that thy love will not suffer thee to leave me de∣stitute
of what thy wisdom knows con∣venient for me. Increase my dependanc on thee; frame my Mind and Desires  my Portion: Keep me from envying ∣thers abundance. Inrich me with Co∣tent, with Spiritual Blessings, and th Enjoyment of thy self. Let me so liv that I may have the continual Comfor and Satisfaction of a good Conscienc and of having thee always for my Frie and Gracious Father in Jesus Christ, wh hath taught me when I Pray to say, O Father which art in Heaven, &c. Another. WHat shall I Render unto thee most merciful Father, for th unspeakable Goodness unto me all m days; that though I have deserved I∣finitely worse than a life of Affliction and Misery; to have lived in perpetua want, pain, and Torment, spending all my days in Sighs and Lamentations, thou do'st thus sweeten my passage tho∣rough the world, giving me Food and Rayment, and Contentment with the
same, with the means and Comfortable opes of being for ever free from Labour, Sorrow, Care, and every thing that is a Burden, or uneasie. O Pardon all my Sins, and Sanctifie all thy Dispensations to me in order to a better life. Amidst all he Hardships and Inconveniences I meet with here, let me not be dejected or discouraged, but have Respect to the Recompence of Reward laid up for those that Endure. Make me Patient in all Afflictions, unfeignedly thankful for all thy Mercies, fully satisfied with my State, and Condition. Let thy word, and ways be my Delight: thy Power, and Wisdom, Care and Faithfulness, Pro∣vidence and Promises, my stay, Support and Comfort; to submit unto thee and serve thee, the Rejoycing of my Soul; and Heaven my Resting place. While others are joyning House to House, and Cumbering themselves about many things, let me be adding one Degree of Grace to another, and making sure of that good part that shall never be taken away. Conduct me safely through all the Troubles, Changes, and Temptations
of this Life, in a Holy Composure, Tran∣quility, and Contentedness of Mind, in a chearful doing and suffering thy Will and after Receive me unto Glory, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour, in whose Holy Name and Words I further Pray unto thee saying, Our Father &c. Duties of the Sick. THat worldly Matters may not Distract or Discompose you, or break love a∣mongst those you leave behind, prudently settle your Estate betimes, as may be most serviceable to him that lent it. If you have fallen out with, or wronged any in word o deed, be thoroughly reconciled to them, and do all you can to make them satisfaction. Labour to get the Benefit of Sickness speedily, seriously, and Impartially Examin your state, heart, and life: Recollect you Particular Errors, be deeply humbled fo them, and firmly resolved in the strength o God to live a Holy Life if you Recover Renew your Repentance for Sin, and your believing thoughts of the love of God, and of your Eternal Happiness. Apply your Saviour's All-sufficient satisfaction and pur∣chace for Returning Sinners, to your own Souls; Confidently cast it upon your mer∣ciful
Father; your Redeemer, his Merits and Mediation, without further Fear or Distrust; He will not Condemn his Friends, his Followers, his own Flesh Joh. 15.14.15. Nothing can reasonably make us doubt of Pardon, but the Insincerity of our Repentance, and Faith in Christ. Tell Standers-by of the worthlessness, vanity, and deceitfulness of all worldly things; and how miserable all men are that are not good. Bear pains with a becoming Christian Patience. Remember Passive obe∣dience is that, God now in special Calls you to; in which you must Serve and Honour him in the Conclusion of your Labours. 'Tis a great Error of the Sick and Impotent to wish for Death, as if they were utterly unserviceable to God; it's no small Service they may do him, not only by their Prayers and Praises, and secret love unto him; but by being Examples of Faith, and Patience, Heavenly-mindedness, and Joy in God to all about them. To that End, Consider, what a vile Body is going to be dissolved, that hath been so great an Enemy, pressure, and hinderance to your Soul, which shall be so no more for ever; and what a world, a life you are leaving, and entering upon: How near you are off a perilsome, dangerous, troublesome Pilgrimage, and at endless
Ease and Rest. Look upon it as a singular mercy, that Death hath so suitable a Har∣binger, and Fore runner; whose Messenger it is that comes for you, even the wise Dis∣poser of all things, that loves you, that never meant you harm in any thing he hath done unto you; that hath provided for you a Saviour, and Eternal Happiness, and done so much to bring you thither. Pray more earnestly and fervently than ever. Stir up in your hearts the love of God and all Goodness; with raised Expectations and longing Desires after the Felicity to which you are going, even to your Dying, Buried, Raised, Ascended, Glorified Lord, who is concerned, interceding for you, ready to re∣ceive you; and what ground of Joy it must needs be to your departing Soul, to think that your Head and Saviour is in Possession of the Kingdom you are passing unto? Get right Apprehensions, take away the disguise of Death: Look not upon its for∣midable Appearance, and pompous Solem∣nity, attended, with Groans, Convulsions, gastly Visage, doleful Elogies, black Ob∣sequies, only as a Debt due to Nature, or a Punishment due to Sinners; but as a Privilege granted to Believers, as part of our Christian Charter, an Enemy Conque∣red and made our Friend; in what mild Phrases the Scripture mentions it, an un-Cloathing,
a Departure, a going to Rest, an en∣tering into our Master's Joy, a sleeping in Je∣sus, &c. Did we really believe this, methinks it should be as hard to perswade a Saint to live, as a Sinner to die; a Believer to keep on his Earthly Tabernacle, as a wicked Man to put it off. Ruminate upon those precious Promises, and melting Expressions to the sincere. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepheard, he shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his bosome, and shall gently lead those that are with young Isa. 40.11. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Founda∣tion of the World Matt. 25.34.. God so lo∣ved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life John 3.16.. All that the Father giveth me shall come unto me, and him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast off John 6.37.. Say unto my Brethren, I ascend to my Father and your Fa∣ther, to my God and your God Joh. 20.17.. If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall my ser∣vant be Joh. 12.26. By him, all that be∣lieve are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justi∣fied by the Law of Moses Acts 13.39.. I
will be mercifull to their unrighteousness, and their Sins and Iniquities will I remem∣ber no more Heb. 8.12.. There is no Con∣demnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit — Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifieth; who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the Right-hand of God, who also maketh inter∣cession for us, &c. Rom. 8.1.33, &c.. Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labours, and their works do follow them Rev. 14.13.. And you that are about the Sick; urge them betimes to make their Will, if they have not. Use your utmost Endeavours for their Ease and Recovery: Be not weary of them, but tender, patient, compassionate, bearing with their Impatience: Grudge not any trouble they put you to, not knowing how soon 'twill be your own Case. Deal faithfully and prudently with them according to their state; flatter them not with groundless Hopes of this, or a better life. Keep such from them as may hinder, or annoy them with Impertinencies, get such about them as will assist them in their passage to endless Best. Let the Spectacle of Weakness, Frailty, and Mortality, have a due Influence upon your
selves: See what they want, (which you would desire in their State,) and speedily sup∣ply them with it. Pray with, and for them, and for your selves against that Hour. Support for the Sick. MOre particularly to direct and assist your Patience in Sickness. Beware of a troublesome, querrelous, peevish Temper as to those about you. The Lord heareth your murmuring which you murmur against him: (They may say unto you) and what are we? Are we the Cause of your Distemper, and Pains? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord Ex. 16.18.? Shall the thing say to him that formed it, why hast thou made me thus? Liable to these Distempers, and Diseases? Impatient Complaining, multiplies our Pains; by adding Sin unto it, and fruitless vexing our Souls, for the Sufferings of our Body: Encreases our own and other's Sorrows about us, who are apt to sympathize with us in our Sufferings; when, by our calm Submis∣sion we should teach them Patience; the on∣ly Remedy, or Allay of those Evils which we cannot avoid, or remove. What Folly is it, to vex or disturb our selves at that which we cannot help; which Providence, and the Frailty of our Nature hath made ne∣cessary
for us to endure; and which others do, who are not assisted with the Result of a long Experience: nor know how to turn Sickness into a Virtue, and Pain into a Re∣ward: That raise not up their minds to the ever quiet Region of undisturbed Health and Ease: That have the Wrath of an angry God to conflict with; attoned and reconciled to us thorough the Merits of our Saviour's Suf∣ferings. How many, without the Advantages of the Gospel, have thought it mean, and effeminate to lament, or be dejecteed in pain? Through Fortitude, and Bravery of Spirit, undergone wracking Tortures, with Constancy and Se∣dateness; for Praise, Dignity, Decency of Demeanour, Stoutness of Resolution: By presenting to their minds Noble precedents: Taking heed of doing any thing to be repen∣ted of, dishonourable, low spirited, unman∣ly, unbecoming their Patience, their Gallan∣try of Mind; whereby they not only put a Check upon themselves, and restrained their Spirits; but even alleviated the very Pain it self. Accounting nothing evil, but what was base and vitious; and him, a wise, cou∣ragious, valliant Man, who was constantly composed; undervaluing all the Contingen∣cies, and Inconveniences of Humane Life. But our Redeemer hath restored us to a more lively Hope. That, after we have undergone
the Labours of a painfull Life, our Troubles shall all end in greater Joy and Gladness; as the escaped Marriner after a Ship-wrack. A lively Apprehension of which, will encou∣rage us to endure Hardship, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. And not suffer us to think that he who designed us good, by all our for∣mer Afflictions, intends us otherwise by this; or, that he hath a greater Kindness for his most flagitious Enemies, because he affords them the Ease he denies us. Was God's Pro∣vidence to Christ the more to be questioned, because he was oppressed, afflicted, a Man of Sorrow? Or his love less to him, because he was acquainted with Grief? An ill Habit of Body is a proper Season for the Acquisition and Exercise of many Graces: A happy Impotency as to the most wasting Vices: An excellent Monitor of our own Frailty and Mortality. Every little Ach toles the Bell; and every extreme pain, is turning Dust to dust, and Ashes to ashes. A firm Constitution of Mind, is often wrought from the Diseases of the Body. And the Soul grows more active and refined, by still work∣ing out its own Separation. Whilst the Mor∣tal part, by a continual Succession of little Dissolutions, is better prepared to drop with Ease and just Maturity, into that final one of Death, which rends strong robust Tem∣pers, with great Concussion and Violence.
It's not much material how weak and rui∣nous our Prison is, seeing we are to tarry in it, but a very little while; seeing we shall the sooner and easier obtain our Liberty and Freedom. And, though here a little Pain molests, in the Grave whole Limbs fall off, and crumble into Dust; without disturbing that quiet Repose, which buries all the Sor∣rows of this Life, in a profound Oblivion and Insensibility. Rouse up therefore from that Sluggishness of Temper, and forgetfulness of your Profes∣sion to which you are inclin'd. Remember in whose Hands you are; who puts forth his Hand now, and touches your Bone and your Flesh Job 2.5., who cuts you off with pining Sickness Isa. 38.12., and is or∣dering all for your good. Make the truth of your profession more apparent and illustrious. Rejoyce, that by this Trial is manifested, the Victory of Faith, the Omnipotency of Grace, the Mi∣racle of Patience, Humility, Resignation, and Complacency under sufferings. Bear up with undaunted, undismayed Courage and Con∣stancy, under all the Uneasinesses of a rugged way. Lift up the Hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble Knees. Let the weak say, I am strong, and the lame Man leap as an Hart Heb. 12.10. Isa. 35.3, &c.. These are the Days of Con∣flict
and Conquest; that admit not of Re∣pose untill the Evening, when he that hath been eminently good, chearfully patient, con∣stant, and couragious, under great Disadvan∣tages, and Discouragements, shall be propor∣tionably rewarded. When all Distempers, and the Causes of them, shall be wholly re∣moved. No more Hospitals, nor Diseases. No more seeking for, or need of Cure, or Remedy; when the Mountebank's Stage shall be pulled down; and all Physicians of no va∣lue: The Doctor, and Apothecary consulted no more: They shall give over acting Experi∣ments upon afflicted Mortals. And the great Physician of Soul and Body, who himself took our Infirmities, and bare our Sicknes∣ses Mat. 8.17., perfected his underta∣ken Cure. And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things (that disturbed them) are pas∣sed away Rev. 21.4.. The thoughts, the belief of this, is the chief Refuge and Delight of all true Christi∣an Sufferers. Whilst this Cordial is next their Hearts, they are healthfull, secure, and satisfied. The Comfort of that day, heals and redresses all their Wounds, their Wrongs, their Injuries: Asswages, and allays all their
Pains, and Perplexities; expells all melan∣choly Thoughts; banishes all Sadness from their Hearts; stills all their Murmurings and Complaints; stifles innumerable Sighs; stops Rivers of unprofitable Tears from flowing from the Afflicted; raises the Minds of the Miserable, and Unfortunate; supports and refreshes the Spirit of Heaviness; makes the Cross of Christ a light Burden: As being both consistent with his love, and the Effects of it, influential upon their Happiness. Prayers for the Sick. O Thou great Creator, and Wise Dis∣poser of all things; in whose Hands are our lives, and breath, and all our ways; in all Humility we prostrate our Souls before thee, acknowledging it of thy In∣finite Mercy and Goodness that we have access unto thee, and may find accep∣tance with thee, in and through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; for his sake pardon all our Sins, and receive us into thy Favour. In much Mercy and tender Compassion, O thou that deligh∣test not in the Miseries of thy Creatures, regard this thine afflicted Servant. Thou
woundest, and thy Hands make whole; thou bringest down to the Grave, and raisest up again: Direct to proper means, we humbly beseech thee, and accompany those used for his health with thy Blessing: Speak the Word, and thy Servant shall be healed. If it may stand with thy good Pleasure, let him not die, but live, and declare the Works of the Lord: However, fit him for what∣soever thou hast designed for him: Give him a true Sence of, and Repentance for all his Sins; and a well-grounded Faith in our great Redeemer of Souls. Sancti∣fie this thy fatherly Visitation to him; let the sickness of his Body tend to the health and good of his Soul: Mitigate his Pains, increase his Patience: Give him a quiet, contented, resigned Spirit, unto thy blessed Will. Lay no more up∣on him than thou wilt inable him to bear, let thy Grace be sufficient for him. In the multitude of his thoughts within him, let thy Comforts delight his Soul. When his Body returns to the Earth as it was, let his Spirit return unto God that gave it, and be glorified together
with thy self, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose Blessed Name and Words we further pray, Our Father, &c. Another. ALmighty and most Mercifull Fa∣ther, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh; thou sendest forth thy Breath and we live, thou recallest it and we die, and return to our dust. O pardon unto us we humbly intreat thee, our unthank∣fulness for our former health, and all thy Mercies; that we have made so little use of the same for thy Glory. Give us grace for the future to be more sensible of, more fruitfull under them. In par∣ticular, look with an eye of favour on this thy suffering Servant. Let thy Power appear in his weakness; strengthen him on his Bed of languishing, make all his Bed in his sickness. Rebuke, remove his Distempers; in love to his Soul deliver him from the Pit of Corruption, and cast all his sins behind thy Back. Let not his sickness be unto Death, but thy Glory, if it may stand with thy good pleasure; but if thou hast otherwise determin'd,
fit and prepare him for thy self: As his outward Man decays, let his in ward Man be renewed day by day. Take him not hence, untill thou hast made him meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in life. Give him an easie and comfortable Pas∣sage out of this Vale of Misery, and re∣ceive him to the Eternal enjoyment of thy self in Heaven. And give all of us grace in Health to provide and prepare for sickness, in our most prosperous and best Estate to consider how frail we are; in a full perswasion of thy unerring Pro∣vidence over us, and Infinite love to∣wards us, let us resign our selves intire∣ly unto thee, resolving by thy gracious Assistance to rest satisfied with thy Ap∣pointment. That we may rejoyce in hope of that Immortal Life and Happi∣ness when thou shalt wipe away all Tears from our Eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, nor any more Pain; but that after Death hath parted us, we may meet together, and acknowledge with Eternal Praises thy wise and mercifull Provi∣dence, which by ways contrary to our
desires, hath brought us to endless and undisturbed Rest, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thy blessed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be all Honour, Glory, and Praise, now and for ever, Amen. Another. EVer blessed Lord, the Father of Mer∣cies, and God of all Consolation; who art not willing any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. We praise and adore thee for thy Pati∣ence, forbearance and goodness to us all our days; that we have enjoyed so much Health and Ease, Peace and Plenty, so many Mercies to sweeten our Passage through this Vale of Tears. O forgive our Ingratitude for, our Abuse of thy Bounty and Kindness to us; and be at Peace with us in and through our Lord and Saviour; and for the time to come give us grace to carry our selves well-plea∣sing in thy sight. In particular, we now recommend unto thee this thy Servant; beseeching it may please thee to restore him unto Health; unto thee no Cure is
difficult, no Case desperate, but all things possible; O command, create Delive∣rance; direct to sutable means, and su∣per-add thy Blessing to them; O spare him that he may recover strength, be∣fore he goes hence, and be no more. But however thou dealest with him, let it be in love, and mercy unto him; pardon all his Sins; and evidence the same un∣to his Soul; give him seasonable Ease, Rest, and Sleep, and patience under his Sufferings; and let these light Afflicti∣ons that are but for a Moment, work out for him a far more exceeding and eter∣nal Weight of Glory; let the Lord Je∣sus be unto him both in Life and Death great Advantage. Take him not out of this Life untill thou hast fitted him for a better. Let not the Enemy have any Advantage over him, or be able to shake his Faith, and Confidence in thy Mercy, through Jesus Christ, to whom with thy Blessed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be all Honour, Glory and Praise, now and ever∣more. Amen.
Another. WE prostrate our selves before thee, O great Physitian of Soul and Body, in a deep sense of our own vile∣ness and unworthiness; acknowledging it of thy free grace and mercy, that thou hast not cut us off in the midst of our Sins, without giving us space to beg thy Par∣don and Mercy: Beseeching thee, for the sake of our All-sufficient Mediator, to be reconciled unto us, and at Peace with us: Wash us throughly from our Iniqui∣ties, and cleanse us from our Sins. In particular, be very gracious and merci∣full to this thy Servant: Thou hast all Distempers at thy Command; if thou sayest go, they go; come, they come; unto God the Lord belong the Issues from Death; O raise him up from his. Bed of languishing: Return, O Lord, de∣liver his Soul, O save him for thy mer∣cies sake; for in Death there is no re∣membrance of thee; in the Grave, who shall give thee Thanks? O let him live that he may bless thee, and be instru∣mental
for thy Glory. But if his days are determined to end now, prepare him for leaving the World. Make him tru∣ly sensible of all his Offences, and accept of the Death and Passion of thy beloved Son, as an Expiation for them. Let him sleep in Jesus, die in the Lord, and rest from his Labours. Take away all sad, disquieting, discouraging, perplexing thoughts. Quiet, compose, support his Spirit. Inable him to wait in an hum∣ble Submission, for that peaceable, joy∣full Repose and Rest which thou hast prepared for thy Servants; for his sake, who subjected himself to Mortality, who died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, and intercedes for us at thy Right-hand, the Anchor of our Hope, and Foundation of our Happiness, in whose Holy Name and Words we further pray unto thee, saying, Our Father, &c. How to spend every Day well. WAste not your precious Morning hours sluggishly in your Bed: Allow your selves so much sleep only as is necessary for your Health. Begin the day with God: Of∣fer
up unto Him (who giveth his Beloved sleep, and careth for you, when you cannot for your self) the first of your Thoughts and Affections. As soon as you awake, lift up a Thankful Heart for your Comfortable Rest, and Sleep, and Preservation: Let not the Continuance, and Commonness of the Mercy, make it seem less, but Encrease your Thankfulness. Beg of Him, to preserve you from all Evil, especially, Sin; To Protect, direct, assist, and Bless you in all your law∣ful undertakings, and ingage in none, where∣in you cannot expect it. Resolve not to lose, or mispend the Day before you, which when gone, you shall see again no more for ever. Think what a Blessed Rest you shall have in the presence of his Angels; and of the Happiness and Privilege of being in his Love, and under his Protection. Let the naked ness of your Body, mind you to avoid Sin, the Cause of Shame; your Rising out of Bed, of the general Resurrection at the last Day before the Judge of all the World; The light of the Day, of the Sun of Righteousness; the several parts of your Cloaths, of taking unto you the whole Armour of God, &c. This is the way to keep out vain Thoughts, and your selves in a Better frame all the Day, which is usually spent well or ill, according as we set out in the beginning of it.
Let your Apparel be Modest, Decent, according to your Place, Condition, and Station, and not Expensive of Time in putting on; not to nourish Pride, or occasion Lust; It's not enough to look to our own Thoughts, except we beware also of provoking others. Affectedness in any thing, is Commendable in nothing. Night and Morning Devotion keeps the fire of the Altar always alive: Enter upon no Business, until you have offered up your Morning Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgi∣ving: Recommend your self and your Affairs unto God by Solemn Prayer, and Return him Thanks for his Care of you, and good∣ness unto you the last Night, and all your Days. And thy Father which seeth in se∣cret, shall reward thee openly Mat. 6.6.. Call to mind, and arm your selves against the Temptations, and failings you are liable to, by-Reason of your Company, Im∣ployment, Inclinations, and watch over them continually. Look for Evils every day, and cast all your Cares, and Fears upon God. Let your Carriage be such all the Day, as those that must appear before him at Night. In all Difficulties ascend to him for Counsel and Direction, in all Troubles for Support, in all your Undertakings for a Blessing. Be still asking, whose am I? what do I here? am
I in my way? Is this my last Day, or do I look for another? Entertain not vain Desires, or worldly Lusts, but resist, reject them; Turn and fix your Thoughts upon something that is good: frequently lift up your Souls to God in men∣tal Praises and Supplications. Make a Covenant with your Eye and Ear, the Inlets of Lust and Vanity. Set the Lord always before you. Do nothing that may Create sorrow at Night, or Confusion at the great Day. Resolve to spend the day as usefully as possible; to God, others, your self; to speak for God and his Glory, what ever it cost you; not to be terrified from, or ashamed of him, or his Service; so as the Testimony of a good Conscience may be ground of your Rejoycing. Your Heavenly work is to run a Race, to fight a good fight, to strive, and wrestle; which cannot be done, without giving all Diligence, Care, and Watchfulness. Follow your Earthly Imployment, though Difficult, with Chearfulness and a Heaven∣ly Mind. Be Industrious in your Business, and Honest in your Dealings: Take no Ad∣vantage of any oversight; work not upon the Ignorance, Unskilfulness, Weakness, or Necessity of others: Do as you would have done, to your selves, or yours. It's better to suffer wrong, than do it. Use not many
words, and those understood by the Con∣tractor: All the Business of a Bargain is sum∣med up in a few: He that speaks least, usu∣ally means fairest: and, He that deceives, by speaking what is true, in a sence not intended or understood by the other, is a Liar and a Thief. Avoid, not only what is false, but that also which deceives; all Equi∣vocating, Intricate, Crafty speeches; speak the sence of your Mind; a Bargain may be as unmerciful, as a Robbery; God still takes the weakest part, and will Reckon with them who Injure the unable to Resist: no man makes an unjust gain, without a certain loss: He can never do, or fare well, who thinks there can be more profit in any thing, than in obeying God. Let no man go beyond to defraud his Brother in any matter, because the Lord is the Avenger of all such 1 Th. 4.6.; Hereafter, at the great Day of Recompence; Here, by making In∣justice as a Canker-worm, to Eat up all the other Increase. Let your Meals be with Thankfulness, Temperance, Sobriety; so as not to Disfit, but Inable you for the Imployments of your Body and Mind. Use Food as Physick, spa∣ringly for Health, rather than Pleasure. Season your Meals with a sence of God's Bounty, and your unworthiness of the least Mercy. Forget not to Pray, and give
Thanks, but not with that carelesness and affected Brevity, as too many do, as if they intended rather a Scoff of the Divine Maje∣sty, than otherwise. Wast not much Time in Recreations; be sure they be Seasonable, Lawful, Harmless Moderate, of good Report, Conducive to Health, to sweeten Rest and Labour. Being necessitated to take the World i your passage to Heaven, walk through it a fast as may be. Remember, all your Business by the way, is to make your self and other Happy. Seek rather to be, than seem strict to do Courtesies, than Profess them. Look upon all things without Passion, because without Interest: not overmuch concern'd how the Scene varies; knowing, when the Play is ended, the Conqueror puts off his Crown in the same Wardrobe, where the Fool puts off his Cap. Take up your Cross daily Luke 9.23., i. e. Bear the Evils of every day with composed Minds. In vain, and to no purpose we gather a stock of patience against the greatest Tribulations, and resolve to bear them, while in the mean time we are fretfull and angry for every trifling Loss or Accident that goes against our humours. The wrongs and vexations we meet with in our intercourse with others, as well as great Calamities, are our proper Cross,
which our Christian Profession obliges us to submit to. Carefully secure your duty; and afterwards care no more, but let God's Will take place. Maintain a chearfull and sedate Temper of Mind under all outward dispen∣sations, though contrary to your particular hopes or desires; as being secure of your In∣terest in him, who hath the management and disposal of all Persons, Times, and Events; the Hearts of all Men are in his hands; and he hath engaged himself, that they shall all work together for your good. Associate your self with the most blameless, serious, practical Christians; who will be stirring you up in your way, and not play the Devil's Part, to lead you out of it; or provoke you to Evil. Improve your Com∣pany in receiving good from, or doing good to them. Assist and Encourage those whose faces are set Heaven-ward; and rescue perishing Souls, who are falling into the flames of an Intollerable Hell. Keep your Tongue from Evil, and your Lips from speak∣ing guile. Let your ordinary speech be for Edification, not Applause; without any thing like Oaths, Imprecations, vain As∣severations, or Protestations. Let no lying, equivocating, vain, obscence, scurrilous, unchast, frothy, unsavory, corrupt Com∣munication; or what may minister to Vice, proceed out of your Lips; but such as may
Administer Grace to the Hearer. Avoid Detraction, or Inquiring into other mens Concerns: He that loves Tale-bearers, shall never be beloved, or Innocent. Speak Evi of no man, or any thing that may tend to his Disgrace, Disparagement, Disadvantage. Be as much afraid to discover a Blemish in another's Eye, as to suffer one in your own: rather Charitably lick it out with your Tongue, than deridingly talk of it. Out of Piety to God, and Compassion to their Souls, let their Infirmities be the object of your Charity, and Pity; not mirth and derision. Every one is bound to preserve his Brother's Reputation. Let your Ear be the Sanctuary of your absent Friend's Name, of your pre∣sent Friend's Secrets; let neither miscarry in your Trust. Avoid those things your self, which in others displease you. Esteem those your best Friends that least spare you; a watchful Conversation, and faithful Admo∣nitions are the most necessary and best ex∣pressions of Friendship. Be of a mild, com∣passionate, affable, courteous Temper and Be∣haviour; not of a froward, peevish, churlish, ruggid Carriage. Put the best Construction on all things; pity the Infirmities, forgive the Injuries of all Men. Account that day lost wherein you have not done, or received some good. Take a view how you have spent the Day according
to the fore-going Directions, alone, in Com∣pany, in your general and particular Calling; what Evil you have committed, what Good received, done, or omitted; what failings in your best Performances; be humbled for eve∣ry Miscarriage, and thankful for every Mercy. By daily summing up our Estate with God, we shall know what we have to expect and answer for; not letting our Score run so long, but by making Even with him, that we shall not be Ignorant of our Debts, or fear an Audit, or despair of Pardon. Having waited upon God by Solemn Pray∣er, and committed your self and yours to his Protection; Close your Eyes with a Holy Confidence of it; but not without a serious Meditation of your last Hour; let the Night Represent to you the many Days of Dark∣ness; your Bed, your Grave; your Sleep, your Death; and so Compose your Soul, as if you looked not to awake till the Morning of the Resurrection. Thus on a pale sheet I extended shall, Become e're long a lifeless Course; and all These too much prized Trifles which Retard My Soul in her best flight, without Regard Or Relish, must be left: Then in my Grave, Where all things are forgotten, I shall have A Cool and loanly Lodging on the Earth, Lock't up from all this world's miscalled mirth.
If thou, O Blest Creator, shalt Restore, The Peace, Ease, Plenty, I enjoy'd before: Let not these over-valu'd Blessings move My Earth-bred Thoughts, to slight the things above. Here's no Abiding City, but thy Grace, Can make the House of Death, a Resting-place. Morning Prayer. ALmighty and most Merciful Father, who knowest my down-lying and up-rising, and art acquainted with all my ways. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with Approbation: 'Tis of thy Infinite Mercy, that in stead of Praying unto Thee, and Praising of Thee, I am not Blaspheming thy Name in Endless Torments. For, I am of the degenerate Posterity of our first Parents, and have daily broken Thy Laws and Commandments, which are all Holy, Just, and Good. O Remember not a∣gainst me what I have done against Thee, but what thy Son hath done and suffered for me, and accept of me in him to the praise of thy Grace. Work a Through Change in my whole Soul; Inlighten
my dark understanding, that I may savingly know Thee; Spiritualize my Affections that I may love Thee; Bow and Incline my will wholly to submit unto Thee; Reform my life, that I may serve Thee, and be saved by thee. Cleanse me from my secret Sins, and let no Presumptuous Sins have Dominion over me. Wean me from the world; let my Heart, my Treasure, my Conversa∣tion be in Heaven. Turn away mine Eyes from beholding Vanity. Set a watch, O Lord, before my Mouth, and keep the Door of my Lips, that I offend not with my Tongue: Let me delight in that which is Good, eschew and abhor that which is Evil; set thee always before me, that I may not dare to Sin against Thee. Make me peaceable and con∣tented in my self, useful and beneficial to others, well-pleasing and acceptable unto Thee. Mind me frequently of my latter end; while I live let me live un∣to thee, when I die let me die unto thee, living and dying let me be thine. Be very merciful to all Mankind, especially those that are called Christians: Inlarge
and Bless thy Holy Catholick Church with more abundant Peace, Purity, and Concord. Pardon the Crying Sins of these three Nations; let us search and try our ways, and turn unto thee our God; make us a People peculiar to thy self, zealous of good works. Bless our Soveraign, with all our Magistrates and Ministers; let them discharge their Duty as those that must give an account. Be with me this Day, and all my Days; where-ever I am, and whatsoever I am doing, let me awefully Remember, God made me, God preserves me, God re∣deemed me, God sees me, and God will Judge me. Never leave me nor forsake me. Guide and direct me by thy Counsel, Assist me by thy Holy Spirit, Prosper me in all my ways, and at last Receive me unto Glory, through Jesus Christ, in whose Holy Name and Words I further Pray, Our Father, &c. Evening Prayer. MOst Holy, and ever Blessed Lord God. Thou hast Commanded
me to Pray, and so it is my great Duty; and hast stiled thy self a God hearing Prayers, and so it is my great Privilege. In Obedience to thy Command, and in Confidence of thy Promises, I desire in all Humility and holy Confidence to wait upon thee at this Time, in and through my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; for his sake beseeching thee for Mercy, and Grace; Mercy, for the Pardon of my Sins, without which I am of all Creatures most miserable, and Grace for the sanctifying of my Nature, and amendment of my life. Search me, O Lord, and Try me, and whatsoever is displeasing in me unto thee, remove it thence, and lead me in the way ever∣lasting. Let me value and mind the things that are not seen, more than the things that are seen, because the things that are seen, are Temporal, and those that are not seen are Eternal. Incline my Heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to any Evil way. Let not the Plea∣sures nor Troubles of this world allure or hinder me from serving thee with Chearfulness and Delight. Prepare me
for every Condition, for every Change, especially for my great and last Change. give me Grace so to live, that I may be neither asham'd to live, nor afraid, nor un∣fit to die; that when thou shalt Call me hence, thou may'st Receive me unto the Eternal Enjoyment of thy self in Hea∣ven. Be very Gracious and Merciful to all Mankind, to all Jews, Turks, Pagans, and Infidels; bring them to the Know∣ledge and Obedience of the Truth. Bless, Prosper, and Protect thy Church, and every Member of it; be with it unto the End of the World, and let not the Gates of Hell prevail against it. Reform what∣soever thou seest amiss in the Belief and Lives of Christians; especially, in these Three Nations; Continue unto us Peace, with the Gospel of Peace for thy Name sake. Bless our Soveraign, and all in Authority, with Holiness here, and Happiness hereafter; Let all his Sub∣jects live under him quiet and peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty. I et the Ministers of thy Gospel Preach both by their Lives, and Doctrine, and daily turn many unto Righteousness.
Let none of my Relations be Strangers unto thy self, nor any of thine Afflicted Servants be forgotten by Thee. Relieve them according to their several Neces∣sities and the Riches of thy Grace in thy Son. I Praise Thee for what thou hast afforded me, Thy good Creatures, thy Blessing with them, thy Provision for me, and preservation of me this Day, and all my Days: Let me lie me down, and take my Rest and Sleep, because thou Lord makest me to dwell in safety. Whether I sleep or wake, live or die, let me be found thine own, to thine Eternal Glory, and my Everlasting Salvation, through Jesus Christ, who hath taught me when I pray to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. Grace before Meat. BLess, and Sanctifie, most Merciful Father, These thy good Creatures to my use, and me unto thy Service, give them strength to nourish me, and me grace to serve Thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
Grace after Meat. BLessed be thy Holy Name, O Lord, for all thy Mercies, for these thy good Creatures; make them healthful for my nourishment, and me thankful for all thy Mercies; Inable me by them to live to thy praise, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. How to spend the Lord's Day. REmember the Lord's Day before it come, so as to prepare for it by suitable Meditations: Go seasonably to your Rest, to prevent heaviness, or drowziness. Pru∣dently dispose and dispatch your Earthly Affairs, that they may be off your hands, and out of your mind, as much as possible, on that Day; that so your Heart may be more free, and fit for the Duties of it. Seek Remission for the Miscarriages of the Week past, that you may not come with guilt or trouble upon your Consciences before the Lord. Think not your worldly Business more worthy of your Early Rising, than your spi∣ritual Imployment. Let your first Thoughts
be, not only Holy, but suitable to the Day. With gladness consider how Early your Re∣deemer arose: what a Day of Mercy you are awoke to; to wait upon God for Re∣ceiving and Exercising of Grace, in order to Glory; to Cast off the Distracting Thoughts and Businesses of the World: and what a Happy opportunity of Good, is put into your Hands, to get more in one Day, than this World can afford you in all your lives. Spend it as a Day of Thanksgiving for the greatest Mercies: Therefore, let the manner of it, and the frame of your Hearts, be holy Joy, Gratitude, and Love, stirred up by the exercise of Faith and Hope. Inlarge your Personal Devotions on this Day: and let not Secret Prayer be slubbered over slightly, but performed with Seriousness, Reverence, Alacrity, and sutable to the na∣ture, and end of the Day. Go to the solemn Assembly with Joy and Gladness, as to the receiving of a great Blessing, with desires after, and hope to speed: not with unwillingness, as to an unpleasant Task and Burden; as Carnal Hearts, that love not God, his Grace, or Service; are weary of all they do, and glad when it is over. Think how Damned Souls would Hear and Pray, if they might with you be tryed again: and how unfit, unbecoming a Careless, a Drowzy Body, dull Affections,
dead Services are, for the living God. Com∣pose your selves with all Reverence, as con∣sidering with whom you have to do, and for what. Beware of a wandring Eye and Mind, or slighting what you Hear. Be seriously imploy'd all the Time. And while others are quarrelling with the Imperfections of the Speaker, or Congregation, be laying up the Word in your Heart. Be Reverent, Solemn, and Serious in every Duty; be sure your Heart be in them. In Confession, Humiliation, Petition, Thanksgiving, Singing, when the Word is Read or Preacht, whe∣ther, Commands, Promises, Threatnings, Calls, Invitations, be answerably Affected with them, as if you heard God speaking from Heaven. Haste not away while the Minister is pro∣nouncing the Blessing, but hope, desire, and believe it shall Descend upon you. Leave not the Assembly until you have lift up your Heart for Pardon, and a Blessing upon the Ordinance to your self, and all present: In these, or the like words. A short Prayer. I Adore and Magnifie thee, O merciful Father, for this opportunity of hear∣ing from, and waiting upon thee (O
pardon whatever thou hast seen amiss in us) and let the Fruit of it be unto Ho∣liness; and the end Everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. After your Attendance in Publick, with that Concern and seriousness the work re∣quires and deserves; let not your self loose the rest of the Day to secular Diversions, and Concerns, and thereby choke and stifle those good Instructions and devout Affections that have been raised and excited in you. Let your Diet be moderate (lest it make you drowzy) and your Hearts Heavenly at it: your Discourse savoury, seasoned with Grace, suitable to the Company, and the Day; in the chearful Remembrance of the love of your Redeemer: the special work of the Day being to Celebrate the Memo∣rial of his Resurrection, and the whole work of our Redemption by him; we ought to speak as much as possible of it, under a sence of our Natural misery; and in stirring up lively Apprehensions of Infinite Condescend∣ing Goodness, in the special exercise of Faith and Love, and Joyful Praises. Having spent as much of the Day as you can in Publick Worship, and in Reading the Word, and ruminating upon it; Review the Duties, Mercies, and Miscarriages of the
Day. Call over what you have Heard and Read, and urge it upon your Heart; Beg the Divine Blessing and Assistance for the Advantage and Improvement of it, and Par∣don for your failings. Bless God for any Enlargement, or Good received. Recom∣mend your self unto him for the Ensuing Night; and let your last Thoughts be in the thankful joyful sence of the Mercies you have, and hope for, and the goodness of God in your Mediator. Confidently trust your self and yours in his Hand; longing for your nearer approach unto him, and full Enjoyment of him in Glory. Morning Prayer, on the Lord's Day. MOst Holy and Infinitely glorious Lord God. Thou art greatly to be feared in the Assembly of thy Saints, and to be had in Reverence by all that draw nigh unto Thee. It's an Infinite Condescention in thy Majesty, to suffer such a despicable Worm as I am, to come before Thee, to wait upon Thee, to speak unto Thee, to have any thing to do with Thee in a way of Grace and Mercy. Had'st thou dealt with me ac∣cording to my Deserts, and Rewarded
me after mine Iniquities, I had been long ago in that place of Torment where Prayer, and the means of Grace could do me no good at all. O Pardon my abuse of thy Mercies, mispending my Time, Prophaning thy Sabbaths, Pollu∣ting thine Ordinances, the unworthy Re∣turns I have made unto Thee for all thy Benefits, which might justly cause thee to withdraw thy self from me, and thy Blessing from thine Ordinances. Make me truly sensible of the worth of the Opportunity thou this Day puts into my hand for the good of my Immortal Soul; let it not be as a prize put into the hand of a Fool, that hath no heart to use it: Help me to make a wise, a right Improvement of the same, for the Glory of Thy Name, and for the pre∣paring my self for my Eternal Rest; Let my Thoughts this Day be much up∣on it, and upon that wonderful love in my Redemption. Take away my Heart of Stone, that's so insensible of my own Vileness and thy abundant Goodness, and give me a Heart of Flesh; write thy Laws upon it, put thy Fear within me,
that I may never depart from Thee. Let not thy Sabbaths, nor thine Ordi∣nances be continued in vain unto me; but let me grow in Grace under all the means of Grace I enjoy. The older I grow, the better let me be; the nearer I come to my end, let me be the fitter for thy self. Let me love the Habitation of thy House, and the place where thine Honour Dwelleth; and Esteem one Day in thy Courts, better than a Thousand elsewhere: and that I had rather be a Door-keeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. Let it be my Meat and Drink, the Joy and Rejoycing of my Soul, to do thy Will, and to be Im∣ployed in thy Service. Visit the dark Corners of the Earth with the light of thy glorious Gospel, and let all that en∣joy it walk worthy of it. Make our Soveraign, and all our Superiors, thy faithful Subjects, and Servants. Let thy Priests be Cloathed with Righteous∣ness, and thy Saints shout for Joy. Be in all our Solemn Assemblies; Accom∣pany thine own Institutions with thine
own Blessing. Make thy Word in the mouths of thy Ministers very effectual for turning many unto Righteousness. Be with me this Day, let my Confes∣sions of Sin Increase my Hatred against it, my Praises and Thanksgivings be the Inward sense of my Soul: Let my Con∣versing with Heavenly things, have an Influence upon me, for the bettering of me. Go along with me into the Assem∣bly of thy Servants; unite and compose my Thoughts in thy Presence, let me attend upon thee without Distraction. Let me Consider, thou hast an Eye up∣on me at all Times, especially when I draw nigh unto Thee in the way of thy Worship. Let me Pray unto Thee in Spirit and Truth, because thou art a Spi∣rit, and requirest so to be worshipped. Give me a Hearing Ear, a seeing Eye, an understanding Heart. Let me hear thy Word, as thy Word, as that Word by which I shall be Judged, and which is able to save my Soul, by believing and obeying of it, through Jesus Christ, in whose Holy Name, and Words, I fur∣ther Pray, Our Father which art in Hea∣ven, &c.
Evening Prayer on the Lord's Day. MOst great and Infinitely glorious Lord God, who hast Exalted thy self far above the Heavens, and above the Praises, and Apprehensions of the best of thy Creatures. Unto thee be all possible Praise, Honour and Glory, for what thou art in thy self, and unto all thy Creatures; for thy Infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, so apparent in Creating, Preserving of, Providing for them: That the Heavens Declare thy Glory, and the Firmaments shew thy Handywork; that the Eyes of all wait upon Thee, and that thou openest thy hand and fillest them with Good; that thou hast not left thy self without witness where thy Gospel is not Preached, in that thou doest them good, and sendest them Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, and fills their Hearts with Food and Gladness. But what shall I render unto thee for thy unspeakable goodness to Mankind, not only in making us
capable of serving and enjoying thee, but in providing for us a Saviour to Re∣concile and Renew us, when we had forfeited thy favour, which was our Happiness, and lost thine Image which was our Excellency and Glory: That so many have enjoy'd thy Gospel, and been translated out of the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of thy Dear Son: That I live in a place where thy Gospel is Preached, the way to Heaven so clearly Revealed; where I have so many opportunities of hearing from thee, of waiting upon thee; that this Day I have enjoyed the means of being Happy with Thee for ever; O accompany the same with thy Blessing to that End. Let me live the Sermons that I hear, the Ordinances I enjoy, the Duties I am Imployed in. Let my Thoughts be much upon that Happy state, where I shall offend thee and my self no more; but Reap my Redeemer's Purchase for those that sincerely serve Thee. Look in much Mercy upon all Mankind; Say, Behold me, Behold me, to the People that have not known thee,
that have not call'd upon thy Name. Let all the Ends of the Earth see the Sal∣vation of our God. Encrease the num∣ber of true Believers, daily add to thy Church such as shall be saved. Forgive the crying Sins of these Three Nations, turn us unto thee by a speedy, and un∣feigned Repentance and Reformation, that Iniquity may not be our Ruine. Compose our Differences, make up our Breaches, heal our Divisions. Endue our Severaign with all necessary quali∣fications for his present and future Happiness. Let none of our Magistrates bear the Sword in vain, but, be faithful to that Trust committed to them. Re∣move not thy Candlestick; let not our Teachers be driven into Corners; let their Doctrine be pure, and their Lives exemplary for the good of Souls; ac∣company their Endeavours with thy Blessing. Bring unto my Remembrance that part of thy Word I have Read or Heard this Day; let me hide it in my heart, that I may not dare to Sin against thee. As I am one day nearer my End, let me be so much nearer keeping an
Eternal Sabbath with thee in Heaven. Smell a sweet savour from the sincere services of thy Servants, Return gracious Answers to their Prayers; Pardon what thou hast seen amiss in me, and them this Day, through Jesus Christ, who hath taught us to Pray, Our Father, &c. Directions as to Prayer. STir up in your Souls the most lively Apprehensions, Reverence, Faith, and Love, as to him before whom you are go∣ing to Appear; and upon what terms he is engaged, and hath resolved to Answer, or deny you. Be throughly sensible of your Sins and wants, and of the worth of those Mercies you are going to ask. Come always in the Humility that becomes a worthless Condemned Sinner, and in the belief and boldness that becomes a Son, a Member of Christ. Disclaim all worthiness of your own, but be as Confident in every lawful Request, as if you saw your Crucified Mediator interceding for you with his, and your Father. Pray with Understanding, Attention, Ab∣horrence of your Sins, a deep sence of your Necessities, a holy Confidence of Assistance and Audience, through your Redeemer,
God's merciful Nature, and gracious Pro∣mises; with holy, and lively Affections, with Charity, a Heart filled with good will to all, your very Enemies; with uprightness and sincerity. Beware you love not Sin, but resolve to leave it, when you Pray against it; that you truely Desire and Endeavour for the Grace and Mercy you ask, and ask not for that you would not have. Keep your Heart all the while in a reve∣rent, serious, fervent frame, as if God's Glory was visible to your Bodily Eye: Suf∣fer it not to wander, grow Remiss, Cold, Formal: It's said of Luther, that he used such Reverence and Humility, as in the presence of Almighty God, but such fervency and Faith, as if he had been talking with his Friend: he that asks with a doubting, listless mind, begs for nothing but to be denied. Make your Prayers your Rule; all your Duties are there set down, what you are bound to do, for the doing whereof you beg the Divine assistance. God loves to Bless and Reward Industry, but not to support Idle∣ness. As we must ask of God what we need, so, we must labour for all we ask, by the Use and Improvement of what we have He that would Pray with Effect, must live with Care and Piety.
Directions as to Reading and Hearing the Word. AWefully Remember that the Scriptures are the Word of God; full of many gra∣tious Promises, Encouragements and Sup∣ports; the Doctrine of unseen things, and of the greatest Mercies; the Rule by which you must live and be Judged: Therefore Read and Meditate upon it, with Humility, Reverence, Love, and great Delight, Sub∣mission, and a full Resolution to obey it. If ny thing seem Difficult, or Improbable, uestion not, suspect not it, but your own gnorance and Understanding; and Pray, hat the Spirit which Indited it, may expound  to you. Before you go to Hear, Pray for the Mi∣nister, the Congregation, and your selves, for the Divine Assistance and Blessing. Lay side all worldly Cares and Thoughts, all thiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with Meekness the Ingrafted Word which is able to save your Souls. Come not with an Irreverent, Careless, unbelieving Heart, as if it were a light matter, that ittle concern'd you; but with Faith, Love, and Reverence, with a deep, an wakened sence of its unspeakable weight, ecessity, Consequence, and Concernment
to you. Come on purpose to get Direction and Strength against your particular failing Hear with Attentive, willing, humble Honest, Teachable Hearts; and Applicatio of it to your selves; with a design to Profi with Resolution to obey, all that shall b Commanded you of God. As new bo Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word that you may grow thereby. Despise it no in the plainness of it: Hear not to Censure or Cavil, but to be taught and Ruled. Su∣fer not vain Thoughts, or drowzy, careles Negligence, to hinder your Attention. Chie∣ly mark the drift and design of the Discours and those things that are of the greate weight and concernment to your selves. When you come Home, Meditate o what you have heard. Lament a stupi careless, unbelieving Heart. Pray over, an endeavour to practise what you have learn Reason, and Plead with your own Heart and let Conscience Repeat, and Do the wor of the Minister again. Make Conscience o Teaching, and Provoking others; Pi Careless, Ignorant Souls: God usually Bless the Grace that's Improved in doing hi Service.
The Lord's Supper. THis Sacrament is so Called, with Refe∣rence to the Time of its first Institution and Administration, at our blessed Lord and aviour's last Supper, Immediately before his Passion, (shewing whereunto it Related) for  Remembrance of him, the Chief Subject, and Inward part of it. It is, (1) A standing Memorial of his great Love, in offering up his Life a Sacrifice for our Sins; and a Seal of the Covenant of Grace. (2) A Commemoration of his Passion and Sacrifice; the Benefits of which are were assured to every worthy Receiver. (3) A Renewing and Confirmation of the Vow ve made in Baptism, to be his faithful Ser∣vants unto our Lives end. (4) To testifie our Inion with him, and Communion with one nother. (5) A Seal and means of our Spiri∣tual nourishment, and growth in the mystical Body of Christ, the Church; and of our be∣ing strengthned with Divine Grace, and Refreshed, highly satisfied and pleased with the sence of God's Love and Mercy through the Sufferings of our Blessed Redeemer, as the Pallat is with wholsom, agreeable food. The Body and Blood of Christ is signified by the Bread and Wine. All the Spiritual Change is wrought by the Faith of the Re∣ceiver,
not the intention, or words of the Giver; to him that believes they are the very Body and Blood of Christ, who as in his Sufferings, as undertaking, and accom∣plishing our Reconciliation with God, ac∣cepted in full Discharge for all our Sins, i Received by the Believing Soul for its life and support, Comfort, and well-being to all Eternity. The Ministers Consecrating them, so setting them a part from a Common to a Spiritual Use, signifies God's setting hi Son apart to the work of our Redemption Breaking of the Bread, and pouring out the Wine, signifies the Sufferings Christ endured for us. His giving them to the Communi∣cants, signifies God's giving his Crucified Son to and for every Believing Receiver, a their Redeemer and Saviour. His saying Take, Eat, &c. fignifies God's Will for ap∣plying Christ unto our selves. Before we Receive, we must Prepare our selves, by examining and awakening our Knowledge of the Principles of Religion particularly, of the Sacrament. Our Faith Repentance of all our Sins. Our sincere Obedience; which we must fully Resolve up∣on, else we are false, and play the Hypo∣crites with God in the Covenant we are going to renew, and Seal. Our love to God and the Brethren. Our Forgiveness of all Men, and Charity to them. Our Sins and
wants, sueing for Pardon and Supply. Our earnest desire after the Graces of the Spirit; Renewing the Exercise of them by serious Meditation, and Earnest Prayer. Taking a strict account of the Miscarriages of our Hearts, and lives as to God, and Man, and our selves in publick, and secret, and being deeply humbled for them, especially since the last renewal of our Covenant with God; cleansing our selves from every new Pollution: seriously considering all the Work we are going to do, and all the Mercies we are going to Receive; and what Graces and Exercises of them are necessary to all this. In Receiving, our Behaviour must be hum∣ble, and reverent, as to the outward Gesture of our Bodies, and inward frame of our Souls. We must seriously mind the Elements and Actions, and the things signified, repre∣sented, exhibited thereby. We must Medi∣tate on Christ's Death, so Disgraceful, so painful for us; grieving for, hating, loathing our Sins, the Cause of it; Hungering and Thirsting after him, and the Benefits pur∣chased by him: Applying the Promises of the New Testament, which is of full force through the Death of the Testator: wholly Trusting our miserable Souls upon him, as our All-sufficient Help and Saviour: Draw∣ing nourishment, and all needful supplies from Him in whom all fulness Dwells: Re∣joycing
in, and giving thanks for his Love: Renewing our Covenant; mingling all with Faith, and most indeared love to him and his Servants: with a firm Resolution of future Obedience, and unfeigned Consent to our Covenant with him. After Receiving, we must Examine our selves, as to our Carriage, and Behaviour: Mourn for our Defects, in Preparation and Performance: be Earnest for Pardon: by after Pains, endeavour to obtain the Bene∣fits of the Ordinance: Be very Thankful for any Assistance, and Enlargement; la∣bouring to retain the sweet relish still upon our Spirits: Encourage our selves in Atten∣dance upon God, in this and all other Duties: Endeavour to draw more and more Virtue from Christ, for Crucifying our In∣ordinate Desires, Irregular Passions, and Affections, and every thing displeasing to him: Be very watchful against Sin, and Carnal Security; that we let not In his and our Enemy, but preserve our Souls, his Temple, clean and undefiled: Carefully per∣form our Vows, and keep the Covenant we have Renewed, and Sworn to.
A Prayer before, or at the Sacrament. LOok down from Heaven, the Habi∣tation of thy Holiness and Glo∣ry, most gracious Father, upon a vile, sinfull, worthless Creature, that desires in all Abasement and Humility to pro∣strate himself before thee. To serve thee is my highest Honour, and to enjoy thee, my greatest Happiness; yet how apt am I to look upon thy Service as my Burden? And how oft do I draw near unto thee with my Lips, and seem to honour thee with my Mouth, when my Heart is far from thee? Which of thy Mercies have I not abused? Which of thy Corrections have I not despised, or been impatient under? Which of thy Sabbaths have I not prophaned? Which of thine Ordinances have I not polluted? Which of thy Promises, or Threatnings have I not slighted, undervalued, disbe∣lieved? Which of thy Commandments have I not broken in Thought, Word, or Deed? Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes. God be mer∣cifull
to me a Sinner. Thou mayest justly inflict upon me all the Curses that are writ in thy Law, and give me my Portion with Hypocrites and Unbelie∣vers. But there is Mercy with thee that thou mayest be feared, that my Sins may be pardoned, and my Soul sa∣ved. Thou hast exalted thy Son to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give Repentance unto Israel, and Remission of Sins. He came not to call the Righteous, but Sin∣ners to Repentance. O for his sake pardon all mine Iniquities, accept of me graciously, and love me freely; look fa∣vourably upon me, be mercifull unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love and fear thy Name. Receive me into thy favour. Give me an unfeigned Consent, and the necessary Conditions of my Right to that Covenant, which I am going to have sealed unto me by thee. Let Christ be formed in me, and altogether desirable unto me. Indue me, and all that celebrate thy love at this Institution, with sutable dispositions and qualifications for so solemn an Ordinance; a through Sence of our own vileness and
deserts, and of thy Infinite love and goodness: A stedfast belief in thee, and thy gracious Promises; fervent Affecti∣ons unto thee, and all that bears thy Image, and Likeness. Let us be filled with the joyfull Exercises of Faith, and Love, Praise, and Thanksgiving, to which we are invited. Let us sensibly feel the Death of Christ to be sweet, and pleasant, refreshing and strengthening unto our Souls; as we shall the Crea∣tures of Bread and Wine unto our Bo∣dies. Let us Take and Eat the Elements, in a thankfull Remembrance, that his Bo∣dy was broken and given, and his Blood shed for us. Let our Taking, Eating, and Drinking, be significations of our recei∣ving and applying Christ, with all his Benefits unto our own Soul's Comfort and Advantage, upon thine own Terms, as made Man for us, and a Sacrifice for our Sins. Let every Grace of thy Holy Spirit be sutably acted and increased by thee: That we may go from strength to strength; from one degree of grace, to another; be more inabled chearfully to do and suffer thy Will, untill Grace be
perfected in Glory; through Jesus Christ, our great High-priest, Sacrifice, and Al∣ter; to whom with thy Blessed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be all Glory, Honour, and Praise, now and evermore. Amen. At the Sacrament. THis Sacrament is a visible Repre∣sentation of the Sacrifice our Re∣deemer made upon the Cross to the Fa∣ther for our Sins; to keep up the Re∣membrance of it, and affect us with it, and to profess our Confidence in a cru∣cified Christ; for the Pardon of our Sins, Acceptance of our Persons, and all our Performances. In him I see Divine An∣ger appeased, his Justice satisfied, our Debt paid. O what hath our Lord done for our sake! How hath he ascertained his good Will to our Nature, by assuming it into his own Person, when we might have ex∣pected rather that it should have been an Abomination to him! Those amazing difficulties, and discouragements that stood in the way of his Kindness, could
not hinder, or diminish it. He hath en∣dured the Cross, and despised the shame, for the love wherewith he loved us: Gi∣ving sensible demonstrations, that it was easier to him to suffer such Torments, than to see us perish; and to abide all the Despites, Indignities, Contradicti∣ons of Sinners, than to forbear to save them. O astonishing, undeserved Kindness! We could plead nothing of our own, ex∣cept provocation, and perversness, could pass for desert; then indeed we had been great Meriters. How great therefore is the depth of that Wisdom, and how is that Goodness to be adored, that when Heaven and Earth was at so great a di∣stance, found out a way for Reconcilia∣tion? 'Twas righteous with the provoked Majesty of Heaven and Earth, to exe∣cute speedily upon me, the Sentence a∣gainst Evil-doers: But behold him offer∣ing by his Ambassador, Terms of Peace, and Amity; to proclaim, and seal a per∣petual Agreement, and Reconciliation. This Sacrament seals Remission of Sins, to
all that perform the Conditions of the Co∣venant. O unmerited, unthought of Mercy, Favour, and Kindness! towards a Stranger, a Rebel, an Enemy! That can do no∣thing to oblige him, that hath done so much to incense him, that's so unwor∣thy of him, so unmeet, unprepared to receive him, to entertain him, to be so nigh unto him. But (O Infinite Condescention!) the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eter∣nity, dwells in the humble and contrite Heart, that trembles at his Word. O take possession of thine own, which thou hast so dearly purchased by thy own Blood, let that cleanse me from all Sin. When you receive the Bread. THis is the Bread that came down from Heaven, and giveth life unto the World; which I receive as a sacred Memo∣rial of his exceeding Love, his painfull Sufferings; as a Seal of those gracious Terms of Mercy he hath thereby pur∣chased, who suffered the Punishment due
unto me, died for my Sins, rose again for my Justification, and ever lives to make in∣tercession for me. Who can sufficiently admire and praise thee, O mercifull Lord, for this thy con∣descending goodness, in taking upon thee our Nature, standing in our stead, ma∣king thy Soul an offering for our Sins? Glory be to God on high, for Peace be∣tween Heaven and Earth, for his Good∣will towards Men. I do this in remembrance of thee, most mercifull Saviour, who remembredst us in our low, our lost Estate; becamest our Surety, paidst our Debt, pacifiedst, reconciledst an offended God, enduredst the Cross, underwentst the Shame; who after thou hadst by thy self purged our Sins, sat down at the Right-hand of the Majesty on high, where thou pleadest our Cause, and preservest in thy Favour all those that sincerely wait upon thee, and serve thee. Let not, O let not this unspeakable Mercy and Kindness, be ever forgotten by me. O keep such a lively Sence thereof upon my Soul, as may inflame
me with Love unto thee, delight in thee, a continual Care to please thee, to do all I can for thee; let nothing blot out the Remembrance of this thy Love unto me; let every thing mind me of it, un∣till I come to be for ever with thee. When you receive the Cup. BEhold the Blood of the Covenant, be∣tween God and Sinners, shed for the Remission of my Sins, as well as for any others; by my Lord, and my God; who loved me, and gave himself for me: Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and hath made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father, be Glory and Do∣minion for ever and ever. Amen. Adored be thy Infinite Wisdom, Love, and Mercy, in our Redemption; that left us not as the faln Angels, to perish without a Remedy; but took upon him our Nature, that he might die for our Sins: That thou invitest, and bringest us into a Covenant of Amity and Kind∣ness, who canst not be injured by our
Enmity, who hast no need of our Friend∣ship; who art no more benefited by us, than the Sun is by darting its Beams on a grain of Dust, on a polluted Creature, on a corrupted Carcass; with whom it's as easie to breath us into Hell, as to breath out one kind invitation to us. Worthless, vile Wretch am I; that de∣serves to be utterly abhorred, forsaken, rejected by him, who is become my reconciled most mercifull Father, my God in Covenant; who will subdue, and pardon mine Iniquities, who knows what I have need of here, and will give it; who will assist, accept of, and bless my sincere Endeavours; for which he hath given me his Word, his Oath, his Seal, who cannot lye, which shall never be broken. O my God, I praise and magnifie thee, for this thy Infinite Eternal Goodness, this inexpressible Love. Let such a deep and lasting Sence thereof, rest upon my Soul, that it may be my great Satisfaction and Pleasure to meditate upon, and comme∣morate it; my dissatisfaction to be long
diverted from it. O hasten the day when I shall have nothing else to do, but to sing thy Praise, to celebrate it world without End. In the mean time, I offer up my Soul and Body, all that I am, and have, un∣to thee; to be sanctified, guided, saved, disposed of by thee: Beseeching thee, to make me willing, and obedient, pati∣ent, and contented, humble and submis∣sive, chearfull, and believing, stedfast and unmoveable in thy Service unto the End. Let me approve my self actually re∣conciled unto thee, by my Hatred of my Enmity with Sin, which made the first Separation between thee and us; and for which thy Son was made a Sa∣crifice; and be afraid of offending thee, not only, because thou hast Power to punish, but because of thy Love where∣with thou hast loved me. And the Con∣ditions of our Peace, which are so reason∣able, so comfortable; that we repent of, and forsake our Crimes: Receive thy Son as our Mediatour, serve thee, which
are such desirable Priviledges, our Hap∣piness, as well as our Duty? O make good the gracious Promises of the Covenant unto me; that thou wilt be my God; forgive my Sins, give me a new Heart, sanctifie my Nature, put thy fear within me, that I shall never depart from thee; that thou wilt never leave me nor forsake me. O free me from the listlesness and backwardness of my Will, to give up my self wholly unto thee, who so wil∣lingly gavest thy Son an offering for my Sins. Let this Love make us more and more affectionate in our Attendance up∣on thee, to approach thee with Alacri∣ty and Delight, that wa'st so solicitous, and at so much Cost to be at Peace with us; to combine all our Thoughts and Affections together to serve thee, who hast done so much to reduce us honou∣rably, and successfully unto thy ever blessed self. With great Thankfulness let me ac∣cept of the smartest Dispensation, and be contented in every Condition, now I
am reconciled: Meekly enduring the Chastisements of a Father, since they are all for my Profit, since I am not like to feel his Stroaks, as a Judge. Blessed is he whose Iniquities are pardoned, un∣to whom the Lord imputeth not Sin. Let me never more harbour any hard thoughts of thee, after so signal a Dis∣covery of thy self in thy Son. If so willing and desirous to make Reconcilia∣tion by his Blood for our Sins, when they lay before thee in their crimson Aggravations, much more on a particu∣lar fall, that we are truly humbled for. How can we refuse Peace, so tenderly and importunately offered by Thee, who shuts out none, that shut not out them∣selves: Art more willing to receive us into favour, to embrace us, than we to go to thee, to receive thee. Extend thy Mercy (O Father of Mer∣cies) to all Mankind. Give Repentance unto Sinners, increase of Grace and Strength to all thy Servants; reduce those that are out of the way, raise up those that are fallen, confirm and streng∣then
those that stand, relieve and com∣fort all that are in distress; pity the Follies, the Degeneracies of Mankind, deliver them from their Sins and from their Miseries: Hear the daily Prayers and Groans of thy Holy Catholick Church, and every Member of the same; enlighten those that are out of it, with the Knowledge of thy Truth; make us in these three Nations a Holy People, a Habitation of Righteousness, a Place where thy Honour dwells. Reward and Recompence all our Friends, grant For∣giveness and Charity to all our Ene∣mies, continue good Will among our Neighbours; support the Sick in Faith and Patience, be with those who are leaving the World, fit them and us for a better, receive the Souls which thou hast redeemed with thy Son's most pre∣cious Blood, to whom with thy blessed Majesty and Holy Spirit, be all Glory, Honour, and Praise, now and for ever. Amen.
A Prayer after the Sacrament. ALL possible Praise and Thanks be given unto thee, most gracious God and mercifull Father; for all the Instances of thy Goodness unto me; for my Health, Peace, Safety, Food and Ray∣ment, the Society, Kindness, and love of Friends; Success of my Labours and good Endeavours after the things of this life and a better; for all the Blessings I have enjoy'd, for preserving me from those Evils I have deserved and escaped; for the means of Grace, the Assistances of thy Holy Spirit, any Inclinations to∣wards thee, any care to please thee, any fear of offending thee; for the Fountain and Foundation of them all, the Lord Jesus Christ; for thy wonderfull Love in sending him, to save us from Sin and Misery, to reveal and lead us to Eternal Happiness, and for giving me this Day, the Pledges and Assurances of the same. My highest Praises fall infinitely short of thy most Excellent Majesty; and I am ashamed of the most affectionate
Thanks I can render unto thee; for those inestimable Benefits thou hast con∣ferr'd upon me, and so long continued unto me: How much Cause then have I to be abased for my shamefull Disobe∣dience, forgetfulness of thee, and Ingra∣titude to thee, to whom I owe all I have in this World, or hope for in the next? I humbly implore thy tender Mercies in the forgiveness of all my sins, for his sake, who hath born the Burden of them, and satisfied thy Justice for them. Let me have such a lively sence of thy mar∣vellous love, and of my Redeemer's suf∣ferings, always possessing my Soul, as may oblige me for ever unto thee; Con∣strain me to love thee, to obey thee, to trust in thee, to be always content with the Portion thy Wisdom and Love al∣lots unto me; and to rejoyce in the midst of all the Troubles of this Life, now thou hast given me the Earnest, the Pledges of my Eternal Salvation. Pre∣serve in me a constant sence of the great value of my Soul, for which he hath paid so dear; and a great Esteem of that Purity and Holiness, for the restoring of
which, he was obedient to the Death of the Cross. Let the same mind be in me that was in Christ; Let that Lowliness and Humility, Tenderness and Compas∣sion, Love and Meekness, Heavenly-mindedness and Submission, Holiness and Delight to do thy Will, Patience and For∣giveness, that shone in his Life and Suf∣ferings appear also in mine: That li∣ving in the Imitation of his Holy Ex∣ample, I may be made partaker of the Benefits of his Death and Passion; his gracious undertakings for me. Let me live in the daily Thoughts, and Praise of his exceeding love. Let it be the Care and Business of my life, to serve, please, and enjoy thee for ever. Let many be daily brought in to understand, and par∣take of this great Salvation, purchased by our Redeemer; let him be made known and faithfully obey'd all the World over. Enlarge, reform, unite thy Church, more especially in these three Nations, let every Member of it be sanctified, supported, and saved by thee. Let all of us that have waited upon thee this Day at this solemn Ordinance, be pardoned,
and accepted in the beloved, be mind∣full of the Vows and Engagements that are upon us: Let us love one another as Christ hath loved us, and given himself for us; and live as thy Redeemed ones, that have tasted how good the Lord is, and will be unto us; we being deliver∣ed out of the hands of our Enemies, let us serve thee without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness all our Days, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose Holy Name and Words I further pray, Our Father, &c. How to Prepare for a Comfortable Death. I. BE sure your State and Condition, your Nature, Disposition, and Inclinations are changed; That you have an Interest in Christ (the only Ark that can carry us safe to shore, after that General Shipwrack made in Adam). An inward principle of Piety and Holiness, a renewed Soul, a reconciled mind to God, and True goodness (which is nothing else, but an Harmony, or Right or∣der of Heart and Life) That you are possessed of the Sanctifying Spirit, made partaker of
the Divine Nature, and Image, Temper, and Dispositions; resembling Him in his Imitable Perfections, of Justice, Truth, Good∣ness, Kindness, Clemency, Bounty, Benevo∣lence, &c. Absolutely, and Intirely re∣signed, and devoted to him without Reserve or Exception; to be govern'd wholly by his Laws. You are then reconciled to God, you have the Judge for your Friend and Advocate; and the Earnest of your Future Inheritance. He deserves not the Name of a Christian (saith St. Jerom) who lives in such a state, in which he would not die. Good men neglecting clearing up their Evidences and Hopes, Their Claim and Title to Heaven, hath made them live Comfortless, and die Heartless. 'Tis dreadful entering Eternity upon loose Hopes, and fluid Peradventures: To die, and not to know how we shall speed in another world: To fall into the Hands of Death, (as the Lepers into the Syrians) not knowing whether we shall meet with Kind∣ness or Cruelty: like that dying Philosopher, Dibius vixi Anxius morior, nescio quo vado. But what is it to be put into the Bill of Mor∣tality, when our Names are written in the Book of Life? where Guilt is Removed, Death is disarmed. We may well desire to be dissolved, when we know our Redeemer liveth: That He shall be our Judge, who hath taken upon Him our Flesh, who hath
given us his Spirit, upon whom we have fixed our Expectations of Happiness, for whom we have suffered from this vile world, whom we always looked on as our Treasure and Portion, whose coming we have so long looked for and desired, who hath the Keys of Heaven, Hell, and Death; our Friend, our Brother, our Husband, our Head: He will not endure to have his own Members cast off; He will never disown those that shall be found in Him; He will vindicate his own Claim and Title to us; He will not lose his own Purchase; not deny his own work; not condemn us for that Debt him∣self hath undertaken to pay; for whom He came to be Surety, was Sentenced, Con∣demned, and Suffered. There is no Con∣demnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit Rom. 8.1.. If upon Gospel grounds our Hearts Condemn us not, but Testifie we are reconciled to Him, we may be sure He is reconciled to us, and may have Confidence in the Day of Judgment. II. In your several places and stations, Imploy well your Talents, your Trust, your Ste∣wardship, your Time; fill up every space of it, by well spending it. Do all the good you can while you are Here; not only by a daily Exercise of Publick and Private Devo∣tion,
but by being in any kind useful and beneficial to others (which is a great part of our Business in this world) by a Charitable helping the necessitous and distressed; allay∣ing their Sorrows, removing their Burdens, supporting them under their Calamities, by all Offices of Kindness and Friendship, hindering Injurious Contentions, promo∣ting Love, Peace, good will amongst Men; by furthering their welfare; by being Courteous and Affable, long-suffering, mild, easie to be intreated and reconciled; of a Benign, Compassionate, Sympathizing Tem∣per; assisting and standing up for the inju∣red and oppressed; Contributing as much as we can, that every one may live as Happily by us, and be as good as may be. More especially, doing good to Mens Souls, by seasonable frequent Reproofs and Ad∣monitions, good Advice and Example, to bring them into love with Goodness and Virtue, and Rescue them from the Domi∣nion of Sin and Satan, and an Intollerable Damnation. A good and generous man, is Ambitious, and heartily glad of an Oppor∣tunity to save a Man's Life or Estate, when in Danger; but He that's an Instrument of Anomer's Eternal Salvation, saves the most precious thing in the world, and furthers his own Dan. 12.3. Jam. 5.19.. We may do a great deal of good in
a little Time, Husbanded well, and suffering none of it to be swallowed up without endea∣vouring to do some real good to our selves or others. We account Him Happy that's taken hence whilest He's well Imploy'd, and every man wishes to Die so: we cannot choose the Circumstances of our own Death, but may certainly make it Comfortable, by imploying our selves so, that when God shall call us, we cannot be accused of any gross mis-spence of our Time, or the neglecting any Opportunity of doing, or receiving good, the Providence of God hath put into our Hands. One of the most principal Rules of solid Devotion (saith St. Cyprian) is, that we let not pass the least occasion of serving God. III. Exercise Charity and Mercy, according to your Opportunities and Abilities. Alms delivers from Death Isa. 1.17. Dan. 4.27. Ecl. 3.9. Tob. 4.10.. Come up for a Memorial before God Act. 10.4.. Charity covers the multi∣tude of Sins 1 Pet. 4.8.. Forgiving o∣thers Intitles us to the Pardon of our Offences Mat. 6.14.15.. We can challenge no Reward from God for our Duty, because the Service of our whole Lives, is Antecedently due to him, and we Receive all from him; but, a good life qualifies and disposes us for that Happiness He hath promised to Holy
and pure Souls; and no Grace or Virtue, more immediately prepares and fits us for it, than works of Mercy; which are like to have a greater Influence on the last Day's Pro∣ceedings, than most are aware of Lu. 12.33. and 16.9. 1 Tim. 6.17, &c.. All the Actions of Men shall be brought to account, but Christ Representing to us the process of the last Judgment, and instancing only in Works of Mercy Mat. 25.32, &c. signifies at least thus much to us, that he hath a peculiar Regard to those, in acquitting or condemning men at that Day: He looks upon the Performance, or Neglect as Re∣dounding upon himself, and Intimates there's something peculiar in the Exercise or Neg∣lect of this Grace, to intitle us to his favour, or expose us to his wrath. The marble-heart∣ed Cruelty of wicked men, is the only thing mentioned that makes the Bill be found a∣gainst them whilst the Righteous are strange∣ly surpriz'd, when told, they had shewed savour to their Judge, to him that sat on the Throne, whom they had never seen in all their lives. He assures us, while we are feeding the meanest of his Brethren (as such) we have Himself our Guest: are Treating Him, whilst we Relieve the real Sufferer, that asks it in his Name. And who would not gladly pare off all the Superfluities of
life, that he might always have ready an Entertainment for so great a Personage as Him when he Craves an Alms? If we have been kind, compassionate, and merciful to others, we have the greater ground to hope we shall find him so to us; who that he may Encourage us to Imitate his Love and Good∣ness, Proportions his Dealings to us, to ours with others; forgive and ye shall be forgiven, give and it shall be given unto you Mar. 11.25.26. Luke 6.37.. None have more rea∣son to dread his Justice and Severity, than those that shut up their Bowels of Compassion towards their Brethren; for, He shall have Judgment with∣out Mercy, that hath shewed no mercy Jam. 2.13.. I do not Remember (saith St. Jerom) to have read, that ever any Charitble Person dy'd an Evil Death. God will notreject him in his greatest Needs, in his passionate Requests; for God is Love, and every degree of Charity that dwells in us, is a participation of his Nature; And therefore, when on our Death-Bed, we have many things to trouble us, and our Friends have forsaken us, or prove miserable Comforters to us, we may call to mind the Alms we have given, the Injuries we have forgiven; how we have sought objects for our Charity, imbraced and followed Peace with all Men, and with the Eye of Faith look
up to God, coming to pronounce the last Sentence, according to his mercy, and ours. I have been (saith Cyrus the Persian on his Death-Bed) a lover of Mankind, and a friend, and merciful, and now I expect to Communicate in that great kindness which he shews, that is the great God, and Father of Men, and Mercies. IV. Die daily towards all Carnal Comforts and Delights; disuse, disingage your self from them, deny your self in them; wean your self from the World, let your Heart grow strange unto it; get right Apprehensions of it, by diminishing its seeming Excellencies, and considering its real Inconveniences. Judge not of it by that Repute, and Enter∣tainment it finds amongst Men, but ill it doth them; how defiling, dangerous, unsu∣table, unsatisfying, (commonly given to the worst) transitory, unusefull in our greatest Need. Present the Soul with that Bill of Di∣vorce which Death will shortly give to all your indearing Enjoyments. The serious thoughts of which will presently sweep down all Cob-web Designs, and false Felicities; pre∣cent Deceit, and every thing which breeds the worm of Conscience. Fix your Resi∣dence above; you will then behold this Mole∣hill of Ants, this World's bustle and gran∣dieur vanish and disappear: Its Castles and Mountains become Warts, and all the Pro∣vinces
of it, for which men swell and fight, as the Cabins of an Honey-comb: And its Idoliz'd Silver and Gold, Earth, and useless Mettle, uncurrent Coin in the other World, where nothing passes but true Goodness. When the Scepter and the Spade shall have one common Grave; and Royal Dust be blended with the Beggar's Ashes; and the Righteous and the Wicked shall be separa∣ted by a vast Gulph, and an amazing Diffe∣rence. Take it but for your Pilgrimage, your passage to Life; be as indifferent in these things, as Travellers in the Affairs of a Fo∣reign Countrey. Receive with thankfulness what comes with a fair Providence, upon Honest Endeavours, but let your mind be upon your Home. Contentedly suffer Losses and Inconveniences in your way to it. He that hath unfeignedly made Heaven his End, will readily pass to it on the hardest Terms: and Comfortably think of laying down his Head in the Earth; for every man is willing to obtain his End, to receive his Reward, to enter upon his Estate. 'Tis much for the sake of the Flesh that most Perish; that Death is so unwelcom to us. O could we subdue that, and live above its Pleasures and Desires, we should easily bear its Dissolution; a Picture that hangs loose on the wall, is easily taken down, and removed; but with much ending if fastned to it.
V. Live so, as you may be always Ready to give an Account. [Be sure you be sincere.] (was the dy∣ing Advice of my dear departed Friend, E.G.) Perform every Duty with all your might, and as if it were your last. Do every thing with Respect to an after Reckoning: will this bear the Tryal, turn to a good account at the great Day? Would I do thus, were I now going to stand before Christ's Tribunal? The Consequences of all our Actions extends as far as another World. The Apostle seems to be startled at such like Thoughts, seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy Conversation and Godli∣ness? 2 Pet. 3.11.14. As if all were little enough to qualifie us for a Happy Eternity. Have a special Regard to the Duties of your particular Calling; be Diligent, and Honest in it: God judges of men by the general course and tenor of their lives, (rather than by any single or extraor∣dinary Action) which is best seen by their demeanour in that place and station his Providence hath set them in. Take Heed of offering violence to your Conscience; of doing any thing you know to be a Sin, or neglecting any thing you know to be a neces∣sary Duty; for that's to Sin deliberately, to provoke God, to give you up to hardness of Heart, to withdraw his Grace and Spirit
from you. Have always a clear unspotted Conscience, void of offence. Behold I come as a Thief, Blessed is He that watcheth and keepeth his Garments Rev. 16.15.. Be∣ware of those things that will fright you in the Night; of doing any thing now, which will make Conscience flash in your face another day; and reproach you with the Remembrance of what you was told would be bitterness in the latter End; when no Sanctuary to shelter, no Cordial to revive, no bosom Friend to stand by, and hearten you: Then Spots will appear in their Breadth and Blackness; Sin and Wrath, another thing, than in your Health and Ease. Be not wicked in thy own sight (was the good Counsel of an old Rabby) Reverence thy self. Do nothing but what you can review with Quiet and Content. Conscience is a tender thing; that always writes, tho' it doth not speak; and what we account small in our Health, may make a dying Bed very uneasie to us: Innumerable Actions which we thought innocent, may appear to be Sin; and what we made light of, infinitely Evil. So black and deformed is that Shape wherein Sinners appear unto themselves, up∣on a Review of their past Crimes, that, then they abhor their own Image, much more, those Sins that have deformed them. Con∣science speaks loudest, when men grow
speechless. Whilst all seems calm and quiet without; and their Flatterers fawn upon them, their minds are restless, and distract∣ed. Horrours and Regrets of Conscience rouls and works within, and draws the dis∣mal Picture of their own Guilt in dreadfull Colours. Then are the proud Boasts of the Atheists and Debauche's quell'd and baffled by the King of Terrors: The very thoughts of whose approach, surprises them with fear and consternation; whilst good men insult over it. The guilty Prisoner dreads every Noise; and trembles when the door opens, for fear of his deserved doom; whilst the In∣nocent upon the same Account, is both calm and joyfull, expecting deliverance. The Di∣vine Majesty sitteth or abideth at the sick. Man's Beds-head, saith a Jewish Writer on Psal. 41.3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of languishing; thou wilt make all his Bed in his Sickness. Guilt makes us shy of a holy Presence, kindles the Sparks of Hell in our Souls, and renders Death terrible indeed; while a Sabboth of Rest Ensues Innocence, and a well-spent life makes the Righteous as bold as a Lyon; to receive Death with open Arms, for its sting is taken away; to Hug and Embrace the Promises afar off, as actually Existent and present, as a man doth his Intimate Friend, who hath been long absent in another Country. Remember now.
O Lord I beseech Thee, how I have walked be∣fore Thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in Thy sight Is. 38.3.. VI. Lay up and secure every day something a∣gainst your last, i. e. The Comfort of a well-spent life, and provisions sutable, and pro∣per to the Necessities of that great Day of Expence; a strong active well tryed Faith, a deep, large, exercised Repentance; a mind well furnished with wise Considerations, an unconstrained Charity, a firm Hope, a pro∣found Submission to the Will of God, a well grounded Expectance of a Blessed Eternity: And this, not only by overcoming and de∣spising the world, accustoming your self to suffer Injuries, and Affronts, Losses, and cross Accidents in it; a delight in (by Con∣versing with God and) Heavenly things, getting sweeter Thoughts of it, than of the most prosperous state on Earth: But by con∣sidering with what Arguments then to fortifie your Soul, what graces and defences are re∣quisite to render Death easie, safe, and happy: And more particularly, by daily, assiduous, fervent address to God, to be with you, stand by you, assist you at that Time, to resist and subdue the Assaults of Satan, to strengthen you against Impatience, and In∣fidelity; to quicken you to Diligence and
sincere Endeavours for obtaining what you pray for; else you play the Hypocrite with, and mock God. Common Acquaintance will not do; it's not enough to say, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence Luk. 13.26.. There must be frequent Interviews, a spiritual Intimacy between Him and us. He that hath had an intire Conversation with God, cannot fear to go to him. No marvel they Tremble that know him not, or know that he will not know Them. Had the Fiery Chariot fetch∣ed away Elijah unlooked for, we had doubt∣ed of the favour of his Translation. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man Luk. 21.36.. VII. Put not the Evil day far from you; Familia∣rize Death unto your Soul by frequent Me∣ditation of it. Look not upon it at a di∣stance, but even at the door; let the Thoughts of it dwell with you. O how soon, how suddenly will winged Time rush into Eter∣nity? Our Lord comes, not only in a Day, but in an Hour we think not of Mat. 24.44.50., and none but He could ever say, Mine Hour is not yet come. We are not sure to be further from our Grave on our Feet, than on our Sick
Bed. Serve up a Skeleton at your Table; walk upon Mount Calvarie: Present to your Soul a frequent view of the Black Scene you go through, when you go off the Stage. Be still stooping down, and looking into your Sepul∣chre. Fancy you see a Grave gaping for you, your crazy Tabernacle falling upon your Head. your Breath growing Cold, your Eye-strings breaking; The vitall Lamp just spent, and ready to go out. How fast Time is Eating you out of Possession of all here. Such Thoughts will not only cool our pas∣sionate fondness to Earthly things, make us sober and indifferent in their use, and habi∣tually ready to part with them; but take off the Horror of the Apprehensions and ap∣proach of Death; we shall find it, not a Stranger, but an intimate Acquaintance, an expected Friend: we shall make no more of it, than of going through a dark Entry to our Father, of falling into the Arms and Em∣braces of our Mother, and Sister. No guest comes unlookt for, to him that keeps a Con∣stant Table. A little warning serves a Tenant that's provided for, who is often thinking of a Remove. VIII. By all means strengthen and confirm your Be∣lief in the Promises of This, and another Life. Live, walk by Faith, and not by Sight. Dwell on the Believing Thoughts of Ever∣lasting
glory; and Inure your self to the daily Exercise of the Imployment of it; of Love, and Joy, and chearful Praising God, which will much prepare, incline, dispose you to be There. Converse chiefly with those that shall be your Companions for ever: A Stranger Rejoyces when he meets with his own Countrey men. In your Pilgrimage enjoy as much as you can of Heaven, which begins Here: let your Treasure, your Heart, your Conversation be in it. Think what others are Enjoying whil'st you are Here; and what a life it will be to see and enjoy the Blessed God, your glorified Redeemer; To be perfectly taken up in the full fruition thereof, among Saints and Angels in the new Jerusalem. O, Could we but realize that, how would our Hearts be affected and ra∣vished with the prelibation, and foresight of it; as Marriners in a Tempest at Sea, when by a Perspective-glass they discern their Harbour afar off; how do they Rejoyce, Embrace, and make towards it? 'Tis utterly the fault of Christians, when they see the Earth Cut out among its Possessors, to mea∣sure Themselves by the standard of the World; and value their Estates by the Crea∣tures Rate-Book; so they are always poor, whil'st they Inventory what Goods they have, not what they Hope for, and expect; for then they could see no end of their
Riches; That they have their Portion to Receive, when all the Treasures of this World shall be exhausted; Enter upon their Estate, when the Inhabitants of it shall be∣come Bankrupts, turn'd out of all, and have nothing to look for, but Wrath and Venge∣ance. They exceedingly wrong their Souls, and hinder Themselves from a willingness to be with God, in spending their days in doubts and drooping worldly Dulness, and negle∣cting so much the Graces, and Work of Heaven. IX. Review daily your Heart and Life by a so∣lemn Scrutiny. Summon your self before the Bar of Conscience; Reckon for your Thoughts, Inclinations, Passions, Words, and Actions; your behaviour in your several Duties, Places, Relations. Take a strict Account of the miscarriages of the Day, what Sins of Omission, or Commission you have been guilty of; and Confess them to God with an hearty sorrow and shame, and a great De∣testation of your self; and firmly Resolve by his Grace and Assistance never to be guilty of the like again; but to lead a new life. A speedy, present, and particular Repentance, is the way to keep your accounts even, and to leave as little as may be upon the score to Trouble you when you are least able to bear it, and have most need of Comfort; and
likelier to wipe out the guilt of your par∣ticular Sins, than a general Repentance on a Death-Bed, when you cannot but forget, and omit many things which you can take no distinct notice of. 'Tis too much Presumpti∣on for any man to Conclude that his Sins will be forgiven him in a lump, and that a general Confession, and Acknowledgment of them will suffice when he comes to Dye. Let no less Humiliation, Repentance and Faith serve for the least Sin, than you have good ground to conclude will carry you bold∣ly from your Knees through Death to Judg∣ment. Thus get your Case rightly stated, by leting Conscience have the full hearing of it in her private Sessions, before you appear at the great Assize. Make your Bed the Memorial of your Grave, and your Evening Thoughts an Image of the Day of Judgment; than which there's no greater Instrument of Piety and Virtue in the world: This will make us ashamed, and afraid to neglect our Duty, to commit any Sin, when we know we must be accountable to our selves for it at Night, and to God at the last Day. By this means we shall be able to Correct the Errors of our past Lives, to walk by a sure and steady Rule, to make our Repentance particular, to prevent Sin coming on us with an After-clap; for, if we would Judge our selves, we should not be judged 1 Cor. 11.31..
Let Conscience speak as a Law, a Witness, a Judge, now, else it will be a Worm in Hell. No wonder most are afraid of Death, they are Strangers at Home; and Justly Dread being called to account, not knowing how things stand between God and Them. Finally, Often set before you the Condition of the wise and foolish Virgins, when the Bridegroom cometh Matt. 25.1, &c.. Be∣hold the Judge standing before the Door James 5.9.. Fancy you see the Fire already kindled, which e'er long will turn the whole Globe of Heaven and Earth into Flames: The Heavens passing a∣way with a hideous Noise and Clamour; and the Works of Nature and Art, (which men so idolize and dote upon,) consuming and bur∣ning to a black Coal: The Son of Man com∣ing in Power and great Glory, with his Holy Angels: The Books opening, the last Trump sounding, the Dead starting out of their Graves; the Wise with great Joy and Triumph, to their expected Blessedness, the Foolish in Horrour and Amazement, look∣ing for their fearfull Doom. Think, what a terrible thing this will be to the drowzy World; what a Surprize to the Careless and Ungodly; to be thus suddainly overtaken, not knowing what to do, or which way to turn: The trembling multitude running up
and down, appaled, astonished, and con∣founded; in so much despair of the abused mercy of God, that instead of supplicating it, they'll call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall on them and hide them from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; and find them as inex∣orable as God himself. O the ghastly looks, the shivering motions, the distorted eyes, and listning ears, the distracted faces, and trem∣bling hands, of the confident and daring sin∣ners, at that great and terrible Day; when all the charming Companions and Associates shall like enraged Furies fly upon one ano∣ther, and the Fewel men feed their Lusts with, shall be turned into Fewel for Hell-fire, and stings of Conscience. When every Vice shall have its proper Torment: The secure Sinner, be fill'd with Remorse and Anguish: The Sen∣sualist tormented with an insatiable Hunger and Thirst, when a vexatious Fire shall burn Body and Soul. The tenacious greedy world∣ling, perish with want. Confusion and Shame cover the Proud and Vain-glorious. When the lascivious Wretch, instead of gazing upon a fictitious Beauty, and sporting in the Arms of his Dalilah, shall have his sight blasted with the contagious Vision of deformed Spe∣ctors, and be embraced by devouring Flames. The amorous Smiles of all his sweetest mirth and jollity, corrupted; and surren∣dred
up into dolefull Howlings, and mor∣tal Gripes. How will the sensual Sinner then look, when all his Terrene Pleasures shall be snatched away by those merciless Flames? What will the Voluptuous Glutton do, when he shall see all his curious delici∣ous Dainties, with which he so gratified his brutish Palate, turn'd to Ashes? Then they would fain vomit up their delicious morsels; and abhor the remembrance of, what they cannot forget. They confess and bewaile their former Folly: The things they eagerly pursued, they sadly lament, when all their Enjoyments are spent, and nothing left but naked Sin, and Conscience. Where will the Costive Avaricious Earth-worm delve or scrape for Riches; the Ambitious Climb for Honour, when they see all Gold and Silver, Crown, and Scepter, burnt up? How soon then will Men's fond Presumptions, and Self-flatteries, vanish into smoak, and vapour, end in dreadfull despair; when all shall ap∣pear in their own likeness, nakedly, as they are, and there can be no varnishing, or gilding over a rotten Heart? When none shall de∣ceive God, as they did men, with a disguise of Piety. No Wolf in Sheep's Cloathing, steal on his Right-hand. With what Amaze∣ment and impotent Rage will they struggle? What would they not give, to change their place, that they might change their doom?
How will men's borrowed Colours be then melted away? What a number of pain∣ted Vizards, and disguised Masks of false Hearts, be thrown into the Fire? What would the Man invited to the Marriage-Feast, give for a Wedding Garment, when he stands at the Door, and receives a Repulse? And the foolish Virgins, for Oyl? How will the Market of Grace rise? with what Industry will they seek it, when they hear the Ru∣mour of the Bridegroom's approach? When Rivers of Tears cannot wash away the Guilt of Conscience, nor ten thousand Rivers of Oyl, allay the Rage and Clamour of it. But, Christ's Followers shall be no losers. He will consider them for their Time, for their Expences, for their Labour, for their Sufferings. None of them serve him for nought. They shall certainly have their Hire, that Work in his Vineyard. The de∣spised Ignorant Christian, will then appear wi∣ser than the craftiest Polititian: The vilest Believer out-shine the Rich man's Scarlet, and glittering Robe: The Content of this World, be of more value than all the Trea∣sures of it: The Penitent's Tears, yield more Comfort, than all the Mirth and Jollity of the Earth: A Holy Life, give more satisfa∣ction, than all the licentious Humours of this Jovial Age. When God shall give Relaxa∣tion and Rest to his troubled Saints: When
all their Burthens of Persecution, Temptati∣on, and Sin, shall be removed: All their bo∣dily Diseases and Infirmities, end in perfect Vigour, Agility, Spirituality, Incorruption, and Glory: All their Ignorances, in a per∣fect Intuition, and Vision of God: All their Troubles of Conscience, in perfect Peace: All their Distempers of Sin, in perfect Subjection to the Will of God: All their exorbitant Af∣fections, in a regular, and harmonious Mo∣tion towards the Supream good: All their Distractions, and deadness in Duty, in a vi∣gorous Activity, and uninterrupted Exercise of Grace: All Church-Divisions, in perfect Union and Communion of Saints: When they shall have no misgiving Thoughts, no remaining Depravity in their Nature, or new contracted Guilt, to eclipse the Face of God, or deject theirs, and make their Coun∣tenance fall before him: Nothing taken from them, but their Prison, their Chain, their Clog, their Shame, their Sting, their Poyson, their Burden, their Misery. The Consideration of Judgment to come, is enough sure to perswade us to a strict and diligent Care of our Lives, and Actions; to cast a damp upon all youthfull Dalliances and Solaces; to check them in their eager pursuit of their most delicious Pleasures Ec. 11.9.. To make the Judge upon the Bench trem∣ble
at a few words of a Prisoner at the Bar Act. 24.25.. The Drunkard, to let fall his Cups; and the Busie Worldling, to stand at gaze; the Prophane Atheist, to hide his Head; and the sleepy Sot, to start up into Anxious Wonder; to hush the loud Com∣panions into Silence, and the merry Droll in∣to a carefull Look. No Sinner knows how soon he may be reduc'd to the very last op∣portunity of making his peace with God; and brought into those straits, that no wise considerate man, would be in for all the World: Into such a Condition, as to have nothing to save him from perishing, but a sudden Repentance; to have but this Plank left, which is a Thousand to one, whether ever it will bring him safe to shore. Now he apprehends himself in danger; he is infi∣nitely troubled for his neglecting Preparati∣on for that, which he could not for his life but believe would come: He thinks (and it's to be fear'd, very right) it's somewhat too late to set about it; to little purpose to gird up his Loins, when he can do no Ser∣vice; to light his Lamp, when all his Oil is spent: He's afraid he shall have no time to do any thing considerable in this work; that God will not accept of any thing he doth, at such a time; he vainly wishes for some of those Hours he was sick of, hung upon his Hand, he foolishly wasted and mis spent;
and nothing hinders him now, from setting about the Work, with all his Might, but that e hath neglected it so long, and that it's ow too late. But is it not better, to pre∣ent the occasion of it? To take away the ground of such vain Wishes, such sad Com∣plaints? Why should we not resolvedly do that now, which so many when they come to die, heartily wish they had done? The Foundation of our Peace and Comfort at Death, must be laid in our youth and health; living in a continual Expectation, and Preparation for it; doing all things in order to it; get∣ting a stock of habitual Grace; and keeping our Souls in a vigorous, vigilant Posture. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights Bur∣ning, and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the Wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open to him immediately; Blessed are those Servants, Luke 12.35, 36, 37. whom the Lord when he cometh, shall find watch∣ing.
A Prayer for a Comfortable Death To be added to our daily Devotions. ALmighty Creator, and most mer∣cifull Redeemer; who hast made me as the Clay, and wilt bring me to Dust again: Have Mercy upon me now, and at the Hour of my Death: By a Holy Conversation, and habitual Per∣formance of my Duty, let me be al∣ways ready for it: Let it not be unpro∣vided, or untimely; having in it no∣thing extraordinary, but an extraordi∣nary Piety, and the Manifestation of a great and miraculous Mercy. Hide thy Face from my Sins, and blot out all mine Iniquities. Let me pass through the Valley of the shadow of Death, with safety and a well-grounded Peace, a meek and quiet Spirit, and a Sence of thy Love and Mercy; let me then fear no Evil because thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff comforts me, when my Flesh and my Heart faileth me, be thou the strength of my Heart, and my Por∣tion
for ever. Give me a right use of y Sences and Understanding; an un∣gned Repentance, a strong Faith and tience, a firm Hope, a sincere Love  thee, and all the World. Be thou e Portion of all my Relations and iends, and our exceeding great Re∣rd. When our Earthly House of this bernacle is dissolved, let's have a Buil∣g of God, an House not made with nds, Eternal in the Heavens; while ive, let me live unto thee; when I , let me die unto thee; living or dy∣, let me be thine, through Jesus Christ  Lord. Amen. Another. O Judge of all the World, and Father of Mercies: In all Humility I strate my self before thee: O Re∣mber not against me the Sins of my th, nor of my riper Years; but ac∣ding to the Multitude of thy tender cies, blot out all my Transgressions.  me not in a short life, create to my  Horror, Amazement, and Eternal
Torment; but be every day doing that which will be matter of Triumph, and Rejoycing when I come to die. All the days of my appointed Time, let m wait till my Change come. Preserv me in thy Faith, Fear, and Love, to my Life's End. Cast me not away from thy Presence, take not thy Holy Spir from me. Deliver me whom thou ha redeemed with thy most precious Blood from the Power and guilt of Sin, from offending thee or others, by an impatent uneasie Spirit; from the Assaults  Satan, from an immoderate Fear  Death, from Eternal Damnation. Th when I have served thee in my Gener∣tion, I may have an abundant Entran into the Kingdom of our Lord and Sav our Jesus Christ; to whom with th Blessed Majesty, and Holy Spirit, be a Glory, Honour, and Praise, now and eve more. Amen.
Another. O Thou that art the Father of Mer∣cies, and God of all Consolation; receive, and keep me in thy Favour, in the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Faith, and Peace, and in Righteousness of Life. Make me always sensible of the shortness and uncertainty of my Life; and of the suddainness and certainty of that Day, when thou wilt bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil. Lead me in thy way; san∣ctifie, and support me by thy Holy Spi∣rit, now, and all my Days. Bind up my Soul in the Bundle of Life. Redeem me from Sin, and Death, and the Power of the Grave; and bring me to thine ever∣lasting Kingdom. Let not any Neglect, Temptation, Pain, or Passion, discompose my Thoughts, or Duty, or hinder me from a well-grounded Confidence in thee. Let neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers,
nor things present, nor things to come, separate me from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath taught me, when I pray, to say, Our Father, &c. FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 75. line 12. for our, read your. P. 85. l. 1. for hnd, r. and.
The CONTENTS. OF the Scriptures. Pag. 1 Of God. Pag. 4 Of the Trinity. Pag. 6 Of Creation. Pag. 7 Of Providence. Pag. 8 Of the Angels. Pag. 9 Of Man by Creation. Pag. 11 Of the Fall of Man. Pag. 15 Of Man's Recovery. Pag. 16 Of the Sacraments. Pag. 19 Of Baptism. Pag. 19 Of the Lord's Supper. Pag. 173 Of the Creed. Pag. 21 Of the Ten Commandments. Pag. 28 Of the Lord's Prayer. Pag. 35 Husbands and Wives Mutual Duties, Pag. 46 Their Prayer. Pag. 51 Husbands Duties. Pag. 54 Their Prayer. Pag. 56 Wives Duties. Pag. 59 Their Prayer. Pag. 60 Prayer for safe Child-bearing. Pag. 62 Thanksgiving after Deliverance. Pag. 64 Parents Duties. Pag. 65 Their Prayer. Pag. 71 Childrens Duties. Pag. 74 Their Prayer. Pag. 76 Masters Duties. Pag. 78 Their Morning and Evening Prayer with their Families. Pag. 81 Servants Duties. Pag. 88 Their Prayer. Pag. 91
Duties of the Aged. Pag. 94 Their Prayer. Pag. 96 Duties of the Young. Pag. 99 Their Prayer. Pag. 105 Duties of the Rich. Pag. 109 Their Prayer. Pag. 115 Duties of the Poor. Pag. 118 Their Prayer. Pag. 122 Duties of the Sick. Pag. 126 Support for the Sick. Pag. 131 Prayers for the Sick. Pag. 136 How to spend every Day well. Pag. 143 Morning Prayer. Pag. 152 Evening Prayer. Pag. 154 Grace before, and after Meat. Pag. 157 How to spend the Lord's Day. Pag. 158 Morning Prayer for the Lord's Day. Pag. 162 Evening Prayer for the Lord's Day. Pag. 166 Directions as to Prayer. Pag. 169 Direction as to Reading and Hearing the Word. Pag. 171 Directions as to the Lord's Supper. Pag. 173 Duties Before, At, and After Receiving. Pag. 174 A Prayer Before, or At Receiving. Pag. 177 Meditations and Prayers before we receive the Bread. Pag. 180 When we receive the Bread. Pag. 182 When we receive the Cup. Pag. 184 A Prayer after receiving. Pag. 190 How to prepare for a comfortable Death. Pag. 193 Prayers for a comfortable Death; to be added to our daily Devotions. Pag. 216
Some Books Printed for, and Sold by W. Freeman at the Bible in Fleet∣street. A Manual of Private Devotions and Me∣ditations, with Directions for the Sick; by the Right Reverend Father in God, L. Andrews, late Lord Bp. of Winchester, in 12o. Price 1 s. 6 d. A View of all Religions in the World; with the several Church-Governments from the Creation, till these times. To which is an∣nexed, the Lives, Actions, and Ends of Cer∣tain Notorious Hereticks; with their Effigies on Copper Plates. The Sixth Edition, En∣larged; by A. Ross, in 8o. Price 6 s. The Old Religion, a Treatise, wherein is laid down the true State of the Difference betwixt the Reformed and the Roman Church; for the Settling of Wavering Minds, and a Preservation against Popish Insinuations; by the Reverend Father in God Jos. Hall, late Lord Bp. of Exeter, in 12o. Price 1 s. 6 d. Quarles's Emblems; the last and best Edi∣tion, in 12o. Price 5 s.
—Argalus and Parthenia, in 8o. with Cuts. —The same in 12o. without Cuts, Pr. 1 s. Miege's last and best French Grammar, in 8o. Price 2 s. Politeupheuia, Wits Common-Wealth; or, a Treasury of Divine, Moral, Historical and Political Admonitions, Similies and Sentences. For the Use of Schools: Newly revised, in 12o. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Manners of the Israelites, in Three Parts, 1. Of the Patriarchs, 2. Of the Is∣raelites coming out of Egypt until the Capti∣vity of Babylon, 3. Of the Jews after their Return from the Captivity until the Preach∣ing of the Gospel, in 12o. Price 1 s. Thesaurarium Mathematicae; or, the Trea∣sury of the Mathematicks; containing Va∣riety of Usefull Practices in Arithmetick, Geometry, Trigonometry, Astronomy, Geo∣graphy, Navigation, and Surveying: As also the Menfuration, of Board, Glass, Tiling, Pa∣ving, Timber, Stone, and Irregular Solids. Likewise it reacheth the Art of Gauging, Dialling, Fortification, and Gunnery; with several Math. Sculptures on Copper Plates; by J. Taylor, Gent. The Elements of Euclid explain'd in a New, but most easie Method: Together with the Use of every Proposition through all Parts of the Mathematicks; written in French by that Excellent Mathematician,
F. C. F. Milliet de Chales of the Society of Jesus, now made English, in 8o. Price 4 s. Dr. Harvey's Treatise of the Small Pox and Measles, in 8o. Price 1s. 6d. The Art of Preserving and Restoring Health, Explaining the Nature and Causes of the Distempers that afflict Mankind. Also shew∣ing that every Man is, or may be his own best Physician. To which is added, a Trea∣tise of the most simple and effectual Reme∣dies for the Diseases of Men and Women; Written in French, by M. Flamaud, M. D. faith∣fully Translated in to English. A Compleat Body of Chirurgical Operations, containing the whole Practice of Surgery; with Observations and Remarks on each Case. Illustrated with Copper Plates, ex∣plaining the several Bandages, Sutures, and divers usefull Instruments; by M. de la Vau∣guion, M. D. and Intendant of the Royal Hospitals about Paris; faithfully done into English, in 8o. Price 6 s. A New Voyage to Italy, with a Descripti∣on of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs, Li∣braries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities, of that Country; together with the Usefull In∣structions for those who shall Travel thither; by Maximilion Misson, Gent. in 2 Vol. 8o. Of Wisdom, three Books: Written Origi∣nally in French, by the Sieur de Charron, made English by G. Stanhope, D. D. Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty, in 2 Vol. 8o. Price 12 s. The Roman History, by Laurence Echard, A. M. of Christ College in Cambridge, in 2 Vol 8o. Price 11 s. Erasmi Colloquia, in 8o. Price 2 s. 6 d. Cambridge Phrases, in 8o. Price 5 s. A Compleat Guide for Justices of Peace: In two Parts; the First containing the Com∣mon and Statute Laws relating to the Office of a Justice of the Peace: The Second con∣sisting of the most Authentick and Usefull Presidents, which do properly concern the same; by J. Bond of Greys-Inn, Esq The Second Edition, much enlarged and conti∣nued down, in 8o. Price 6 s.
