S5983 E844_8 99863542 115746
THE FLOATING ISLAND: A TRAGI-COMEDY, Acted before his Majesty at OXFORD, Aug. 29. 1636. By the Students of CHRIST-CHURCH. Written by WILLIAM STRODE, late Orator of the University of OXFORD. The Aires and Songs set by Mr. HENRY LAVVES, servant to his late Majesty in his publick and private Musick. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for H. Twiford in Vine-court Middle-Temple, N. Brooke at the Angel in Cornhill, and J. Place at Furnivals-Inne-gate. 1655.
To the Reader. BEfore you read so farre as the Prologue, be pleased to consider this Tragi-comedy was both written and presented above eigh∣teen years since; and if now it seem (in Language or Plot) to fit these times, it must be by Prophesie, the Author also himselfe having been long dead. He wrote it at the instance of those who might command him; else he had scarce conde∣scended to a Play, his serious thoughts being fill'd with notions of deeper consideration. 'Tis sufficient for its worth that the best lik'd it best; the rest (espe∣cially those great ones of the weaker Sect) should claim no lawful Judicature over it, since it was not written for them, though they thought themselves too severely dealt with, which yet was an injury to the Author as well as his Poem. Were this translated in∣to Latin or Italian, it would be grateful to foraign Wits; and if at home it finde lesse welcome, 'tis be∣cause there is not so much true wit among us as was or ought to be. It is not now inscribed to any for Protection, but left dedicated (as it was by the Au∣thor when it was first born) to the Authors noble Pa∣tron. If you bid this welcome, you'l be gainers by it; for then you'l encourage us to publish other Pieces of this Authors, which (we dare say) will convince you to say (what the best and most knowing of this Na∣tion have confessed) that our Author was one of the judicious wits of England. Farewell.
To my most Honoured Patron, Sir JOHN HELE, Knight. THis Draft at once cry'd Up and Down amain By divers men, up by the same again At divers times, hath planely found thereby That it hath censur'd been Tumultuously. Twixt Actors and Spectators did appear Small difference; and through a Jealous fear The Scaffold play'd the Stage; to say't I'm loth, Affection against Reason play'd in both. Yet Reason at a neerer view gain'd sway, The Censure ended just as doth the Play. After this various Fate, because indeed Of pleasing more then Four there was small heed, From Court and Oxford home it comes to you, Secure of Reason and Affection too. You lent the Author; and tis therefore just The work should yeeld you Tribute for your Trust: If Friends make wits, and wit-wrights Poets be, Then This is His, and He your Poetry. Your most Humble and most affectionate Servant, WILLIAM STRODE.
Authori Illustri. MIlle modis superare Tibi conceditur astra, Quae solùm caelo splendida sunt nitido: Dum Tua lux tenebras, et opaca nube recessus Invenit umbrosos, et sine sole vias. Gemmula nocte micans non est vulgar bus apta Auribus, aspectum Principis illa decet. Haud minus ista Tui Comaedia Principe digna, Nec nisi Regali conspicienda foro, Transtulit in Scenam quae res penetralibus imi Pectoris inclusas, implicitum{que} nefas. Ipse oculus mundi nostris valedicit ocellis, Cum semel occiduos aequore mersit equos: Ter sex (STRODE) tuus solares splendor in annos Fulsit, et in dubio lumine fulget adhuc. Tu tamen ecclipsin pateris, signum{que} futuri Deliquium nostri funeris illud erat. J. D.
After the Appearance of a FLOATING ISLAND, Enter the Prologue, as coming out of the Sea. To the King and Queenes Majesty. WHatever Element we light upon, (Great Monarch & bright Queen) 'tis yours alone. Shook from my station on that giddy Shore, That flotes in Seas, in wretchednesse much more, I hardly scap'd to tell what stormes arise Through rage of the Inhabitants: mine eyes Behold a wonder; Blustring Tempests there, Yet Sun and Moon fair shining both so neer. Should your Land stagger thus, I wish the Age, Might end such acting sooner then the Stage: Yet in these Tumults you shall onely see A tottring Throne held firme by Majestie.
To the Ʋniversity, Before whom it was afterwards acted. WHich is more waving, yonder Sea, or Land, Or Passions dwelling there, we doubt; but stand Here firm and safe; for blustring Tempests there We see in every eye, fair clearnesse here. The Sun and Moon, more out of sight then minde, Have for our comfort left these Stars behinde. We hope to finde Spectatours, and we may, For you'l not act the Humours of the Play; Or fret at Passions e're you read them calm'd In the next word. Your stomacks feele no Qualm Rising through smell of rude Philosophy: Nor shall you finde much more then to descry An Academick Birth. The Royal race Of Austria thinks the swelling lip a grace, And would not lose that mark by which 'tis known; Men love the Blot which proves the Childe their own. Whether you come to see a Play or hear, Whether your censure sit in th' Eye or Eare, Phancy or Judgement, Carelesse of Event We aime at Service; cannot misse th' Intent.
The Persons. Prudentius the King depos'd. Intellectus Agens his Counsellour. Sir Amorous a Courtly Knight. Hilario his Son a merry jovial Gent. Malevolo a Malicious contriver. Melancholico a Malecontent turn'd Puritan. Irato an Angry Lord. Audax a bold Captain. Sir Timerous-Fearall a Cowardly Knight. Livebyhope a Favourite Desperato a desperate Soldier turn'd Physi∣tian. Memor a Lawyer and Recorder. Phancy the new instated Queen. Concupiscence the lustful daughter of Amorous: Fuga the coy daughter of Malevolo. Morphe the beautous Mistress of Amorous. Morpheus the God of Dreames. 6 Dreaming Masquers Groome of the Chamber. Ovidian a Poet. Model a Tireman. Painter Musitian Hilario's boy, and Atendants.
The Floating Island. ACTVS I. SCENA. I. The Scene turns to the Court of Prudentius. Enter from several wayes Sr. Amorous, and Morphe. AM. Well met sweet Morphe, Empresse of my heart, And all hearts else, if made of flesh like mine. You must not passe untouch'd. Mor. What mean you Sir? Am. To print you Mine; Mor. Hands off Sir Amorous. Am. Why should such coynesse wrinkle such a Brow? Mor. Why should such boystrous incivi∣lity Defile your Courtship? All your court∣ly Arts Of Singing, Playing, Dancing, Poetry, Will grow suspected pleaders of meer Lust: Forbeare for my sake: this rude force in you May chance to blot a white repute in me. Am. The blot Ile thus rub out. (Offers to kisse. Mor. Ile wash it thus. (Spits. Am. How can the eye, that sees not love the light? Blame your own beauty if you blame my Love. Mor. I blame th' Expression. Am. If the thing be good, Expression makes it better. Mor. Yes, if chast, Am. Chast Love is nothing. Mor. Nothing to th' unchast. Forbeare I pray, and feare a neere example. Do you not know the King hath taught the Passions Within this Floating Isle more modesty, By banishing your child Concupiscence? Am. Others perhaps shall quickly know I know it, And that I know it as rough tyranny. What for a trick of youth such Discipline? Doth breeding Subjects call for Banish∣ment? Or giving life deserve a civil Death? Hold; stand; in vain you strive; I am re∣solv'd; Should now the King look on, and call a Kisse Treason, should poyson punish this swet touch, Thus far I durst presume. Mor. Shame on your rudeness. (Ex. Mor. Am. Are not our Eyes and Lipps and touch our own, Not to be us'd without a special warrant? At length we shall not satisfie meere Na∣ture, Nor spit without a Counsel. If my Girle Pertake my spirit, then like me she'l try, What fury Love can in the Passions raise, To shake this Stoick from his chaire of Rule. Ile move my Fellows. SCENA II. Enter to him Irato, Malevolo, Audax. Ir. How? not fight this Duel?
Duel forbidden to the Valiant? Am. Some other cause, it seemes, moves these already. (aside) Mal. Be sure, Irato, by Prudentius law Personal Valour now is nothing worth. Hope with his Pen, Sr. Timerous with his knife, Or Desperato's man with single Halter May passe in equal ranke with you, or me, Or Captain Audax. Au. Not with me, I tro. Mal. Yes, if this Law should stand. Am. Not so however. Mal. Not if? Au. If to a generous Passion? Am. I see these sparkes are glowing. No∣ble Sparkes, Let Amorous adde fire. Love burnes with Hate. Thy Hand Malevolo, and 'gainst the King. Ir. Why what's your grief? Am. My Daughters Banishment. Mal. Great cause: yet none need press a single grief: We finde our selves all pinch'd of liberty: We walk in chaines, call'd Justice, Tem∣perance, Such rusty curbs; and none can further start Then the strict keeper will allow us length. Ir. Tis so; we're us'd like Dogs, or ring'd like Beares; Whither Prudentius leades us we must follow: But if we take a loose, or swell and roar, We must be whip'd for't; Sirs, Prudentius whips us. Am. Can this be brook'd by them that draw the Sword? Ir. And amongst them, by one that will exact Life for a word, pay death for crabbed lookes? Au. And amongst them, by one that scales the wall, That swims in Armour, flies against the mouth Of thundring Ordinance? must also He, Must He be ordered by a sit still thus? Mal. So he hath been. For my part, if I broach Some biting Libel, venemous word or Book Against some prosprous Object which I hate, My Eares are questioned. Locks which I have scorn'd Must hide my Eare stumps. Ir. And me thinkes I spy some want upon your Nose. Mal. Is your spleene up? Rage for your selfe. You also may remem∣ber Brave Lord Irato when you hardly kept Your Neck. Some fellow Peers, for as few blowes, Have lost it quite. Ir. My Veynes will burst. Mal. And Captaines Not to be numbred; All as bold and stout As Audax here, for undertaking reskues, And following them too far in open streetes, Have been casheered of Lberty and Life. Au. But shall not be again. Ile hang the Law. Mal. Then as for you, Sr. Amorous, you may talk Not onely of your Daughters Banishment, But of your Sisters whip'd, your carred Aunts, And Mulcts upon your selfe. Am. The truth to tell, My hard restraint is worst of all. I live (If it be life) confin'd to mine own Bed: Prudentius bridles up my mouth from kis∣sing, Yea and from speech, and calls that stinting manners. I cannot cast a faire inviting look, But he pulls back the Nerve. I scarce dare think, Or sigh beyond my stint. One Sigh a day Is all that I must spend for her that keepes And may command my breath. Pruden∣tius Locks up my winde like Aeolus; 'tis calm'd, And may not issue forth to bear a whisper. Ir. Mend your Comparison. Prudentius Like Aeolus? No, Aeolus sometimes Permitts a Tempest: does Prudentius so? Au. The Passions cannot stretch beyond his line,
But they are censured, Perturbations call'd, Breakers of Peace; if calm'd, they nothing are: We lose both Name and Nature by re∣straint. Ir. For what's a Lord I ask you but his Anger? Mal. Or what's a great man but op∣pression? Au. A Captain but his Cutting? Am. And a Knight What but his Pleasure? O this frost of Reason Hath numd my Joynts. I that with spright∣ly vigour Dancing to please my Mistress, could have rose To fetch her from the Moon (had she been there) Or as she stood salute her, now have lost Those active legs, and not by doing service To any Creature but Prudentius. I live a Hermite in the Court; to me It seemes a Colledg or a Nunnery. Ir. To me a Prison. Au. A meer Schoole to me. Mal. To me an Inquisition: worse: a Hell. Where Objects still we meet, and may not reach. You Amorous like Tantalus behold Two red white Apples in a well made face, Which you as soon may touch as reach the Sun; Which doth but scorch the gazer. Am. Ile to Hell: Tis lesse to sterve for Apples then for Cheekes. Mal. You being stir'd Irato thirst for blood, And thirst you may, but not be satisfied: You must take blowes and beare'em; your Reward (O poor!) is to orecome by suffering; As now I kick you; stand: you must not rage, For this is Patience; now I pull your Nose; You must not fume, least you impatient prove. Ir. Let me kill thee, or serve Prudentius still. Mal. you must keep Peace. I speak but as a Friend; And onely tell what you have told your selfe. You Audax, like Ixion, though you dare To set on Heaven, must wheele about your selfe When Reason bids you. Au. Audax will run on Though thunder meet him. Mal. Yes; but I my selfe Like Titius vainly feed the Vultur Hate With mine own heart, and wreck it not on others, Those Favourits which I hate. Shall this be ever? Ir. How long shall I like to a painted George Advance my idle Sword? What must I strike Like Iack o'th clock-house, never but in season? Mal. How long shall I like a grim Sta∣tue stand, Look hatred and use none? Prudentius Hath he Medusa's head? Am. Hey ho, how long! Au. How long shall I like a fell Mastiff held, Yelp for the glorious danger that I love! Water it selfe if bounded in too streight, Will foame and swell and breake thick bonds of Rock. I wish we Passions were as strong as water. SCENA. III. Enter to them Hilario Singing, Dancing and Passing by. My limbs I will fling Out of joynt, and sing, And dancing will shake my hair: Not how at each beck, Nor break my neck With sorrow and deep despaire. Such a chirpiu din, with mirth within,
And a head not needing a cloute, Is much better far Than a careful chaire, And a wreath of thornes without. (Exitarus. Am. The Boy may be our Tutor. Hilario my Boy! Hil. Sir. Am. We were taking care how thou may'st be merry thus alwaies; never be check'd for drinking, for singing, or for playing thy prankes. Hil. I imagin your design: and thereto promise, give, grant, let, set and submit my full assent and consent: In witnesse where∣of here's my hand with a clap, and my seale with a kisse; Your son and servant Hilario. Am. But stay, whence now? Hil. From my blubbering Sister Con∣cupiscence; who desired me forsooth To arme and conduct her to Lady Phancy. Am. And whether bound? Hil. I go to be merry with or upon Melancholico and Desperato, Either to quicken their dumps, or by laugh∣ing at their dulnesse to heighten my selfe. Am. Where are they? Hil. Not far; close by; here at the Hart. Mal. Courteous Sir, send them hither, Hil. I shall or will Sir. Mal. We must no longer ripe up grei∣vances, (Ex. Hil. But think of Remedy. Au. Passions must not stay. Ir. Why with a murraine do we stay to say so? Mal. In briefe do all consent to free themselves From this oppession? Ir. What a Question's that? Am. Give a Command that it be ask'd no more. Au. We all consent. Mal. All are not here. Am. Indeed We want two serviceable men now sent for. Ir. Delayes intolerable! Am. We want besides Sir Timerous Fear all. Au. Wee'l force that dowty Knight To know his good when all is done; and so Prevent his Treason. Ir. Consultation too. Am. And where is Livebyhope? Mal. No matter where. His hopes will make him turn to any side That shall succeed. Am. For femal Passions, Their fortune lies in ours. Mal. Then to proceed, The way to free our selves lies, thus, or thus; Kill, or dethrone Prudentius. Ir. I begin To think on Sr. Raviliack, and Sr. Garnett. Au. The boldest way is safest. Ir. Yes, if bloodiest. Am. Or if he will escape. Ir. Let him go far enough. Mal. Then who shall do the feare? Au. I. Ir. I, or else Ile kill some other; what? should I for get My ancient Trade of killing? Mal. Let him doo't Who first hath opportunity. Am. To this We all must sweare. (They lay two Swords across) Ir. By all the wounds which on my flesh are scor'd, And all the ghosts I've made. Au. By all attempts And all the mines of Bullets in my Entrals; Mal. By all my pangs of hare and black designes; Am. By all the goodly Nymphes, and Morphe chief. SCENA IIII. Enter to them Prudentius, Intel∣lectus Agens, and Liveby hope with Attendents. Pru. D'ee long for action? have ye too much Peace?
Orecloy'd with blessings? you Malevolo Bend hate against th' unjust. Mal. My hand is crampt; Strike Audax. Au. O his brow! I turn to feare. Pru. You Amorous love true beauty, Honesty. Mal. Thy spleene Irato. Pru. Thou Irato fight Meerely for publike peace. Ir. Sweetnesse! Mal. Witchcraft! Pru. Audax, be bold, but stay till I have bid Ex. Pru. & Int. & Liveby▪ following. Au. S't. Liveby hope Liv. I must attend his Majesty. Int. Goe back, and secretly oreheare this meeting. (Liv. returns▪ Am. Ha! What Schooling call you this? Mal. What Vision? That Eye of subtil Intellectus Agent Troubles me somewhat; and I doubt of Liveby. Ir. Now I could kill my selfe. Au. Now I, Prudentius He came upon us like the Basilisk, Or like a Wolfe; but had we seen him first— Mal. You could not do it then: never by day. Am. Why so? Mal. You saw the cause. His flaming Temples Strike with such charming Power, such secret Spells, That if you see the Light upon his Face, Your spirits quaile; it must be done by night. And Desperato, he must be the man. Au. Why He above All Us? Mal. Tush, we are foyld; Already foyld; and may be so again. Besides Irato spends himselfe: hee's now So full of heat, I doubt hee'l then grow cold. But Desperato to his mischief goes With art and argued resolution, Strong in cold blood. Ir. I perfectly abhorr All Judgement, Plos, and Consultations▪ To canvase thoughts, to toile and vexe the In weighing meanes, and picking out the best, This is as bad as to have serv'd Prudentius. Mal. And how thinks Audax? Au. So. Or else I'm mad. To plot is base; and to demurr contrivance Of things that should be done, as soon as thought, Is foolish too. What turn our powder up, Then smother't under ground, then by degrees Give fire! Such creeping mischeife hath no luck. Ir. Come Martial Law, come Captain Martial Law Au. And wise Malevolo, when have you e're heard Of great attempts without the hand of Au∣dax? Come wee'l too't presently. Mal. Even as you please. Liv. (in secret) I sweat with hearing. Il now run with this Least I may come too short of telling more. Am. Onely this word. Liv. Then yet I'le stay. Am. Be sure, If you miscarry we are all undone. Goe with Ʋlysses in this night-attempt, Be each of you to him a Diomed. Mal. Stay till they come. Am. Lo here they are. Who else? SCENA V. Enter to them Melancholico, Des∣perato and Sr. Timerous. Ir. What and Sr. Timerous too? Come▪ mend your pace. What? doth Prudentius moderate your feet? And make you snayles as well as slaves? Mal. Free Passions, (So ye must be) we know your greivances. Brother Melancholy, discreet you are, But not expressive; unprefer'd you are, Because precise; but say, would you with
State Insold your armes; look sad, and feele content; Live careful over bags, retire your selfe To solemn greife in Temples of delight, Sigh in a Sisters bosom, and complain Of Persecution at a plenteous Feast? Ir. Yes, yes. I'le answer for him. Mal. Sooth, you may. Sadnesse is pleasant, but the cause is not. Au. And Desperato, once my old Comrad, Once Noble, and again to be the same, But now as void of cash as of imployment, Would you, in Peace forgot, bard of a Pen∣sion, Having no lands but bare high-wayes, now run All hazards for new Fortune? Desp. Yes apace. Ir. Why parly then? can he not first draw blood? Do Cutters ask what money have you first? Tim. Blood and Cutters? his speech is rough. Mal. hee's mad. Say on. Ir. Nought's done through such long talke. Mal. Such Choler. Au. Wouldst thou have power to raise more flames then Nero, To fire the World, prevent his final doome, Stare awfully, stab others with applause, Hang, drown thy selfe, to immortality. Desp. Such change I long for; rows'd from Lethargy I am reviv'd. Au. Thou lyest, thou art not yet. (Desp. offers to draw) Hold, hold thy hand: I did but tempt thy mettle, To search the truth. Desp. And Sir, 'tis well you say so. Ir. This Bully,s right, why now I'm pleas'd Am. Sr. Tim. My fellow Knight, you know (but do not tremble) How oft the King hath misimpos'd on you Those dreadful, those horrible, terrible Tim. Good Sir. Am. Those heart-labouring imploy∣ments, Which Audax beg'd. Tim. I pray. Am. He sought thereby Meerely to vexe and to disgrace your spurr▪ But wouldst thou hug thy Pillow or thy Love Without disturbance, or the noise of danger? How say'st? Tim. I love to live, and love in safety. Mal. Then in a word. Au. He first kick hence this Knight, Hee'l prove a five through feare; his tremb∣ling humour Will shake our secrets out. Am. Which to prevent, He stirs not from this company. Mal. Then know, Our common medicine is Prudentius ruine. Last comers, do ye twist in full consent? Mel. & Desp. We do. Ir. then kisse the Sacramental Sword. Am. Sr. Tim. you came unsought, but being come, You must consent, or will be beaten too't. Tim. I, I do consent—but caution must be had; This is no common sport: what Engines use ye? Au. Not you, be sure. Will Desperato joyne With me and this brave Count? Desp. Yes, and strike home. Mal. Then for the time: we think close midnight best. Mel. And fittest; cause the crowned Fox is watchful. Tim. Be sure you take disguise to passe unknown, Though it be night. Au. O wit and valour both! Vizards to Passengers will be but signes Hang'd out to move suspicion; and to leave Him ignorant whom we assault is losse▪ Unto the glory of our bold revenge. Mal. What shall be done with Memor the Recorder, One whom I hate, yet have no reason for't, Like an old debt-book, or mine own Con∣science▪
Shall he be blotted out, or shall he stand? Am. Alas he's all Record, Example, Custome, What's done Quadragesimo primo Henrici tertii, Tricesimo primo Henrici octavi; And these sute more with Passion then with Reason. Mal. What shall be done with Com∣mon sense the Judge? Am. He also more inclines to sense then Prudence, Leanes to the Commons rather then the King. Au. As for the rest, they ne're shall trouble us; Cut off the head, we need not feare the Members. Mal. Who shall succeed? I mean, in place, and shew, Not in the tyranny of strict Command; Who shall assemble, lead, incourage us, And give some fashion to our Common∣wealth? Am. What say to Fancie? will not Fancie do't? Au. No better choice: for Fancie neerest is To unyoak'd Passion. Am. And 'tis most proper, That since by Passion this revolt is made From Reason unto Sense, the Rule should passe From man to Woman. Au. She, she, Fancie she. Liv. (in secret) O now for wings like thought, this to relate First to the Agent of Prudentius; And then to beare first newes to new Queen Fancie. (Ex. Liv. Au. She, Fancie's Queen. Am. She'l be a pleasant Mistresse Rather then Governesse, leading each Passion Whether himselfe inclines. Nay she'l in∣vent New Objects for their several content. SCENA VI. Enter to them Groome of the Chamber. Groo. Silence through all the Court, the King would rest. Desp. Let him Eternally. Mal. The time growes nigh. You three to th' task of Blood: the rest to Fancy. (Ex. Passions. Groo. I doubt this earnest talk portends no good, The businesse hath been hot.— Enter form the Bedchamber Pru∣dentius Crown'd, and Intellectus Agens. Pru. We would be private. (Ex. Groome. Liveby the Relator is most creditable. Int. A right ingenuous man. Pru. And you have sent him To take advantage of the changing State, With Caveat to reserve his heart for Us. Int. The Pinch and my best thoughts did so instruct me. Pru. Tis well, I dearely thank your sharp observance, Suspecting Treason by their startled brows; And then your art of finding out, and now Your Providence for our Restablishment. But O, O this ungrateful Rout, whom I have taught Both how to Feare and Love, and what to Loath, Wherefore to Greive and Joy, and in what place To rouse their anger and audacity By Rule and Circumstance, and with such Sweetnesse As might befit a Wooer more then King. Have I these Vipers bred within my Brest With greater Care and Pangs then can a Mother
The Childe within her womb? have I broke sleep Toss'd after slumbers, early rose, and spent The day from Sun to Sun in painful Coun∣sel; Sent Birds about their Coasts, sent Eyes and Tongues Abroad the world, to watch and guard, and work, And keep all safe, and make them great, for This For This Reward? Ask Heaven and Earth, if I Have not with utmost care procur'd them Bread, Cloth, Health, Peace, Manners, and Reli∣gion! For Prudence is the womb and Forg of all This mortal blisse. What ere I took from Them Was for their use; like Vapour now ex∣hal'd, And soon return'd in Showers to fat their Land. Oft have I bore them under both these wings, One under each, when they inclin'd to Fury, Would push each other down a Precipice, Not steep like th' Alpes, but steep on ei∣ther side, There on a narrow ridg, an edg, a Thrid, (Such is the meane, so plac'd betwixt two Gulfes) I bore them in their Strife. For this and more They have not pay'd (what's cheaper?) Single Duty. Nothing but Grudgings, Whispers, Evil words: These are their Thankes. Int. The greater glory yours: What Crown like This to govern out of almes! Pru. But now they seek the Crown; my life they seek. Int. They'l beg hereafter that you'l take the Rule, Which now they wrest out of your hands. Pru. Perhaps. Int. Meane while your life is safe. Pru. And while 'tis safe, Though they forget their Duty, I, le not leave A Fathers care, but will be still a King In love, though not in power. Int. This is a signe Of future greatnesse. Then cast off this Crown As but the sheddings of renewing State, Now to be burnished. Leave it on your Pillow: For that they seek. But it return'd shall be With double service both of Heart and Knee. Pru. Be Thou my Prophet. Int. Ware; the Caitiffes come. SCENA VII. Enter Audax, Desperato, Irato with Swords: the first bearing a Torch. Au. This Torch must out, or some must blind their eyes; And look not all at once, least all be struck. The Chamber's here. Desp. Come set your Points And Postures right; stand sure. Pru. Why should not I Step in, and daunt them? Int. Tis not safe to tempt United Impudence too far: withdraw. Pru. When Folly's ripe, Ile to my Dili∣gence. Int. And I to serve you with Intelli∣gence. I'le guide you to some Cloyster. Ir. Now: there's the Nest. (Ex. Pru. & Int. Desp. But what? the Eagle's flowne. Ir. Damn'd Trechery! Treason amongst us Traytors! Desp. Lesse Resolution Then mine had serv'd this Task. Au. How'ere my Lads, (Brings forth the Crowd. Our Labour is not lost. Here's what we
seek for. Ir. Thus when the Beaver smells the Hunters aime, He throwes away the price of his escape. Au. Now shall I offer what affront I please. Ir. Ile stab with honour at what word mislikes me. Desp. No Peace shall stand unlesse our pleasure make it. Au. Fancie, we come. Stay, hark, stand, hark. This sound Musick begins softly. The Sirens make, 'cause Fancie shall be crown'd. (Ex. Omnes. Finis actus Primi. ACTVS II SCENA. I. The Scene turns to Fancies Court. Enter Concupiscence and Fuga. Conc. The Day appears in Scarlet; and the Sun Seconds the luster of our rising Queen. I nere long'd more for night, then for this morning. Fug. Twill be to you a double day, and bring Your Mistresse Majesty, you Liberty. Conc. Fuga, the case is alterd; he that banish'd, Himselfe is vanish'd. Thus the King and I, Or I and he, are up and down like Buckets. Ha wench! these Moral men are taught, I tro, What 'tis to wrong kind hearts. Return with me Periwigs, Powders, Fucuses for Ladies, Chioppiens for short, for crooked Farthin∣gals; For tainted Artificial breath; Teeth move∣able; Such as may serve a Family by turns, To eat, and laugh abroad: now wellcome helps For all decayes of Nature, Arts for allure∣ment; Be licenc'd Ladies for Variety Now to mistake your Servant, Usher, Page, For your own Lords, and without Heresie In marri'd State. Fug. Fie Madam how you talk! Conc. How talk I Madam Simpers? do not thus And broader too as mincing Dames as you, When met together? Do you see your Servant? SCENA II. Enter to them Sr. Timerous with a Paper. Conc. Sr. Timerous Fear-all inches and inches to you Iust like a Spy. He steals to Fuga and offers the Paper, she refuses; Concup. snatches and reades it. Fug. And still he comes in secret Least he be spied. Conc. What's this? a silent motion? The Bill hung out will shew us what it is. Lady, I dare not with the praise of arts With any thing but Love assay your parts; Which are so rare, that when I strive to write, The scant Expression seems not Love but spite. Well wrot Sr. Tim. Fug. You cannot say well spoke. Conc. Can you not use your mouth? no way, Sr Tim.? Why do you love? you are not fit to love; Think me your Mistresse; now addresse your selfe In form befitting. Tim. Hum! He offers to Salute and steps back again; she makes to him. Conc. I must make up Your will with my performance. Tim. Hum—I fear Fuga will frown. Conc. Thy Mother was a Fuga. Nor give nor take? not in a faire Salute? Tongue-tide and Lip-bound too? O that
it were In fashion for my Sex, my Sex, to wooe. Fug. Lady, you seem to me in word and action Too loose and open. Conc. My Complexion Is I confesse the same with Messaline's; We might have layn together in one Egg As well a Helena and Clytemnestra. To me no such desire as of our Like, No Joy like Union. But your eares and age Want breeding yet; I'm sorry for offending: I thought I knew my Sex; but if I do not, I know my selfe. SCENA III. Enter to them Hilario. Hil. What here ye whirlygigs, while Queen Fancie calls you? Where's Concu∣piscence, where's Concupiscence? After all your Starching, Quilling, Turning, Seeking, Pinning; after your Jury of Pedlars, Tire∣women, Lacemakers and Semsters, still where's Concupiscence? Your Lady Fancie findes many greivous defects; there wants a Pin or two at least. One of her ribband Fancies are loose; a long haire hath un weav'd it selfe out of its curl'd Spheare, and passionatly broke forth out of Order. Fly, fly, ye Baggases. (Ex. Conc. Fug. Baggases? Hil. As for my Sister, shee's one I'm sure: She colours for it; her willow gowne with ay me forsaken wretch is a Challeng, a meer Challeng to all pitti∣ful-minded Amoroses: She's true touch, all the world can tell. Wu'd you were so too Lady for Sr. Tim's sake. Stay Fuga, you must stay one minute; for I must shew on you how Sr. Tim. must wooe. Fug. I see every one's ready to be a Dunces Teacher. Singing and Dancing he drives her to the drink of the Stage; She returns to escape. So twice or thrice. Hil. Thus Sr. Tim. This is Loves Trenchmore. Fug. Fie on you all. (Ex. Fuga. Hil. A prity wench. Sr. Tim, but that she's sawe'd With some of her Fathers Humour; this coynesse calls her Ma'evolo's Daughter. But what of that? Every coy lasse is of Cockeril condition, And must be woo'd as Cockerils fight, chase and retreate; And then sheel love you like your shadow; Fly thou, sheel follow; follow thou, sheel fly, For I say no, and for her no say I. Thus when a long time ye have turn'd backs one to another, Ye may at length turn faces. Tim. Sr. I shall sometimes Repaire to your wit for my direction. Hil. You may—and I shall readily afford it to your folly (Ex. Tim. For mine own merriment. Enter Hilario's Boy. Boy. The Queen's at hand. Hil. And they not ready yet with their tedious Phantastticalia! SCENA IIII. Enter also Fancie, Concupiscence going backward before, carrying an Ʋmbrella over her, Fuga and Me∣mor following. After a while the Solemnity. Mem. Iust in that Posture, Madam, as you walk'd, Horacius kill'd three men. Conc. Three? what no more? Why, I have kill'd three hundred, would three thousand. Fan. Where's that appearance which we have expected? And where's my glasse? Fug. You have one in your watch. Fan. That's not big enough. Run Fu∣ga; come hither
Concupiscence, pin this handsomer. Ir. Au. Desp. (within) Ile beare The Crown or nothing. Mel. (within) I the Crown or nothing. Liv (Enters and out again) Ile fit each Passion to his own content. Hil. Boy, fill up the Time with noise. Boy. (Sings) Hail thou great Queen of varous Humours, Some loving hearts, some raging tumours, Some sadder soules embracing Rumours; Such a mixed crew None yet ever knew So steady and true As these in heaping honours on you. Enter in the midst of the song Amo∣rous ushering the solemnity, Irato bearing the Sword, Malevolo the Scepter; then six others bearing six Crowns, two in a rank. First Au∣dax on the right hand bearing a Crown of Gold, and with him Poet Ovidian a Lawrel: then Despe∣rato a Turkish Turbant, and with him Timerous a Persian Cydaris: Lastly Livebyhope a Crown of all colour'd feathers circled at the bot∣tome with Pearle, and with him Model her Tireman a Coronet of black beaugled wire set with black and Silver spangles. Having done obeysance, they stand and present in Order. Am. Great goddesse, most ador'd of men, behold, Amorous thy lovingst Passion, brings the rest To offer at thy Feet Ensignes of State. Ir. I that unsheath'd my anger with my Sword To make thee great, present this Sword of Justice. Mal. I that with Plots have wrung this awful Secpter From other hands, will hold hold it fast in thine. Ile finde or make new matter of great ruine To raise thy Throne, Au. This massy Crown of Gold, The price of nightly danger, won by Au∣dax, Left by Prudentius, let it crown thy Tem∣ples, Ovid. Else let thy shining brow re∣crown this Lawrel, Worn but by Caesar Monarch of the world, And thy Ovidii, makers made of thee. Desp. Let Desperato wrap thy semal head With Imniu State, the Crown of that grand Seignior Who worships most these two, Woman and Fate. Tim. But Timerous brings the Persian Cydaris, Which drop'd from Xerxes Temples in his flight. Liv. Liveby a Crown of Feathers here presents To represent the light and easiy yoak, Which all the Passions hope. Mod. Model thy Tireman Offers for company this Crown, not costly, But yet of prety Fancie, new Invention. Fan. We thank the wit and paynes of all your service. We'l weare these Crownes in turn, and try them all. Liveby, reach hither.—Where's Recorder Memor? Liv. reaches his feathered Crown. Au. reaches the Golden, Mal. the Scepter. Mem. Here. Au. First take this, the chief true real Crown. Mal. These were the honours which Prudentius wore. Fan. Were those his honours? they shall ne're be mine. Those onely I except. Ir. Wisely excepted: Am. Great Lady, say not so: put on this Crown, And with your Head crown it: then let
your Hand Give Life unto this Scepter, and to Us: Fan. Ile rather not be Empresse, then assume Or that, or this. Au. Say so? Hil. Prettiest of pretties; We here would have a Queen, and she'l not weare The Badg and Ensigne that should make her so. Fan. Is none a Prince, but she whose head supports The burden of a Crown? Liv. Indeed Authority Lies not in this: then Kings could do no more Without the leave of this Authentick toy Then can a Constable without his staff. Fan. A Crown would crooke my neck, which for a Realme I would not marr. Hil. Nor marr that Ruff for three. Fan. If this condition needs must be inforc'd, I willingly resign what you conferr. Mal. Then some of us shall be a gainer by it. Am. Do not so slight the labour of your Servants, Who ventur'd far to gain this wreath; in which Lies the significance of all the rest. Ir. Let her refuse once more. Fan. My Noble friends, It signifies too much, too great a Care, Too high Command. Should my free wandring thoughts Be hoop'd and compass'd in with weight and care, Or should that staff keep down your sprightly humours, Fancie might then be stil'd Prudentia. No; though I reign, provide your selves live free. This onely is my Law, that each man use His proper humour, be it Vice or Vertue, Inordinate or stay'd. Who mindes his pleasure Shall best deserve; my selfe will teach him how; And guide him in't. For your own sakes and mine, Offer no more that badg of Tyranny. All but It. Mal. Au. & Desp. Fancie beyond all Fancie. Ir. Plague on Dissemblers; First on her selfe; then on these rascals here; Who first perswaded her to take the Crown, And then admire her for refusing it. Liv. Pleases your highnesse with your radiant haire To grace some other badg of Majesty? Fan. To shew I do not quite reject your Favours, Nor slight the proffered Rule, reach me the Lawrel, And then the glass.she lookes Liv. reaches the Crownes in turn. Mem. Ev'n thus did mighty Caesar! Fan. Ti's too Imperious This. Mem. Wit beyond Caesars! Au. Excellent Lady! Fan. Tis too Imperious If rule it mean; if height of wit, too low: Tis like a Tavern, Bush and begs for sale, Which Fancy scornes. Small Poet, take it you. What's next? the Turbant.—What a Turk am I now! Had I with this a large Seraglio, I'de lend them to Sr. Amorous.—The next.— This Persian Cydaris hath made some Sophies That scarce were wise before: when I sit next In Solemn Counsel, Ile weare This.— But now;— This feather'd Crown like a Mercurial hat Shall lift me from the ground; herein Ile grace The present Fashion.—The Tiremans Coronet May be in Fashion too; and pitty 'tis not; I like it well.—But Liveby, tis your Fa∣vour That must take place, and give us Majesty. Set it on firm, and somewhat glancing.—So.
I, marry Sir; why, this befits us right. Hil. Wu'd I had brought my Fooles Cap to present her, My fooles Cap would have gotten the start of Favour From Live by for ever. Fan. Thankes Liveby, and Ile study a Reward. Liv. Your humblest Creature. Fan. This fits the Quality Of our intended Rule, which shall be light, Light as your Liveby said, and soft and sweet, And various, and pliable to every passion. I'm bound to All, and much to Amo ous, And most to Liveby For besides this pre∣sent, You brought me tidings first of this ad∣vancement, And Crown'd me in my Eare. Who likes the newes, Must needs regard the teller.—One I misse Amongst the Passions, Melancholico. Liv. He sullen grew because he might not beare The massy Crown.— SCENA V. Enter to them Melancholico bring∣ing Fancies Picture Crown'd with Gold. Painter and Musitian. Conc. —Now he hath brought him∣selfe. Fug. And somewhat else. Mel. Although I wanted Grace To plant the massy Crown upon your head In the true substance, yet I found a way To crown you in this Picture. Here's the Painter; And here a try'd Musitian; men of Arts, Which Melancholy much affects. Fan. And I. But mende your peice. That Crown de∣lights not me. Some sudden businesse calls me to conferr With certain Femal Artists!—Liveby, Take you the keeping of those Orna∣ments.— (She offers to go forth. Mal. What? have we made a shittle∣cock our Queen? (She returns.) Fan. Stay, I had quite forgot to strew mine honours On these deservers. You Malevolo Be our chief Counsellour: be you Irato The Lord Controwler: Livebyhope shall be The Master of Requests: you Amorous Shall be the Master of our Ceremonies; For which here's Poet, Painter, man of Musick, And man of Properties: I give you leave To use them for your selfe in wooing Morphe. But you my Poet whom I well respect, Shall be my Secretary, and you shall turn The long-breath'd stile of Proclamation To Lyrick Verse. Liv. Most understanding Queen! Ir. A prety Curr! my hands now itch to try Whether he be true Spaniel breed, or no; O I could beate and kick him, and see whether He'l fawn then to.—You were not best to flatter Your selfe into an Earldom, one degree Above mine Honour. Tim. Take heed my Lord: he's likely to be great; A Favourite can hurt. Ir. What then? must I Therefore take heed? bid me take heed again, And it shall be the last, last Caution, You ere shall give. What? give a Lord good Counsel? Fan. The rest, if they themselves can finde a way How I may pleasure them, I'm crown'd their servant: You know your Law; each man pursue his humour. Ile rule by Fancie since I am Queen Fan; And use as little wisdom as I can.
Au. And so it seemes. Ex. Fan. with her women. Am. Liv. Mem. Poet, Mus. Hil. Ha ha ha ha ha ha— How merry shall I live!—Hil.— (I'v eman. Ex. Paint. Sr. Shall I mend This peice? Mel. Mend! marr, or break it if you will. Now shall I turn far more precise then ever, And praise Prudenius dayes throw discon¦tent. Au. Slighted? contemned? bafled? fooles preferd? (Ex. Mel. and Paint. I'm well rewarded. Ir. Hark Sr. Timerous, You gave me Counsel. Tim. Out of Love indeed Sir. Ir. You gave Prudentius warning to escape. Tim. Not I, indeed not I, Sr. Amorous knowes Ir. How ere Ile kick thee now, cause tis my humour; Ile take thee to be Liveby, tis my Humour. Tim. The Queen shall know how you have kick'd my Knighthood. Ir. I kick'd thy breech, two foot above thy Knighthood. I trust I shall have cause to kill thee too. Mean while, to stir my choler, Ile con∣trowle Roughly, most roughly. Desp. I to feed my humour, (For little I shall have to feed my body) Must run some desperate course. The stream of Favour (Ex Desp. Runs crosse from me, to Hope and Amcrous. Au. Did we expose our selves to utmost danger To gain a Crown for Her that more regards A Cap and Feather? Mal. I her Counsellour Who alters with each puff, more flickering Then Flag or Streamer? Then Ile write on Sand, Or print the Aire. But still I wonder much, How Liveby being absent from our Coun∣sels, Carri'd the first Intelligence. His telling In Her esteem outweighs our Action. Au. This shewes what women love, the Tong and atling. Mal. How sayes this man of Fate? is Livebyhope, That primrose thing, that forward bud, long liv'd? Ir. Ha! I think no; unlesse I may con∣troule him To be no Favourite. Mal. Men of that calling, If I might counsel them for their best safety, Ought not to live too long. For we can hate. Au. Challeng. Ir. Or stab. Au. And call these things our Humours. SCENA. VI. Enter to them Intellectus Agens. Int. The safest Armour is un weapon'd boldnesse. Thus priviledg'd Ile trust their savage hands. All happinesse, that is, true Liberty Unto the Passions; how d'e like your choice? Au. First tell us where Prudentius hides himselfe. Int. Within a Sanctuary, where his thoughts Are sequestred from earthly cares to hea∣ven. Au. Our choice we like beyond Pru∣dentius, Just so, as Fancie Livebys feather'd crown Beyond my Golden. Mal. We like the power of chusing. Ir. And some variety though join'd with loosing— Ex. Passions. Int. Who ere Usurps, considers not his task, How he must sooth the lowest of his vil∣laines, Give highest place and all to every one, Else all will be displeas'd. The King shall know,
What seeds of discontent and headlon folly Appeare already in this warring state. Clos'd in too safe, they broke their hedg; what lesse Then wandring now through wretched wildernesse? Ex. Int. Agens. Finis Actus secun. ACTVS III SCENA I. Enter Memor and Sr. Timerous. Mem. I think your cause exceeds the Cognisance Of common sense. He like a Juryman Can onely sinde and judge the outward fact: As whether now your kicks look white or blew; Whether his threatning words were high or low; What favour follow'd, whether sweet or sowre; Whether the kicks were Rough or gentle; (Rough Your Grinkling sayes) These with some other notions Thereto belonging, as the quantity, The Figure, Number, the swift motion, Or ceasing of your kicks; these he can judge of. But as for higher speculations Of Passions rising out of meer conceit, How it was rais'd, what punishment is due, This proper lbyelongs to Fancie's audience. Was there no cause? Tim. None giv'n, but apprehended. Mem. The worse for you; this shewes there was no malice, But single heat. Were the kicks thick and many? Tim. Six strong ones in one instant. Mem. Still the worse. It shewes meer heat. What said he, 'twas his humour? Tim. Ev'n so. Mem. Yet worse. Tis Law, that ev'ry Passion May follow his own humour. Anger's his. Besides he's writ a Lord: all things con∣sidered, I give you counsel to be patient, To ask if he be pleas'd to give you more; To break a Tooth, pull Haire, strik out an Eye. Tim. Accept my thankes: I see the Law it selfe Is very Timerous against great Per∣sons.— (Ex. Tim. Mem. I now can see no use of Law at all, Law is casheer'd: where all things are permitted What need of plea? what can be call'd unjust? And are not these the Popular dayes we look'd for, When we expected Cunning should be Soveraigne? SCENA II. Enter to him Malevolo. Mal. In mischeif we must use the men we hate. You are the man I seek. Have you con∣sider'd Those State-projections? Mem. Sr. we want some Lawes, Such as were made for certain Lord Pro∣tectors. Mal. Indeed this lawful murder is an Art Of Excellence, and yet as easie too For Statesmen Lawyers as Physitians. Mem. An Art familiar in the Roman State, As ancient too as the first Monarchy. O I could tell you Lawes worth millions to us, By faire intrapping of the wealthy Clergy. ;Mal. Have you no model to insnare a Prince? Mem. Henry the third, though wise and valiant,
Was caught in a strong line knit by him∣selfe, Here ith mad Parliament, Mal. As how? Mem. Twelve Peers Under pretence of evil Officers And grand abuses, were selected out, Strengthen'd with Lawes to prune Pre∣rogatives, To tutour and reform the State; to size The Kings expence, and to appoint him Servants, Both menial and forinsecal. Mal I'st possible The King should seale to this? Mem. O Poverty, She to Obedience is the Lay-mother. As some say Ignorance is the Clarklike, Betwixt Superiours and Inferiours, Look either way, this rule is mutual, The poorer must be servant to the richer. Henry brought low with various Action Could not subsist without their subsi∣dies. Keep thy Prince poor, then thou shalt rule thy Ruler, And subject thy Commander. Mal. This we try'd To fasten on Prudentius: but he Too wise, too frugal was. Now Fancie Through giddinesse of minde, and vast expence, Will prove lesse wary and more prodi∣gal. Mem. Let some insnareing Law be once propos'd, Fancie will yeild, not ponder. Mal. Well, think you; Ile speak and speed. O 'tis the praise of hate To practise ruine and pretend the State. Mem. But Sir, I trust upon your fur∣therance (Mal. about to go. About impropriations. Mal. You Ile remember First, or my selfe I ever shall forget. (Ex. Mal. SCENA III. Enter Fancie in a Cydaris, Con∣cupiscence, Fuga, Hilario before them. Fan. The Cydaris well fits me; now must I er this Persian Crown with mutual fitnesse. What thing was proper to the Persian Kings, Say Memor. Mem. Persian Kings did wed their Sisters. Fan. Though in my Person thus I can∣not wed, Ile licence others. You Hilario May, if you please, enjoy your lively Sister Concupiscence. Hil. I thank your Majesty Both that I may, and may not; for to me Nothing so pleasing is as Liberty. I would not be bound to that neither, though I love it best; If I were, I should long for the prison. Bind me to be rich, I shall play at Duckes and Drakes with peices; Bind me to my good behaviour, I shall feele an itching desire to beate the Justice. O what a Prentise should I make! I should run away no oftner then I came in fight Of the threshold. And most of the Pas∣sions, I think, have a spice of this humor. Fan. But can no bond please you like Liberty? Hil. Neither bond of Matrimony, nor bond of friendship, Nor bond of Usury, nor bond of iniquity; I rejoyce in the present, I desire nothing, and therefore would be tied to nothing. Fan. Concupiscence your Sister's of an∣other minde. Conc. I could well indure to be bound, so I might be loose too. Fan. The Theme which I propos'd was Royalty, No lesse then Persian. Then Concupi∣scence, How ist we are so thinly waited on, By Femal Passions? are there no more women Of Passion kind? Conc. Of Passionate enough. But to say Truth, the Femal Passions As soon as they are born, turn all to sins And they are all my Children. Mem. Then have you
More Daughters far then Danaus, or Mar∣garet Countesse of Henneberg: whereof one did equal The weekes, and th' other the dayes of the year With numerous issue. Conc. I have more by thousands. I'm as Fruitful and quick of Delivery As any Uermin, spreading as Potatoes; My race ruas o're the World. Fan. Or what age are they? Conc. As old as my selfe very neere. Mem. Then you Continued a maide no longer then Quar∣tilla. Conc. O never at all that I can remem∣ber. Mem. You beare your age exceeding well. Conc. I hope I shall be young forever; I have the ver∣tue Of making old folkes young by touching them. Fan. Are none of those your Children ripe and handsome And fit for our attendance? Conc. Pride my Eldest She is the likeliest. Fan. Let her be admitted. Conc. She's now i'th Spanish Court; but when she comes— Hil. Then the Court and her Mother will teach her to fall both wayes, Forward and Backward. Fan. Till she return, is't not in Fan∣cie's power To change a Sex, and make some Passion Female? Mem. The like hath been; I have heard of a Femal By meer force of Fancy turn'd Male. So Iphis A Maide, in love with a Maide, was trans∣form'd Just on the marriage Eve. Tiresias Was Male and Femal annually by turns; Some Hermaphrodites have been both at once. Conc. Wud I could live and turn Her∣maphrodite. Fug. Wud I could live and be of nei∣ther Sex. Fan. What think ye of transforming Amorous? Hil. He's undone then: he cannot shew his legs, nor use his Postures Nor enjoy his Idol Morphe. No, change Sir Timerous, He's as fearful as a Hare, and may be as changable: He hath many Symbolical conditions of womanhood already: He is Femal in every part but one, and half Femal in his cloathes Give me but an Inch of Ribband from Fu∣ga, and I'le undertake to present him The Lady Timida. (Ex. Hil. Fan. Fuga Give him one of your changable Fancie's, Thus first our selves must whet our own Invention; Else others will not stir. Men do not strive Methinkes to please me as they ought to do. No other rarities these many Ages But Powder, Printing, Seaman Card, and Watches? So much vain dotage for the fond Elixir? Why are not yet my Christals malleable, To make our Gold no Gold, and foile the Di'mond? Why want I Instruments to measure out The Year, the Day, the Houre, without the help Of Sun, or turning of these tedious wheeles? Nothing to carry me but Barges, Coaches? Sedans, and Litters? through the Aire I'd passe By some new waftage▪ I must have my house Convey'd by wheeles and sailes and plum∣mers hung In some deep pit, deep as the way is dist∣ant, To hurry me, my Family, and it, Whether I please. Ile travel like the Snaile, With all my house; but swifter then the Faulcon.
Fug. Rare Lady! Conc. Ravishing Inventions! Fan. Why have not I not my Beds stuffd all with wind, Baths fill'd with Maydew, Flowers pre∣serv'd till winter, As well as Snow till Summer: choisest Fruits Growing and ripe in midst of January? Why have not I Ponds running through my Cellars, For Bottles and for Fish call'd by their names? Why not in drough an Artificial rain, Scattered by spowtes, to cheer my Para∣dise? Mem. I wish you had these things; I nere saw such. Fan. Cheape I can have Aeolian bel∣lowes made Within the Bowles of Andirons, where the water Shall blow the fire by which 'tis rarified. I will have Vaults which shall convey my whispers In steed of Embasies to forreign Nations; Places for Ecchoes to pronounce a speech, Or give a Suffrage like a multitude: Consorts well play'd by water; Pictures taught By secret Organs both to move and speak: We spend our selves too much upon the Taylour; I rather would new mold new fashion Nature. SCENA IIII. Enter Amorous and Liveby one way, Malevolo another way. After a while a Shew. Am. Pleases your Highnesse to behold a Shew, Wherein some Passions are display'd by Dreams How they affected are by Day. Fan. Ile see it. What means that whisper? (Mal. & Mem. whisper. Mal. Tis an honest project Thought on by Memor, out of love to Churches, To buy back saleable impropriations With charitable money. Doth it please you? Fan. This task was fitter for Pruden∣tius Then Sense or Passion. This although I grant, Yet take it with condition. Memor knows Conveyance old and new, the Right and Wrong. In things not sacred he may use his cun∣ning, In this he must be just. To you I say, It was not seasonable to move this business When Shewes were comming. Mal. This your selfe did move By asking. Mem. Now. Mal. Then make you here a Law, That none these three dayes shall prefer a Sute Or motion under forfeiture of life. Me you shall finde content; I'm no Trou∣bler. Mem. This trap is laid full right. Liv. Stay, stay great Queen. This Law will seale my mouth, and tie your hands, And stop the necessary speed of businesse, Whereby your Crown may be dissolv'd. Fan. Away, Away Malevolo. Mal. My snare for Liveby Is brok, but violence shall it supply. You Memor have your wish. (Ex. Mal. & Mems Enter Amorous with the shew. Morpheus in a Cloud-coloured Cassock with a wreath of Poppies and a Caduceus from a black Cell. Then at his call, six sleeping Persons in their night caps half down their Faces, and in their wastcoates, representing in their clothes downwards Memor,
Malevolo, Irato, Timerous, Hila∣rio, Desperato. Morpheus shakes his Caduceus over them severally as they stand in Couples. Being mov'd they fall successively into their proper gestures, and lastly all dance together in those gestures. More. I Morpheus King of Dreames, whose might Can equal Fanci's in the night, Have caus'd the night six dreames to send: As I appointed they attend They enter from a black Cave. Now Memor turn thy Books and prate, Plead with thy hands and fees then take. Shrug, scratch, Malevolo, and grin, Grasp thy foule heart and feel thy sin. Irato, bend thy fist and draw, Offer to thrust, keep fear in aw. Shak Timerous, offer to fly, Begin to sink, offer to die. Hilario clap thy hands and laugh, Skip, leap, and turn, offer to quaff. Despaire start, stand, and crush thy throat, Then stab thy breast and groan death's note. The Dance. (After the dance, Ex. Masquers. Fan. Whose labour was this sport? Am. Livebys invention and my contri∣ving. Fan. For this I'le send you to your dearest Morphe. Goe at what hour you please, and say I want Her company at Court. You, Hope, for this, And for preventing that pernicious Law, Ask what you will. Liv. Grant the Monopoly Of Watches, or of Beavers. Fan take them both; And ask again. Liv. When woodlands shall be turn'd To other use, grant me a twelfth as forfeit. Fan. Be it confirm'd▪ Liv. I was about to ask The Patronage of Churches in Sea-towns; Where popular choice maintains a Fa∣ction Brought in with Merchandize from for∣reign parts. But that were better taken to the Crown. Fan. Take what thou wilt. Thou begst to give us share. None can please all, the best the better fare. (Ex. Omnes. SCENA. V. The Scene turns to feilds, walkes & scattered houses. Enter Hilario, and then Sir Time∣rous with Fuga's ribband. Hil. By this way Sir Timerous should come; whom I as sent from his wrong'd Lady Fuga have engag'd in a quarrel against Audax. And yonder comes the pittiful Earthquake most lovingly trem∣bling. Tim. What should I do here? some desperate knave or other, Desperato himself (it may be) hath rob'd me of my best weapon. I thought not to have fought with steele, but with Gold; and to have brought this needy Captain to an honour∣able submission by dint of Cash. What disasters have I? That unreasonablly wicked, that divlish two fac'd Cutter knew me too well: for when I drew this harmless blade, he look'd upon it as slight∣ly as upon a riding wand; and bad me familiarly put up that, and draw my purse. Certainly I have too much of the Mother; I am that which they call a Coward, and all the world knows it. Wherefore (O Ribband) I take it extream scurvily of Fuga, that she being of the same temper her selfe, doth not consider her temper in me. Hil. Now this Craven stands as tick∣lish on the point of running as a Bowle on the top of a ridg. Tim. Two steps further I'le move. I have been coming a quarter of a mile these two houres at least; and yet I sweat till
the very drops run a race; my shaking feaver is turn'd to a cold sweat, and that's a true Prognostication of death. Puts on his Cap. Good night to all the world; for this is that fatal peice of ground which I shall anon-measure with my Carcasse. Never a Bush nor Hole here? though it be call'd Champion ground I shall not fight: perhaps I shall make use of its plainnesse, and give ground a mile or two; that shall be my way of fighting. For if I the Challenger stand still on my guard, it will not stand with mine ho∣nour: And then while I keep my back∣sword point still in his face (I have seen the play at cudgells) he will wheele about me, and falsifying a blow at the head will strike me just on the legs where my heart lies. Then shall I be quite spoiled for run∣ning away; which I think I had best do presently, for I hear him coming. O— Hil. Now I see Sir Tim, thou art a Lad of mettle. Tim. Mettle? I protest Sir I had rather drink this cold iron fil'd small to dust and be a Lad of mettle so, then to thrust it whole into any mans flesh whatsoever; much lesse into my Enemies. You see then what power Love hath, and how Fuga is beholding to me. Hil. Most dreadfully. Tim. Is not the time yet past? I think I may retire with honour, and say he durst not meet me. Hil. It wants yet halfe an hour. If you hold not out your time, then he'l assault you openly in Court, and make your shame publick, which otherwise will be but private. Ile stand secretly by you, and if need require will step in and part you. Tim. Stand not far off I beseech you for when I am kill'd I shall not be able to call.—O my heart!—the Gyant's coming—O—Hilario— Malevolo passes by. Mal. Saw you not here Irato? Tim. No believe me Sir; no I thank heaven. Hilario!—Now comes Audax. O—I have but a minute to live. Irato passes by. Ir. How now stinkerd, how does thy breech? sawst thou not here Malevolo? Tim. He past by in hast; just now in hast.—Well. Two Furies are past. Ile not wait for the third, go Love and Honour whither they will. Hilario!—I fear he hath left me. Ile raze my Flesh with a slight cut, and sweare I receiv'd that wound in fight. But now I think on't better, I have an issue under my left arme; Ile force that bigger till it bleed, and swear that into a wound. For sure a fresh one would be far greater pain. Soft, I am loath to suffer so much, if I may chuse Hilario?— Hil. What a Champion are you? not dare to look a man in the face? Tim. Sweet Hilario, I consider thou hast no Sword to help me: stretch thy wit, and invent some speedy way, how I may escape with honour, and not fight? Hil You cannot possibly escape fight∣ing. Tim. Sweet Hilario do not kill me be∣fore hand with saying so. Hil. Why then will you be rul'd by me? Tim. In any thing, any thing. Quickly for love of Life. Hil. I have promis'd to furnish the Queen with a new Lady attendant. Tim. What then? Hil. Put on Womans apparel, you shall be she; by name of Madam Timida. Tim. Ha! Say on. Hil. Then shall you be free, not onely from this quarrel, but from all future beat∣ings and challenges. Tim. Safe and sound! Hil. Then shall you have perpetual ac∣cesse to Fuga, bully. Tim. Safe and delicious! Hil. Then to steale her affection you may habit your selfe like her. Tim. Safe and wise! Hil. Then as for you honour, who can upbraid you when you are no where to be sound: twill be suppos'd by your sweet friend, that you died in her quarrel, Audax if he himself talk will be dangerously question'd.
Tim. But will you be secret? Hil. For mine own sake, mine own sake, Sir Tim. Tim. Dearest Hilario, thou art my pre∣serving Angel. Hil. Make hast, before you can new cast your selfe Ile come to present you. (Ex. Tim Poor snake, I delivered no Challeng; I onely frighted him to a more willing Metamorphosis. SCENA VI. Enter by him Concupiscence in a Citizens habit. Conc. Hey ho for a husband; Two three, or more, As many as I meet; 'tis fit, that we Ladies Attendant should be qualified For three at least. Hil. What ere the habit be, this is the Face The Voice and language of Concupiscence, Why, how now Sister, taking the Aire a∣lone? Conc. A safe Conscience never feares any man. Hil. I think thou fear'st not any, but lov'st all. Such was thy wont; and hast thou now a Conscience? Conc. Be grave or silent, know I'm rectified. Hil. Pox on your train: by feigned honesty You seek to wooe me. I'le unvaile you streight. What think you of two husbands, three, or more, As many as you meet? Conc. Why didst thou hear me? Hil. Ladies Attendant should be qua∣lified For three at least. Conc. That I spoke merrily. Hil. If thou hadst ten, thou still wouldst cry more Hymens. Conc. If so you think, think on, I think so too. Hil. But when will all thy maiden∣heads be spent? Tell me sincerely, truly, and bodily. Conc. They come again like Teeth, I'm breeding now. Hil. Then are thy maidenheads like Hydra's heads, Not to be tam'd but by a Hercules. Who has the next? Conc. I am resolv'd to part it Betwixt a Courtier and a Citizen: The Courtier has the maide, the Citizen Shall have the head. Hil. Sister, I cannot wed you, You have too much complexion for my use: But Ile provide you one shall bear the name Of Husband. Conc. Let him be honest, quiet. Hil. Of you own garb, say he be Me∣lancolico. And so Ile rid my selfe of Fanci's march. Conc. I care but for his shadow ha∣ving Servants. Hil. Farewell Carnality. (Ex. Hil. Conc. Hilario thinks He took me, when alas twas my intent The Boy should overheare, and so become If not a Husband, such an Officer. SCENA VII. Enter to her Audax. Au. What's here? Concupiscence? Conc. Nor stare, nor startle; As I hope to look saire, I'm nothing chang'd In minde or body. No where, but in habit. Au. And why in This? Conc. O for Variety. Fancy permits all change. This dresse sometimes Pleases the Courtier better then his Ladies.
Au. Is it but so? come then my Paphi∣an drum, I'le brace the close. Conc. Soft Sir, you march too feircely. I have a task which first you must perform; I fear you will not do't; you do not love me; Promise me first; the task I can assure you, Befitts your Valour, and will pay it selfe. Au. Is it to kill the Queen, that thou mayst reign? Conc. No, nor her maide; thou shalt but use her kindly. Au. Speak plain, be bold. Conc. Then thou shalt ravish Fuga. She twits me with my Servants, Favours, Lookes, My Words, and scapes: in This you bear a share. If this to me bring shame, you are not free. Au. Is this your heavy task? no more but This? Onely to ravish? is not the work Reward? Ile do't effectually; Her selfe shall thank me. Conc. But I'le outthank her far; Ile ravish thee With fast embraces. Take this kisse in earnest Of future payment. Though I seeme a Vestal, To thee I'm Venus. Au. Venus, be secur'd. (Ex. Au. Conc. Then, when her fruit shall swell, and I stand simpring, Turn'd to a seeming Saint, O how Ile triumph In grave reproofe and holy Admonition! This 'tis to be too chast.—here come the Stagemen. SCENA VIII. Enter to her Malevolo, Irato, Memor. Mal. Sir you and we were acted at the Court. We loosers are made laughing-stocks, and sport For open Stages. Ir. Tell my Sword the Author; That it my write his doome upon his flesh. Mal. This Creature can informe us. Who I pray Were your late witwrights in the Masque? Conc. Hope pend it, My Father Amorous (without Offence) (Ex. Conc. Contriv'd the Shew. Mem. This trick Malevolo Was chiefly meant to you, because your pen Hath scourg'd the Stage. Ir. However Lord Irato Shall act a red Catastrophe on Liveby: (Ex. Ir. and Mem. Mal. Ile watch his haunt and hunt him to his fall; You Amorous too. This mirth of theirs at last Shall close their sweetnesse with an Aloed tast. These once remov'd, who can be great but I; Whose word shall sway but mine? Then power is sweet When Rubs are made the staires to mount our feet. (Ex. Mal. Finis Actus 3. ACTVS IIII SCENA I. Enter Desperato in a Physitians habit. Desp. Whatever chang succeed, still wretchednesse My old inseparable mate hangs on. Therefore I seem ridiculous; my grief Is others mirth; Malevolo sayes I'm acted▪ Henceforth Ile finde new Company: since Fate Barrs me from others happinesse, Ile spread My misery to others; and Ile thrive Meerely in spite, to make men miserable. This is my humour; 'tis begun already. The Gold I took from Timerous, if que∣stion'd, I can defend; I took it in my humour; And that's good law; I took it in a humour
Most desperatly bent; and it hath made me Such as men see, an able man for mischeif; Clad me in th' outside of a mystery, Furnish'd my shelves with Pots, with Boxes, Names, Slight Medicines, and strong Poysons. Time hath been, When I in War serv'd Death a Prentiship; There learn'd to open Veynes, to lance and kill; Now I am free o'th Trade; a Soldier then, Physitian now; Ile do the selfe same work, But now more Artificially.— SCENA II. Enter to him Melancholico. Mel. —The godly in distresse; the wicked, that usurp The Childrens right, do here grow fat and prosper: Wherefore I thought of drowning. Verily ulesse that Conscientious Lawyer, Good Memor, from rebought Impropria∣tions, Had thus deducted and distributed The better part to us oppressed Brethren, Affliction some, and some Devotion Had brought me to despaire. Now Ile not see him. Desp. Methinkes dejected Melancholico Should prove fit Timber for my fatal work. What, Melancholico? not know your friend, Whose medci'nal skill cures Body, Minde, and State? Trust thou art not over lucky; art? Do'st feel no misery? I thought ere this should have had thy custome. Mel. Verily My sicknesse could but little cure your purse. Desp. It might have brought me pra∣ctise howsoever, And that's the onely Fee of new pro∣fessours. Mel. But are you then indeed a true professour, And one of Us? Sooth I professe sincerity, Desp. Hath not the same which caus'd sincerity, Caus'd a foule spleen? no Hypocondrick Vapours? Mel. For that a godly Lawyer gave me physick: Desp. Then take it next from a Divine. Mel. That Lawyer First took it from Divines, then gave it me. And I can give you counsel to your phy∣sick: You have a faire advantage in mens sick∣nesse To prick the Conscience, and to let them know, Their onely way is to releive the Bre∣ren, And  their stock of holy usury For new Plantations. You shall have a share. Desp. This is a verier rogue then I my selfe. Mel. And what I pray mov'd you to turn Physitian? Desp. Want set me on, a booty set me up. Now let me know of mutual curtesie, What was your Dos? Mel. 'Twill buy all yours; 'twas Gold. Desp. Why then, thou'st run unto pre∣sumption, Not to despaire. I heare you are to marry; Which if thou dost, then thou wilt come to me, For Ratsbane, Hensbane, some such whol∣some banes, To cure thy bands of Matrimony. Mel. Hence. (Ex. Desp. SCENA III. Enter to him Hilario and Concu∣piscence. Hil. Friend Melancholico, How is't? Sister, stand by a while. Me∣thinks
Upon a sudden you are grown brisk and cheereful, Fit company for me, nay for a wife. Mel. You'l never leave your waggery and jeasting. " You call'd Peculiars rags of Popery. Hil. Sometimes you are too sad and solitary: Is this jeasting? and solitarinesse Requires due Recreation; Is this jeasting? And Recreation much consisteth in The yoak of a meet helper; you may call This jeasting too; but is't not sport in earnest? Mel. The Saints allow no sport. Hil. Then love in earnest. You know you cannot well converse with men; Your lookes are indispos'd, your language sparing, Your manners different. But to a woman A long Parenthesis of busi'd silence Does passing well. Then in her company You have a world, and none to contradict. And in her Ear you may reform the Church, Or purg the State, as safe, as if you spake Ʋnto the Aire or whisper'd to your selfe, For so she is. Think on a wife. Mel. No wife. Hil. Then on a spouse. Mel. Now you say somewhat. Hil. Now. He'l marry words not substance. The word whore Would have spoil'd all. This blockhead suites with me As frost with fire. But for your sake Ile thaw him. Mel. Have you not injur'd that fair pro∣mising Sister By leaving her alone? Hil. She meditates. Mel. She walketh gravely, turns her eye devoutly. Hil. The white's pure, the black as full of Adultery As thou art of Hypocrisie; she harbours A good conceit of you. Shall she concive Further? Mel. If that her name be right. Hil. She was Concupiscence, now call'd Temperance Sister This is your Husband whom I so com∣mended. Conc. I chuse not for my selfe. Mel. Sister and Spouse, If so you please, our hands sha'l us unite Marches are made in Heaven; few words suffice The Night consummates. As for other rites I hold them superstitious Ceremonies. I had forgot her Portion. Hil. She's a widow, He shew you her Estate. Mel. He first retire And clasp her hand in zeale. Conc. my Lord and Bridegroome. Hil. The Divel and his Dam you are. Come Brother. Mel. Once more. I like your medi∣tation, But do not spend your selfe therewith too much. (Ex. Hil. and Mel. Conc. Now I am double shelter'd in my hear, With name of Husband, and this formal guise. SCENA IIII. Enter to her Audax. Conc. Now welcome Servant; have you won the Fort? Au. Hell take her, she's a man. Conc. A man? Au. Just so I found, scarce left him so. Conc. O you mistooke. Sir Timerous is transform'd to wait at Court: Twas Phanci's own device. O I could laugh. Au. I made him so much woman as to cry; " Else I had made him woman with my Sword. Conc. Alas poor Timida.
Au. The thing so trembled, No leafe nor ague like him. Conc. Ha ha ha. Au. Did you intend to put this trick upon me? Conc. No by the kisses which shall satisfie Thy height forthwith, and pay thy errour full. Besides I'm satisfied with this mistake As well as with the right. Aspersion Shall blot the name of Fuga full as much. SCENA V. Enter to them Sir Tim. as Timida. After a while Fuga, alike dress'd. Au. What's this? the He or She? Conc. No matter which. Au. If it be she, I'le ravish her; if he, Then thou shalt do't. Conc. Neither▪ tis done enough. Au. Tim hath a fine time on't. Conc. Come, you have a better.— Tim. Is this to be a woman? O I could teare, (Ex. Conc. & Au. As timerous as I am, my lawnes to rags, And scratch my face, and stick my heart with pins, Or streight turn valiant. Wud my Fuga knew, What she hath scap'd through me. And here she comes. (Enter Fuga. O Fuga, female habit and strang sufferings Have lent me tongue enough. Now I can speake; And boldly say I have deserved your love. Fug. Wherein Sir Lady? I Tim. Now in this your habit sav'd you from a hideous ravishing. Audax with whom I should have fought, came on me With love more rude then rage, blasted my face With breath like brimstone, turn'd my limbs like twigs; I live by miracle. Fug. You came too neere Uuto a Sex from which you should keep further. Tim. Shall I not then be neer and dear unto you? Fug. Experience tells you what a boy∣strous thing Tis to be ruffled by a man. Tim. Still so? Why I have been a woman for thy sake; I hear within these weedes a minde as tender, White skin, blew veines, and armes as soft as thine. Fug. But still you are a man, and I still Fuga. Tim. Nothing can merit love from pevish∣nesse. What shall I do? I'le streight turn man again, And suffer for my selfe. Farewel coy wo∣man, Ungrateful, and unwise. My ravishment Is fairely past, but yours may be the next. How ere when I appear my selfe, the noise Of what is past will light upon your name. I bore the loathsome suffering for thee, Now shalt thou bear the foule reproach for me. (Ex. Tim. Fug. Much I was overseen, too much extreamely; I could run after him; but if he turn I shall run back again. O I am lost; My Honour, Safety, and perhaps some lik∣ing, All these are lost, with these I'm lost, lost Fuga. SCENA VI. Enter to her Amorous. Am. This change of State gaines me small perfect pleasure. Meer meditation on Morphe's beauty Will not suffice. Come Fuga, since thy Ocean Cannot be minish'd by some drops, give freely What Audax forc'd.
Fug. That I am miserable Is't not enough, unlesse I bear more bur∣dens Of common scorn, or (which is worse) true stayning? Good Sir, of all the Passions you are gent∣lest; Though you esteem me light, which I am not, Yet take some weight unto your selfe. Consider That after this you cannot worthy be Of Morphe, never woe with confidence. Am. Thus still a Female Sermon puts me by, And I gain nothing by my Liberty. Once more I ask. Fug. Once was too much before. Am. Once more. Fug. First kill me. Am. Then to make you quick Is past my cunning. (Ex. Amorous. SCENA VII. Enter Hilario, Concupiscence, after a while Melancholico. Hil. Joy to you Madam Fuga, you know why. (Ex. Hil. Conc. If I could give you Joy of what I loath, And you delight in, this if I could do Without a sin, I would. Fug. Is false report Worse then true guilt? how i'st this fil∣thy Strumpet Lookes like a Saint, and I as foule as hell? Conc. Lady, an Eye refin'd sees more then dull ones, And Holinesse far clearer then Uncleaness. I wonder what loose words and actions Have pass'd from you, to give incourag∣ment To the kind ravisher; for I have heard None can be ravish'd without some con∣sent. Be humbled, know you fault, live chaster Lady. (Enter Mel. Fug. Sure I should think I'm guilty. Mel. Out upon thee. Fie Temperance, what here? wilt thou have Eggs And rotten Oranges flung at thee too? What can you chuse no other company But this lewde, crack'd abominable peice? Conc. You see your company is scanda∣lous, I must take leave. (Ex. Mel. & Conc. Fug. If there be any power To see and judge, I challeng his assistance. What have I done, unlesse too stedfast coy∣nesse Be now accounted loosenesse? what's my Crime, That such a general storme of loude dis∣grace Conspires to bear down Innocence? Hold heart, Hold my weake spirits: for if this continue I shall grow desperate.— SCENA VIII. Enter to her Malevolo. Fug. —Pitty me Father, My name is stain'd beyond all patience. Sir Timerous having foolishly put on My shape; in stead of me was rudely ra∣vish'd By blustring Audax. The reproach is mine. You know a darksome cloud can much ob∣scure The face of water though as pure as Chri∣stal. Mal. Audax shall rue this base attempt, whose shadow Blots your opinion, and portends more danger Unto your Person. Cast your cares on me. Fug. I may communicate, not cast them off. (Ex Fug. Mal. I thought to use him in a bold de∣sign Gainst Liveby, and I will; 'tis dangerous Unto himselfe. If combat raine one,
Vengeance persues the other: thus Ile make The vanquish'd and the victor both my prey, And whilst they fight, my selfe shall win the day. SCENA IX. Enter by him Irato and Audax quarreling. Ir. What, you that Office? know your turn; give place First to your betters. You be General? Au. Yes I. And know, that whilst I hold a Sword To prove my worth, the Sun beholds none better. Neither your Lordship nor Controwlership Can dastard me. Ir. But I shall teach you distance. Au. Make me draw back one inch, and gain this place, Then thou gain'st That. Be calmer good Irato. Ir. Unwing the Lightning, stop Araxes floods, Then mayest thou stop my wrath, and guard thy selfe Against my stroke. Mal. Hold, hold; what means this Fury? May I be Umpire in your difference? Au. Know it you may; this feirce and haughty Lord Crosses my aime, and stands Competitour For what he understands not, to be Gene∣ral. Ir. Not understand? give way Malevolo. Au. You may be fit to quarrel in a Tavern, But not to lead an Army. Ir. Give me scope; Unlesse thou wouldst be broach'd on the same blade, And coupled plung in Styx; open the way. Mal. Why would you seek this Office? Ir. Cause I scorn That any man should be prefer'd before me. Mal. And why would you? Au. Because I can do service; And would gain honour, equal unto His. Mal. There's yet no Army levi'd, there's no cause, But doubtful Rumour. Au. When there is, Ile lead it. Mal. Yes, both alike; while you con∣tend for shadows, Liveby will bear the substance from you both. Rid him, then you may talk. Au. What sayes Irato? Ir. Agreed. Mal. Then you shall take him now in th' Evening, Comming from Intellectus: there's his haunt,— (Ex. Ir. & Au. Now try your fury on a third; for I Stanch'd not this combat out of love, but hate, To turn them hot, and mad, on Liveby's blood; That done, meet seas again; I'le be no Isthmus; But spur their heat, and clap them on the shoulder. For I my selfe first rais'd this bruite of war, For fuel of some new commotion; Which luckily takes fire betwixt these two. SCENA X. Enter by him Amorous and Musi∣tian. Then Morphe. Mal. Now Amorous; you sit in For∣tunes lap, Your Mistresse sits in yours; you spend your dayes In Honour, and Delight. Am. I shall the more, If with your liking. Mal. Mine? I am your Theme For mirth at Court; one of your Hobby-horses: And glad of such perferment; but I'le dash And poyson your sweet delicates. Am. Your hate (Ex. Mal.
Shall not break off my Scene of Love. Stand there, And send thy notes like shafts through Morphe's Eare. Musitian Sings. Sweet Morphe lend a feeling eare To the soft straines wherein I bear My soul, and sigh it out to thee Compos'd of sweeter harmony; With one kind word or smile Reprive the man a while, Who life doth crave Thy print to save, And feares to make his breast, thy Pictures grave. Mor. (Above) Why do you trouble both your selfe and me, With such fond circumstance of open woo∣ing? Am. I'm glad at any rate to hear your voice, Though sent in chiding. But my dearest Morphe, I have a businesse to you from the Queen, Besides mine own. Mor. This you pretend to wrong me. Though I be loyal, yet my loyalty Ought not to make me Traytor to my selfe. Am. If I be false or any way immodest, Accuse and shun me. Mor. Shall I then believe you? Am. Adde to that curse a greater if you can, And may it fall upon me. Mor. Well, I come. (Mor. descends. Am. Now having liberty to act my will, No Law but this vain curse to hold me in, How shall I bear my self? Mor. What wills the Queen? Am. She calls you to her company at Court. She wants your privacy; you likewise want Her publick presence: O you wrong your beauty By shutting such a Jewel from the gaze Of solemne adoration. Mor. Pray excuse me; If I have beauty, let me keep it well. The various Fashions, and new Fancies there, In the opinion of us plainer beauties, Do but Sophisticate the Elements Of native Colour, and distort the lines Of proper figure. What should I do there? Say I am sickly, as this newes hath made me. Farewell Sir Amorous. Am. Nay, tis not modesty But blunt stupidity to part so soon. May I not walk and take you by the arme, And passe a faire discourse? what hurt in This? May I not feed my spirits with the aire That fans your cheekes? lighten mine eye from yours? Is this immodest? Mor. Hark. Am. 'Tis the clash of weapons. SCENA. XI. Enter Live by hope persued by Au∣dax and Irato They speed him and pass along. Liv. Help Amorous, help.—O—it comes too late. Am. Ignoble Swords, and bloody butcherers! Who would believe that two such Her∣cules Should joyn against a single Hylas thus. It was not manly.—Morphe—O my life! (Mor. Sownes. This hideous sight hath struck her gentle spirits With frighted numnesse. Water, spirits, help.— Enter Mus. and out again Out strip the wind, fly for a Physitian.— I'le rub her Temples, rouze her by the name Which she best knows: Morphe. Liv. O! Am. Life there appears; Is there none here? how should I save them both?
Help there, 'tis but a Sowne. I feele some breath. I'le bear her hence.—O that my armes might clasp (Ex. Am Her living thus, and willing.— SCENA XII. Enter Intellectus Agens. Int. —Hence did thrill That peircing noise. What's here? see false mine eyes! Poor Liveby slaine? then for thy Sove∣raignes favour Thou diedst a Martyr. Liv. O, Intellectus help. Int. He speaks; ther's hope of life. If Art can save A thrid so mangled, thus Ile bear thee to't. Although my breast have us'd to bear it's burden (Ex. Int. bear∣ing Liv.) Within, and not without.— Am. (above)—Looke carefully Unto your Lady. Let the Physitan First speak with me.—Now to my se∣cond loade.— (He descends.) What? vanish'd? I have heard of walk∣ing ghosts, Never of walking carcasses. Then surely The Murderers have drag'd him hence. His blood Will rise upon their cheekes; and it shall speak Lowd on my Tongue.— SCENA XIII. Enter by him Fancie in a Turbant, Fuga, after a while Musitian, Desperato. Fan. —Now in my Turkish Turbant I walk to find Sir Amorous in his heaven. Be not so deeply discontented Fuga. Fug. Unlesse you cleare me openly, I die. Fan. I finde you Amorous somewhat neare your Center. Your Morphe fittest is to be a Queen. I go to waite on her, and fetch her home With me. Am. Sweet Soul (that's all she is by this) I cannot tell you in what world she is, Nor where I am my selfe. Fan. And why? Am. She's dying, Frighted with such a dismal accident, That when I tell it, I much fear your high∣nesse Will be as weak as she. Fan. Speak, I am arm'd. Where's Livebyhope? Am. The same I faine would know: Last when I saw him, he was laid for dead. Fan. How dead? Am. Tis so. Just now: not far from hence, Two bloody Villaines, Audax and Irato, Persued and sped him with two mortal wounds. I ran to help; Morphe fell in a Sownd; I bore her hence; mean while his Corps were gone. Fan. I am perplext beyond my power of bearing. My arme is lopt, my Kingdom is all tumult▪ The Passions taking vantage of my Law, Follow their humours to their mutual ruine; Enter Mus. with Desp. Am. seems to talk with him. And run like Vessels till they quite run out. Am. Mix some ingredient to excite her Love. Doctor, thou shalt be rich, Desp. I'le fit you all. Morphe for physick sends, Malevolo Hath purchas'd me long since to give her poyson; Sir Amorous buyes a Love-pill: I my selfe, Ev'n I, that will be Master in conclusion, Intend to mix them all: then fight con∣fusion. (Ex. Desp. SCENA XIIII. Enter to them Audax and Irato, at length Malevolo secretly.
Au. Pleases your highnesse to decide by choice, Or leave it to our Swords, who shall be General? Fan. Then I am bound to honour one of them For their good service. Bloodhounds, have ye murder'd One worth you both? and dare to ask re∣ward Of me? of me so wrong'd? So both will joine In mutual revenge, and fall together, Fight for't. Ir. Fond Queen, what if our rage pro∣ceed, To hew Sir Amorous for telling this, You for distasting? all will be but humour. Au. Then give us not occasion to pro∣ceed. Fan. Proceed, I pray you, do. Lo, here's my breast. Tent it; to finde the greife which I con∣ceive For Livebys Death, and your more horrid Lives. What, have ye surfeited with blood? good Amorous, Do't thou, do't streight: what these refuse as Rebels, Do as a Friend. Kill me, but kill me gently, With some sad straine under this spreading Oake. Am. I hope 'twill ease not kill you. Sing of Venus. (Musitian Sings. Once Venus cheekes that sham'd the morn Their hue let fall; Her lipps, that Winter had out born, In June look'd pale: Her heat grew cold, her nectar dry. No juyce she had but in her eye, The wonted fire and flames to mortifie. When was this so dismal sight? When Adonis bad good night. (Ex. Mus. Fan. The same which turn'd her beauty, turns my Fancy, Alas poor Liveby.—What dee mean to thrust? Fie what a presse is here? stand off; for I Am but a Cloud: your Elbowes peirce me through; Your hot and angry breaths will streight dissolve me. (Enter Malevolo secretly. And I shall crack into a showre of Teares. Am. Alas she's crak'd indeed, the Queen's distemper'd. Fan. Do you not see, and hear a Lamb there bleating? Pray kill him not, he bears the head of Liveby. Au. In a mad world what use of place? what businesse? Ir. Now had I any anger left, I'd shred That Fidler into Atomes. Au. O, I'm struck (Plague on Malevolo that fets us on!) I'm struck at heart with leaden heavinesse! Ir. I feele my veines now curdled; what successe But Horror of this Fact? Mal. I see and hear (Ex. Ir. & Au. Enough to grate me. O that plotts well laid (Ex. Mal. Should thus be dash'd and foyld.— SCENA XV. Enter Melancholico with a Peti∣tion, after him Sir Timerous in mans habit. Mel. —That naughty Boy Hilario hath match'd me to the Divel. Hell flames are in her; she hath stuck a brand " Into my bones; I sue for just divorce∣ment. Am. Did not you snuffle till you match'd my Daughter? Peace, or you'l shame your selfe. Fan. A pretty Picture, Here's Day and Night united in one peice; Look here a Swan, look there a foule black Raven. Tim. Justice great Queen against a mul∣titude. Am. That's hard to be obtain'd. Tim. Against Irato,
Tilario, Desperato, Audax: Some beat, some cheate, some rob, some ra∣vish me. Fan. What saist? Go on and still that howling kennel. I know you well, for all you are a Tortesse, And have liv'd like a frog in diverse Ele∣ments. Of what Gender are you? Go learn of Protens How to do tricks. If you be dull and blockish, You must be beaten. Come to me for Justice? Judge one another, or get you all to Liveby. Tim. He's in his grave. Fan. And therefore get ye to him. Tim. No doing's here: I'm gone. Mel. And I: but whither? Ex. Tim. & Mel. Fan. No Amorous, Liveby sleeps, but Morphe's dead. Am. Heaven help you Lady. Fan. But I can soon restore her. " Take you the sent of a Travellers toes, " The sneeze of a Sleeper fresh from his nose; " The fat of a Frier well fed with fasting, " The lean of a Drunkard consum'd with tasting; " The juyce of a Lemmon tha's civil at sea∣sons, " Twelve dancing Capers, ten lunatick Reasons; " Two dying notes of an ancient Swan, " Three Sighes a thousand years kept if you can: " Some scrapings of Giges his Ring may passe, " With the skin of a Shadow caught in a glasse; " Six peny worth of Thoughts untold, " The jelly of a Star before it be cold; " One ounce of Courtship from a country-Daughter, " A grain of Wit, and a quart of Laughter. " Boyle these on the Fire of Zeal or of Lust, " With some beech Coales, least the Ves∣sel bust. " If you can get these Ingredients, I'e com∣pound them for you. " Then when she is perfectly recovered, she shall be married In rich cloth of Rainbow lac'd with Sun-beames. Am. I hope Desperato hath given her other Physick. Fan. Desperato? is he her Physitian? Since hope is dead, we all must to despair. SCENA XVI. Enter Model bringing a message. Mod. Pardon the messenger if he re∣late What he could wish were false. Morphe once was: But after physick brought by Desperato, Raging and crying Amorous, She died. Fan. Lo now, believe your Cybill next. Ex. Fan. Fug. Mod.— Am. —If madness Be now so near allied to prophecy, I shall grow Prophet too. What angry Star Thus frownes on all the Passions, most on me? Ere since Prudentius dayes, we onely toil'd In wretched mazes of confusion, Mischeif, and discontent. I have not pass'd One hour in those delights whereof I dream't; And now the object of my happinesse Is clean extinct. But how? O there's the torment! My torment's doubled through my selfe the cause. Curs'd be my heedlesse Love, which not content With likely hopes, with honest wayes of wooing, The wayes to long injoyning, headlong ran To arts forbid. She had such Innocence Ev'n in her body, Temper so unforc'd, That violent mixtures tending but to Love To her were poysons. Yet methinks, some∣times,
There's Death in Desperato's looks; per∣chance He's divel in his dumps, as I in lust. Where shall we finde the bottom of our woe, Who but on Passion have no ground to go! Ex. Am. Finis Actus IIII. ACTVS V SCENA I. The Scene turnes to the house of Despair. A Table there laid. Enter Desperato. Desp. Grow blacker yet my thoughts, grow blacker yet: Your Plummets have not fadom'd the full depth Of Passions misery. I have invited them; But I must chang their Cheere; and make it stronger Then food and bare discourse. I onely live For others-death, and then I'le fill the heap With mine own ruine: rather with mine ease: For now the Passions flow like shoales of Fish Into my net; they sue to me for Counsel; Ev'n to me; whose joy is in their death. Just so the fearful Deere persu'd with dogs, Flies to the keepers lodg, a surer Fate. To poyson is dull art; my selfe am sorry For doing ill so poorly; my design Is now more glorious; for I'le make them act Their death upon themselves, aud thank me for't Amidst their groanings. There have been with me Fancie herselfe, distracted for her Liveby; Irato, Audax for massacring him; Sir Timerous and Fuga for impatience Of their abuse. Unlesse Recorder Memor Skil'd in the Law, have wayes to scape my Noose, I doubt of none. I've bid them to a Feast; But such a one, as Tantalus would shun; Where I shall feed on all the guests that come. SCENA II. Enter Sir Amorous. Am. Black Desperato, did I lay two thrids Upon thy spindle? hast thou cut them both, Morphe's and mine? Desp. Why Sir, I mix'd your Philtre. Am. She lives not me to love nor to be lov'd. Didst thou mix nothing else? Desp. You know sometimes That Death and Cupid do mistake their shes: Had I mix'd Poyson too and serv'd two humours, Both mine and yours, it might be well di∣gested.— Am. If I had not a dear request unto thee, To give me of the same, I would exact Thy life for hers, however it was spilt. Desp. If I had not design'd to kill some others Out of meer kindnesse, thou shoulst try my skill Of letting blood as well as giving physick. But since I owe thee kindnesse out of hate, Come to my Banquet, thou shalt have thy sawce. There thou shalt meet thy friend Malevolo, Who shar'd in this, and gave as much for Poyson As you did for your Philtre. I dealt ho∣nestly, And pleasur'd Both. Come, thou shalt have thy sawce. Am. Divel, I thank thee.— (Ex. Am. SCENA III. Enter Malevolo. Desp. —Now▪ Malevolo.
Mal. To hate was still my hony. But this gall Of being hated totally of all, I cannot bear: for now I cannot hurt, Having no Credit. Give me from thy store A dram of Poyson. I have been thy friend, Let it be strong. Desp. First shake hands you must With all the Passions, or at least make shew Of formal reconcilement: stay a while, My Guests and Cheer are coming.— SCENA IIII. Enter to them Irato, Audax. Ir. —Have we found This monster here? we'l send thy ugly soul Unto her fellow Feinds for tempting us. Mal. I prompted you to kill. Were not you ready To do as bad as I could say? Meane while I turn'd you from destroying one another. Au. Twas for thine one black Ends. Mal. And say it was: Might not I hate, as well as you might kill? My humour was as lawful. Au. Hadst thou kept it Home to thy selfe. Mal. I labour not excuse, But accusation of your equal Crimes. Desp. He sayes the right; and hospita∣lity Doth now require, ye should deferr your Broyles. (Ex. Desp. SCENA V. Enter to them Fancie in the Tire∣mans Coronet, hair dissheveld, in black and Silver habit. Fuga, Amorous, Timerous. Fan. Sir, here's a Crown, (and tis the worst of mine) Not to be match'd in all the globe of hea∣ven Now shall I feed upon Ambrosia? Most divelishly. What gods are these two Mars-es? Am. Hell is broke loose; here are more Feinds then two. Fug. It shames me to look up; through griefe I cannot. Tim. Wud I could die a sleep in some darke hole Unknown unto my selfe and all the world. Am. Malevolo, th' art damn'd. Mal. How know you that? Am. And thou must sinke to hell now instantly For killing Morphe. Thou shalt drink the same That very Poyson. Mal. Wel, so you'l begin. SCENA VI. Enter Hilario before Melancho∣lico and Concupiscence, brought in a Sedan. Hil. Now Sister you are right: now you can snuffle ' As well a Melancolico. Care of fiction " With help of somewhat else hath brought perfection. " None come in Pomp but you: weake∣nesse is stately. " Twere brave if these two beasts that draw without " And these two rotten carcasses within ' Made it not look so Cart-like. My clean couple, If you would be divorc'd, there's none can do't Like Desperato; he can seperate At a worlds distance; that ye ner'e shall meet To clamour me or others, or your selves. Fan. A pretty kinde of Coach; one horse before And one behinde! Am. Horses? why, these are Men.
Fan. I see it now; it is the glass∣mans pack. Have you good choice of Glasses, made in Figure Of Guns and Trumpets, or of Rats and Owles? Last time I saw the like, I bid a Gallant Begin a health, and after break his glasse: So did the rest; but do not do so now, Least for a Glasse some should mistake a Lady. Hil. Femals are Venice mettle. Am. These sad men Use to be sumptuous in their Feasts. Hil. And witty. Tim. I fear 'twill be too great. Ir. Too tedious. Au. Wellcome and bold I'le be.— SCENA VII. Enter Desperato before his banquet serv'd in cover'd dishes, Desp. —Aerious Queen, Here are no Phoenix eggs; had nature any, You should have some: and eggs sublim'd with Amber I thought too mean. I have not now se∣lected Rare filling meats, but rarely physical, And swiftly curing all the maladies Which time can throw upon the face of man. Each dish containes a general remedy, Beyond th' Elixir, or the golden Liquour, Though it were drunk in th' Antimonial Cup. Open and try. Am. What's here? Knives, Bodkins, Daggers? Mal. Ropes, silken, hairy, hempen? Tim. Little papers, Of witty, loving, raging, sleeping poysons? Desp. There's Wine to temper them. Hil. So, where's the Wine? I still come somewhat merry to a Feast, And still go merrier back. This is my messe: All this to all. Fan. Is this our entertainment? Desp. Could Art invent, or Wealth procure you better? The Greatest, Wisest, Stoutest, and the fairest Have chose these Cates to relish their last palats: Have you not heard of Mithridates, Cato, Of Hannibal, and Cleopatra? These? These gods on earth have travl'd to their home With such provision. Tast. One tast of these Forever frees from Hunger, Thirst, Want, Griefe: These are receites for immortality. Tim. But through a mortal way. Desp. That sleeping Dos Will steal thy fearful soul insensibly. Tim. Then that shall bear me hood∣wink'd unto Lethe; There I'le forget my wrongs. Hil. Manners however; First let the Queen begin. I broke that Rule My selfe, and therefore mm.—Well danc'd youd Scaffold. He falls into a Chaire. Desp. These things the most of you desir'd; All want, Y'are wellcome all. Hil. No, no more I thank you. Desp. Death to the wretched soul as needful is, As sleep unto the weary. Why should men Condemnd to misery thus toile to mend Their Fates which cannot alter? Hil. This Desperate What a gift he has! he never was at th' University; Never took Orders, and yet lectures as good Divinity As commonly we finde in most Dutch Systems Or City-conventicles. Desp. Pleases your Highnesse To chuse and give the signal, that we all May waite upon your dying. Fan. Reach me then The witty poyson. Am. Me the loving mixt; That when I die, embracing her Idea,
My Soul may keep that print, and bear from hence A heaven within me. He that stript of flesh And lust still loves, will shew true love indeed. But you Malevolo shall take my part. Mel. My place in heaven is sure; what need I hast? Yes, 'cause I live in hell. Desp. Then take these banes Mentioned before. Hil. Do; as good he poyson thee As thou else drown thy selfe. Mel. Poyson I have too much, Already, and in vain. Reach me your hal∣ter. Hil. Hoh hoh hoh; a halter? a dagger, he's so rotten, He'l ne're hold hanging. Now for my part, sleep Kills me sufficiently; Ile die before hand. Conc. In lust I liv'd with man; to kill that sin Lend me that ponyard, so I'le manly die. Fug. This Bodkin is my husband; this alone Shall know my flesh, and finde I was a Vir∣gin. Au. Come joyn Irato, as we liv'd lets hang, Two nooses and one rope will serve us both. Ir. Tis a dogs death, and therefore not unfit. Hil. Hoh hoh hoh. Mal. Choice I neglect whatever can dispatch Loath'd life is sweet. My hate would faine turn home, But cannot: Still me thinks I feele con∣tent In seeing such a fruitful race of mischeife, Because it sprung from me. If Fancies madnesse Had not unhing'd the course of my design, And brought remedilesse confusion On all the Passions here at once; unseen Beloved and honor'd, I with Art and Plea∣sure Had done what Desperato does by chance. He onely held the Net; I hunted in The store of game: The praise is mine. And now I die not with remorse of hate, but want Of objects to be hated. Thus the worme Having consum'd the Orb wherein it liv'd, Doth lastly turn its hunger on it selfe. Should I survive I could not finde more work, Unlesse I learn,d to pitty what is done. That's worse then death. Desp. When I have rid you all, If I slink off let all the world besides Fling stones. In such good company to fall, Must needs be lightsome. And before out death A Hymne is necessary. Then sing good Fellow. An Attendant sings in a base. Come heavy souls oppressed with the weight Of Crimes, or Pangs, or want of your delight, Come down in Lethe's, sleepy lake Whatever makes you ake. Drink health from poyson'd bowles Breathe out your cares together with your souls. Cool Death's a salve Which all may have There's no distinction in the grave; Lay down your loads before deaths iron dore, Sigh, and sigh out, groan once, and groan no more. SCENA VIII. Enter towards the end of the song Intellectus Agens with a book. Livebyhope and Morphe. Au. Ha! thou com'st to challeng: but thou art spirit, I cannot wound thee. Stay some few short minutes, Till I have quite undress'd me of my flesh; And stand on equal termes, then I will fight. Else if thou canst, kill me; and take my flesh; Then I'le kill thee again. Thus o're and o're
Wel'l kill each other and be ghosts by turnes. Ir. My anger is not high: I onely guess He comes to shew the way to following ghosts. Fan. I gave him once a house, my most remote, Perchance 'tis in Elysium, he invites me. Am. But Morphe stands as if she bid me come Like a clear spirit fitly to salute her. Mal. Why should that sight fling Ice into this heart? Tim. and Fug. O horrid! Desp. Come what will, I can but die. Mal. Hath this shrewd Scholer con∣jur'd up these ghosts? Int. I see you are amazd; the snares of death Are tangled on your hands: you think these sights A pair of ghosts; feel, and when you feel them True flesh, alive and warme, next you must know They are a token sent from Prudentius. Am. How? from Prudentius? hath he rais'd the dead And wretched both at once? and sent me Morphe? Fan. And giv'n me hope again? a dainty show, Who'ere contriv'd it. Am. Be thou shade or substance, Since thou appear'st in such a lovely shap, My soul I'e mingle with thine airy hand, And strive to suck from thence the hated poyson. But soft, I may do rashly. Int. Know once more, These are not ghosts, nor ever were; but live Preserv'd with care, and sent with love from him, Whom ye refus'd, your King Prudentius. Am. By heav'n, true flesh and warme. Fan. Why speaks not Hope If he have breath? Ir. Speak: free us from thy blood, For which we have been angry with our selves. Au. Speak, if thou canst, thou must. Liv. I fear'd to startle Unsettled heads with unexpected speech. High Mistresse, your distracted griefe for me Had almost kill'd me when I was recover'd. Fan. I am recover'd by this voice. Then tell me Thy preservation. Liv. Audax and Irato Know how they left me. Au. Kill us for amends: Liv. Alas your death's would pro∣fit me no more Then mine could you: but gracious Intel∣lectus Found and releiv'd me, while Sir Amorous Carri'd in Morphe. Int. Him I took up gasping Temper'd like Ice before it thaw and crack, In such a glimmering state of doubtful life. As Candles have before they blaze and vanish. Mal. These ropes will all be mine. Int. And her I sav'd. By looking on her mixt and poysnous physick. The simples I extracted, and gave out The same effect which likely would have follow'd. Am. Pardon my fault, I nothing mixt but love, Those villaines added poison. Mor. Heav'n forgive As I forgive you all. Am. Give me some poyson, (Int. Liv. and Mor. stay him. You stay me too? Mor. Although I love thee not Beyond an honest man, I cannot see Thee die neglected. Hil. What a coile is here With ghosts? I cannot take my rest for ghosts. People, y'ar wellcome to this world. How fare My fellow sleepers, ghosts, your Country∣men. Int. Thank not my care for this, but thank Prudentius;
Ask not what Genius sent me to releive Expiring Hope, it was Prudentius: Ask not what star compell'd my timely visit Of Morphe poyson-trap'd, it was Prudentius. From him proceeds their preservation; And yours in them. Snatch'd from the jawes of death As lights blown in again you live through him. This is your cast-away, your drosse, Pru∣dentius. Ir. I think we wrong'd him in our heedlesse anger. Au. And yet his love seems payment for desert. Fan. How shall I rule this craz'd and tottring State? Mal. I smell in what half point the wind is turning. One breath will carry all the Passions Back to Prudentius sailes. Now for a fetch. Well, I'le prevent them all. Call back Prudentius, (alowde) Let's sue to him for grace. Au. Call back Prudentius. (alowde) Mal. Tis quickly done. If this way lead to peace I opend it; but still I would stand safer. Audax, you have a Drum. Now do not you And Lord Irato end your businesse sneak∣ing. Fan. Liveby you kept the Crownes: go with him Amorous, Carry his own: I ne're esteem'd the Gol∣den. I can be Queen alone, and govern subjects. Of mine own making; more, then Kings can muster Or Earth bring forth. Am. I'le take Recorder Memor To lay our sute in form. Then on our knees We'l beg to serve him so, ev'n so forever. Hil. Come, to our old new Sun. Int. He's in his Court; And now me thinks his presence guilds the walls. (Ex. Int. Liv. Am. Mel. Though weak we'l go along. Conc. Weake legs can kneel. Desp. This peice of mine own banquet le assume And walk in penance of a solemn hal∣ter. (Ex. Om. preter. Mal. Mal. Ile go some neerer way, and re∣compence My forward breach with much more for∣ward duty. For this Event spun out by Intellectus Makes me think honesty may weigh with cunning. Some sheep, some Fox will make a perfect man. Howe're, me thinkes, these Sword-men might compound Our Peace in Armes, and plead with vio∣lence. SCENA. IX. The Scene returns to Prudentius his Court. Enter one way Prudentius, Memor with the Crown, Intellectus, Live∣byhope, Amorous with the Sword. By another way Malevolo soon after. Mem. Without a Seizin no possession. Your Crown is undefil'd, untouch'd. Pru. Place thou The world in my ballance, place in theirs All Levity, then weigh them both. Next tell me How ended those commotions which arose Betwixt the third King Henry and his Rebells? Mem. He sentenc'd his Metropolis to flames Their goods to his Exchequer, and their lives— Pru. No more. Should I do so? do not I know What doomes have pass'd upon untrusty Lawyers?— Mem. I Sink before your mercy, be't like Henries.
Mal. Kneeling is but a Subjects Com∣plement. I sink. Am. And I. (a Drum.) Mal. we might have stay'd to hear What means this Drum. SCENA X. Enter Irato, Audax. Au. —We have descri'd a Fleet; And therefore call'd to armes. Ir. Submissively We prostrate our repentance with a sute, That I and Audax may decide in Duel Who shall be sacrific'd for both to justice, And the Surviver may be General. Pru. The Fleet which you suspect, is your defence; Unknown to you I sent it forth to guard This Island from the dangers you have call'd, By Tumult, Lust, Debate, and Discontent. As for your Duel, 'tis a Savadg fury By us forbid. But you have lately tri'd A new found Duel, (was it honourable?) Two upon one. Or was it Captain like To kill a friend? In any likely way Hope would have further'd Audax: but when boldnesse Growes impudent it turns a foe to Hope. SCENA XI. Enter Fancie, Fuga, Hilario, Timerous, Melancholico and Concupiscence. Soon after Despe∣rato. Fan. King of Affections:— Pru: Queen of Inventions.— Fan. Unlesse you think your selfe be∣holding to me You are not fit to be my King. The Passions I have so suffer'd in absurdity, That now they beg your reign which they shook off. Hil. I see there is some mirth in misery. Fan. I kneel unto your grace to use me so, As one that hath been Queen, and yet no Queeen, Rather a shew then Soveraign. I walk'd But in mock-majesty. Say it were true, I sought it not, and what is worth a taking If not a Kingdom? Hil. Down my frolick joynts, Kneeling is now in fashion. Down, down Fuga; Concupiscence and Melancholico Favour your selves with kneeling. Mel. I kneel not To thee, but to thy power; I kneel to thee But not adore thee. Conc. Pardon. Enter Desperato. Desp. —Thus attir'd I wear my sentence. Sir, I can but offer That power of doome which I my selfe might take. Pru. If you ask pardon, ask it of your Prince; For I nor am, nor will be. Au. Royal Sir, Why have you giv'n us lives, if not to take Or to preserve them? Am. Hope, speak for us Hope. Liv. Be pleas'd thou god on earth. Int. I likewise joyn In this request. Pru. Ile send them Epimetheus My Brother Afterwit; and he shall rule them. Those fooles whom Prudence cannot prerestrain, The lash of Afterwit brings home again. Au. We'l die upon this place. Mal. And each man turn To his own grave. Pru. Do, and do not burden Me with new cares for new Rebellion. Au. We grone unto you? Pru. Why? for here are many That would be Kings, Amorous, this gay thing, He offers about his Crown. Which overlookes a Kingdom, may command
All Choice of pleasure: take it for that use: No? then Malevolo to devour your flock, T' ingrosse the Elements, and let none breath That may resist, and onely spare a few That may for fear do service, i'st not glo∣rious? Work with this Engine. No? are you grown modest? Then Desperato, what a life it is To have the power of hanging, or of caus∣ing Some to prevent the gallowes in their prison. What, hang your head so dully at a Crown. Hil. This is to offer Sallets unto dogs. Pru. Irato, anger is a Kings perfection As roaring is the Lions. When his eye Darts lightning, when he snaps his dagger hard Cries hah and starts, doth he not then seem god like, And well deserve the name of Thunderer? Be thou that Jove. Not you? Then Cap∣tain Audax. You took great pains to win, now weare this Crown. Au. Any but yours I would. Pru. Could ye get Crownes Abroad as soon as pull off one at home, Ye should be Kings or Deputies all over. Now there can be but one: would that be Memor. Mem. In all records I finde no Lawyer Crown'd. Hil. A Lawyer needs it not: to pen the Law, And then interpret it as much as making. Pru. Fancie you must be troubled once again With this bright loade. Fan. I loath'd it at the first. Grant me the Soveraignty of changing fashions, Promotion of new Projects, leave to weare Such Coronets at these, I ask no more. Pru. When I am King, be this thy Royalty. Poor Diadem, since here thou canst not get A Master, lye thou there for the next com∣mer, Or sink into thy Oare.—None stoop to take thee? What all refuse, I once refus'd of all Am fit to wear. Au. Long live Prudentius. (Int. & Liv. Crown him.) Pru. Then once more chain'd in Gold, Ile bear your burden. Henchforth to awe your folly, be assur'd, None of your crooked actions words or lookes Hath scap'd my notice. They camefresh unto me With tongues of spirits: But Ile leave the chiding To your own Conscience. Now, thus re∣concil'd, I'le pardon your deserts, cannot reward them. If you expect in sign of peacesome matches You are deceiv'd. Amorous shall not wed Morphe, without a faire probation. And Timerous I forbid; such must not marry As have no mettle, least they spoile their race. But Melancolico and Concupiscence Shall keep their state; i'th suburbs, or new-England. Now rise. For shew of future correspon∣dence, Rank your selves friendly with your oppo∣sites.— Am. I live not by my line of life, but yours. Mal. Love is a willing Passion, full of sweetnesse, But not so serviceable as loyal hate; This loves with zeal and with comparison, Works against all for one. to serve your State Let others love, whilst I for you shall hate; My selfe, if that you please; and others so, That hate with vertue hand in hand shall go. Pru. Tis well, tis very well. Live as you look, Irato beare the Sword: I'le view them all. Thus betwixt love of good, and hate of ill. With slight of this; and chast desire of that, With sadnesse to be wise, joy for good ends
Boldnesse for just attemps, Feare of un∣fit; Hope for true peace, despair of nothing lesse Then meer Impossibilities, we'l walk To Immortality upon those lines Which a wise Princes breast nought else defines. Exeunt Omnes. A Scheme of Posture. Prudentius Fancie Amorous Concupiscence Hilario Audax Livebyhope Irato Intellectus Memor Malevolo Fuga Melancolico Timerous Desperato After the musick ended, the Island appearing Setled. Enter the Epiloge. To His Majesty. BY this short Model of self-policy, We find what use of Outward Soveraignty. The Isle is setled, rage of Passion, laid, And Phancy stoopes to Prudence. Things so staid, Our Scene which was but Fiction now is true; No King so much Prudentius as you: Whose Rule is Reason, Throne the heart; And now No souls so Passionate as we; that bow Both with the weight of Duty and of Debt. Henceforth our hearts all motion shall forget But yours. Your Rule alone is fit to sway; Yet we no lesse your benefits obey. Twixt both, our loyalty will nameless prove; That makes it Vertue, these will have it Love. To the University. THe Isle is setled, Rage of Passions laid Phancy to Prudence bowes. Let all be staid In your Acceptance too, and then each breast Will cease its Floating, and as firmly rest As doth our Scene. One Passion still would prove An Actor when the Scene is shut, Our Love. FINIS.
