T1165 E850_9 99866457 118732
THE FOURTH PRINCIPLE OF Christian Religion: OR, The FOƲNDATION DOCTRINE OF Laying on of Hands. Asserted and Vindicated by way of Answer to such Arguments as by Lieutenant Colonel Paul Hobson have been presented against this Gospel Ordinance. Affectionately tendred to such enqui∣ring souls as are desirous throughly to forsake Babylon notion and humane tradition, and by universall obedience to follow the Lamb in all his righteous appointments. By THO. TILLAM a Minister of Jesus Christ. PSAL. 102.13, 14. Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea the set time is come. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof. LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold by William Hucheson of Durham M.DC.LV.
To all the espoused Virgins of the Prince of Peace, whether Persons or Churches, with such pretious panting Spirits as are breathing after his Divine embraces. Heirs of Glory, WHatsoever be your outward state, yet since the distinguishing love of God hath enrich∣ed you with grace, I dare confidently (as his Ambassadour) salute you with peace, even that peace which the world can neither give nor take away; the peace of God that passeth all understanding, such peace as unbelieving disobedient ones never tasted, neither can enjoy. For however the Prince of darknesse transforming himself into an Angell of light, doth now more then ever, by strong delusions Captivate thou∣sands in his airy region, where fancied spirituall enjoy∣ments possesse them with vehement desires to their con∣ceited Paradise: Yet alas! Isa. 44.20. True peace is a meer stranger, they feed upon ashes, deceived hearts have tur∣ned them aside, that they cannot deliver their souls, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? While they boast of perfection, light, infallibility, the enemy hath stoln their hearts from Evangelicall obedience. I would in a word warn your pretious souls (ye who desire to obey from the heart that forme of Doctrine which was delivered you) beware of the great deceit of these dayes, Rom. 6.17.
wherewith Satan deceiveth multitudes, to a sleighting that wholesome form of sound words; and in the mean time leads them by the noses into the most piti∣full formes that ever were invented, as putting off the hat, bowing the knee, saying, Sir, Master, Lord, thou, and such like. And such as differ from them about these gnats, shall presently discern the serpents sting full of deadly poyson, denouncing Wrath, Woe, Dam∣nation, all the plagues of God. But for the precious or∣dinances of Christ, as Baptisme, Church fellowship, Love-feasts, washing of feet, breaking of bread, sing∣ing of Psalmes, Imposition of hands, Church officers, Sabbath, Lords day, Anointing with oil, Holy kisse, Christian salutes, Censures and such like, their very souls abhor them, and their presumptuous tongues dare curse the pretious saints that use them. But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, Jude v. 10, 21. pray∣ing in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, waiting for the second coming of Jesus Christ, in all the wayes he hath appointed. Be not found in the fire of foolish Virgins when the Bridegroom comes, but labour to stand compleat in all the will of God, lacking nothing. To this end I here present you with a pretious Ordinance of Christ, opposed by many profes∣sors; and particularly by a Northern Gent. a Preacher, whose arguments I do professe should never have recei∣ved answer by me, had not some boasted, that because they were not, therefore they could not be answered. Whereupon at the earnest desires of some choise spirits I did engage, with purpose to confine my self to a narrow compasse, such as might be easily copied; but the enlargements of that holy Spirit who is variously communicated through this Ordinance of Hands, hath
put me upon the necessity of making it more publick: with which purpose I did acquaint my Antagonist that if he pleased he might alter any thing of forme in his arguments; but after severall weeks expectation, I heard of his absence far from home, so that my occasi∣ons, and present opportunities of the Presse have enga∣ged me to publish the Gent. Arguments as they were first presented, with my answer thereunto. And now the God of truth, accompany his own Precept with his own presence, for the confirmation of those obe∣dient souls who have greatly honoured Christ by early submission. For the information of those pretious Spirits who are weeping and seeking the way to Sion, with their faces thitherwards. And for the mitigation of that bitter persecuting, harsh imposing, imperious spirit, that so greatly rageth in many professors against the practice of this duty. O that darknesse might be dispel'd, and the true light shine in professors spirits, lips, and lives! Let all that fear Christ beware of resting in that light so much cryed up by deluded souls. The light in the naturall man will never save him, no nor so much as shew him what he ought to do (as a Christi∣an) No wonder then that those who so cry up that light, live in such grosse disobedience to Gospell Ordinances. But if natures highest attainers will know what they ought to do, Act. 10.6. if they would be told words whereby they may be saved, Act. 11.14. they must not be sent to the light within (as deceivers say) but they must send for a Gospell minister to tell them words. But those that cry up the light in the Conscience, are enemies to those words of Scripture. Alas pitifull dark soules! they know no light but that which lighteth every man that cometh into the world; Joh. 1.5. but thy pretious
soul (thou Spouse of Christ) canst witnesse the Gospell light that lightneth every man that cometh out of the world, Joh. 15.19. by religious separation, not by a voluntary Po∣pish humiliation. The former is a true light but natu∣rall; the latter light is truly evangelicall. And this light is communicated through the Word and Ordi∣nances, and particularly, through this holy Ordinance of Laying on of hands Psal. 119.130. Act. 9.17., to which light I leave thy enquiring soul, to illuminate thy understanding in the knowledge of this Ordinance, that through obedience to it thou mayest have more light, to conduct thee into everlasting life, through Christ thy King; for whose sake I am thy servant. Tho. Tillam.
This Question it seems was propoun∣ded to the Gent. WHether the laying on of hands upon all Believers be a standing Ordinance to continue in the Church of Christ, and to be practised now by the Ministers of Christ, yea or no. To which he returned these lines. Your Quere doth not at all relate to the use of Laying on of hands for the designing of fit subjects to Offices, ac∣cording to these Scriptures, Act. 6.16. & 13.3. 1 Tim. 4.14. & 5.22. Nor to your laying hands upon the sick accor∣ding to these Scriptures, Jam. 5.14. Act. 28.8. Therefore in my answer I shall minde neither of them, but singly your Quere as ye lay it down (which is) Whether hands are to be laid upon all believers as believers without relating to an Office be a standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, Yea or No. My answer to it briefly is, That I judge it not a standing Ordinance, and my grounds are these. The first is taken from the unwarrantable foundation of such an act. Secondly, The sad absurdities that will come up∣on it. For the first.I. Where we have no command given out by Christ to his Church for a practise, there the Church hath no ground to continue a practise; but there is no command given forth by God or Christ to the Church of Christ for the laying on of hands upon all Disciples. Therefore there is no ground to continue that practise. The Major Proposition is proved from these Scriptures, Isa. 1.12. & 8.20. Ezek. 43.7. Job. 15.14. Rom. 4.15. Levit. 10.1, 2. applyed to the 13. v. Enod. 13.5.
If any shall question the minor, I should be glad to see their proof. If any say it is proved in Heb. 5.12. with Heb. 6.2. where it is called, An oracle of God. And some have from that indevoured to prove Oracles and Commands both one. I shall say little to the reasons, but refer the Reader to the justifying of the proof. And how inconsistent the application of those Scri∣ptures they bring, are to make good this particular, to wit, Laying on of hands upon all believers, and that by them that are bare Ministers. Now though it be not proper for any to prove negatives, yet something I must say to them that go about to maintain this practise from that Scri∣pture. First, I would have you consider that all that is said by them from hence is but a supposition, and a supposition is not a sufficient foundation for the continuation of any thing that is called a Gospell Ordinance. And that it is but a supposition is clear, if ye read but the Arguments of them that paraphrase upon that Scripture, and consider well the Scripture it self, Heb. 5.12. applyed with Heb. 6.2. Secondly, It is not only a supposition, but a doubtfull supposition, for it is more probable that the Laying on of hands by the Apostles upon any that were bare Disciples, was rather concluded in that word in the first part of the second verse of the 6. of the Heb. concerning Baptismes; then that which the Apostle speaks in the second vers. con∣cerning laying on of hands; for if this be not one of the Baptismes that was here expressed in this Scripture, Heb. 6.2. I should gladly know how they would make up Baptisms according to this Scripture, Heb. 6.2. for that if you will consider all the case is doubtfull, and whether a doubtfull supposition be a sufficient foundation to bear up an act as a Church Ordinance, we leave it to any soul to judge. So that the minor is as well true as the major, then the conclu∣sion must follow. Object. Object.If the Apostles did it, we have a command for it, for we are commanded to follow them, 1 Cor. 4.14. 1 Cor. 10.1.
Answ. In answer to this consider these things. First, Those that object do not, nor cannot follow the Apostles in their works of Miracles. Secondly, The two Scriptures, and ye will see, it doth not at all make good what they intend. For the first place, 1 Cor. 4.16. the Apostle there doth not intend following him in all things, but he exhorts them from false Apostles to follow him that is his teaching, and that teaching which he had preached to them, and in all the Churches; that you will see if you read the 15. v. But the Laying on of hands upon all disciples he taught in no Church nor to them. Now to the second Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.1. 1. To that is, Answ.that the Apostle did not intend acts of pow∣er, as this is, but acts of imitation, for it is the same word of the Apostle hath in Eph. 5.1. where we are commanded to be followers of God as dear children. Now none are so ignorant as to think we are commanded to follow God in acts of power. But in imitable acts answering the com∣mands of Christ, and the practises of the Churches. But there is, as we said before, neither a command from Christ, nor any practise of the Churches that we can read of for Laying on of hands upon all Disciples, but it was properly an act of power, Act 8.19. & 19.6. 2. That which we have no example from the practise of the primitive Churches, we have now no ground to practise now. But we have no president in the primitive Churches that ever Laying on of hands was practised upon all believers, by them that were not Apostles; therefore there is no ground for that practise. Now the Major proposition none will deny; and as for the Minor, it will clearly appear if ye consider, 1. That we have no Scripture that ever hands were laid upon bare believers; two Scriptures Act. 8.17. & 19.6. and no other Scriptures declares, that that act was performed either then, afterwards, or before; and I am confident that if you with a single heart desire to see truth, as it is exprest and intended, you will see no foundation to warrant such an act as the Laying on of hands upon all believers, by the Mini∣sters
of the Churches to be a standing Ordinance, and that you will clearly see if ye mind these things. 1. Who did it. 2. Upon whom. 3. Why. First, By whom, it was by the Apostle and no other, if any should be so absurd as to say, What the Apostles did we are commanded to do, though we have no command for it, nor practise in the primitive Churches. To that I answer, If the bare examples of the Apostles without a command doth bind in any thing, then in every thing; the great absurdities that will follow upon that, you will clearly see, if ye view well these Scriptures, Act. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. & 16.3, 21, 26. Secondly, Minde upon whom it was done, they were a people ignorant of and strangers to the Holy Ghost, as you will see if you read the said Scripture Act. 19.2. and also the forementioned Scripture. But where you read of so many thousands as was converted Act. 2.41. so many at another time Act. 4.4. nay if ye read over all the practises of the Church of Corinth, the Church of Rome, or the Church of Thessalonica, or any other Churches, that were setled, ye shall never see any such practises amongst them. Thirdly, It was not as men pretend in these dayes to put men in expectation of the Holy Ghost to wait for him in this practise. But it was absolutely to communicate the Holy Ghost in and by the action, Act. 8.14. & 19.6. Now we might speak much more to the minor propositi∣on, were it proper to speak much to negatives, but that which hath been said is sufficient to manifest the truth of the Minor, therefore the conclusion followeth. The second thing is the Absurdities that of necessitie must follow such an unwarrantable practise. The first absurditie is, they lay unfaithfulnesse upon Jesus Christ, Exod. 25.8, 9, & 40. vers. Heb. 8.5. crossing this Scripture, Heb. 3.2. and advancing Moses above Christ, for Moses who was but a servant of God to de∣clare the order and forme of Gods house never left any to act upon doubtfull suppositions, but gives them a particular command for every ordinance that was to abide in Gods house.
The second Absurdity is, They lay a lie upon Paul, he sayes that he had declared the whole counsell of God to the Church, Act. 20.27. and yet never did deliver this to the Mi∣nisters of Christ to lay hands upon all Disciples, which if they say is a truth, then they lay an untruth upon Paul. The third Absurdity is, They cannot do it in faith, there∣fore sinfull, unlesse it be an imaginary faith. All acts done in faith have a command for it, or a promise to meet God in it. But in this they have neither. The fourth Absurdity is, It brings them out of a capacity to answer this Scripture 1 Pet. 3.15. In being able alwayes to give a reason of the faith or hope that is in them, that so gainsayers mouths might be stopped. Now to maintain an act from nothing but supposition, can never stop the mouths of gainsayers; for supposition is as strong in the one as in the other, and is so far from convincing any, that it pro∣duceth disputes in all. There is two things to be considered in the Acts of the Apostles, which were glorious discoveries of the power and authority of Christ in the settlement of the Gospell, which these men do directly crosse who are bare imitators of the act, but cannot carry on the end. The first is, The Apostles had power before to preach and Baptize with water, yet before they did this, they must wait for power, and that an eminent and glorious power at Jeru∣salem, Luk. 24.49. Secondly, When they did do it, it was so done that no men as men could imitate it, that made Simon so amazed. Act. 8.18, 19. Now these men that thus plead and endevour thus to pra∣ctise, have neither waited for power, nor yet have received that power, and what they do as their imitating the act without carrying on the end, which is the essence of the act, in that thing men as men may do. And what an absurd thing this is, let them that fear the Lord, and love the glorious discoveries of his power and authority in the settlement of the Gospell, judge. Now dear friends I desire you in the fear of the Lord seri∣ously to minde not only what hath been said, as to the un∣warrantablenesse
of such an act, and the absurdities it doth produce; but further consider these few considerations that I shall in Christian love present to you who own and practise such a thing. First, Consider how injurious you are to Jesus Christ, which you will see if ye mind well the fift absurdity, Act. 8.18, 19. & 19.5, 6, 7. Christ bringing forth an act to shew his power, you imitate the act and have not the power; so turnes acts of power into a bare imitation, and so are injurious to Christs intention. Secondly, Consider how you put your selves under the reproof of God, Isa. 1.12. when he shall say, Who hath re∣quired these at your hands? should you then bring that place of Scripture, Heb. 6.2. and if God demands, How ye know he did intend the Laying on of hands upon all Disciples in that place, you can only say, you think so. And what a sad thing is that? How justly do you come under Gods reproof? Thirdly, Consider not only in your acting how unlike all the primitive Churches you are, but also unlike Philip you are Act. 8.12, 13. though he was able to work miracles, and in many things beyond you, yet when he had Baptized with water, he left the Laying on of hands to the Apostles, Act. 8.14, 15, 16, 17. Fourthly, Consider the great danger of turning acts of power, into bare imitation and want the power, see Act. 19.13, 14, 15, 16. Exod. 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. & 8.16, 17, 18, 19.
The Fourth Principle OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION: OR, The FOUNDATION DOCTRINE OF Laying on of Hands. Asserted and Vindicated by way of Answer to these Arguments. THE Gents. first ground, Why the Foundation Principle of Laying on of Hands, is not a standing Ordinance, he taketh (as he saith) From the unwar∣rantable foundation of such an act. To which in Christs strength I answer. That it's to me a Paradox, that a Foundation Principle of Christianity, should want a warrantable foundation. How then can Christ be accounted faithfull in all his house, even
as Moses was, if he hath shewed-himself such a foolish builder to raise a superstructure upon an unwarrantable foundation? Heb. 3.2. Moses never left his house in such a pitifull plight. The Lord Christ timely expostulates with such as will give him the hearing, Luk. 6.46. but will not do the things that he sayes; and such this age abounds with, that grant this Foun∣dation principle to be the teaching, saying, or doctrine of Christ, but it's only to be learned, not to be practised. But I am sure this assertion hath none other then an unwarrantable sandy foundation, which this interrogatory must needs overturn, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Whereas the man which Christ commands, digged deep, and laid the foundation upon a rock, and such a foundation have the Six Principles of Christian Religion, and every one of them, for they are plainly called Foundation Principles, which all the rising flouds, Luk. 6.48. and vehement streams of oppo∣sition shall never be able to shake, for they are all founded upon a rock, and the rock is Christ: Ʋpon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. The Gent. Mat. 16.18. hath laid but a sandy assertion for his first groundwork, in judging Imposition of hands no standing Ordinance, as having no warrantable foundation. Where∣as, it hath not only as firm a foundation as Christ himself the rock of ages, being one of his first Doctrines, words, say∣ings, or teachings, (as the Originall holds forth) but is also it self (with the other principles) called a Foundation. Not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, Heb. 6.1, 2. and of faith towards God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of hands, &c. The word in the Greek is , which signifies such a basis or principle is laid under another thing, without which that thing cannot stand. Ephes. 2.20, 21. It is one of those foundation stones of the Apostles and Prophets, layed next the chief corner-stone Christ Jesus, and whatsoever building would grow up to an holy temple in the Lord, Can no more want this foundation principle of Laying on of hands, Heb. 5.12. then its fel∣low principle Baptisme, for it is , the word of the beginning of Christ, which the the Apostle saith, Every Christian babe ought to be taught, 1 Pet. 2.2. as being a part
of that sincere milke of the word, which he ought to use in the infancy of his profession, whiles yet he is unskilfull in the word of righteousnesse. Heb. 12.13. We have talked much of the Six Principles of Christi∣an Religion, but alas, it hath been but an uncertain sound from unskilfull Trumpets, whereby Christs Souldiers have not prepared themselves to the battell, Act 8.30. through their obedience; so that if a Philip should demand, Ʋnder∣standest thou what thou readest, or hearest? who could give a clear answer? A great noise is made of Six Principles, and yet this Gent. saith, that one of them is not a standing Ordinance, as wan∣ting a warrantable foundation; thus the number of our Principles are only five, by his account. And Christ him∣self affronted as a deceiver. For if this be true that the Gent. saith; there is a title, yea and more then a title of a law, word, or doctrine, far exceeding the law of Moses, that is fallen to the ground, and no more a standing Ordinance, Christs lips being not a warrantable foundation (it seems by this assrrtion) to support it. But who would not tremble that ever was truly awakened to hear a practicall Doctrine of Christ, which at first was spoken by the Lord Heb. 2.3. with 6.1, 2. to be so flighted? He that despised Moses law, died without mercy. O that timely repentance may avert that so much sorer punishment, Heb. 10.29. due to those who bring ano∣ther Doctrine, to raise a foundation Principle of Christian Religion, as no standing Ordinance. Contrary to many clear Scriptures, as Mat. 28. ult. Phil. 4.9. 2 Tim. 2.2. 2 Pet. 1.15. Joh. 14.26. Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. which clear Scriptures (with many more) do prove the continuance of all Gospel Ordinances throughout all ages, and yet this plain institution of Christ himself, seems to the Gent. Luk. 24.11. (like Maries message) but an idle tale, no standing Ordinance, as having no warrantable foun∣dation. From which absurd and unjust conclusion, the Gent. pro∣ceeds to twist a rope of sand, in a strange Syllogism, for the subverting a people, who are little better acquainted with mood and figure, then their plow-shares, to whom Logick is as much a stranger, as the truth of this Principle of Laying
on of hands. But though the Gent. differ not much from a Barbarian to them in this Logicall dresse: yet to a preju∣diced people set led upon their lees, any thing that looks but against this truth will serve turn. The substance of what he asserts in such a multitude of words, is, That Christ hath given no command to his Church to practise the Laying on of Hands upon all Disciples. But so far are those Scriptures he quotes, from proving his assertion, that they return vigorously upon his own head. For from the first of them I do in Gods name expostu∣late with him, Isa. 1.12. Who hath required this at your hands, to con∣tradict and oppose one of the Principles of Christian Religion? Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandements and teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdome of heaven, Mat. 5.19. that is, utterly cut off. Act. 3.22.23. His second Scripture directs us to the Law and to the testimony, Isa. 8.20. which through distinguishing grace hath engaged gratious hearts in obedience to this law of Laying on of hands; whiles he rejecteth the Law, and shunneth the clear testimony that Christ hath given to this, equall with other of his Ordinances, Heb. 2.4. His third, Ezck. 43.7. Me thinks should lay a loving restraint up∣on him, no more to defile the pretious things of Christs house, of which Laying on of hands hath the fourth place. And O that his fourth proof might prove armour of proof upon his, Joh. 15.14. and many others hearts! to stop their car∣reer against the commands of Christ; for how can he men∣tion this Scripture, Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I com∣mand you, whiles he sheweth himself an adversary to this command of Christ? which the Apostle shews is necessary to be taught Christs babes, Heb. 5.12. and doubtlesse they acted according to their commission, which runs thus, teaching them to do all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 28.20. Yea the Spirit expresly testifyeth that what the Apostles did teach or write are the commands of Christ,
1 Cor. 14.37. Then doubtlesse Christs true friends, will hear and observe these teachings (Heb. 5 12. Ye have need that one teach you again) which are none other then Christs own com∣mands. The Gents. Rom. 4.15. fifth Scripture informs us that where no law is, no trasgression. But why did he produce this Scripture? or what is this to the Fourth principle or Christian Religi∣on, but only to ratifie and confirm this law of Christ: un∣lesse it can be imagined that Christs foundation principles are not his own lawes? he commands nothing but what he teacheth, he teacheth nothing but what he commands, yea what his Apostles teach, he teacheth, Luk. 10 16. He that heareth you heareth me, and he that despiseth you despi∣seth me. Let such therefore as tremble at Gods word take heed of the transgression of his own laws, issuing from his own lips, such as this foundation Principle is fully proved; Lest they share in Nadabs judgement, Levit. 10.1. & 2.13. remembring that of the Apostle, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all; for he that did teach re∣pentance, faith, and Baptisme, did also with the same lips teach Laying on of hands. Now if thou be Baptized, and yet doest not submit to the Fourth Principle, thou art become a transgressour of the Law Jam. 2.11.. And when once the seal is opened, and the trumpet hath sounded forth that opened Gospell truth; nothing remains but the powring out of Gods Vials upon such as refuse it. Certainly he hath no discerning eye that beholds not sad marks of Gods displeasure upon severall persons who have turn'd their backs upon this fourth foundation Principle in those parts where this Gents. papers are spread abroad, of which I may speak particularly in a convenient season; for because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, 2 Thess 2.10, 11. therefore God doth send them strong delusions to believe lies. The good Lord make the fearfull fals, Schisms, Apostasie and blindnesse of some, to be a timely warning unto others, 1 Cor. 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. & 2 Cor. 4 3, 4.
But I must proceed to declare that we make no such mat∣ter of the word Oracle, as the Gent. deems, for though all the lively oracles of God are his commands; to be imbra∣ced, if Notionall, and to be obeyed if Practicall, (as Baptism and Laying on of hands) yet they are no such niceties that we insist on, neither resting on suppositions, or doubt∣full suppositions, wherein the Gent. so much toyls and en∣tangles himself and his readers. But have plainly and clear∣ly proved that Laying on of hands is a doctrine of Christ, or one of the words of the beginning of Christ, a foundation Principle, the Apostle teaching a command of the eternall King; and he that hath an ear let him hear, for it is the Spi∣rit that speaks to the Churches. But more dust in new doubts arise from the Gent. suppo∣sition or probability that Laying on of hands upon bare Disciples was rather concluded in the word Baptism then in the word Laying on of hands: for if Laying on of hands be not one of the Baptisms here expressed, he saith, He would gladly know how we would make up Baptism according to the Scripture? Heb. 6.2. Answ. First, I would demand of the Gent. whether ever he read that Laying on of hands is any where termed a Baptisme? if not, then it is a wilde supposition, and hath no probability at all that Laying on of hands should be con∣cluded (as he phraseth it) in the word Baptism. Secondly, I shall (now I am set to it) as gladly an∣swer his demand that we can very currantly make up Bap∣tism, and never be beholding to imposition of hands for the matter. There are three sorts of Baptisme, Flaminis, Fluminis, San∣guinis, Ephes. 4.5. of Spirit, of Water, of Bloud, and these three agree in one, 1 Joh. 5.8. The first is that heavenly birth, qualifying the subject for Water, Joh. 3.3. as I long since deliverd in his hearing at Muggleswik from Heb. 10.22. In this, the eternall dove with his extended wings, Isa. 30.1. Luk. 1.35. covereth, or overshadoweth the believing soul, who (like the blessed Virgin) conceiveth with his Jesus, by the hearing of the ear.
The second is that externall administration in which the Disciple of Christ is buried with him, as our Lord com∣manded, and his Ministers practised, Mat. 28 19. Act. 10.47, 48. The third is that bitter cup, the drinking whereof, first baptized our Redeemer in a sea of sorrows, Luk. 12.50. His Fathers wrath forcing his vitall bloud in streams through every pore of his body, falling down to the ground, Luk 22.44. This is that cup and Baptism, which the true servants of Christ must also submit unto, Mat. 20.23. fol∣lowing their Lord without the Camp, (through many tri∣bulations) bearing his reproach. Heb. 10.32. Call to remembrance the for∣mer dayes, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions. It is observed by one that the word  which we translate illuminated, (and that truly is rendred in the Syriack, Arabick, and Aethiopick, Baptized. And that the Greek fathers do sometimes call , Baptizo. But enough hath been said and proved, in answer to the Gentlemans demand, so that I hope he and others will see that we are put to no straight at all to make up the Do∣ctrine of Baptisms, of Spirit, of Water, of Bloud; without any need of imposition of hands upon that account. And therefore this doubtfull supposition is utterly vanished, and the fourth Foundation Doctrine of Christ established, as an eternall Mar. 24 35. with Heb 6.1, 2. decree of his own lips, which the Church through∣out all ages (Ephes. 3.21) is obliged faithfully to observe, Mat. 28.20. But the Gent. goes on to answer an objection made from Apostolicall example. 1 Cor. 4.16. & 10.1. Concerning which (before I reply to his answers) let this be observed, That although Apostolicall example be suffi∣cient ground to practise Christian duties, yet we have in this particular of hands, much more then bare examples, namely the teachings of Christ and his Apostles, for it is al∣ready fully proved, and I hope will be retained in obedient hearts.
1. Institution.That this foundation Principle is the expresse Doctrine, or word of Christ. 2. That such as be babes in Christ, had need to be taught this Doctrine. 3. That this Doctrine was religiously taught and practi∣sed in the Churches of the Hebrews, &c. And 4. That the Spirit of God enjoyns all that are truly spirituall to embrace the things written by the Apostles, as none other then the commands of Christ, 1 Cor. 14.37. First, And as for Apostolicall examples, we look upon them as binding, 1. If they were performed in the Churches of Christ, Phil. 4.9. 2. If those Apostolicall practises were never solemn∣ly repealed; for there were some cerimonies wherewith for a time they complyed, which were afterwards utterly abolished, Gal. 2.3, 4, 5, 12, 13. & 4.9, 10, 11. & 5.2. 3. If such performances be not impossible (such as miracles) for Christ doth not command impossi∣bilities, his yoak is easie, his burden light; yea the Gent. himself confesseth, that we are not commanded to fol∣low in acts of power, I suppose he means miraculous acts, which may serve as a just reply to his first consideration; for though Christ hath left us an example that we should follow his steps, yet it is only in his morall, not in his mediatory actions. Moreover, let it be observed, That miracles are no part of the Ordinance, for though many miracles did attend Prea∣ching, Baptism, Supper, Laying on of hands, and other Ordinances, yet I hope the Gentleman will not conclude that the cessation of miracles doth strip us of these mercies. These things being premised, 1 Cor. 4.16. & 10.1, 2. I do confidently assert from the two Scriptures he mentions, That the Apostles examples are obliging to all believers.
1. Because we have no other warrant for many of our Ordinances then Apostolicall example. There is no expresse command for observing the Lords day, and but one Aposto∣licall example, but this I fear too many ungratefull (that I say not ungracious) spirits would readily and willingly dispense with. 2. Where have we ought but Apostolicall example, for women to receive the Lords supper? 3. What shall we do for authority to ordain officers by imposition of hands, if we refuse Apostolicall Prece∣dents? Secondly, We must observe Apostolicall examples, be∣cause they have exactly followed the commands of Christ. That which we have seen and heard (saith John 1 Epist. 1.3) de∣clare we unto you, touching fellowship. We have not fellowed cun∣ningly devised fables, saith Peter 2 Epist. 1.16. I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, saith Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23. So that whatsoever I finde the Apostles practising (except before excepted) I shall freely and chearfully observe, and expect the presence of the God of peace in so doing, Phil. 4.9. And in the very case in hand, touching the Fourth foun∣dation Principle, had I no more to rest upon but the bare example of the Apostles in the Churches, I would faithfully obey: for I hope enough hath been said punctually pro∣ving, that what they so practised, Christ commanded them. and though I have heard much ignorance in the handling of this point, yet I hope none will henceforth be so blasphemous as to charge the Apostles of will-worship, but rather bewail their own blindnesse. Well then, if the Apostles laid on hands by command from Christ; Certain I am, that all Baptized Disciples are bound to observe it, for so runs the Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing them—Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. He doth not say, observe what I shall command them, neither doth he leave them or us to teach and practise what, and so much as we please, But all things whatsoever I have
commanded you. You Peter, and John, &c. so that if Peter and John, were commanded to practise Laying on of hands, then all Baptized Disciples are bound to observe it. And upon these termes (and none other) Christ hath promised them his presence to the end of the world. But the Gent. saith (upon 1 Cor. 4.16) That the Apostle doth not intend fellowing him in all things. I must needs say these are very slender, Reply.sorry shifts to shuffle off obedience, since tis evident in the same Epistle (1 Cor. 11.1.) that he commands them for remembring him in all things, and keeping the ordinances as he delivered them to them. And would the Apostle so praise them, for that they were never exhorted to? But secondly, Whosoever (in his right mind) shall peruse that Chapter (viz. 1 Cor. 4.) may easily see that the Apostle intends all things, even all the mysteries of God, whereof he was a Steward, v. 1, 2. And as a Steward of such divine mysteries he shunned not to declare all the counsell of God, his care being alike in all Churches, Act. 20.27. 1 Cor. 7.17. & 14.33, 34. & 2 Cor. 11.28. the care of all the Churches. Yet the Gent. confidently affirmes, That he did not teach the Laying on of hands upon all Disciples in any Churches nor to them. To which I reply. First, It seems somewhat more then strange that the A∣postle should be thus censured of Pharisaicall hypocrisie, in making clean the outside of the cup and platter, tithing Mint and Cummin, and neglect the great and weighty matters of the Law. Is he so carefull in all Churches about parti∣cular callings, 1 Cor. 7.17. about orderly speaking, 1 Cor. 14.33, 34. about Almes, 1 Cor. 16.1. And is he so care∣lesse in laying the Foundation Principles of Christian Re∣ligion? Either the Apostle in neglecting, or the Gent. in asserting such neglect, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. must needs be grosly guilty of igno∣rance, unfaithfulnesse, or hypocrisie. Secondly, It's plain the Apostle practised Laying on of hands in the Church; and did he inforce obedience without
teaching? Act. 19.5, 6. Chap. 17.11. Chap. 2.40. or were those Ephesian Disciples so ignoble to act by an implicite faith, in submitting to they know not what. The Bereans are recorded noble, for not barely resting on the Apostles words; it is said of Peter, that with many other words he did testifie and exhort. For the Gospel and Acts is but an Epitomy of what Jesus and his Apostles did and said. Must it then be asserted that because it is not de∣clared in so many words, He taught laying on of hands, that therefore he taught it not at all? why then they pra∣ctised what he never taught; this is will-worship with a witnesse. We do not finde that Philip spake one syllable of the Do∣ctrine of Baptisme, ether to the Samaritans, or to the Eunuch, Act. 8.12, 36. and yet they are Baptized, and he cals for the Ordinance; so that I dare boldly affirme that Philip did teach the Do∣ctrine of Baptisme, though no mention be made of teaching, and so of hands; for what liberty soever others dare take, yet I dare not charge the Apostles with acting besides their Commission; and certain I am, their Commission binds them to teach, that which the Disciples are bound to observe, Teaching them to observe; Mat. 28.20. and Paul himself pro∣fesseth, That what he received of the Lord, that he also delivered un∣to them, by way of teaching, 1 Cor. 11.23. And requires us to account of him and his fellow Ministers, as faithfull stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. So that what∣ever the Gent. confidently affirmes to the contrary, I dare boldly avouch that if there were no more but Aposto∣licall practise, and Disciples observing Laying on of hands, I say, I dare from hence aver it with full assurance, that the Apostle did teach Laying on of hands on all Disciples, faith∣fully in all Churches. Christ having purchased the same priviledges for all his Saints, commanded the same exact rules for them all (teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you) And the Apostles most faithfully dispensing all to al Churches, and particularly to this Church of Corinth, for saith he, 2 Cor 12.13. What is it wherein ye were inferior to other Churches? Nay he professeth, That in every thing they were enriched by him, So that they came behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7.
But if the Gent. speak true in saying, that the Laying on of hands upon all Dyciples, he taught in no Church nor to them: I must be bold to say, the Apostle spake false in affirming that they were enriched in every thing—in all knowledge, and that they came behind in no girt. For I am sure that Laying on of hands is the Vehicle, Vehiculum Spi∣ritus. or conduit pipe, through which many gifts of the Spirit are conveyed. And as sure that those divine ornaments wherewith the Corinthians were so enriched, were graciously handed through Paul, 1 Cor. 4.15. Lastly, I do positively assert, That the Apostle did ex∣presly teach the Laying on of hands upon all Disciples in the Churches, for besides the Church of Samaria, Act 8. and the Church of Ephesus, Act. 19.5, 6. where it is declared that they heard before they observed either Baptisme or Laying on of hands. When they heard this, they were Baptized— and Paul laid his hands upon them all. I say, besides the Apostles teachings in these Churches, it is evident that they did expresly teach this Doctrine with other foundation words, Act. 5.31. Gal. 1.22. once and again to the Churches of Judea, or Christian Hebrews, who were then comfortably walking in the compleat order of the Gospell, Heb. 13.7. & 17.24. Yea this Doctrine is taught to all the Disciples or babes in Christ, as milke fitter for constitution; for though by the improvement of their time, and talents they might have been teachers, yet they were stil such babes (not teachers) that there was a necessity of teaching them again these first foundation Doctrines, which possibly they had so forgot, that young converts were deprived of them. Thus 'tis evident this Doctrine of hands was taught in the Churches to babes, yea to the Hebrew Disciples, and though it be so much slighted, yet the Apostles do rec∣kon it one of the six foundation Doctrines, for Sions babes.
The Gent. proceeds to overturn Apostolicall example, by his answer to the second Scripture brought to assert it, namely 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ, to which he sayes the Apostle did not intend acts of power, but acts of imi∣tation. My reply is,That if his meaning be, Reply.that the Apostle did not exhort all the Corinthians to exercise the Ministeriall function, or to follow him in doing miracles, 'tis freely yeelded. But if he mean that the Apostle did not command them to follow him in all imitable Christian duties, 'tis utterly denyed; for what he commands more generally in this Scripture, he he doth more particularize in Phil. 4.9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you. Now to the point in hand; such babes to whom he writes, 1 Cor. 3 1, 2. had learned the Doctrine of Laying on of hands, Heb. 5.12. and this Doctrine they had also received, Act. 19.6. which likewise they had heard and seen in Paul, when he was a babe in Christ, Act. 9.17. This therefore they ought to do as ever they expect the presence of the God of peace, so that in this particular it is evident that Paul com∣mands them, Be ye followers of me: as being fully proved a command of Christ, and practise of the Churches. But the Gent. saith, That imposition of hands is an act of Power. To which I reply, 'Tis no more an act of power then its fellow Principle Baptisme, Preaching, or any other Ordinance of Christ, touching which, that of the Wiseman may be applyed, Say not this is better then that, for they are all beautifull in their season. It's true, the gifts of the H. Ghost were so eminently poured out through Laying on of hands, that Simon Magus thought it
an act of power, Act. 8.19. But Simon Magus shall be no tutor of mine, for Simon Peter teacheth me a contrary lesson, Act. 3.12. namely, that what gift Christ is pleased to convey through Ministers, is not by any power in the poor instru∣ment. But wherein is Laying on of hands an act of power, more then Baptisme or Preaching? is it because the gifts of the Spirit were received by it? Why so, they were by Baptisme, or else Peter preached false doctrine, and failed in what he promised, Act. 2.38. Repent and be Baptized every one of you, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Object. Nay, but there were miraculous gifts bestowed vi∣sibly upon Laying on of hands, Act. 19.6. They spake with tonguet and prophesied. Answ. So there was in Preaching, Act. 10 44. While Peter yet spake these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word, and they spake with tongues and magnified God, vers. 46. Now what reason or religion can call Laying on of hands a greater act of power then Preaching is? Or who dare put an end to the Fourth Principle because the visi∣ble power is ceased; and yet retain Preaching from which the very same visible power that did accompany it is also ceased. But the Gent. Syllogistically asserts, That the laying on of hands upon all Believers, was never practised by any save only Apostles. If by Apostles he means the Twelve, Answ.and Paul, then I deny his assertion, for Ananias was not such an Apostle, and yet he did Lay hands on Paul, presently after his conversion, and before his Baptisme; and that not for ordination to office: but as the Scripture plainly declareth, for these two ends. 1. Act. 9.17. That he might receive his sight. 2. That he might be filled with the holy Ghost. Which latter, is the very end of the administration of the Fourth Principle; which is not buond up to any precise
time, but is here administred before Baptism. In Act. 8. soon after Baptisme. In Act. 19. long after Baptisme. Which is the ground of our latitude in waiting for believers submis∣sion to thir holy Ordinance. But Secondly, If his assertion were true, that none but Apostles may administer this Ordinance of hands, yet must it not fall to the ground for want of such officers to administer it, for Christs hand is not shortned, neither are the gifts and graces of his Spirit restrained. I know not of any gift that is ceased, but what Reprobates may have and go to hell with, Mat. 7.22, 23. Neither are those gifts utterly ceased in the Churches of the Saints. And as for those choise gifts of his love, Jer. 3.15. Ephes. 4.8.11.12. for the work of the Ministry, those Pastors after his own heart, which he that is faithfull hath promised; no lesse hath been his libera∣lity since his ascension then before. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former dayes were better then these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this, Eccles. 7.10. I know that many deceived souls have traditionally received the cessation of Apostles, with as much confidence as they dare blot out this Fourth Foundation Principle. But where is that Scripture that saith, Apostles are ceased? To put a distinction between ordinary and extraordinary officers, is to coyn such terms and conclusions, as will never passe for cur∣rant in Gods account, as being not once mentioned in the Scriptures of truth. I have therefore laid down this as an eternall truth, That Apostles are not ceased, but by the free gift of Christ continued in, and to the Churches of the Saints. As Christ hath given them to, (Ephes. 4.11.12.) so he hath set them in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. And in his Churches we frequently find these A∣postles, Epaphoditus was an Apostle of the Church of Philippi, , which we translate Your Messenger; so 2 Cor. Phil. 2.27. 8.23. , The Apostles of the Churches, the glory of Christ. So that we must not be unfaithfull to Christ, to let fall one of his Foundation Principles for want of an officer to administer it. If it were true, as the Gent. saith, that none but Apostles may do it, yet 'tis clear that Christ hath richly furnished his Churches even with Apostles,
so that neither Officer nor Ordinance is yet fallen to the ground. Thirdly, Gal. 2.18. the Apostle saith, If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a transgressour. Such a transgressour is this Gent. in bringing slime in stead of morter by these his Arguments to build again that Popish, Prelaticall superiority, which Christ and Saints have exploded. It was indeed their aspiring project to uphold their totte∣ring Babel, that all the Ministers of Christ had not equall authority, and therefore must not presume to administer all ordinances,; and particularly none but Lawn-sleeves must presume to medle with this Ordinance of hands, either to private Disciples (wherein they being purblind did grosly mistake the subject, as they did also in Baptisme, taking Carnall babes for Spirituall) neither might any else without these Lordly Prelates ordain any to Church office. And such a designe is this Gent. driving, who would con∣fine and limit this ordinance of hands, to the hands of A∣postles. 'Tis strange that this foundation Principle must either be mounted and advanced above its fellowes, or else it must be buried in oblivion, and not practised at all. What is imposition of hands, more then the Doctrine of Faith, Repentance, Baptisme, and the rest, that the beautifull feet of him which bringeth the Doctrine of Faith, and Baptizeth, may not presume to administer hands? Christs Doctrine owns no such difference in point of superiority, but whosoever is orderly called to preach, hath also full authority to carry on all Ordinances what∣soever Christ commanded his Apostles, Mat. 28.19, 20. If what hath been said doth not satisfie, as to the equall power of all preaching Ministers to carry on all Ordinan∣ces, let these Scriptures be considered, 2 Tim. 2.2. Act. 20.28. 1 Cor. 3.5.8. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 3 Joh. 9. 1 Thess. 1.1. with many more; which clearly hold out equall power, not one for any superiority. So that the Gent. is much mistaken in saying, 'tis an Absurdity, yea that many Absur∣dities
will follow our assertion, that we are commanded to follow the Apostles in all things (except stil before excepted.) Act. 9.) And in this thing it's plain Ananias did it, and the Presbyte∣rie did it, and Timothy had power to do it, 1 Tim. 4.14. & 5.22. and other Mi∣nisters may do it, and God will blesse it. And thus having answered the Gent. touching fit Ministers for this ordinance; I shall in the second place take a view of the subjects, which he saith were a people ignorant of, and strangers to the holy Ghost. Whereunto I answer, 1. That it is true of those Act. 19. before Paul instructed them better; but I hope the Gent. will bethink himself, and confesse that before the Laying on of hands, they were taught and believed in the holy Ghost. And as for those Disciples of both sexes in Samaria, they heard Christ faithfully preached, (Act. 8.5, 6.) they saw the power of the holy Spirit working by wonderfull mi∣racles, (v. 6. unclean spirits cast out (v. 7.) they were fil∣led with joy (a lively fruit of the Spirit, v. 8.) they believed (which is an eminent gift of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.9.) and were Baptized in the name of Jesus, that is, according to the command of Jesus, (v. 12.) Now to affirme that these were ignorant of, and strangers to the Holy Ghost, is that which I dare not venture upon, for the reverence I owe to God, and fear lest his Saints should shun me for grosse un∣truth. But however, the Gent. at unawares hath thus far holpen us, in acknowledging some truth, namely, That they were but yong beginners, meer babes in Christ, to whom this Ordinance of hands was administred. Whereas he saith, That there was no such practise a∣mongst. the 3000. Act. 2. nor Act. 4. nor in the Churches of Corinth, Rome, Thessalonica, or any other set∣led Churches. I answer, If Laying on of hands be the Apostles Doctrine, Answ.then the 3000. did religiously practise it; what a needlesse thing is
it now to play the Logician, and muster up a Minor, and Conclusion. But Laying on of hands is the Apostles Do∣ctrine, Ergo. Is it not much more substantiall to prove this truth by the plain word of God; thus, Act. 2.42. They continued stedfast in the Apostles Doctrine; so that either the Gent. must deny Laying on of hands to be the Apostles Do∣ctrine for babes, or else he must perforce confesse, (with humility) that they did practise it. What wiseman will say, this Church neglected, what their messengers in ano∣ther Act. 8.14, 15, 16, 17. Church practised? And as for that uncouth reasoning, that neither the Churches of Rome, nor Corinth, nor any setled Churches, did practise the Fourth Principle. As it is not true in it self, as I have already fully proved, so it must unavoidably bring in such grosse Absurdities (if he talks of Absurdi∣ties) as shall shake, yea and overturn most of our Ordi∣nances. For I may as well conclude, that breaking of bread, and the Lords Supper is not to be practised, because neither the Churches of Rome, of Ephesus, of Philippi, of Colosse, of Thessalonica, nor any of the seven Churches of Asia, have any mention of it. I know not of any more then three Churches that mention the Lords supper; namely, Judea, Troas, and Corinth, and in so many (at least) is the Fourth Principle recorded, viz. the Hebrews, Samaria, and Ephesus. I might produce many Churches, where not a syllable of Baptisme is once mentioned, and the like of severall other Ordinances; but I am perswaded so of the Gent. that he will ingenuously acknowledge, it was for want of a better reason that he produced this. From the subjects, he proceeds to the end of this Or∣dinance, which he saith, Was not to put persons in expectation of, or waiting for the Holy Ghost, but imme∣diately to communicate the Spirit in the action. Tis strange to me that the Apostles should so earnestly pray for the holy Spirit, Answ. Act. 8.19. to fill them that were not to ex∣pect
or wait for it. Deserves he food that thinks it vain to gape? The Lord Jesus hath put all his upon earnest prayer and expectation for his Spirit, Luk. 11. Neither is it in the power of any creature to communi∣cate of the Spirit through any ordinance, for the Wind (or Spirit) bloweth where and how it listeth, having severall gifts which he distributeth as he pleaseth, 1 Cor. 12.11. whether sooner or later, 'tis worth the waiting for. Now the just end of this Ordinance of hands (as of all other ordinances) is for spirituall babes to obtain a geater measure of the same Spirit, some heavenly qualifica∣tion, some sealing, confirming mercy, such as Believers have need of, as Ephes. 1.13. In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed by that holy Spirit of promise; that is, after the poor babe hath rolled it self upon Christ by a faith of adherence, God is pleased to seal it by faith of assurance, sometimes sooner, sometimes later, sometimes in Baptisme or after, sometims, through laying on of hands, Lords Sup∣per, Prayer, Preaching, how he will, and when he will; where∣fore it behoves the gratious soul to wait upon him for his Spirit in all his holy appointments, for there he will hand out his loves, Cant. 7.12. There is a generation of professors that are rather princi∣pled by sight then faith, who will not believe except they see signes and wonders, but they should remember that an evill and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign. And yet they might see signs and wonders every day, 2 Cor. 12.12. yea the signs and wonders of Apostles wrought amongst them; that is, those greater works, that Christ promised his Disciples should do, Joh. 14.12. Greater miracles they never could, they never did do. But greater works of conversion were wrought by them, and these are the great signes and seals, and mighty deeds, that God is working by his Apostles even before our eyes. There being many through grace that are able to say, The seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord: 1 Cor. 9.2. 2 Cor. 3.2. Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, seen and read of all men. Yet these signes will never satisfie a doubting Didymus, no not all the attestation of all the Apostles; except he shall
see in his hands the print of the nails, and put his finger into the print of the nails, Joh. 20.25. and thrust his hand into his side, he will not believe. Such a faithlesse generation hath this age brought forth, except they see the very same miracles as were wrought by Peter and Paul upon mens bodies, they will not believe there are any Apostles now in being, except they see the same gifts of tongues, or some visible operation upon laying on of hands, they will not believe there's any such Ordinance now in force. Although the same unbelieving professors will not reject preaching upon that account (that were too open a discovery of a half Christian) though the same signs did, but now do not accompany that Or∣dinance. Thus Herod may do many things, and hear John gladly, but foolish Virgins cannot be thorough spirited; some∣thing will be found wanting in the day of Christ, when it will be too late to go to buy, what now they slight. And then they shall experimentally finde the truth of St. James his Doctrine, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point (one principle) he is guilty of all. Remember that after Trumpets, Act. 13.41. come Vials. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your dayes, a work which you shall in no wise be∣lieve, though a man declare it unto you. But as for the gracious heart, who puts forth his faith into obedience upon the account of a naked institution, because he finds that Laying on of hands is the Doctrine or word of that Christ whom he loves, and in whom he lives, because it is one of his Foundation Principles; because it is sincere milk for new born babes; because the Master builders declare that such babes have need of such Princi∣ples; because these were the Apostles teachings in, and wri∣tings to the Churches; because the eternall Spirit binds true Disciples to embrace the Apostles writings, and teachings, as none other then the commands of Christ. Hence the faithfull soul mounted on the wings of love (without attendance upon miraculous or visible opera∣tions) divinely ecchoing to the language of his beloved, cries, Lo I come to do thy will O God, yea thy law is within my heart. I am weary with forbearing, and I can no longer stay.
And thus putting resolution into action, he frequently meets with such holy transportations and true spirituall re∣freshings (far exceeding any miraculous visible operation) that he breaths forth this or the like heavenly Rapture, (as being translated and transformed into the same image from glory to glory, Cant. 6.10. by the Spirit of the Lord) Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the Chariots of Ammi∣nadib. These are no fancies; we speak that we know, and testi∣fie that we have seen. And thus the believing babe, meets with that benediction which Christ entailed upon his obe∣dience, Joh. 20.29. Because thou hast seen, thou hast believed, blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. These are the proper objects of Christs prayer, Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word. He doth not say through their miracles, but through their word; because it is a surer rule of directi∣on then any miracle, yea then any revelation, vision, or extraordinary voice from heaven whatsoever, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. The Apostles voice is the tryall of spirits, 1 Joh. 4.7. We are of God, he that knoweth God, heareth us: hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of errour. For further illustration of the end of this Ordinance of Laying on of hands; namely, A fuller attainment, and greater measure of spirituall gifts; Let it be observed, that the gifts of the Spirit are of two sorts. The first, Externall, and visibly miraculous; and the se have two speciall uses. 1. To confirm the word and ordinances. 2. To convince unbelievers. The second sort are more intrinsecall, soul-satisfying and glorious; for the sealing, establishing, and nourishing of Christ babes. Those externall gifts, which are of such excellent use, Mark. 6.7, 13 and are accompanied with choice consolation to believers; yet may a Judas, Demas, or any other re∣probate
be largely stored with them, Mat. 7.22. and go to hell after∣wards. Those gifts are, 1. Healing. 2. Miracles. 3. Extraordinary Prophesie. 4. Divers kinds of tongues. 5. Interpretation of tongues, 1 Cor. 12.9, 10. 1. For healing. Although it be a gift continued in the Churches, and is the proper work of Elders, Jam. 5.14, 15. and we enjoy it to this day, and have sometimes seen and heard of wonderfull effects, yet it cannot be constantly ex∣pected no not from the hands of Apostles. If Paul could have healed his faithfull fellow-labourer (Phil. 2.25, 27, 30.) I am confident he would. 2. If any are by this means healed, Christ hath performed his promise. If all were under the influence of this gift (at all times) mortality should cease; no man would ever dye, that might so easily injoy life. 3. This gift is rather for confirming Mark. 16.20. the word and Ordi∣nances, and for the conviction of Heathens, then for the reco∣very of Christians. Act. 28.8. And thereupon Paul leaves the Heathen Parent of Publius at Miletum well. But the Christian Trophimus, he left at Miletum sick. 2 Tim. 4.20. 4. A reprobate may enjoy this gift and perish, Luk. 9.6. Therefore this is no such desirable gift for beleevers to look for in Laying on of hands. Secondly, Miracles, of what kind soever, are 1. To con∣firme the word and Ordinances, Heb. 2.4. Whereupon such Ordinances as God confirmed by Miracles, are firmly to be retained and observed, and not at any time to be let slip, Heb. 2.1. Now it is most clear that Laying on of hands upon Disciples, was confirmed by miracles; so that this Ordi∣nance (amongst others) must be carefully observed, with ear∣nest heed Heb. 2.1. opened., lest at at any time we should let it slip. Observe
poor soul, thou that standest in awe of thy God must not let it slip at any time, therefore hold it fast at this time. 1. Because it is a super-angelicall ordinance, and there∣fore to remain stedfast and unmoveable, Heb. 2.2. Vers. 2. 2. Because the slighting of this, and other Gospel mer∣cies will unavoidably bring the greatest miseries (v. 3.) Vers. 3. no possibility of escape: if every transgression and disobedi∣ence to Moses law Heb. 10.28, 29. (every transgression) were so se∣verely punished; how shall we escape? Impossible to escape. 3. Thou must take heed to this Fourth Principle as well as other duties, (earnest heed) Because it was at first spoken by the Lord, and confirmed to his Apostles, and by them faith∣fully taught us. Mind it Christian, 'tis for thy life; thou canst not escape, if thou let it slip; after warning, if thou receive not the truth with love, God will send thee strong delusions to believe a lie. Ah! how have I seen the Lords professed people carried away captive, that have slighted this Ordinance. Hurryed by Satan, to blaspheme other glo∣rious truths, drowned in the world, and the love of it (1 Joh. 2.15.) given up to horrible lying, bitternesse, emula∣tion, envy, strife, sedition, making schisms, rents, divisions, what not? O thou believer, that professest Christ, mind this word of Christ, these four first verses of the Epistle to the Hebrews; Remember, that this fourth principle was first spoken by the Lord himself, and is plainly called, The word of the Heb. 6.1. beginning of Christ, and was confirmed by signs, and wonders, and miracles. 2. Miracles are given for conviction of Heathens, Act. 8.6. & 16.27, 29, 30. But alas! this avails not at all, if love (manifested by obedience to all Christs commands) be wanting, 1 Cor. 13.2. A person may have this gift, and perish. The third gift of this nature is extraordinary Prophesie, or foretelling of events; such as may wonderfully possesse a Balaam, a Saul, a Caiaphas, a Witch; this may confirme truths, and convince sinners, but the Prophet be damn'd; 'tis an
excellent gift in a gratious heart, but short of ordinary Pro∣phesie. The fourth extraordinary gift (that is according to Court custome not the chief) is kinds of tongues, not new tongues, for that is a speciall gift peculiar to true believers; a reall sign of an effectuall work of grace; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, Rev. 14.1. wherefore those 144000. Redeemed Virgins, are presented with a new song in their mouth, which none else could learn. Act. 17.19. When once Paul becomes a Convert he Preacheth a new Doctrine; he was before a Blasphemer, but now he hath learned a new lesson. He is not a believer, that hath not learned a new language Ephes. 5.4.. These miraculous tongues are never called new tongues, but strange tongues, and other tongues, to convince a strange people; to preach to other Nations, as was needfull then, but now cannot well be employed, since Popish inquisiti∣ons, and Turkish slavery, hath shut the Gospell out of their territories, Act. 13.46. Neither have Christs Ministers any warrant to attempt the publishing of Gospell truths in other Nations, who are known to be dogs, swine, and persecutors, Mat. 7.6. & 10.23. And therefore Satan, and not Gods Spirit, hath enga∣ged some foolish deluded souls called Quakers to passe the Seas, in expectation probably of some miraculous ability to publish their poison against Christs Ordinances, but have only performed the work of Barbarians, and so re∣turned. But certainly should Christ call into forain parts, he would enable his servants to help sick souls abroad, as well as to heal sick bodies at home. Alas! our native Countrey hath need enough of more labourers. Wherefore (saith the Apostle) tongues are for a sign, Not to them that believe, 1 Cor. 14.21. but to them that believe not. This gift therefore belongs not to thee thou dear Disciple of Christ, It is our mercy that the Ordinance I now contend for came once under hand and seal from heaven; our Masters hand, and this sign of tongues confirming it.
Since therefore this fourth Foundation Principle of thy Religion is thus by this miraculous gift ratified, and thy pre∣tious soul converted; thouart not to expect such needlesse unsutable gifts as these, which Gods word tels thee are not convenient for thee; But fince the Spirit of truth hath more excellent treasure, then tongues, or the interpretation of tongues; take thou the counsell of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet earnest∣ly the best gifts, and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way; there are some gifts more excellent then others, and there are graces more excellent then any other gifts, the best gifts will be fewel to thy choice graces, and set thy heavenly heart all on a holy flame. Wherefore covet earnestly the best gifts for this end. And fince 'tis evident that the golden gifts of Christ Zech. 4.12. passe through golden pipes or Ordinances, into the bowl of the Can∣diestick, that is, the Church; put thy affectionate mouth to these pretious pipes, that contain such pretious gifts, and draw with the buckets of joy out of the wels of sal∣vation. It is undeniable that this fourth foundation Doctrine of Christ is one of those pipes, or channels, through which these eternall streames do run; and doubtlesse did not poor crea∣tures (drownd in delusions) conclude these streams were dryed up, they would not neglect this pipe, this ordinance of hands, as they do. But so they think, and so they speak, for say they, the power or gifts of the Spirit are ceased, and therefore the ordinance is of no use. Well, when I shall clearly demonstrate, that the best gifts are to this day continued, as I have already proved that no gift is ceased, that is needfull for believers; And when it shall appear that these best gifts have been conveyed through impo∣fition of hands; Then surely both the Ordinance and gifts will be earnestly desired, and affectionately embraced, by gra∣tious souls. These best gifts which being continued, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. Saints should covet, are 1. Wisdome. 2. Knowledge. 3. Faith.
4. Prophesie. 5. Discerning of Spirits. It must be granted without controversie, that these are the best gifts of the Spirit, and that they are continued in power and efficacy to this generation. And first of Wisdome, Prov. 4.7. Job 28.18. 2 Sam. 14.20. which the eternall Spirit that gives it, hath recorded as the principall thing, and therefore it is here in the Catalogue of gifts deservedly set in the first place; The price thereof is above Rubies, it's a defence bet∣ter then strength, it transformes the person so, that he ap∣pears as an Angell of God. Marvellous encomiums of de∣served praise, are given by the Spirit to this most excellent gift; far surpassing all those other gifts before mentioned, as Healing, Tongues, Miracles, &c. which the devotion of a Didymus doth so much dote upon, making so great a noise in the world, so that all's lost with such a professor, because tongues are ceased, and miracles do not appear to satisfie his sense. Ah poor shallow creatures, shadowes of Saints, that thus cry out as undone, for the want of what they may perish with. Scarce one word of wisdome to be heard; nay the very Ordinance which is most particularly designed for the conveyance of Spirituall gifts, must be cut off, though it be a foundation Principle because they see not the prints of the nails, and spear. The power is gone, we want Apostles, the Fourth Prin∣ciple is void, Gifts do not now appear, the power is gone. This is the great cry of these times, to cry down a founda∣tion Doctrine of Christ. But let the true babes of Christ know to their comfort that the pwoer is not gone, so long as this gift, this best gift of the Spirit remains, which is better then they all. Wherefore get wisdome thou believing obedient soul, Prov. 4.7. and with all thy getting, get understanding, forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep thee; exalt her, and she shall promove thee; she shall bring thee to honour when thou dost embrace her. He that thus counsels thee, hath richly experienced the truth of what he assures thee: he asked wisdome, and God gave
him a large heart, and was so well pleased with his choice, 2 Chron. 1.10, 11, 12. and desire, that he added to his request, the greatest wealth, honour and royalty that ever was given to mor∣tall man. This pretious gift shall conduct the true Christian to the Bridegrooms Chamber, yea into his Masters joy, Matth. 25. Dan. 12.3. where he shall shine as the brightnesse of the Firmament, for he made wisdome his choice, and used all means, all the appoint∣ments of Christ to attain it, and did not finde those pipes empty, which others slighted and neglected; but through those channels his vessell was filled, wherefore he now lifts up his head with confidence; Heb. 5.9. and Christ is become what he promised, even the authour of eternall salvation to his obedient soul. While those who lived in the profession of some (it may be many) truths, are found with empty vessels, void of this excellent gift of wisdome, as refusing the channell through which it passeth; so that now, Psal. 45. Mat. 25.10, 11, 12. when all too late, they would run to buy, the Bridegroom enters his royall chamber, the Bride with the wise Virgins attend him, and the door is shut, eternally shut; Lord, Lord, open to us, is all too late. Because I have called and ye refused, (O read and trem∣ble) Prov. 1.24, &c. Hos. 14. ult. Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know them? for the wayes of the Lord are right, and the just shall walke in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein. By this time possibly some gratious soul will confesse, that the best, and most excellent gifts of the Spirit are not ceased. But this powerfull, yea most powerfull operation is continued, in this principall gift of Wisdome, and seeing the necessity of it, may possibly cry out, O help me to wisdome or else I die! Which way is my beloved gone? in what path doth this most excellent gift of wisdome passe? Why thou poor enquiring soul, it is the Prince of gifts thou enquirest after, he is free, and I dare not confine him to any particular passage, he hath many walkes, but I can point thee out which way he hath gone, namely, in yonder path, which is one of his principall walks, termed Laying on of hands; 'tis a path of his own preparing, and indeed,
a foundation Doctrine of his own lips. His servant Joshua found him in this very path, and therein obtained this precious gift of wisdome, which for the excellency of it beares his own name, Deut. 34.9. And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the Spirit of wisdome; for Moses had laid his hands upon him. Was this transcendent gift of the Spirit conveyed through the Laying on of Moses hands? Luk. 7.28. Why, the least Gospell Mini∣ster is greater then Moses. Object. But Joshua was an Officer. Answ. He was a great Captain indeed, and did conquer Canaan, but there is not a Disciple of Christ, but is a greater Captain, even a King and a Priest, and conquereth the world; yea is more then a Conquerer through Christ. What∣soever priviledges the chiefest in Moses house enjoyed, even the least member of Christs Kingdome is invested with; that is, to enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum, or most holy place with boldnesse, Heb. 10.19. which was the peculiar priviledge of their high Priests. So that this way, even through impositions of hands hath the blessed Spirit communicated wisdome, his most excellent gift. In the time of the Gospell we finde the great Apostle of the Gentiles rich in this gift, A wise Master builder. And St. Peter greatly admires this gift of Wisdome in him, 2 Pet. 3.15. Even as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the Wisdome given unto him. Quest. But when was this Wisdome given unto him? Answ. At the same time when the Holy Ghost first filled him; that is, when the first Messenger was sent for this (as the chief end) from the Lord Jesus to him; Brother Saul (said Ananias) the Lord Jesus — hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 9.17. and accordingly the eyes of his mind (as well as of his body) were so enlightned with this choice gift of wisdome, that he was able to preach Christ so, that all which heard him were amazed; he being so able presently to prove that he which bestowed this gift upon him, is the very Christ.
So that here we have the precise time when this wisdome was given him. Quest. But how, or by what means was this gift commu∣nicated? Answ. By that especiall Ordinance through which other gifts of the same Spirit were conveyed by Peter, and John, and Paul himself, afterwards; that is, by imposition of hands, Act. 9.17. And Ananias went his way and entered into the house, and putting his hands on him said, &c. So that here in two lively examples, the way and means of communicating this principall gift, is discovered to thy inquiring soul. I shall add no more at present concerning this gift, which I would be found in at the sound of the great trumpet, but to counsell thee in the words of my Redeemer in another case, Go, and do thou likewise. Luk. 10.31. The second best gift which is also continued to, and must be more and more encreased in the Saints (as we may see this day) is Knowledge, Dan. 12.4. As this is honoured in the next place to Wisdome; so are they both lock'd up together for the newborn babe, in the richest Cabinet that heaven hath, even in the heart of the Lords Christ, and our Jesus, Col. 2.3. in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdome and knowledge. This is one of those choice acquirements for the building up of the Saints, which whosoever wants is blind, 2 Pet. 1.5, 8. and in a perishing condition; My people are destroyed for want of knowledge, is the great Gods patheticall expression, Hos. 4.6. Take heed therefore thou dost not reject it, nor the means by, and through which it is attained; for as it is treasured up in the same magazin or storehouse, so it runs in the same channel with wisdome; that is, communicated through the same Ordinance; Then shall we know, Hos. 6.3. Hab. 2.14. if we follow on to know the Lord. Faith is the third continued gift, running through se∣verall channels, that is, different administrations, from the same Lord. 1 Cor. 12.5. But that saith which so runs as through Bap∣tisme,
Supper, Hands, and other Ordinances, I do not judge that foundation Principle (Heb. 6.) but a faith of assurance, Ephes. 1.13. or the sealing of the Spirit, which hath been communicated to some upon their purpose to obey Christ in this Ordinance, to others, whiles they have been under the administration of hands; to a third sort immediately after, to divers at a greater distance; yea I have seen such a presence, and (with an eye which the naturall man never enjoyed) be∣held so great a Majesty in the administration of this fourth Principle, as hath constrained me to admire the mighty ope∣ration of the Spirit, and to conclude that wonders are not totally ceased. Let babes in Christ covet earnestly this great gift, Gal. 2.20. Ephes. 3.8. Hab. 3.17, 18. 1 Sam. 30.6. Mat. 21.22. Josh. 10.12, 13. 1 Joh. 5.4. Isa. 45.11. and be found in all the means and wayes of obtaining it; for 'tis a Christ-exalting gift; a self-abasing gift; a soul-satisfy∣ing gift; a heart-encouraging gift; a mercy-obtaining gift; a wonder-working gift; a world-conquering gift; a God-commanding gift. Now certainly, if I have spoken truth concerning this pre∣tious gift of Faith, then it is not true which some have so confidently asserted; namely, that the powerfull operations of the Spirit are ceased. But I know, what they mean, viz. the visible print of the nails, and spear, so that it appears to me, they believe little further then they see, and therefore slight this Doctrine of Laying on of hands. Which I think few will deny to be a notable means for the conveyance of the fourth continued spirituall gift, which is Prophesie. All spirituall gifts are beautifull in their place, but this rather to be desired, for the edification of others, as the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 14.1. I do not judge a person compleatly in Gods way, how eminent soever he be gifted, untill he have received this Ordi∣nance of hands. I look upon the Church as neglecting her duty when omitting it, or employing persons in the Admini∣stration of Ordinances without it, and hiding her talents when she doth not separate such persons by it, as are fit for the Lords harvest.
And I esteem any man that sets to the Ministery without it (if he may and doth not receive it) as running without his errand. Let none here mistake me, as though I did confound the fourth Principle with Ordination; I know the one is an initiating Ordinance proper for babes, 2 Tim. 1, 6. such as Timothy re∣ceived at the hands of Paul, by which often this gift of Pro∣phesie is communicated; which when it mounts to such a flame, that the soul is constrained with the Prophet, Jer. 20.9. to cry out, I was weary with forbearing and I could not stay; Then I judge it the Churches duty to set upon this separa∣ting administration, with sasting and prayer, according to pattern, Act. 13.2, 3. As the Eldership or Presbyterie, did to Timothy, 1 Tim. 4.14. Persons thus designed to the work, are sent out by the Holy Spirit, Act. 13.4. therefore prize it. The last standing or continued gift here mentioned, is, Discerning of Spirits, which raiseth the soul to a notable degree of spirituality 1 Cor. 2.14.. No wonder then, that the Apostle urgeth the necessity of the Six Principles, as being the dishes, in, and by which this spirituall gift is brought by degrees to the believing soul, which when he heartily feeds of, it is of that strengthning nature, as transforming the Disciple from a babe to a strong man, Heb. 5. ult. 'Tis no small mercy to be able to try the spirits whether they be of God, and to know Christs voice from a stranger, 1 Joh. 4.1. Joh. 10. Mat. 7.15, 16. a wolf from a sheep. Since therefore the use and end of Laying on of hands, is for attaining the Spirit of Christ by degrees. And that I have so fully proved, that the choicest gifts of the Spirit are as largely (that I say not more liberally) handed to believers now as ever, and that these heavenly gifts are so clearly communicated through this Ordinance of hands; Let my counsell be acceptable to thee, if ever thou desirest thy friends society, get thee to his place of abode, that is, Can. 1.8. forth by the foot steps of the flock, and feed thy kids besides the shepheards tents.
There he makes his flock to rest at noon. There he will give thee his loves, not every where, but in wayes of his own appointment. His flock have left thee fair prints of their footsteps both in Doctrine and practise; A goodly flock hath the Shepherd of Israel, whose faith follow, and lean not to thine own un∣derstanding. Say not the Lords hands is shortned, or his power ceased; thou seest his richest gifts are continued to thee, and many more then I have mentioned, as the spirit of grace and supplication, Zech. 13.10. the gift of suffering, Phil. 1.29. of courage and boldnesse, Act. 4.10, 13. and sun∣dry others. Be not wanting to thy self in slighting this or any Or∣dinance, through which Christ is pleased to convey his gift. Jonah 2.8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. If there be any breathings in thy soul after these spiritu∣all treasures which will stand thee in stead when the trumpet sounds, get thee to the Merchants now, if thou drive off thy bargain till then the door will be shut. Possibly thou mayest think this Ordinance of hands not worth half my writing, or thy reading I am sure my pains is the greater, and I do not think it too much to clear up an Ordinance whereby Christ hath sweetly refreshed my soul; I know it hath long lien sullied amongst the Romish pots. Psal. 68.13. Isa. 60.8. But God can give it the wings of a dove to thy bosome to engage thy dove-like soul to flie (though in clouds) to thy windowes. What if thou shouldest look upon this Ordinance with a contemptible eye, Joh. 9.6, 7. and esteem it no better then clay and spittle, yet use it, because 'tis the Doctrine or word of Christ; pos∣sibly it may clear thy sight. Thou hast many pretious Lambs of Christ in view, that have led thee the way through this administration, as Peter, John, Paul, Ananias, and thousands more, who continued stedfastly in this and all the rest of the Apostles Doctrine. And remember that thou art commanded to observe and do all things whatsoever Christ commanded his Disciples
in those dayes, so shalt thou be sure of the presence of Christ whose favour soever thou losest. So shalt thou approve thy self a new-born-babe, a new Creature, a friend of Christ. And as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. I must now return to the Gent. my Antagonist, to wipe off those Absurdities, which he saith must of necessity follow this practise. First, We lay no unfaithfulnesse upon Christ, nor advance Moses above him, since Christ hath not left us to doubtfull suppositions (as the Gent. speaks) for the institution of this practise of Laying on of hands is substantially proved from the mouth of Christ. Secondly, Neither do we lay a lie upon Paul, who hath declared this Principle as a part of the counsell of God, and so to be practised by Christs Ministers, 2 Tim. 2.2. Thirdly, We have both commands and promises, and therefore can act in faith in this Ordinance, as is already fully proved. Fourthly, We have given substantiall grounds of our hope, in this point, to the stopping the mouths of gainsayers, let suppositions go to the supposers. As for the Gentlemans two Apostolicall acts, which he saith we crosse, if there were any thing worth noting it would fall fall upon himself; for I suppose he is but an imitator of the Act in Preaching, but cannot carry on the end, insomuch as he wants the power they had (if it be a want.) 2. They were as much amazed at the power of the Spirit in Peters Preaching (Act. 10.44, 45.) and more, then Simon Magus was. Neither can the Gent. imitate Peters Preaching, any more then I can their imposing hands; he hath neither
received like power, neither is he able to carry on the like end (as he phraseth it) nor do any thing in Preach∣ing, but what men as men may do. And whatever of this nature he brings forth is equally applicable to his own practise of Preaching. Really the Gent. writes more like a Notionist, Quaker, or Seeker, then a setled Christian; I wish he were throughly weaned from those wandrings; for why doth he raise such a dust about waiting for the power and re∣ceiving the power, of being imitators of the act, but cannot carry on the end? Let all that fear the great God and tremble at his glori∣ous word, and have any love to his Ordinances, consider whither this Gent. would lead them. He saith, The Apostles had power before to Preach and Baptize with water, yet before they did this (Lay on hands) the must wait for power, and that an eminent glorious power at Jerusalem, and he quotes Luk. 24.49. Answ. Here are big words, and smooth words, to deceive the hearts of the simple, Rom. 16.17, 18. But I do utterly deny them to be the words of truth. For why doth he? how durst he quote Luk. 24.49. and yet so confidently assert they had power to preach be∣fore? Let him, and those dear friends he writes to, (if they be not willing to be deluded) look two verses backward, viz. Luk. 24.47. and they shall see that the Apostles had no power to preach upon the account of their full and great commission, untill this power came. For thus speaks the Lord Jesus — And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name, Luk. 24.47, 48, 49. among all Nations, beginning at Jerusa∣lem. — And behold I send the promise of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, untill ye be endued with power from on high. Now friends in the name of Christ consider whether the Gent, hath declared truth in saying they had power to Preach and Baptize before, upon the account of their last Commission? for that only he relates to in quoting Luk.
24.49. their former Preaching and Baptisme being at that time utterly void, as you may clearly see by comparing these Scriptures, Mat. 10.5, 6. with Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. and Luk. 22.35, 36. and Act. 19 4. Their former work was to preach, The Kingdome of God is at hand. But now, Mat. 5.7. The King∣dome of God is come with power, Mark. 9.1. Luk. 24.49. and such as was their Preaching, such was their Bap∣tisme. But here I must challenge the Gent. to make good his word, that they did ever preach one Sermon, or ever Baptize one person, before this power came, or else he hath but deluded you, in making you believe that there is need of a greater power for administring the Ordinance of Laying on of hands, then there needs for Preaching, and Bap∣tisme, for that is his full scope and design, in which I appeal to any ingenuous soul. Nay, I appeal to him∣selfe. Secondly, He would perswade persons (but then they must be very ignorant) that the Miraculous visible power, is the essence of the Ordinance. Whereas I have abundantly proved that the command of Christ gives essence to the Ordinance, and that the commu∣nicating of the Spirits gifts is the full end of the Ordinance to obedient souls for Christs honour. And I have also proved, That the Spirit hath commu∣nicated better gifts and more glorious power through this Ordinance, then ever were or can be visible to a naturall eye, 1 Cor. 2.9. ad finem; and that the same gifts still remain, for which by all means we should endevour. Thus I hope 'tis evident that the same power is requi∣site for Preaching, Baptism, and other Gospell Ordinances, as for Laying on of hands, and that the very same power hath accompanied Preaching, as hath attended the fourth Prin∣ciple, and as often hath it appeared in the one, as in the other. Wherefore consider in the name of the Lord what a design is here laid to rase the foundation of all Ordinances, and level them with the dust? And indeed what presumption is it for the Gent. to Preach, Baptize, break-bread, &c. and yet
want the essence of these Ordinances; if it were true as he holds forth, that the visible miraculous power of the Spirit were the essence of Ordinances? But to the Gent. fifth absurdity, which he saith is injurious to Jesus Christ who brings forth an act to shew his power, and yet we having not the power, do imitate the act turning acts of power into bare imitation, and so are injurious to Christs intention. Answ. 1. All the acts which Christ brings forth are acts of power, since all power in heaven and earth is put into his hand, we professe he cannot act unlike himself, therefore we are slandered in being charged as injurious to Christ. 2. The great power Christ intends in all the acts he brings forth, is to convert souls, these acts are those greater works which Christ promised his Saints should performe, Joh. 14.12. and these are the mighty signes of true Apostles, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. & 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. Whosoever therefore is inabled to perform these greater works, is so far from being injurious to Christ, that he fully answers Christs intention, for herein Christs greatest power is put forth, and shines most gloriously, and they that are instrumentall thus in bearing up his name and power in the world, shall at last shine as the brightnesse of the Firmament, Dan. 12. 1 Pet. 5.5. and receive at his hands a Crown of glory that fadeth not away. 3. I have already fully proved, that those externall visi∣ble gifts of the Spirit, which Carnall Christians, and di∣strustfull Didymusses do so strangely dote upon, are not the greatest acts of Christs power, those prints of the nailes and spear, are but Christs condescensions to weak Christians. Those tongues which were given once (and but once that we know of) in the laying on of hands, and in Preaching, although the Gent. do ever so highly magnifie them amongst professors, and believers, so as to rase the foundation of a foundation principle, because he sees not that sign of tongues, doth but feed his hearers with food that is not for them. If we dare but give credit to that wise master builder,
he will clearly shew us what an unwise steward is this Gent. Mat. 24.45. Luk. 12.42. what an unfaithfull servant, not dividing the word of truth aright, not giving them their portion of meat in due season. 2 Tim. 2.15. But indeed setting them a gaping for such food as Christ in∣tends not for them. Tongues being for a sign, 1 Cor. 14.22. Not to them that be∣lieve, but to them that believe not. And while they are thus busily enquiring after the visible power, the signs, the miracles, (like that impertinent question Act. 1.6.) they are robbed of that proper, powerful, food that Christ hath fitted for his table guests, and conveyed through laying on of hands; that true Manna, which who∣soever feeds upon shall never die. I mean those best gifts which true Christians ought earnestly to covet, and use all means to procure; as Wisdome, Knowledge, Faith, Prophesie, Prayer, and the rest, wherein the mighty Al∣mighty power of Christ is put forth, and which sundry believing soules have felt, and found, in this Ad∣ministration of hands, some eminently, and speedily, others more obscurely, and by insensible degrees The blessed Spirit dividing to every man severally as he will; that is, What he will, how he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. and when he will. Lastly, I must declare that the Gent. and others, making so much noise about the visible Power, the miraculous Power, the externall glorious Power, &c. do but hereby proclaime their own unbelief: The Apostle plainly telling us that tongues are for a sign, not to believers, but to unbelievers, as above. Secondly, As for that reproof in Isa. 1.12. I have already spoke to it, and the God of heaven make it a warning to him, that he may cease to re∣proach the wayes, ordinances, and servants of Christ. And as for Gods demand, how we know Heb. 6.2. is meant to lay hands on all Disciples; though the
Gent. sayes we can but answer we think so, and how sad that would be. I answer, We can confidently tell him (for God will make no such idle demands) that we know so, we know the fourth Princi∣ple belongs to all Disciples. 1. Because it is one of the first Doctrines or Words of Christ. 2. Because it's one of the foundation Principles for Chri∣stians. 3. Because it's plainly called milk for babes, Indefi∣nitely. 4. Because the Ministers of Christ taught and practised it to all his. 5. Because Christs babes have need of it, God himself hath spoken it, and therefore will never question us for ob∣serving the Apostles writings and teachings, 1 Cor. 11.37. which his holy Spirit hath testifyed are his own commands. Thirdly the Gent. would have us consider, How unlike this practise is to the primitive Churches, and to Philip, Act. 8.12, 13. who wrought miracles, more then we can do, and Baptized with water, but left the Laying on of hands to the Apostles, Act. 8.14. Answ. 1. We have diligently considered, and through grace found our selves in the very steps of the primitive Churches, whereof some are particularized as the Church of Samaria, the Church of Ephesus, the Churches of Judea, or the Hebrewes, who were taught and continued stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, they being care∣full to settle the same order in all Churches: Especially in foundation Principles, upon which all the Saints are built. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forainers, Ephes. 2.19, 20. but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God; and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Pro∣phets,
Jesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner-stone. 2. It's too bold to say that Philip left Laying on of hands to the Apostles, when it was the speciall work of God to employ Philip suddainly in the mighty service of converting that noble Aethiopian, whom Historians record to be so famous in converting his whole Nation. But secondly, What a deal of stir here is to set up the poor weak instrument, as though there were any power or virtue in one Ministers hands more then another, or in one Ordinance then another? Why, this is nothing but the old Pope and Prelate, masking in a new habit. Let the eternall Spirit determine, what difference there is between Peter and Philip (I shall offer no violence to the text, only change names a little) 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. Who then is Peter, and who is Philip, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? Philip planted, Peter and John watered, but God gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase. Now he that planteth, and he that watereth are one. And one would think this should satisfie an honest hum∣ble heart in this matter. But thirdly, Philip was an Evangelist, in the very same rank with Timothy, and it cannot be denyed but laying on of hands was the work of an Evangelist, 1 Tim. 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. Fourthly, Act. 9.17. Doubtlesse Philip had as much authority as Ananias; for it is confidently asserted by some, that Ananias was but a bare Disciple, though 'tis a wild assertion, but let that passe at present. Well, certain it is, Ananias who had power to Baptize, had equall power to lay hands upon Paul, upon a twofold account. 1. For the cure of his body. 2. For the filling of him with the holy Ghost. The very end, and use of this fourth Foundation Prin∣ciple. Paul was at present but a new-born-babe, learning and ob∣serving, or practising his Principles. I hope none will pre∣sume to say that this main end of Ananias imposing hands,
that Paul might be filled with the Holy Spirit, was any or∣dination to office, unlesse they will be wise above what is written. Paul was not then Baptized, and not likely to re∣ceive ordination before his Foundation Principles were laid. Besides, Certain it is, that his solemne Ordina∣tion, by imposition of hands, was long after, namely, Act. 13. But Lastly, Philip being an Evangelist, was not inferiour to the setled elders, or Presbytery 1 Tim. 4.14., and they had authority to impose hands. If any shall object, That was in Ordination. I shall only answer this, That strong meat for men is not inferior to milk for babes. But enough hath been said, to prove Christs Ministers e∣quall in power. The Gents. last Consideration, warneth his dear friends of the danger of turning Acts of Power into bare imitation and want the power, quoting, Act. 19.13, 14, 15, 16. Exod. 7. to 13. & 8.16, 17, 18, 19. Answ. 1. I know no power that was ever put forth in Laying on of hands, more then there was in Preaching. Act. 10.44, 45. How dare he then imitate them in Preaching and want the power? 2. I know no power any man hath to Preach Authori∣tatively, Tit. 2.15. but the same person hath by the same Commission power to carry on all Ordinances that ever Christ commanded. Paul and Apollo are equall in power, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7.8. Here Paul is the planter, and Apollo the waterer. In Act. 8. Philip is the planter, and Peter with John the waterers. Now by the Gents arguing from Act. 8. Apollo beares the bell away from Paul in point of power. But the Spirit of God saith, they are equall, One. Ana∣nias had power to Baptize, Ananias had power to impose hands.
3. Thrre were certain Conjurers cudgel'd by the Devill, Act. 19. for calling on the name of Jesus whom they ab∣horred. And a sort of Sorcerers, whose serpents, Moses's serpent devoured. But were ever any Gospell Ministers in the least reproved for administring any of Christ Ordinances? Why, those Vagabond exorcists knew not, believed not Jesus; how then should they call on him Rom. 10.14. 1 Joh. 2.3, 4.? but we know him, and obey him, as we are able. And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandements. He that saith I know him, and keepeth not his Commandements, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him. He will never charge us with sin for observing all things whatsoever he commanded his Apostles. He never commanded his Apostles to teach his Churches that it was necessary to have such ministers, as must either do miracles, or else they must not administer all Ordinances to the end of the world. But he layes down plain directions how Ministers must be qualifyed, 1 Tim. 3. Tit 1. not one syllable of miracles or tongues. And yet they are bound to teach the same things, 2 Tim. 2.2. that Paul and Timothy did, amongst which I am sure Laying on of hands was one. To conclude, lest the Gents. bustle about imitation of Christ and his Apostles, in carrying on Gospell Ordi∣nances, without power to confirme them ten thousand times over, with new miracles; I say lest this noise and dust should weaken the hands, and blear the eyes of Christs enquiring ones, so as to have a slight esteem of Christs commands, since all Gospell Ordinances, and Ministers have equall au∣thority; Let it be remembred that those Divine writings and Ordinances which our deceased husband left as Le∣gacies, for the tryall of our love to our first love, in remembrance of his sad sufferings till his second coming, were all confirmed once unto us by signes and wonders.
And being thus ratified under hand and seal, by him whose Kingdomes, Lawes, are lesse mutable then the Laws of Medes and Persians, it is not for us to question them, but testifie our love, Joh. 14.15. & 15.14. and friendship by observing them, even all of them. Remember the pattern of heavenly things, I mean those Mosaicall administrations, Heb. 10.1. which were a shadow and no more of what we now enjoy. But whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our Learning. And therefore at the giving and writing of the Law, migh∣ty signs and wonders were wrought in the sight of Israel, and Egypt. So at the giving and writing of the Gospel signs and won∣ders from heaven confirm'd it, in the sight both of Christians and Heathens. But at the Jews return from Babylon, not one miracle wrought, and yet the people observe all their ordinances, yea some that were discontinued hundreds of years. Neh. 8.16, 17. We are now returning out of Babylon, praised be God, let us embrace all our ordinances with thankfulnesse, without expecting new miracles to confirm them. It's true, all our Ordinances have been discontinued many hundreds of years during the time of Popish Apostasie, or else in an Antichristian garb, have they been administred to false subjects. Yet even in the darkest times of the Beasts rage, did the Lord preserve himself a remnant, that held fast his truth in some corners; perhaps by fifties in a Cave: for the woman had a being though in a wildernesse, sack∣cloth condition, Revel. 12. all that 1260. years, being nourished there with her own proper food, the sincere milk of the Word, the Scriptures of the old and new testaments, which are none other then those two witnesses appointed of God to seed her Joh. 5.39. Jer. 15.16.. And at her approach into the open light, and cheerfull day of liberty (which shine most gloriously under this happy Government we now enjoy) being by degrees freed from that imposing, persecuting Babylonish thraldome▪ she searcheth those divine records, her own peculiar trea∣sure,
and portion, and like those Nehem. 8.14. what she findes written in that law, she obeyes, step by step, as God discovers truth, without expecting new miracles to confirm it; and at length hath found out, and laid this fourth Principle in its proper place. Yet some have branded this pretious Ordinance in Print, as A new Admini∣stration. But really I stand amazed that their consciences did not give their pen a check; since 'tis so evident that Peter, and John, and Paul, and Ananias, and thousands more, were found in this practise, sixteen hundred years ago, and did most faithfully teach the same doctrine as one of the six foundati∣on Principles of Christian Religion; as the proper food or milke for babes, yong beginners in Christianity, to whom the Epistle to the Hebrewes is chiefly written, nay on∣ly written. For although it is clear that those Hebrew or Judean Churches, had officers setled amongst them, whom they are exhorted to remember, as those that had the rule over them, &c. Heb. 13.7. and to obey them, and submit to them, vers. 17. Yet was not this Epistle written to those Officers, or Rulers, or Ministers, or Angels (like the 7. Epistles to the Asian Churches Rev. 2, & 3.) but only to the members of those Churches; as is most evident by the close of that Epistle, where this exhortation or injunction is laid upon those babes; Heb. 13.24. Salute all them that have the rule over you. Had this been wisely considered, the adversaries of this fourth Principle would not so much have betrayed their weaknesse, and discovered their nakednesse, as with such con∣fidence to assert that the Doctrine of hands Heb. 6. belongs only to the Ministery. The wiseman cryes out, Eccl. 10.16. Woe to thee O Land when thy King is a child. I may much more sadly apply it to Churches, if our adversaries speak truth that the fourth Principle be∣longeth to Ministers. Woe to thee O Church when thy Elders (or Bishops) are babes: Yea such babes as are unskilfull in the word of righteousnesse, Heb. 5.13. And yet it's as clear as the Sun, that this Principle (among the rest) is to be used by
such babes as are unskilfull in the word of righteousnesse. Where∣fore let our adversaries pretend never so much ability, or eminency, or experience to teach others; I dare boldly assert, that untill such time as God shall draw out their hearts to use this milk of the fourth Principle, they are but unskilfull in a Foundation Doctrine of the word of righteousnesse; And truly that's exceeding sad, if we consider, Tit. 1.9. Well then; to weaklings in the faith, to young Disciples hath Christ designed this A B C. Doctrine of six principles, to be laid as their first foundation upon himself, Ephes. 2.20. which is so far from being A new Administration (as our An∣tagonists term this fourth Principle by way of derision) that what we contend for, is one of the words of the be∣ginning of Christ; . Heb. 6.1. one of those first things which Jesus began to do and teach, which are not set down particularly by the Evangelists (for if they should be written every one, it's supposed the world could not contain them, Joh. 21.25) this is one of those Commandements which Christ gave to his Apostles after his resurrection, one of those things that he spake to them concerning the Kingdome of God, Act. 1.1, 2, 3. for as Christ was forty dayes instructing Moses in Sinai, how to govern his house under the Law; so he was forty dayes instructing his Apostles in Sion, how to order his house under the Gospell, not writing his Lawes (then) with inke and paper, or in tables of stone, but acccor∣to the tenour of the new Covenant, he did engrave them in their minds, Heb. 8.10. and write them in their hearts, with this full assurance (upon the word of a King) Joh. 14.26. that his holy Spirit should bring all things to their remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto them; so that he hath been ex∣actly faithfull in all his house, Heb. 3. As truly therefore as Christ gave them Commandements, (Act. 1.2.) so truly are those things which the A∣postles taught, Act. 2.40, 41, 42. and 8.17. and left in writing, Heb. 5.12. & 6.1, 2. so truly, I say, are these things, the very Commandements of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37. which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, Heb. 2.3.
So that the vanity of that taunt (that Laying on of hands is A new Administration) doth too much betray an ignorant, that I say not an envious frame of spi∣rit. And as this foundation Principle was laid in Sion, by those wise master-builders in the beginning of the Kingdom of Christ, which is to be practised and observed equally with its fellow principles, Faith, Repentance, Baptisme, &c. to the end of the world: So was it religiously performed with the rest, in the purest Churches, for some hundreds of years after the Apostles, as is fully and faithfully proved from the purest streams of Antiquity, by those eminent shining lights in the Church of God, to whom this present generation is so exceedingly obliged, for their indefatigable labours in vindication of this, and many other pretious truths of Christ; namely, Mr. John Tombs in his Anti-paedobaptism, Second Part. 23. Sect. and Mr. Christopher Blackwood, in his Soul-searching Catechism, pag. 58. to whom I refer you. Only one testimony I shall set down out of Eusebius, lib. 6. cap. 42. Novatus (saith he) being very like to die, was baptized in the bed where he lay, if it may be termed a baptisme which he received, for he obtained not after his recovery that which he should have done according to the Canon of the Church, to wit, confirmation by the hands of the Bishop: In so much then as he obtained not that, how came he by the Holy Ghost? In which passage I observe, First, That in those dayes (namely in the third Century) it was not the custome to baptize Infants, but Professors, that lasie practice of Infant sprinkling being after wars fomented and advanced by the man of sin. Secondly I observe, That it could not be termed or judged a lawfull baptism, which was Administred in bed; for how was that a buriall? Nay both the Clergy and Laity oppo∣sed his admission into the Ministery, because they judged that bed-baptisme unlawfull, pag. 118.
Thirdly, I observe, That the Church had received the fourth Principle, as one of their Canons, Lawes, or Rules. Fourthly, That he is recorded as a disobedient person to all posterity, for neglecting and omitting that duty of Laying on of hands. And lastly, That it was so long received as an eternall truth, that the holy Ghost was communicated (in his gifts) by Laying on of hands. So that I hope God will cause shame to work unfeigned sorrow in such as have so rashly termed Laying on of hands, A new administration. My counsell and advice to all that truly fear the Lord, and desire a greater measure of his Blessed Spirit, in the gracious gifts, and flourishing fruits thereof, is speedily to hasten to the use of all means that the redeemer of our souls hath desig∣ned for his dear Disciples, his babes, his lambs, which he folds in his bosome, and hath enjoyned all his under-shepheards faithfully to feed, as ever they would manifest their loves to him their Saviour. Wherefore I as the unworthyest of them all, would gladly serve thee, thou espoused soul, that hast devoted thy Virgin affections to the divine embraces of the King of Saints. I beseech thee (as Christs Ambassadour) I humbly intreat thee, open the mouth of thy enquiring thirsty soul, that as a new∣born-babe thou mayst receive this growing thriving food, in the rich encreases of Gods holy Spirit; 'tis sincere milk fit∣ted for thy constitution. O tast and see how gratious the Lord is! thou dost not yet know, how he will communi∣cate himself to thee through this Ordinance; thou canst never experience the virtue and goodnesse of food till thou receive it. I do not so earnestly invite thee to the meanest things of Christs house, those inferiour gifts which Reprobates may have, and Simon Magus would have purchased with money, and which carnall Christians so much cry out for, the power, the visible miraculous power, the tongues, the signs, the wonders, &c. Alas poor soul! these will not feed thee, the
wisest Stewards that ever Christ employed, 1 Cor. 14.22. tell thee (thou panting spirit) they are not for thee. Why, thou art a believer, I prethee what good would tongues or miracles do thee? would they satisfie thy gaping thirsty soul? did not that excellent Apostle earnestly disswade Disciples from their vain affection of these externall gifts? What if I should come with tongues to you (saith he 1 Cor. 14.6.) would that profit you? I should not be understood, ver. 7.8. and if you did enjoy your desire of tongues, ye should but speak to the aire, and be a Barbarian, vers. 9, 11. Ah brethren (saith he, after long labouring to blunt the edge of their fond desire of tongues above other gifts) vers. 20. Be not children in understanding; as if he should say, thy desires are childish, in making such a noise about this lesser gift, which will neither edifie thy self nor others, vers. 14, 17. No, no, thou little one, thou suckling, Luk. 10.21. to whom the good pleasure of thy Father is to reveal the mysteries of his Kingdome, which he conceals from the wise and prudent. I stand (as one of wisdomes maidens) to give thee an earnest in∣vitation, yea to compell thee to come, Prov. 9.3. Luk. 14.23. and sup with the Lord, upon a daintier dish then tongues, or any such ex∣ternall things: Upon that hidden manna, the bread that cometh down from Heaven, Joh. 6.50. Cant. 1.3, 4. & 2.4. which whosoever eats of shall never die. I would lead thee and all thy virgin compani∣ons, by the savor of his good oyntments, into the inner chambers of the King, yea into his banqueting house, where thou shalt be presented with his choisest gifts, Wisdome, Know∣ledge, Faith, &c. The Wisdome of God in a Mystery, not an external sound, Col. 2.3. Ephes. 3.17, 18, 19, 20. to satisfie a carnall heart, but all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge, such as will warm thy inside, and by degrees so root thee and ground thee in love, that at length thou shalt be filled with all the fulnesse of God; Col. 2.2. Ʋnto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledge∣ment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.
Come then, Rev. 22.17. let heaven and earth ring together. The Spi∣rit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that heareth, say Come, and let him that is athirst Come, and whosoeverwill, let him take of the water of life freely. Who so is simple let him turn in bither, Pov. 9.4, 5. as for him that wanteth un∣derstanding, she saith unto him, Come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Ah thou beloved believer! here's a feast for a King, such a King as thou art, and thou shalt be a welcome guest, the more thou shalt eat, Cant. 5.1. the better welcome, Eat O friends, drink abundantly O beloved. I have acquainted thee in what dishes this supper is served, through what pipes these best gifts are conveyed; Act. 10.44. & 2.38. & 9.17. namely, through the word Preached, through Baptism, through Lay∣ing on of hands, and other Ordinances. Thy obedience will dispell the clouds of thy Ignorance. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the dectrine whether it be of God or whether I speak of my self. Joh. 7.17. Rom. 2.13. For not the hearers, but the doers of the Law are justified. Therefore look upon them as the enemies of thy soul, that tell thee thou must learn the fourth Principle but not practise it. Thy dear Redeemer learns thee another lesson; If ye know these things, Joh. 13.17. happy are ye if ye do them. Do them there∣fore, and wait upon God for what he pleaseth to give, and when. The sucking babe is not alwayes sensible of its grouth, in drawing the breasts; Possibly God may give thee an Eunuch's portion speedily, possibly by insensible degrees. The Christian Hebrews had been in the use of this milk (this fourth Principle and in the other five) a considerable time, Heb. 5.12, 13. before they had any eminent gift; wherefore let not any pretious soul in this practise either say God is a hard master, or question his own condition, if gifts do not presently or eminently flow as they desire. O Augustine! he is come, he is come, warmed the Martyr within, when the flames were most scorching without. Possibly God reserves his gifts till thou hast most need of them. Some sooner, some later.
If any shall say the Hebrews were not in the practise of this Doctrine of Laying on of hands, because they were not eminent in gifts. I must tell such persons that they flatly contradict the Scriptures which tessifie, Act. 2.42. Heb. 5.12.13. That they continued stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine; yea that they had been taught it, and did use it. And to say, That they were taught Baptisme, and did pra∣ctise it; and were taught, Laying on of hands, but did not practise it; is such a sign of a shallow capacity as deserves no answer but silence and pity. Wherefore I invite thee again thou troubled tempted soul, whom the enemy keeps back with scruples, it is thy Lord cals for thee; Behold I have prepared my dinner, Mat. 22.4. my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, come unto the marriage. Take heed thou tender Lamb of making light of these in∣vitations; beware of delaies, they are very dangerous, as thou tenderest the good of thy soul look not upon thy livings or livelihood, but especially thy relations; Luk 14.18, 19, 20. Ch. 9.59, 61. Ch. 14.27. no not so much as bury thy dead, or take leave of them that are at home. He that loveth father and mother more then me, is not wor∣thy of me. And whosoever doth not bear his crosse and come after me, cannot be my disciple. How many poor souls have I known, some at the very door of Baptisme, and while they have delayed, slumbred, and loitered, the enemy came and sowed tares, Mat. 13.25. by some de∣luded Quaker, or otherwise, slighting Christs Ordinances. I am come in my Fathers name and ye receive me not, Joh. 5.43. if another come in his own name, (crying up his light within, in the secret chambers, Mat. 24.26.) him ye will receive. Some have been ready to fall upon their knees (for con∣venience sake) to have hands laid upon them, and though God hath had mercy upon any that have afterwards obeyed; yet others have been left to strong delusions, to believe, 2 Thess. 2.11. write and practise lies. If any man draw back, Heb. 10.38. my soul shall have no pleasure in him. And others who have slighted the fellow∣ship of the Saints, neglecting Christ invitation; I have
seen death surprise them in their disobedience. Luk. 14.24. For I say unto you that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of my Supper. And is not that sad, thou poor enquiring soul? But in the last place, If God have drawn out thy heart, by the smell of Christs garments; I say Christs garments, those outward things, which proud ones passe by, and deluded souls disdain; Which yet the Spirit sayes, Psal. 45.8. Come out of the Ivory Palaces, casting forth the fragrant odours, and cordiall perfumes of myrrhe, Aloes and Cassia. If these have made glad thy gracious heart, whiles thy Queen-like virgin-soul hath adorned her self with the choice embroyderies of thy beloved, not contenting thy self wich a fancied light in thy conscience, but approving thy self the Kings daughter indeed, Vers. 13. legitimately descen∣ded, all glorious within, (and) thy clothing of wrought gold; That is, if thou have yeelded thine obedience to those principles, and other Ordinances Zech. 4.12., through which the golden gifts and graces of his Spirit flow: Let no man de∣ceive thee with vain words, giving thee leave to learn, but not to practise thy Principles. The Lord make my counsell acceptable to thee, which is, To live in the perpetuall exercise or practise of all thy Prin∣ciples. Yet mistake not, I would not have thee set them up for Idols, Judg. 17.13. and live upon them, to say, Now I know that the Lord will doe me good, seeing I have got a Levite to my Priest. Take heed of so practising any of thy Principles. Now I have done enough once to believe (a Magus may do so) or repent; Act. 8.13. Judas did it; or be baptized, so was Ananias and Sapphira. In this respect, Phil. 3.13, 14. thou must forget what is behind, and presse forward. In this respect, Heb. 6.1. thou must leave thy Principles, and go on to perfection.
But how must thou leave thy Principles? What, never to look at them any more? No such matter. Mat. 19.5. But as thou must leave thy father and mother and cleave to thy wife, so thou must leave thy Principles. Whosoever shall teach thee (in a marryed state) to be disobedient to, or utterly to leave and forsake thy Parents; I shall bequeath to him the Legacie fit for a blind Pharisee, Mat. 15.6. And the like portion to him that shall counsell thee to learn thy Six Principles, but not to practise them; or at any time to leave them, so. As for the first Principle, which is Repentance, Why thou poor soul, as oft as thou callest for thy dayly bread, so often thou must practise thy Repentance. For thou dost dayly contract new flaines, therefore thou must dayly go to that sountain Zech. 13.1. Rev. 7.14., to wash thy robes, and make them white in the bloud of the Lamb. Crying, Father which art in heaven, forgive my trespasses, as I forgive others; that is, manifest forgivenesse, seal my pardon, satisfie my soul, that all my sins are imputed unto Christ, and his righte-ousnesse to me. And can thy soul live a day without this satisfaction, without this assurance? The Lord would have thee aske to purpose; not barely pardon, but assurance that thou art pardoned; Aske and ye may receive, Joh. 16.24. that your joy may be full. And thus thou must not leave, but practise Re∣pentance. Secondly, for Faith; If ever thou didst receive it, embrace it, Rom. 1.5. and yeeld obe∣dience to it, be carefull constantly to live in the exercise of it. Why thou no longer livest then thou believest; Vers. 17. there∣fore go thy wayes on, from faith to faith, in the mounting steps of Abrahams faith, as one of the houshold of faith. Rom. 4.12. Gal. 6.10. Take heed of Hymeneus sin 1 Tim. 1.19., and let Pauls exercise be thine, Act. 24.16. O beware of men that will yeeld thou shouldest learn it, but not practise it.
As for Baptisme; If ever thou was buried with Christ in it, Rom. 6.4. one buriall will serve the turn, , he that is once baptized, or washed, needeth not save to wash his feet Joh. 13.10. compared with 2 King. 5.10. & 14. & Heb. 10.22.; and yet there is dayly need of Mortification, Col. 3.5. this thou must be practising all the dayes of thy Pilgrimage, thou dost never learn it till thou practise it; There's dayly need of a holy walk in newnesse of life, Rom. 6.4. Wherefore thou Baptized Believer, whatever men say, be thou dayly in the practise of this Prin∣ciple. A chast Virgin often resisted Satans temptation, with this weapon, Christiana sum, I am a Christian. As oft as the enemy makes his appoaches against thee, tell him thou art espoused to Christ, and hast (not in thy childish infant state, when perhaps thou wast asleep) made a bold manly profession of thy subjection to him in this Ordinance. What should I fear? if truth speak truth, Mark. 16.16. I did (I do) be∣lieve. I was Baptized, I shall be saved. And for this fourth Principle. Be sure thou practise it, as ever thou desirest a larger mea∣sure of the Spirit, for the communicating of which it is ap∣propriated. If God do immediatly confer his gifts in, or soon after the administration, be carefull to improve them to his glory, put them not under a bed of ease, or a bushell of gain. If he deal with thee as with those Hebrew babes, keep thee long in thy childhood, without some eminent manly gift, yet pra∣ctise this Principle, in the exercises of patience; waiting for a return to those prayers, that did accompany this Ordi∣nance, and indeed is an essentiall part of it, without which, neither this nor any thing else is or can be sanctifyed, Luk. 11.13. and upon which pretious promises are entail'd. Breaking bread, is no ordinance of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.11. without prayer and praise. Re∣member the Spirits method, who is a free Agent, Dividing to every man severally as he will, what, how, and when he pleaseth.
Some seed in some sort of ground, will spring up speedily. Though I do not say that is either the best seed, or the best soil, see Mat. 13.5. And such is the gift of tongnes, to such as greedily gape after it, and pettishly cast away the ordinance of hands, if they may not have it. That, or nothing will please their palate. But the Spirit hath another sort of seeds, which may not so suddainly appear, but possibly lie all winter under the clods, and yet the ground very good, and the seed lying so long in it, makes it better; and although it make not such speed in springing, yet it is carefully kept, Luk. 8.15. and brings forth fruit with patience. At the first practise of this Principle, the seed is sown, Isa. 45.19. and in a sutable season it will spring and ap∣pear. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: Jam. 5.7. Behold, the Husbandman waiteth for the pretious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, untill be receive the early and latter rain. We are at a great losse for want of waiting for returns of duties. Having therefore yeelded obedience to this Ordinance, let no man perswade thee (thou longing soul) to cast off the exercises of a patient waiting for a return; but take up thy resolution with the Prophet, Psal. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to folly. If God have but bestowed so much wisdome upon thine obedience, as to wait with faith and patience, for fuller manifestations of himself; then I am sure thou hast not found this ordinance empty. The fifth Principle, If thou be truly spirituall, must be thy dayly practise. It is a duty incumbent upon thee, and beares a date as antient as thy visible profession and reall subjection to Christs com∣mands. Rom. 6.4. For in thy buriall with thy Redeemer in the Bap∣tismall sountain, 2 Cor. 5.17. Heb. 10.20. thou didst begin thy case in the similitude of his resurrection, with an engagement so to run, by the rules of the new creature, in that new and living way, all the dayes of thy life. Thou wast a miserable polluted creature, Ephes. 2.1.
before he met with thee dead in trespasses and fins, but he hath breathed upon thee by his quickning Spirit, and there∣fore in the power of the same Spirit dayly thou must practise the resurrection. Rom. 3.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the death dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortall bodies, by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. Wherefore stop thy ears to any other Spirit, that would dull the edge of thy devotion in the practise of the resurrection. Live at present in the power of it, and make use of all means with the Apostle. Phil. 3.11. If by any means I might attain unto the refur∣rection of the dead. Thy God will be found in the use of his own means. Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above. And Lastly, Let the eternall judgment be thy exercise continually. Thou hast no other way in this world, to avoid the horrour and terrour of it, and this way (whatever men talke, to keep thee in idlenesse) thou mayest escape it. 1 Cor. 11.31. For if we would judge curselves, we should not be judged. Cheer up thy drooping spirit, take courage and resolution, and be as lively as possible, in the practise and exercise of all thy Principles: The more lively, the more like Christ, whose meat and drink was to do the will of his father; and the more like Christ, the more boldnesse thou shalt have in the day of judgement 1 Joh. 4.17.. Wherefore labour diligently to be found in all the will of thy God. Let no man spoil thee of any truth, but espe∣cially of one of thy Foundation principles. What though this milk be never so mean, 'tis the more like a crucified Christ. I confesse Laying on of hands is but a simple service, Rom. 6.17. no more is its companion (Baptisme) but tis one of the first words of thy dear Redeemer, a part of that form of Doctrine which he delivered and hath owned, Act. 8. & 19. and by signs and wonders confirmed, which he would not so fignally have ratified, had it not been a part of his owne service.
Let not mens conceits of the cessation of this holy Ordi∣nance, deprive thy pretious soul of those choice gifts which stream through it, which thy panting spirit (if thou be truly thirsty soul) cannot but find as much need of, as thy fellow saints, sixteen hundred years since. The promise runs as strenuously to this age, and the Saints in it, though we be those afar off, as it did to them that were nigh Act. 2.39.: For he that made promise remains faith∣full; and what ever men dare affirme to the contrary, yet he hath said, that It is easier for heaven and earth to passe, Luk. 16.17. then one tittle of the Law to fail. THE END.
