T475 E169_8 99873288 157023
THE LIAR. OR, A contradiction to those who in the titles of their Bookes affirmed them to be true, when they were false: although mine are all true, yet I terme them lyes. Veritas veritatis. The Liar rackt. depiction of a victim on a punitive positioning device Printed in the yeare 1641.
A Booke of Lyes. THere was an Englishman which travelled to the Swedish army, and began to relate very strange pas∣sages which he had seene here in England, thinking that travellers mightlye by authority; for said he, in the Coun∣ty of Berke, at a place called Abingdon, when the Earle of Strafford lost his head, was such thundring and lightning, and earthquakes, that it is almost incredible. Surely I thinke it is in∣credible indeed, for I know 'tis no such matter. He told too that the very same day that my L. Archbishop of Canterbury was committed to the Tower, there was a child born in the Coun∣ty of Somerset with a Miter on its head, a marke on his breast like a Crucifix, and many other strange things which were there seene. Another time, said he, I saw a Lady goe over Thames at London starke naked, without swim∣ming, for she cannot be drowned, ergo shee is a witch.
Item, he related unto them that the Bishop of Canterbury was little better then a Papist, and that he was committed for that occasion to the Tower, and that he was not like to be freed from thence till he came with his heeles forward. Item, he reported that Q. M. was to leave the fragrant soile of England, and go into Italy. Item, he related that Sucklin, Davenant, and Pearcy were accused as traytors, and fearing to be hanged, fled for it beyond the Seas, because they would not be chid. Item, he told them that Wrens nest was defiled, and that the Jesuits and Friers had almost wept their eyes out for his fall. Item, all the Brownists and Anabaptists, and the like, of what age soever, that shall come to be baptized, may have a twenty shilling piece laid on his forehead, as soone as the Minister shall have figned him with the signe of the Crosse. Item, There is a booke come out of the Kings entertainment in Scotland some certaine dayes before he came there. Item, he swore that he never did tell a lye in all his life. Item, hee vowed most deeply that the Scots were as many in number as the stars in the sky. Item, he told that the Turk and the Jew were as good friends as ever was friend to friend. Item, he most falsly protested that he suffered
as much in Hungary of famine as ever did Ger∣many in all its warres. Item, he vowed that our Bishops did bend like greene sticks, and therefore he thought that they would never break, and that they were all bow∣ers to the Altar, and Papists, for they loved Ima∣ges extraordinarily. Item, he told a most notable lye, that Law∣yers in England did scorne to take any fees for pleading any cause: then said one, How doe they live? he answered, like Camelions, they feed upon the ayre, and cloath themselves with honesty, which is the warmest weed they can weare in these times. Item, he swore that any man might steale any thing now in England, and never be shent for it, for all the Iudges are hanged because they have taken bribes. Item, he protested that Gregory the Hangman is growne very rich, because none are hanged. Item, he vowed he saw St. Pauls steeple stand in its owne place where it was built, and Cha∣ring crosse quite ruinated. Item, hee told that there were a great many Puritans in England, and that they did now so disturbe the quietnesse of the Commonwealth, that it was now almost turned topsie turvy. Item, hee protested that all the women in England were growne precise, and turned Prea∣chers.
Item, hee told them that it was as common a thing for Sow-gelders, Tinkers, Felt-makers, Buttonmakers, Weavers, and Coblers, to preach in a tub, a joyn'd stoole, or such like thing, as for a man to drinke when he is thirsty. They heard him with patience till hee had made an end of his lying, and then they asked him whether yea or nay hee saw these things he spake of, he presently swore all the oathts of God that he saw these things with his owne naturall eies, which he had reported, and he would maintaine it, though he spent his dearest blood in the doeing of it; well they heard his protestations, and made a full account that they would prove his constancie whether he would be a Martyr yea or nay, in the meane time they horsed him, and this was the manner of it. There was a great high thing raised to the hight of twelue of fourteene yards, made of Iron, whereon he was seated, with two great weights on his toes, and the like on his hands where he sate in great paine, if he should chance to case himselfe upwards, there were sharpe nailes over his head which would prick him, thus he sate, and thus he suffered, till they had sufficiently made a laughing stock of him; well when hee had suffered enough they let him downe, and incontinently he came backe againe into this country, where he related as follow∣eth.
The Emperour (saith he) hath given such an overthow to the Sweeds that I thought not one would have returned againe; the Canons roared, the skies were dimmed with smoke, and the earth shooke with an earthquake; another time, the Swedes gave the Emperour such an over∣throw, that I dare say he will never rise againe, which made the Pope proclaime a fast for six and thenty weeks, but a pox choak them they cate fish a little too much. A little after there was a commet seene in the ayre, forth the space of two moneths, with great thundering and lightnings and such like, which made all the whole Country amazed. These and such like things he related till hee made the wearie eares of honest men glow, and if they had served him as he was served before he had had his desert, and hang him that would pittie him for me, but in conceit either in the stocks, cage, counter, or Bridewell I leave him. Gentle reader, I have heerre related under the name of lies nothing but trut tales, for if a man doth now speake truth he shall be sure to smart for it now a daies, either heere or in other places; read gentlie, and buy willingly. FINIS.
