U128 E77_35 99860645 155571
The Popes Brief: OR ROMES Inquiry after the death of their Catholiques here in ENGLAND, during these Times of WARRE: Discovered by two Commissions; The one sent from the Pope that now is: The other from the Bishop and Duke of Cambrey, to severall Commissioners in England: Whereby the Death of such Catholiques may be returned to the See of Rome, to be determined of (As may be fit for the glory of God.) Together with A CATALOGUE Of the Vicars Generall, and Archdeacons under the Bishop of Cal∣cedon, for the setling of the Popish Hierarchy in England. With divers LETTERS concerning the same. Also severall LETTERS and PAPERS Of the Lord Inchiquines in Jreland, Intercepted by the Earl of War∣wick, and sent to the House of Commons; wherein is discovered the ungratefull and perfidious dealing of the said Lord with the Parliament of England. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That the said Commissions, toge∣ther with the Hierarchy, and severall Letters and Papers Intercepted, be forth∣with Printed and published: H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw: Husbands. Decem. 7. 1643.
[Note:] That this Commission, together with a Letter herewith Printed concerning the same, was taken at Great-Yarmouth in the county of Norfolk, amongst divers other Letters and Papers directed to divers Papists in Eng∣land; from one Walter Winsor a Papist, who brought the same from Flanders, as he confes∣seth in his Examination, on the 26. of Septem∣ber, 1643. which said Winsor still remaineth in custody. The Commission. FRancis Vander Burch, Dei & Apostolicae sedis gratia Archiepiscopus & Dux Cameracen, Sac. Rom. Imp. Princeps, Comes Cameracesii, &c. Executor & Comissarius ad infra tam una cum quibusdam aliis nostris in hac parte Collegis per litteras Apostolicas in vim clausulae & quemlibet ipsorum specialiter deputatus om∣nibus & singulis ad quos praesentes nostrae litterae pervenerint, quousque in fratrum tangit negotium seu tangere poterit quomedo libet in futurum, communiter vel divisim quibuscunque nominibus conseantur, aut quacunque praefulgeant dignitate, salutem in Do∣mino sempiternam, & praesentibus fidem indubiam adhibere no∣strisque,
imo verius Apostolicis obedire mandatis. Litteras San∣cti in Christo Patris Domini nostri, Domini Urbani divina pro∣videntia Papae Octavi, nos eum eâ qua decuit reverentiâ recepisse noveritis, hujusmodi sub tenore. Urbanus P. P. Octa∣vus ad futuram rei memoriam Pii. Dilecti filii Procuratoris Generalis Congregationis Angliae Ordinis Sancti Benedicti vo∣tis annuere, idque specialis gratiae favore prosequi volentes & à quibusvis excommunicationts suspensionis & interdicti aliisque Ecclesiasticis sententiis, censuris & panis â Iure, vel ab homine quà∣vis occasione vel causa latis, si quibus quomodolibet imo datus exisiit ad effectum praesentium duntaxat consequendum harum serie absolventes & absolutum fore consentes: Supplicationibus ejusdem Procuratoris Generalis nomine nobis super hoc humiliter porrectis ini de venerabilium fratrum nostrorum S. R. E. Cardinalium in total Repulbica a Christiana contra haereticam pravitatem Inquisitorum generalium ab hac Sancta sede Aposto∣licas spectaliter deputatorum consilio Venerabiles fratres Archi∣episcopum Cameracen', ac Andomar' & Ipren' Episcopos, & quemlibet ipsorum Apostolica auctoritate tenore presentium subro∣gamus in leum Ordinariorum in Angli ad effectum tantum modo auctoritate Ordinaria legitimè instituendi Processus super causa, & genere mortis corum qui pro fide Catholica in Anglia patiuntur, ita ut hujusmodi processus aliaque acta ab illis, seu quilibet ipsorum legitime confecta ad Doctrinas passiones, & mor∣tes verificand fiant auctoritate Ordinaria. nec aliter, nec alio mo∣do, irritum & ine decernentes quidquid secus super his à qui∣quam scienter, vel ignoranter contigerit attentari, Non obstantibus quatenus opus sit foelicis recordationis Bonifacii Papae Octavi pra∣decessoris nostri de una, & Concilii Generalis de duabus dictis, aliique constitutionibus & Ordinationibus Apostolicis caeterisque contrariis quibuscunque. Datum Remae apud Sanctum Petrum sub Annulo Piscatoris die vigesima tertia Februarii, Anni mil∣lesimi sexcentesimi quadragesimi tertii, Pontificatus nostri anno vig simo, signat. M: A: Maraldus. Post quarum quidem litterarum Apostolicarum prae insertarum praesentationem & receptionem nobis & per nos, ut praemittitur, factas, suimus per Reverendos Dominos, Dominum Ceorgium Musket Collegii Anglicani Duaceni Praesidem, fratrem Joan∣nem
Meutisse Conventus Sancti Gregorii Magni Benedictino∣rum Anglorum Prierem, & fratrem Angelum de Sancto Fran∣cisco Provinciae fratrum Minorum in Anglia Commissarium, pro parte totius Cleri secularis Anglicani Congregationisque Anglicanae Ordinis Sancti Benedicti, & dictae Provinciae fra∣trum Minorum debita cum instantia requisiti, quatenus ad ea∣rundem praeinsertarum litterarum Apostolicarum & contentorum in eisdem executionem, juxta traditas seu directas à sede Apo∣stolica praesentia per easdem litteras nobis facultatem, formam & auctoritatem procedere Litterasque nostras desuper opportunas concedere vellemus & dignaremur. Nos igitur Franciscus Van∣der Burch, Archiepiscopus & Dux Cameracen', S. R. Imp. Princeps, Comes Cameracesi, &c. Executor & Commissarius subrogatus auctoritate Apostolica Praesentia in locum Ordinariorum in Anglia, attendentes requisitionem hujusmodi esse justam & nationi consonam, Volentesque Mandatum Apostolicum supradi∣ctum nobis in hac parte directum & commissum reerenter exequi, prout tenemur: idcirco auctoritate Apostolica nobis commissa, & quà fungimur in hac parte, tenore praesentium committimus & deputamus pro iis qui Londini, vel juxta Trentam fluvium ver∣sus Londinum in Anglia degunt, Reverendos Dominos D. Geor∣gium Gage Prothonotarium Apostolicum, P: Thomas Dade Or∣dinis Sancti Dominici in Doctrina Angliae Provincialem, Pa∣trem Benedictum Coxium Congregationis Anglicanae Ordinis Sancti Benedicti Presbyterum, P: Franciscum Bell Provinciae fratrum Minorum in eadem Anglia Definitorem; Pro iis qui Eboraci, vel ultra Trentam fluvium respectu civitatis Londinen∣sis in supradicta. Anglia degunt Reverendissimum Dominum Philippum serenissimae Reginae Angliae Confessarium, ac Reveren∣dos Dominos D. Georgium Catherick, P: Robertum Hado∣kium, alias Bensonium, Provinciae Eboracen', Ordinis Sancti Benedicti Exprovinciàlem, ac P. Gulielmum Andertonum Or∣dinis Sancti Francisci, Religiosum, lomnes simul: & conjunctim ac quemlibet corum divisim ac separatim in solidum ad effe∣ctum legitimè instituendi Processus super causa, & genere mor∣tis eorum, qui in suts respective districtibus, hac ultima saevi∣ente contra Catholicos ibidem persecutione pro fide Catholicâ oc∣cubuerunt, dicta auctgritate Apostolica mandantes iis ut personaliter
accedant loca, quae prepter hoc fuerint, & erunt accedenda, & evocatis coram se personis probis ac fide dignis, quae passionis ac mortis hujusmodi Catholicorum notitiam habuerint, de ve∣ritate passionis ac mortis corundem formàque causis scicentiae, & circumstantiis ad rem facientibus, aliis{que} ad rei certitudinem requisitis seu alias opportunis praeviis solemni juramento diligen∣ter interrogent, audiant, & examinent, earumque persona∣rum nomina, cognomina, dicta & depositiones pertinenter in scriptis redigant, & sic redacta & fideliter clausa ad nos di∣rigant, ut ea postmodum ad sedem Apostolicam transmitta∣mus, quatenus de iis quod justum fuerit ad Dei gloriam statuat & decernat. Caeterum intendimus & declaramus quod si aliquis, vel aliqui dictorum, per nos Deputatorum, per seip∣sum vel seipsos, hoc munus personalìter praestare non potuerit, vel non potuerint, ille vel illi quem vel quos aliquis vel aliqui dictorum Deputatorum ad dictum effectum subrogare voluerit, vel voluerint, simili omnino potestate & Iurisdictione quam principales & primo Deputati gaudeat vel gaudeant quartus aliquis dictorum Deputatorum vel ab iis subrogatorum, alix legitimè impeditis in dicto Processu instituendo cum effectu pergat & procedat, & auctoritate nostra ordinaria per sedem Apostolicam nobis attributa ex nunc prout tunc ipsis hujus∣modi tribuimus facultatem. In quorum omnium fidem ac ro∣bur praesentes per Secretarium nostrum expeditas nostris signa∣tura sigilloque communimus. Datum Cameraci in Palatio nostro Archiepiscopali, Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo quadragesimo tertio mensis Junii die decima. Franciscus Vander Burch, Archiepiscopus Cameracen. De Mandato Illustrissimi & Reveren∣dissiimi Domini D. Archiepiscopi & Ducis Cameracen. Patr. Foulon, Secret.
5. October. 1643. FRancis Vander Burch, By the Grace of God, and of the Apostolicall Sea, Archbishop and Duke of Cambrey, Prince of the Sacred Romane Empire, Earl of Cambresis, &c. Agent and Commissary for the things hereafter mentioned. Joyntly, and severally, with some others in that behalf, by Apostolicall Let∣ters especially deputed. To all and singular persons, to whom our present Letters shall come, and whom the matter herein after mentioned, doth or may con∣cerne, joyntly and severally, by what names soever they shall be called, or of what dignity and honour they shall be of, health everlasting in the Lord, to give undoubted credit to these Presents, and to obey our, or more truly the Apostolicall commands. Know ye, we did receive with that reverence which was meet, the Letters of the most Holy Father in Christ, our Lord, the Lord Vrbane, by the Divine Provi∣dence, the Eight Pope of that name, under this Tenure, Pope Vrbane the VIII. for future remembrance of the matter: Being willing to Condescend unto the pious desires of our beloved Son, the Generall Procuratour of the Congregation of England, of the order of Saint Bennet, and to favour him with a speciall Grace (and by the Order of these Presents absolving him, and holding him to be absolved, from whatsoever censure of Excommunication, Suspension and Interdict, and all other Ecclesiasticall Censures, and Paines inflicted by Law, or by man: For whatsoever oc∣casion or cause, if in any way, he do lye under any of them, onely for he effecting of these Presents)
Inclining unto the Petition humbly presented unto us in that behalfe, in the name of the same Generall Pro∣curator, with the Councell of our venerable Brethren, the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church, Inquisitours Generals, especially deputed by this holy Apostolicall Sea in all the Christan Common-wealth against Here∣ticall wickednesse, by the tenour of these presents, and Apostolical authority we substitute our venerable Bre∣thren the Archbishop of Cambreys the Bishops of Saint Omer and Iper, and every one of them into the place of ordinary in England only to that effect, that they may by ordinary authority according to Law make out Pro∣cesse, To enquire after the cause and kinde of death of them that suffer in England for the Catholique Faith: So that such Processe and other Acts lawfully done by them, or any of them, for the clearing of the Truth of such sufferings and deaths, be done by ordinary authori∣ty, nor otherwise, nor in any other manner; Comman∣ding that whatsoever in that behalfe shall happen here∣in to be attempted otherwise by any man, either wit∣tingly or ignorantly, it shall be void and of none effect; Notwithstanding any use that may be made of the Con∣stitution of Pope Boniface the eight, our Predecessor, of most happy memory, commonly called de una, or that of the Generall Conncell, commonly called de Duabus, or any other constitutions or Apostolicall Ordinances made to the contrary whatsoever. Given at Rome at Saint Peters under the King of the Fisher, the three and twentieth day of February 1643. in the twentieth year of Our Popedome, signed M. A. Maraldus. After the presentation and reception of the which Apostolicall Letters above written, to Us and by Us
(as is abovesaid made) we have been earnestly and duly required by the Reverend Master, Master George Mu∣sher, President of the English Colledge of Dowey, Fryer Iohn Mentisse, Prior of the Covent of Saint Gre∣gory the great, of the English Benedictins, and Frier An∣gell of Saint Francis, Commissary of the Province of the Friers Minorites in England, on the behalfe of all the Secular Clergie of England, of the English con∣gregation of the Order of Saint Bennet, and of the said Province of the Friers Minorites, that we would be wil∣ling & vouchsafe to go on in the execution of the same above mentioned Apostolicall Letters, and of the con∣tents of the same, according to the power, manner, and authority, given or sent to us from the said Apostolical Sea by the same Letters, and to grant to that end as ne∣cessary Letters. We therefore Francis Vanderburgh Archbishop and Duke of Cambrey, Prince of the sacred Roman Empire, Earle of Cambresis, &c. Agent and commissary substituted by the above-said Apostolical Authority into the place of the Ordinaries in England, taking into consideration that such a request is just and reasonable, and willing (with reverence as we ought to do) to put in execution the abovesaid Apostolical com∣mand directed & committed to us in that behalf. Ther∣fore by the Apostolicall authority committed to us, & by the authority which we exercise in that behalfe; by the Tenure of these presents, we ordaine and depute for them that live at London or on this side Trent in England, the Reverend Mrs. M. George Gage, Aposto∣licall Prothonotary, Father Thomas Dade, Provinciall of the order of Saint Dominick, in England aforesaid; Father Bennet Cox, Priest of the English Congregation of the Order of S. Bennet, Father Francis Bell, Limitor
Collector of the Province of the Friers Minorites in England aforesaid; and for those that live at York, or beyond the River of Trent in England aforesaid, the Re∣verend Mr. Phillips Confessor to the most gracious Queene of England, and the Reverend Masters, Master George Cathericke, Father Robert Hadock, alias, Benson, late Provinciall of the Province of Yorke, of the order of S. Bennet, and Father William Anderton of the order of S. Francis; all & every one of them joyntly, severally, and wholly to this purpose; that they according to law make presse to inquire of the cause and kinde of death of them, who in their respective Limits, during this last fierce persecution there against the Catholickes, have dyed for the Catholick Faith: Commanding them by the said Apostolicall Authority, that they do personally repaire to such places, as for this purpose are or shall be to be repaired unto: and that they call before them, such persons of honesty and credit, as have knowledge of the sufferings and deaths of such Catholicks; and that they diligently inquire, heare and examine, upon solemne oath, the truth and manner of their sufferings and deaths, and the cause of such their knowledge and such circumstances pertaining to the same and other things requisite for the discovery of the truth of the matter: and that they conveniently put in writing, the names sirnames, sayings, and depo∣sitions of the said persons, and direct them to us, being so disposed, & faithfully closed up; That we may after∣wards transmit them to the Apostolicall See; to the end that the said See may ordaine and determine of them, that which shall bee fit to the glory of God. Moreover, we intend and declare, That if any one, or some of them deputed by us by himselfe, or by themselves, cannot
personally performe that office, he or they, whom, one or some of the said deputed persons shall or will substi∣tute to that effect; he or they so substituted, shall enjoy the very like power & jurisdiction, as they which were principally and first deputed doe enjoy: To that end, that any one of the said deputies or their substitutes, the rest having lawfull excuse of absence, may proceed and go on with effect in the execution of these presents, and by our ordinary authority given unto us by the A∣postolicall See from this time forth wee grant unto them such power; for testimony and credit whereof we have authorized with our hand and seale these presents: Dispatched by our Secretary. Given at Cambrey in our Archiepiscopall Palace in the yeare of our Lord 1643. Tenth of June FRANCIS VANDER BURGH, Archbishop of Cambrey, By the command of the most Illustrious and Reve∣rend Lord, the Lord Archbishop and Duke of Cam∣brey aforesaid. Foulin Secretary.
This Figure of a Crosse ✚ was on the top of the Letter. Very much respected Sir, SEEing that I was to write unto you obout the busi∣nesse contained in the inclosed Commission; I was also commanded by my Master (who is altogether unknown unto you) to let you understand, that the Bea∣rer (who is the Foreman of his shop) is sent to the party with Letters from Mr. Iozelin (the which he is to im∣part unto you) and with Letters from himselfe, to the Parents of some young men, who are Prentises here; ex∣pecting to heare their resolutions before they can be∣come Free men. I hope that you will find him to be a fit man for both imployments (if you would be pleased to assist him with the best advice whiles he is a stranger amongst you) peradventure you will startle at the sight of the inclosed Commission, considering how the times go now in those parts, and to how little purpose it is to medle in affairs of that nature. But if you please to know the true reasons and motives why I sent it now, I doubt not but that you will rest satisfied. The first is because I had now an extraordinary good opportunity to send it safely by a known friend, who would have a special care to see it conveighed unto you, with those small directi∣ons it hath; which none could make any use of, (in case it should fall into their hands) but only the Bearer: and if I should not have sent it now by him, the directions must have beene such as might have brought you into some question, if my Letters had been intercepted. The second and principall reason is, because the Pope
is old and sickly, and so is the Archbishop of Cambrey, and if either of them dye before the mattet be begun by one or other, the grace would be of no force: and if any of the three named in it do but call any one Catholike man and take such information as hee can give of the martyrdome of Father Ambrose, and record them be∣fore witnesse, the grace will be of such force that wee may make use of it, any time these thirty or forty years following, when the said parties are dead. Therefore I beseech you excuse me for having sent it unto you: and for Gods sake commend it presently to some of the par∣ties named in it, or to be named by them, to see the mat∣ter begun, as I have said, and then to be kept in great se∣crecy till we see better times. Thus in haste I bid you fare-well. August 17. 1643. Your true Friend, B. B. This Letter was intercepted with the former Com∣mission, with divers other Letters to Papists in England.
A CATALOGVE OF The Vicars Generall and Arch-Deacons in ENGLAND, under the Bishop of CALCEDON. Vicars Generall constituted, by the most Reverend RICHARD Lord Bishop of CALCE∣DON, By the Letters dated the first of JUNE, 1625. MAster John Colleton Episcopall Vicar in the eleven Provinces under-written,Two moneths after nis Ma∣jesty came to the Crowne. Essex, Suf∣folk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and the Isle of Elv, Bedford, Buckingham, Middlesex, and Hartford, The City of London, and the Suburbs, and the City of Westminster. To Master John Colleton, being disabled through old age, is added, as a Coadjutor, Master Gregory Fisher, alias Muscot, Arch-Deacon of Surrey and Middlesex, by the letters bearing date the tenth of February, 1626. by the most Reverend Richard Lord Bishop of Cal∣cedon. 2. Edward Bennet Episcopall Vicar in the sixteen Provinces under written, viz. Walesboth South and North parts, the Isle of Anglesey, Hereford, Shrop∣shire, and Chester.
3. Master John Bostile. Doctor of Divinity, Epis∣copall Vicar in the five Provinces under-written, Ox∣ford, Warwick, Northampton, Stafford, & Worcester. 4. Master Broughton, Episcopall Vicar in the seven Provinces under-written, Huntington, Rutland, Lin∣coln, Leicester, Nottingham, Darby, and York. 5. Master Iohn Iackson, Episcopall Vicar in the six Provinces under-written. Dorcester, Wiltshire, Glou∣cester Somerset-shire, Devonshire and Cornwall. 6. Mr. Cuthbert Trollop, Epicopall Vicar in the five Provinces under-written. Lancaster, Northumber∣land, Cumberland, Westmerland, and the Bishopricke of Durham. 7. Master Beiamin Norton Episcopall Vcar in the five Provinces under-written. Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Hampshire and Barkshire. Arch-Deacons and their Provinces. 1. Master Iohn Colleton Arch Deacon in the County of Kent. 2. Master Arthur Pits Arch-Deacon of the Cities of London, Westminster, and the Suburbs. 3. Master Iohn Bostile, Doctor of Divinity, Arch-Deacon in the Counties of Warwick and Leicester. 4. Mr. Edward Bennet Arch-Deacon in the Counties of Buckingham and Bedford. 5. Mr. Thomas wright Doctor of Divinity, Arch-Deacon in the Counties of Norfolk, Cambridge, and the Isle of Ely.
To Doctor Thomas Wright, now resident in the parts beyond Sea, is constituted as a coadjutor, Master Elisha Brabant, by the Letter of the most Reverend Lord, Ri∣chard Bishop of Calcedon, dared the 11. of Febr. 1626. 6. Master Richard Broughton Arch-Deacon in the counties of Huntington, Rutland, Lincolne. 7. Master Iohn Iackson Arch-Deacon in the coun∣ties of Wiltshire and Hampshire. 8. Master Cuthbert Trollop Arch-Deacon in the coun∣ties of Northumberland and Bishoprick of Durham. 9. Master Roger Strickland Arch-Deacon in the county of York. 10. Master Iohn Mitchell Arch-Deacon in the coun∣ty of Lancaster. To Master Iohn Mitchel, weak through old age, is con∣stituted as a coadjutor, Master Iohn Redman, by the Let∣ters of the most Reverend Richard Lord Bishop of Cal∣cedon, dated the tenth of February, 16.26. 11. Ioseph Heynes Arch-Deacon in the county of Essex, and Suffolk. To which Heynes. Master Iohn Southcot Doctor of Divinity is coadjutor. 12. Richard Button Arch-Deacon in the counties of Stafford and Chester. 13. Humphrey Hanmer Arch-Deacon in the counties of South-Wales and Hereford. To whom succeeded Mr. Guin.
14. Matthew Britton Doctor of Divinitie Archdeacon in the Counties of Westmerland and Cumberland. 15. Master George Fisher Archdeacon in the Counties of Midlesex and Surrey. 16. Master Humphrey Hughes Archdeacon in the County of North-Wales. 17. Master Thomas Moore Archdeacon in the Coun∣ties of Hartford and Northampton. 18. Master Thomas Morton Archdeacon in the Coun∣ties of Devonshire, Cornwall, and Gloucester. 19. Master William Shilley Archdeacon in the Coun∣ty of Sussex. To him succeeded M. Lane. 20. Master Anthony Teuchnor Archdeacon in the Counties of (Oxford and Barkeshire). 21. Master John Merricke Archdeacon in the Coun∣ties of (Shropshire and Worcester). To him succeeded M. Hyde. 22. Master Thomas Manger Archdeacon in the Coun∣ties of (Sommerset and Dorset-shire). 23. Master Thomas Worthington Archdeacon in the Counties of (Notingham and Darbie).
The new division of the Provinces, of the Vicaries and of the Archdeacons, with the number of the Arch∣deaconries, contained in every one of the Vicarships. 1. The first Vicarship containes seaven Counties or Provinces, viz. Cornwall, Devonshire, Somersetshire, Wilt∣shire, Gloucestershire, Hampshire, and it hath under it, three Archdeaconries. 1. Cornwall Devonshire 2. Somersetshire Dorsetshire 3. Wiltshire Gloucestershire Hampshire 2. The second Vicariate containes seven Counties, Viz. Midlesex with the City of London and City of VVestminster, Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Barkeshire, Essex, and Hartfordshire, and it hath foure Archdeaconries, 1. London Middlesex 2. Surrey Barkeshire 3. Kent Sussex 4. Essex and Hartford 3. The third Vicariate containes five Counties, viz. Bedfordshire, Huntingtonshire, Cambridgeshire with the Isle of Ely and with the part of the Province of Lincolnshire which is called Holland and Norfolke and out of that part which is called Marshland and Suffolke; And it hath three Archdeaconries. 1. Bedford Huntington 2. Suffolke Norfolke 3. Cābridge with the Isle of Ely, Holland, & Marshland. 4. The fourth Vicariate containes eight Counties,
viz. Oxford, Buckingham, Northampton, Leicester, Stafford, Warwicke, worcester and Chester, and hath foure Arch-deaconries. 1. Oxford Buckingham 2. Northampton Leicester. 3. VVorcester. Warwicke. 4. Stafford Chester. 5. The fifth Vicariate containes fiveteen Counties, viz. North-Wales, South-VVales with the Isle of Angle∣sey, Hartford, and Shropshire, and it hath three Archdea∣conries. 1. North-Wales with the Isle of Anglesey, Mountgome∣rie, Merioneth, Denbigh, Flint, Carnarvan. 2. Monmouth, Clamorgan, Radnar, Cardigan, Carmar. then, and Pembrooke. 3. Hereford and Shropshire. 6. The sixth Vicariate containes five Counties, viz. 1. Yorkeshire. 2. Darbishire Nottingham 3. Lincolne Rutland 7. The seaventh Vicariate containes five Counties Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland, Northumberland, and the Bishopricke of Durham, and it hath three Arch. deaconries. 1. Lancashire. 2. Westmerland Cumberland 3. Northumberland & the Bishoprick of Durham According to the present division there are seaven Vi∣carships and three and twenty Archdeaconries, viz. Two more then there were heretofore ordained. That if it
doth not seeme good to multiply the number of the Archdeacons, the present division may be so ordained that Cheshire and Staffordshire shall be taken from the fourth Vicarship, and the Archdeanerie of Worcester, and Warwickeshire, shall be added thereunto, and Cheshire shall be ioyned to the Archdeanerie of North-Wales or Lan∣cashire, and so shall belong to the fifth or seaventh Vi∣carship. A Committee of Parliament sitting at Rochester, inter∣cepted the foresaid Catalogue and divers other letters and papers herewith printed, as they were carrying to the Bishop of Chalcedon, for the nominating such per∣sons to fill up vacant places in England as his Lordship shall thinke fit.
SIR, I Send you all the inclosed open, that ere you deliver them to my Lord, you may if you please take Copies of them, or at least be able to suggest unto his Lordship the ordering of his Secretary to copy out, and keepe safe such Records as we are in danger here to lose, and cannot misse without great prejudice to our Clergy. You have herein what light and assistance we can give you to∣wards filling up the Chapter, in case you persist in that resolution in these confused times, which perhaps considering my Lords age were not amisse to dispatch, if not before, at least as soone after the election of a Coadjutor as may be, lest his Lordship die before it be done, for we were better have it done lesse compleatly before his Lordships death then not at all, and this cogitation hath ac∣curred since I writ the former Papers, wherein was some doubt made about the point, especially in the long Letter I had written to you before this setting downe the present state of your Chapter, and certifying who are living thereof, who Dead, wherein are some things necessary perhaps to shew my Lord what ere the whole Letter it selfe be, which I referre unto your discretion, be∣cause I had no notice from his Lordship of filling up all the vacant Places in the Chapter, only of adding some more Canons there∣unto. As I had written thus farre, I received yours of this weeke, and by good fortune Master Herbert was actually with Master Webster at the same time; so after he had read your Letter to him, and heard how earnestly Mr. Webster moved not to resist his Brethrens Election, in case your selfe may not comply with the place, hee at last consented to submit to what his Brethren should finally con∣clude upon, desiring first, that they advise againe about your selfe, if there be any probabilitie with you to comply with the Place, if not, you see by his consent our businesse is at an end, for he hath (in case you faile) all the Votes there, and here of those that are to Vote herein; as also he hath Master Bensons of Doway, and doubt∣lesse will have most, if not all, of our Brethren in the Countries, who are not yet consulted about this affaire, but shall be speedily. The said News of Mr. Montague being taken at Rochester,Mr. Montague and
preparation for him in the Tower doth much afflict his friend and will be as unwelcome to you, as to any man living. This night the Count de Harecourt is expected in Towne; I beseech you excuse me at this time to Master Clifton, you see I have been over∣charged with the inclosed, and pray tell my Lord I had not time to write faire those Lights I send him for  the Chapter be∣sides they are not so perfect as were requisite if we had more time, but if his Lordship will give longer time, he shall have it more ex∣act. The ninth Canon now I perceive was Master Herbert; excuse, if what I writ before in that be obscure or lesse exact, for I have no time to rectifie it, you may easily mend all Errours therein by what is written otherwise about this businesse of the Chapter. SIR, ACcording to your desire, and my promise, I now send you the state of our present Chapter, together with such Patents as will be necessary for the filling up thereof, with a parti∣cular of how many thereof are dead, and with such a note (as up on so short a warning could be gotten) of names to fill it up a∣gaine, as have been by those of the Chapter in London reflected on, for such was your desire. The Copies of the Patents are such as Master Lovell left me, and I snall desire that you will cause them to be kept there in safetie, lest those I have here should in these troublesome times miscarry. I could wish you had also there other Copies of things most ne∣cessary, which I find here handsomely recorded in Bookes by Ma∣ster Lovell, God rest his soule; but truly I am so ill, I cannot my selfe transcribe them, and to trust them out of my hands in the times to Scribes, I dare not, and spare the Booke I cannot, so I must hope God will protect them and us his servants, whom they concerne. You will perceive by the Copie of the Catalogues of Vicars and Archdeacons which Master Lovell left, as I now send them to you transcribed, that there have bin two divisions of the Counties, in the first there appeare 55. in the last but 53, Counties of
distributed unto the care of 7. Vicars Generall, and of 23. Arch∣deacons out of which number of Archdeacons you must deduct but 7. forasmuch as the 7. Vicars Generall not being (as Vicars) of the Chapter were made each of them Archdeacons purposely to render them Chapter men also, so that how are the number of Archdeacons be 23. yet deducting 7. out of that number, as ap∣propriate to the 7. Vicars you will find remaining only 16. Arch∣deacons, I meane such as are purely Archdeacons, and not Vicars to boote; And yet by the Note of Master Lovells at the end of the new Division, me thinkes there was an intention to have only 22. Archdeacons in all, or to speake perhaps more properly to the Bi∣shops intention, but 22. Chapter-men. Yet I find that either you must increase the former districts of some Archdeacons, of else you will not exhaust the Counties in the distribution thereof, for you shall not find the Counties of Nottingham nor Darby appropria∣ted to any Archdeacon, unlesse you resolve the number of 23. shall stand good. An perhaps that number was reduced to 22. only in the last Division upon reflection that the seventh Vicar viz. Ma∣ster Norton was not made Archdeacon, that I can find upon any Record, and I send you all I have of this nature, so that my Lord and you of the Chapter there, must please to resolve whether there shall be any Vicar Generall without the Title of Archdeacon, and so let the first number of 23. Archdeacons stand good, or whether all the seven Vicars shall be Archdeacons, and then the last Divisi∣on of Archdeacons into 22. to remaine. It seemes here most con∣sonant to reason, to make each Vicar Generall an Archdeacon, but what you there resolve will be here allowed of, but you shall doe well to appropriate such Counties to each Vicar and Archdeacon, as may be most convenient for them to repaire unto, which will be ahard matter to determine in these unsetled times. And hence you will perceive that by the Addition of Canons to the Chapter, which you know were added but lately, that with∣out filling up the places of the old Chapter-men deceased, you will have as great a number almost of Chapter men now living to choose a Coadjutor to the Deane (which is the present affaire in agitation) as would have been if all the dead persons vacant pla∣ces were filled up before the Election of this Coadjutor, so that if
the desire of filling the Chapter proceed out of a feare that there will want a competent number of Chapter-men to make this Ele∣ction, considering the late Addition of Canons to the Chapter with power of voting in all affaires of the Clergy, there will be no want of almost as full a number as ever were of the Chapter since it was first erected. For you see there never were above two or three and twenty at most of the Chapter, and albeit most of them that were Vicars and Archdeacons be dead; neverthelesse those that are living to∣gether with the Canons lately added thereunto, amount to the number of twentie, as I wrote you word last weeke; onely I for∣got then to tell you, that one of the six whom I reckoned upon to be in Paris, viz. Master Laborne, is neither of the Chapter in ver∣tue of Vicar, Archdeacon, or Canon, that I can find upon any Record, but this I impute to an Accident of his being out of the way at Tame when the Canons were made, and so I reckon upon him as if he were a Chapter-man, the rather because he was, and is still one of his Lordships Consult, which may perhaps ipso facto, give him that quality,The whole Chapter in the nature of a Counsell to Doctor Rich. Smith titular Bishop of Chalcedon and Ordinarie of England and Scotland by Commission from the Pope. in regard the whole Chapter hath the na∣ture of his Lordships Counsell. But now to come unto the particulars, who are dead of the Chapter, and who now living thereof, that so you may see cleerely in the particulars what I tell you of our Chapter in generall, you may please to understand, that of the Vicars Generall who were at most in number but seven, there are five dead, viz. Master Colleton, Mr. Bennet, Mr. Boswill, Mr. Broughton, Mr. Norton, so that you must thinke of Constituting five Vicars, for however Master Muscot was made coadjutor to Master Colleton, yet he is now in a charge by the Popes command incompatible with that office of Vicar Generall in Master Broughtons place, whose resi∣dence he possesseth, yet I doe not conceive that hee was ever made Vicar Generall by Patent. Now for the Vicars actually living, you will easily see they are but two, viz. Master Iackson, and Master Trollop, who had need of a Coadjutor, being himself grown unable to travell as you all know, As for the Archdeacons, there are dead five in the five Vicars, and of such as were purely Archdeacons and no more, there are
dead besides Master Muscot (whose place is vacant though he bee living) ten, viz. Master Pits, Doctor Wright and his successor Brabant, Master Strickland, Master Heines and his successor Doctor Lovell, Master Hanmer and his successor Mr. Guin, as also the in∣tended successor to him, Master Robert Hughes lately, Doctor Brit∣ton, Master More, Master Martine, Mr. Tushenor and his succes∣sor Mr. Aston, and Mr. Worthington. I doe not accompt Mr. Shellyes, nor Mr. Merricks places va∣cant, by reason Mr. Lane and Mr. Hide (surviving both) doe sup∣ply them, but whether by Patents created Archdeacons or not I cannot say, or whether by Deputation only they execute the same, which in effect I account is all one. So that here are undoubtedly to be de novo, created ten Arch∣deacons to fill up the places vacant by death, and more to supply Mr. Muscots place yet living as abovesaid. Now for the living Archdeacons they are in number two, in the two Vicars above, and foure that are purely Archdeacons by Pa∣tents undoubted, viz. Master Redman, Master Button, Mr. Hughes, and Master Manger, whereunto if you adde the suppliants (at least) living, Master Hide and Master Lane, then are there six Archdea∣cons living. As for Canons there were Created (as I remember) nine at the first, and they are all living still, viz. Master Blaclo, Master Har∣rington, Master Holden, Mr. Fitton, Master Clifford, Master Morgan, Master Curtes, Master Gage, and Mr. Herbert; for I have now no convenience to come at such Records as doe shew this, perhaps your memory will tell you this better then mine, or else then Ma∣ster Hide was made Canon, and not Master of which you shall know the certaintie ere long; but however thus you see what with two Vicars living, six Archdeacons, and nine Canons, and the Deane, there are eighteen persons of the Chapter now li∣ving; or take the Deane and at least five Archdeacons, and nine pure Canons, supposing Master Hide to be no Archdeacon, they will in all amount to the number of seventeen persons, whereunto adding the three Suppliants for Archdeacons, who have as vet ne∣ver had Patents viz, Master Barlo in Warwickshire, and Master Stevens in Hertford, and Master Thomas Greene in Suffolke, by the
old Division Norff. by new; you see we may accompt upon just nineteene or twenty Chapter-men now actually living, whereas at first Erection of the Chapter there were never more (as you see) then twenty two or twenty three at most: And thus you have the exact account of the Chapter as now it stands, wherewith if you rest not satisfied, but desire either to make more Canons (as my Lord seemes to doe) or to fill up the number of those that ale dead, Wee can suggest unto you for the present only these that follow for that purpose, because we cannot have an exact accompt from all the Shires what men are now residing therein, much lesse can we make any probable conjecture how to six any one man in any one County of England, as times now stand, to officiate therein, and so we should not at this time have thought of filling up the vacant places yet because you there have that cogitation, and desire to know whom we here in towne thinke fitting for that purpose, wee have reflected on these under-written. For Vicars Generall. Master Blaclo Mr. Holden, Mr. Harrington, Mr. Fitton, Mr. Her∣bert, Mr. Hide, Mr. Drury Mr. Clifford, Mr. Laborne, Mr. Barquer. For Archdeacons. Master Iohn Berrington, Mr. Stevens, Mr. Barlo, Mr. Edward Hughes. Mr Green, Mr. Coffin, Mr. Sands, Mr. Laurence, Mr. Bru∣arton, Doctor Bloudston, Mr. Faulconer, Mr. Ireland, Mr. Iennings, Mr. Curtes, Mr. Cattericke, Mr. Clampit, Mr. Woodward, Master Cheake. For Canons. Master Carleton, Mr. Everard, Mr. More, Mr. Knightley, Master Warham Mr. Polewheele, Mr. Carre, Mr. Todhill, Mr. Bradshawe, Lassels, Mr. Warnford, Mr. Hall, Mr. Worthington, Mr. Marten, Mr. Lutlo, Mr. Turbervile, Mr. Ellice, Mr. Weekes, Mr. Harrison, Mr. Page, Mr. Skinner, Mr. Sale, Mr. Totty, Mr. Tustall. Above all things you must recommend secrecie if you resolve upon Master Herbert, that his Lady come not to the notice of his being chosen into any Office that will require resort to him, or his going abroad.
Master Carre however not in England, is a man so considerable, that above all others not already of the Chapter, it were fit he were made one thereof, and however I put him amongst Canons only, yet if his continuall absence admit of higher place, surely his mer∣rits will claime it. CONSIDERATIONS. COnsiderations about filling up the Chapter. The maine to appoint such Of∣ficers in such Divisions, as pro∣bably shall reside therein, or at least conveniently may once a yeare repaire thereto to comply with their Officers. Then persisting in the last Di∣vision, which you will find ta∣ken out of Master Records. The first Vicar is Master Ham∣mon in Cornwall. Note that he is also Archdea∣con of the Shires, Hunt. and Wiltshire; now to keep the forme of this last Division, you must either adde Gloucester shire to his Archdeaconate, or else incurre a greater confusion in altering the whole frame of this Divi∣sion. And here I may not omit to let you know, that master Ham. hath often desired to resigne up his Archdeaconate in the two Shires above said, for what cause I know not; but admit hee may be intreated to keepe them, and to accept of Glocester shire there∣unto; Yet you must cast for two Archdeacons more, viz. of So∣merset, Dorset. Cornwall and Devon. For however master Manger is living Archdeacon of Somerset and Dorset shire yet now a bedrid man in Wales, hee had need of a Coadjutor at least. The men living in, or at least acquainted, & frequenting those parts are, Master Victor, Mr. Martine, Mr. Woodward, the two Brothers Warhams, Mr. White Mr. Hames, Mr. Browne, Mr. Newman. The said Vicar according to this last Division, of London, Etcae't; will be the man of most consideration in this affaire, as being (being neere to the Dean) hee through whose hands the greatest part of the Clergies af∣faires will run, both for recei∣ving the Priests new commers,
and dealing With Persons of greatost ranke about the Towne. This was Mr. Lahetans charge, and since Mr. Muscots, and is now (by his absence, and being in a charge incompatible there∣with) vacant. If you thinke of fixing in this place any of the Chapter-men now about the Towne, you will finde few to afford you choyce, for Mr. Herbert is already sup∣pliant to the sixth Vicariate, and happily may bee changed into the fifth, as being the onely Brit∣ton that we can thinke of except Master Humphrey Hughes, to be Vicar Generall of Wales Etcae't, Mr. Hamman you see is already fixed, Mr. Webster is Deane, here onely remaine of Chapter-men Mr. Curtes, and Mr. Hoard now about the Towne. so that you must in this point goe I believe by ghesse who is likely of all those learned and grave Chap∣termen now at Paris or Doway to fixe in Towne when times come favourable, and those men you know are Master Blacklo, Mr. Harrington, Mr. Barquer Mr. Holden, Mr. Filton, Mr. Hide, Mr. Clifford, Mr. Laborne, Master Drury. Now admit you fixe upon one of these abroad, for the Vicar Generall about London; You are then to finde him three Archdeacons more, for by this last division there are foure Archdeacons belonging to this Vicurate, so that making the Vi∣car one of these foure Archdea∣cons, as is supposed you will, there remaine three Archdeacons to be chosen under him. With whom they shall be most serviceable for the cómon good, as being most upon the eye of the world, and stay of our com∣mon affaires, you must resolve. The Priests about the towne are now so few, that they scarce make a number, especially those that are Chapter-men, and not already deputed otherwaies, viz. Master Curles Mr. Howard. The Priests abroad you know. The Priests (not Chaptermen) in towne to bee thought on for this charge are sew or none, one∣ly Mr. Worthington, though hee was one moved to bee made of the Chapter, and it was refused, because hee was as servant to Doway being Procurator, and so not to governe. Note, that of the three Arch∣deacons, Master Lane must bee one, for he hath a long time sup∣plyed Mr. Thelis place as Arch∣deacon of Sussex, and so to keep Order of this second Division, must have added unto his di∣strict
Kent also; so his Patent must run Archdeacon of Sussex and Kent. The third Vicar of Bedford, Huntington Elect, is in vertue al∣ready, and in repute, M. Herbert, and consequently Archdeacon of two Counties therunto belōging. So then you must provide for him two Archdeacons more out of these Priests following (you will take such as live in those parts) they are Master Thomas Greene, Mr. Weekes, Mr. Everard, Mr. Carleton, Mr. Henry Black∣lo. In Norfolke and Suffolke. In Cambridge elect, Elie, Hoh, Marchland, or thereabouts, none at all. The fourth Vicar of Oxford Buckingham. Elect, which was Doctor Bosvile, and now must be supplyed by whom you think good, either of those named in an other paper for Vicars, or of some of these following Priests living in that Division and hath under him foure Archdeacons, but himselfe being to be one of the foure, you must cast for three more, and if you take the Priests living in those Counties they are these that follow. Master, Button Archdeacon al∣ready of Stafford and Cheshire, but so old, that he had need of a Coadjutor, with power to suc∣ceed him. Master Barlo, Mr. Bruerton, Mr. Venables, Mr. Lawrence, Ma∣ster Suttlo, Mr. Turbervill, Ma∣ster Iennings, designed one for a Reader, a very able man, but young; Master Humphrey Hattlo, Mr. William Ellis. These are in Worcester Warwick Stafford, Cheshire: in Northton & Leicester shire are Mr. Faulconer, Mr. Cheeke, Mr. Edward Hughes. Oxford and Bucks are the Counties perhaps most fit for these Vicars district as hee is Archdeacon. The fist Vicar, who is he of Wells Elect, hath under him three one∣ly Archdeacons, whereof him∣selfe standing for one, you are to thinke onely of two Archdeacons more for that Division. For the Vicar himselfe there occurres none fitter then either Mr. Herbert, (if he be not depu∣ted Vicar in Huntington Elect) or Mr. Humphrey Hughes now Archdeacon of North-Wales. For two Archdeacons under him, besides, if you choose them out of Priests in those parts, they are these following. Master Stevens living in Hert∣ford,
Mr. Vaughan, Mr. Stephen Pue, Mr. Permane, Mr. Williams, Mr. Iohn Barrington, Master Iohn Powell, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Thomas Street, Mr. Iohn Holland Remble, Master Barnes Lay, Mr. William Pue, Mr. Francis Greene, chiefe man, Master Elliets, Mr. Morris, Mr. Prises, two of them. Master Stevens and Mr. Bar∣rington held the two fittest. The sixth Vicar, who is of Yorke, Darby, Nottingham, Lin∣colne, and Rutland, and whose place is vacant, hath under him only two Archdeacons, whereof himselfe being one, you are to thinke of one more onely for that Division. The men fit to be thought on for this Vicariate, if you take the Priests living in those parts are, Master Falconer, Mr. Coffine. The Archdeacon may bee one of those names in the foure Vi∣cars district, Mr. French, Mr. Ar∣nold, Mr. Fathering, Mr. Edward Hughes, Mr. Iackson, Mr. Wor∣hington. The seventh Vicar who is hee of Lancashire, Northumberland, &c. Master Trollop still living, but so old, as he had need of a Coadjutor with power to suc∣ceed him, which whether it may not be Mr. Holden considering who is of those parts, or master Lab. who is likewise of the same you may there advise. This Vicar hath under him three Archdeacons, himselfe be∣ing one; you are to appoint one more onely, Mr. Redman being Archdeacon in Lancashire al∣ready. The Priests in the Countrey most considerable, for Vicars or Archdeacons, are these that fol∣low. In Northumberland and the York-shire district. Mr. Catricke, Mr. Walker, Do∣ctor Blunderston, Master Wivell, Mr. Nearby, Mr. Iohn Lassells, Master H. Greene, Mr. William Constable, Mr. Hodgeson, Master Strickland; one his name Prebend of Yorke Minster. In Lancashire, there is already Archdeacons, Master Redman; too besides him are, Master Sands principally, Mr. Totty, Mr. Sale, Mr. Thomas Worthington, Master Tunstall.
Right Reverend my very good Lord, Isend you now according to my promise last week such Copies of Patents as you desired of Canons; and such other of Vicars and Archdeacons, and Rurall Deanes as you may have need of for compleating the Chapter with such light into that affaire as in these darke and confused times I could procure. I must not omit to certifie your Lordship, that I have inserted Mr. Peter Warnefords name amongst those who are suggested here to be made Canons, and I should humbly desire he may be made such for one maine reason above others, that I have a probable hope hereby to secure the Chapter of the holy Thorne after his decease: and that is a Jewell which I am sure your Lordship values at a high rate,A pretious Re∣lique. as also doe all others that know thereof. If the light I have given in the choice of such men as may com∣pleat the Chapter be sufficient to satisfy your Lordship of the me∣rits of the men suggested: Perhaps it may not be a misse to thinke of even in these uncertaine times, if for no other reason then to pre∣vent mortality, and that the Chapter might have the fuller power in its compleatnesse in case your Lordship should dy; as we that are many yeares younger cannot say but wee may dye very suddenly, and truly but for this only reason perhaps it were better deferre the filling up the Chapter till wee better times expected; yet since I writ those inclosed Papers I have refle∣cted that perhaps it may not bee amisse to compleat the Chap∣ter with all speed that may be, for however we cannot suggest unto your Lordship all our men in every County, yet I am confident we have named those that are fittest for such places in each Coun∣ty, and such as are persoually best known I beleive to your Lord∣ship for the most part of them. As I wrote last weeke that Mr. Fittons repaire to England would not be necessary though he be chosen Coadjutor to Mr. Webster, cum jure missionis, so I write againe now upon better grounds, for God be thanked Mr. Webster mends in his health: but admit he should fall back and dy, yet even in that case per∣haps Mr. Fitton would most probably get our Chapter confirmed in his person of Deane, and this not onely through his being
knowne and liked well of in Rome, but farther through his per∣ticular relation with Lord  who perhaps would con∣duce much towards confirming our Chapter, and Mr. Fittons per∣son and the Confirmation of our Chap: being the main thing we ayme at, moves many to thinke, that we were better choose Mr. Fitton Coadjutor then a stronger man; because if in his per∣son we get the Chapter confirmed, we can easily choose a Coad∣jutor to him in case he should not grow strong; And so by this means we effect our greatest affaire and desire. The rest is that I am, my Lord, Your most humble servant, F: H: Mr. Herbert upon sight of these last Letters from being moved by Mr. Webster to accept of the place makes answer, that if Mr. Fitton cannot supply the place, rather then give offence unto his Brethren, he is content to conforme to the Votes of his Brethren.
A Letter from the Earl of Warwick, and some Members of the house of COMMONS: To the Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the said House. SIR, VVE have thought fit to acquaint you with some Informations that we have lately received, concerning the affairs of Ireland, such as we suppose you will think fit to be imparted to the House. The In∣habitants of the Lath of Saint Augustine in the county of Kent, out of their charitable commiseration of the miseries of the Protestants in Ireland, (being inabled thereunto by an Ordinance of Parliament). did in a ve∣ry large manner contribute and gather Five hundred quartets of Wheat, and other Grain; and accordingly sent it over to Cork, imbarqued in a Vessell called the Prosperous of Sandwich, whereof one Thomas Basset was Master; who accordingly carried the same unto Cork, and delivered it unto the hands of the Lord Inche∣quine, according to an Order of the Committee for Irish affairs: Now the said Vessell being returned, the Master thereof makes this report, which we with all care and diligence have sent up. 1. First, That the Lord Inchequine was so far from distributing the said Grain, according to the intention of the Parliament, and the Doners, (who did intend it as a free Gift, for the relief of the poor Protestants in Ireland) that he did seize it, and sell it at a very dear rate, to any that would buy it, detaining it from those to whom it was given.
2. That he did not onely deprive them of the inten∣ded Charity, but also opprest them, with Billetting of two Regiments of Souldiers, that are since sent over, (whereof the said Mr. Basset was an eye-witnesse) under the command of Sir Charles Vavasour, and Sir John Pawlet, to the Port of Bristoll, to serve here against the Parliament. 3. That the Lord Inchequine did presse the said Ma∣ster, Thomas Basset, to carry over more Souldiers to the Port of Bristoll, which Basset did colourably undertake, and attended severall dayes to receive the Souldiers aboard of him, till such time as he met with a conve∣nient opportunity to make his escape, which he desired, and now at last obtained. 4. The said Thomas Basset doth report upon ve∣ry good grounds, That there are further intentions of raising great Forces of the Irish Rebells, to come over to serve against the Parliament; and that for present there are ready two Regiments, under the command of Sir Hardes Waller, and four Regiments of the Lord Inchequines, and six Troops of Horse under the command of the Earl of Cork; all which are to be list∣ed under the Duke of York, to maintain this unnaturall War against the Parliament and Kingdom. Now that it may appear that this Information of Thomas Basset is not conjecturall, he is ready to testific all this upon Oath; And for present we have here sent up divers Instruments tending to this effect, subscri∣bed by the Lord Inchiquine, and delivered to the said Thomas Basset. By all this you may perceive what a Designe there is to bring over both Horse and Foot of the Irish, to war here against the Parliament; which might in some
sort have been prevented, if the winter guard had been timely set forth, which we desire you with all possible speed to hasten the winter guard, as hoping it may be a means to prevent, and intercept a great many of the Irish Rebells, which daily are in readinesse to come over. And so, with our best respects remembred unto you, praying God to give a blessing to all your pro∣ceedings; We bid you heartily farewell, and rest Downs, the 7th. Novemb. 1643. Your assured loving Friend, Warwick. William Strickland, Henry Mildmay, Edw. Boys. By the Lord of Inchiquine, Commander of His Majesties Forces in chief for the Province of Mounster. VVHereas Thomas Basset, Master of the Providence of Sandwich, Bur. 100 Tuns; arrived here in this Port of Cork, with his said Vessell from Sandwich, loaden with Corn and other provisions for the use of His Majesties
army; for which he hath here accordingly du∣ly performed in that particular. And further, I do hereby certifie to whom it may or shall concern, That I have pressed the said Vessell, Master, Company, and all other provisions to her belonging, for His Majesties service, the Ninth day of this present October: And is by me commanded, from the said day to give his attendance untill further order: For which, he the said Master may not fail at his perill. Given under my hand at Cork, the Ninth day of October, ut supra, Anno Dom. 1643. Jnchiquine. By the Right Honorable, the Lord of Inchiquine, Commander in chief of his Ma∣jesties Forces within the Province of Mounster. VVHereas Thomas Basset, Master of the good Ship called The Prosperous of Sand∣wich, Burthen 100 Tuns or thereabouts, Com∣pany and said Ship, Is imployed by me from this Port of Cork, To carry and transport
Souldiers for the Port of Bristoll: And in re∣spect I finde him obedient, and ready to per∣form the said service, I do hereby very earnestly desire the Admirals of His Majesties Fleet, and all others imployed in His service, or any other person or persons whatsoever whom it may any way concern, Not any wayes to hin∣der or molest him the said Master, Ship, or Company, or any of them in their departure from the said Port of Bristoll, or in their in∣tended Voyage into Wales, there to lade the said Ship with Coals, to be transported from thence to this Harbour, for the relief of this distressed Garrison of Cork; To which pur∣pose I have ingaged my self to the said Master; and therefore am confident, That my desire herein shall be complyed withall. Dated under my Hand at the said city of Cork, this Eighteenth day of October, Anno Dom. 1643. Jnchiquine. To the Right Honourable, my very good Lord, the Lord Hopton, Governour of the City of Bristoll. MY LORD, I Have imployed this Bearer, Mr. Basses, Master of a ship, called The Prosperous of Sandwich, for the trans∣porting,
and carrying over hence in his ship, to the Port of Bristoll souldiers for His Majesties service and have, According to His Majesties Letters, enabling and authorizing mee, agreed with the said Master, that he shall be paid fourty pounds ster. for the fraight of his ship up∣on her arrivall there; which I conceive to be reaso∣nable: And therefore do desire, not only for the pre∣sent service, but also for the future encouragement of others of his quality: That the said money, accor∣ding to my said agreement with him, be forthwith upon his arrivall in that Port punctually paid: Thus, not doubting of the speedy performance hereof, I take leave and remaine Corke 18. Octob: 1643. Your Lordships affectionated friend, and servant, Inchiquine. If it be nor proper for your Lordship to order this payment, I beseech you recommend the Master, to whom your Lordship thinks fit for his satis∣faction. A Letter from the Governor of Plymouth, To Mr. Speaker of the Honourable House of SIR, COMMONS, These present in London. I Have sent you true Intelligence from Falmouth, one Iohn German comming from Perrin doth report, that two ships are come to the Pott of Falmouth, From the Rebels in Jreland, with-men,
and ammunition, shewing the Kings Broad-seale for their safety; And the Ca∣stle gave two Peeces of Ordiance, with great joy at their arrivall, with menacing speeches against the Par∣liament, and swore the Round heads should pay for all: Whereupon some Captains of the ships, being men of war there, and divers of the Inhabitants peti∣tioned Iohn Arundel Esquire, Governour of Pendennis Castle, asking of him, if he would admit entrance to the Rebels; and told him, if he did, many of them would forsake that cause, for good could not possibly come of it; hee answered them, that he would send to know His Majesties pleasure in that particular; the Rebels that came from Ireland and Falmouth, report, that they look every day for eleven ships from Ire∣land, with men and ammunition, and call themselves the Queens Army; two ships were also going to re∣lieve the poore Protestants in Ireland, and both stopt at Falmouth, the one laden with wheat, the other with malt: Likewise there is one Iohn Burlasse Esquire, a known Papist, hath command of a foot Regiment, and governs the West of the County of Cornwall. More∣over, the said German reporteth, that to the foresaid Port of Falmouth, is come four French ships, landed some Officers and men, being laden with ammunition, and it is thought, that the Officers are gone to the Kings Army; for they presently tooke post from Falmouth, and the said French Officers report, that they expect ten thousand men to be speedily sent over out of France to them. Your most humble servant to command, Iames Wardlaw. Plymouth, Novem. 1. 1643. FINIS.
