W1486 E1674_3 99867380 170250
BE Variolis & Morbillis: OF THE SMALL POX AND MEASLES: With their Definitions, Distincti∣ons Causes, Differences, Signs, Prognosticks, and Curs, with Cautions in Aire and Diet to prevent them. Also Cordiall Remedies, by which we may preserve our Bodies from them, with locall Medicines of excellent vertues to be applied outwardly or carried in the hand, to repel the venemous and pestife∣rous aire from entring into the body. By Anthony Westwood, Practitioner in Physick and Chirurgery at Arundel in Sussex. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for H. Seyle, at the Black Boy over against S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet 1656.
To the Honourable and singular∣ly vertuous, Mrs. Margaret Morley of Glyn in Sussex. The Author consecrateth these his Labours. Honourable Mrs. THe principall motive which impelled mee to consecrate the sub∣sequent Treatise unto
your Name, is the same which at the first invited me to pen it, and that was to pu∣blish it to the benefit of the Towne and Countrey wherein I live, that every one that would but take the paines to peruse this little Tract, & make triall of the receipts of Physick and Chirur∣gery at large declared therein, might much benefit themselves, &
doe much good to their acquaintance & friends. Honoured Mistress, nothing hath more afflicted me than the death of him who truly honoured you in his life, and was truly beloved by you to his death, your dear Brother, my best Friend, William Morley Esquire, who died of this contagious dis∣ease, the Small Pox. I
shall ever admire and proclaim his vertues and goodness, who of his innate & noble di∣sposition, loved all his followers in generall, as his fellow-souldi∣ers. I wept for him at his death, as for a Brother, and after death saw him ho∣nourably buried, as a Souldier; but I'le la∣ment no more his death, who is transla∣ted into a better life,
nor weepe for him that is in joy, nor put on mourning clothes for him that is clo∣thed with Immorta∣lity; whom death hath parted, I hope blessed eternity shall at length bring toge∣ther again. So I leave him and returne to you; I have strived to shape my subject to the affection of so ho∣nourable a Patroness as your self, to whom
I dedicate this rude piece, which I could have wished might have been underta∣ken by a more able workman: vouchsafe therefore to shroud under your protecti∣on this unpolished worke which I offer not as a Present, but as a Homage I owe you. And therefore the marke I chiefly aimed at, was not at a∣ny vain hope of praise
to my self (which how little I hereby deserve I am not so weak but to perceive) but to leave a testimony to my Countrey, how much I desire her be∣nefit, and to your self, how much I am bound to remain, Mistress, Yours in all dutisull observance, A. Westwood.
The PREFACE TO The Reader. Courteous Reader, THe chiefest thing that induced me to publish these Collections, was a principall aim at the good of these in the town where∣in I live, which hath been much visited with these , Variolae, or
Small Pox. And there∣fore I have adventured to divulge many receipts of my Fathers, who lived an able Physitian, and in great practice above fifty yeares in this Town of Arundell. I have also set down many receipts by me daily practi∣sed (and therefore need no probatum to be anne∣xed) with divers vari∣eties not published by any heretofore, which I hope will be to the great benefit of all such as shall have oc∣casion to practise any thing herein contained; where I strive not to set forth an e∣loquent style (as if it were some fancy-delighting Hi∣story)
but a plain way to help the poorer sort: I here produce a thing serious, and for the generall good, especially of those whom it shall please God to visit with this disease. Some perhaps will think that those who knowing such things, would be loth to publish them, and make their Science common; but I am rather of the mindes of those who once a yeare writ in the temple of AE∣sculapius all the cures they had performed, and by what remedies; and I think with Aristotle, that a good thing is the better the more common it is:
and as Cicero saith, we are not born to our selves; if any thing in this small Tract may bring glory to God, any good to his Peo∣ple, I have my desire and aim: I will not stand to amplifie any further, be∣cause all that I seek in this book is to eschew prolixity; for I know there are a sort of Criticks, that will ra∣ther carp at a fault, than amend it. But Reader I end, craving thy faveura∣ble acceptation; which will encourage me to publish a very necessary Tract of the Diseases of Women and Children, intituled De Morbis mulierum & in∣fantium.
Thus much I thought good to acquaint thee with, wishing thee all happinesse. Thy well-wishing Friend Anth. Westwood.
Upon the death of my very good friend Dr. JOHN WESTWOOD. GReat Westwood's fall'n; let my lamenting Verse Doe its last duty to thy mourning Herse. All we can doe is but to let men see How much we owe unto thy memory. Great soul, discharg'd of thy base mould, whose All And ev'ry part we justly Spirit call. Though here, he liv'd not here; his free desires Were alwayes quickned with celestiall fires. Thy high born soul tow'rd to its proper place; Restless, unwearied, till't bad run its race. 'Tis true, thy body made us think thee Clay; But thy refined self did more display Ʋnto our second thoughts, whilst we could spy Thy Vertues speak so much Divinity:
Through that darkesome veyle who could not see Thy Lynce y'd soul peep at Eternity? This world was but the trouble of thy mind. Which now by separation is resin'd, And like it self; thy now sublimed Sprite (The veyl being drawn) enjoyes its Eagle sight. What once in contemplation thou didst see, By death thou hast a full discovery. Enjoy thy Trophies Death; what thoss bast done Is but to make the blind enjoy the Sun. Instead of hurting thoss hast set him free, Lately a Pris'ner, now at liberty. Triumph then in thy Conquest, who'l deny To lose this life to catch Eternity? But now I've found thy plot; great Westwood's Art Hindred thy Spoils, lockt up thy rusty dart; His skill, like a strong Bulwark, did withstand The fatall strokes of thy destroying hand:
When thou hadst past thy Sentence, he could give Beyond all hope a wonderfull Reprieve. Nay thou hadst miss'd him, had not feeble Age Made him the object of thy cruell rage; Then to encounter him, when 'twas too late (Nature succumbing) to divert his fate. 'Twas well advis'd, to strike when the last sand Was run; Stout Champion! bid a bound man stand. This is thy Trophy, thus thou'rt magni∣fied; Naturs consum'd, Oyle spent, Sand out, he died. F. Haddon, Doctor of Physick.
DEVARIOLIS ET Morbillis: Of the Small Pox and Measles. THe Small Pox is Variolae quid. called in Latin Variolae. Those little A∣spetities of the Skn, like St. Anthony's Fie, which are discussed within five or seven dayes without suppuration, are called in La∣tine Morbilli, in English Mea∣sles. , Papulae. Sunt Goreus. eruptiones leves humorum per¦cutem.
Variolae. Sunt pustnlae in summa cute. . Morbilli verò Seunertus. sunt maculae aut tubercula par∣va: Subjectum est cutis quae Morbilli quid. ' dicitur. The Small Pox are Pustles, and the Measles Spots, which arise in the top of the skin, by What the Small Pox and Mea∣sles are. reason of the impurity of the corrupt blood sent, thither by the force of Nature. This Impurity is the re∣licks of the menstruous blood remaining in the body of the Their matter. Infant, being of that matter from whence it drew nou∣rishment in the womb. It is stirred up at the first opportunity of a hotter sum∣mer, or a hidden malignity in the aire, and boyling up, or working with the whole mass of the blood, spread or shew
themselves upon the whole surface of the body. There is as much difference between the Small Pox and the Measles, as there is betweene a Carbuncle and a pestilent Bubo; for a Bubo and Carbuncle are tumors of a near effinity, so that the one doth scarce come without the other, consisting of one kinde of matter, unlesse that which maketh the Bubo is more grosse and clammy, and that which causeth the Carbuncle more sharp, burning and ra∣ging, by reason of its greater subtilty. These Carbuncles and Bu∣boes do rise in divers parts of the body, but especially where the Glandules are; because the expulsive faculty being provoked by a malignant
quality, does expel the perni∣cious matter from the inter∣nall parts especially, the more noble ones to the externall; so that from the Brain she sends it to the Glandules or Kernels behinde the Eares, from the Hart to the A m∣pits, from the Lver to the Groyns; whence swellings under th Eres called Paro∣tides, d those in the Gyn called Bubones, do arise. For the Small Pox arise of a more grosle and viscous matter, but the Measles of a more subtl and hot. The Measles yeild no marks, but certain small spots with∣out any tumour, and they ei∣ther red, purple, or black. There is another kinde of Pustles common to children, called the Chrystals, they are
white, and as it were bladders full of a wheyish humour; these cause no danger: with∣in three dayes they break and dry up. The Small Pox are extube∣rating Pustles, white in the midst, but red in the circum∣serence, yet they are scarce known on the first or second day they appeare; but on the third and fourth day they bunch and rise into a tumour, and are white before they scab, but the Measles re∣main still the same. The Small Pox prick like needles, by reason of a certain acrimony, and cause an it∣ching; the Measles doe nei∣ther, because the matter is not so acrid and biting. That Feaver which is com∣monly attended by the Small
Pox and Measles, may justly be reckoned among malig∣nant and pstilential Feavers, because it is epidemicall and contagious, and kills very ma∣ny. Of the cause of the Small Pox and Measles. Sennertus in his Tomus se∣cundus, De cause variolarum & morbil∣lorum. fol. 191. hath these words concerning the cause of the Small Pox and Measles. Causam prxmam & con∣tinentem variolarum & mor∣billorū referunt in immūditiem  primo ortu in sanguine reli∣ctam, ex sanguine materno, quem monstruum vocart quo oeus in utero matr is alitur, &c. Riverius saith thus, Son∣guinem vero maternum esse
veram causam variolarum & morbillorum, inde praecipue col∣ligitur, quod ex bominum mil∣libus vix unum reperire lice it, qui semel saltem in vita hos affectus non patiatur. At mor∣bus omnibus hominibus cōu∣nis à causa aliqua com ouni necessariò dependet; qualia sunt generationis principia, semen nimirum & sanguis mater∣nus. But that the Seed cannot be the cause, he goes farther, and gives this reason. At semen non potest esse causa variolarum & morbillo∣rum, cum ab to morbi haeredita∣rii & tota vita perdurantes ori∣antur, &c. The meaning of these two learned and judicious Au∣thors, is this, That the mo∣thers blood is the true cause
of the Small Pox and Measles, and that it is hence chiefly gathered, because among ma∣ny thousands of men it is hard to find one, who once in his life hath not had these disea∣ses. But a disease common to all men, must needs depend upon some common cause; such as are the principles of Generation, viz. the Seed and Mothers Blood. But the Seed cannot be the cause of the Small Pox and Measles, because from it come hereditary diseases, such as last a mans life-time, as some Gouts, which are affirmed by the most judicious Authors, to be engrafted and here dita∣ry from the parents; yet they doe not deny but that there are some Gouts which are adventitious, caused by exter∣nall
causes, and errors in Diet. It remains therefore that the Small Pox and Measles spring from the Mothers Blood, with which the child is nourished in the womb; for therein, be it never so pure, some impuri∣ties are found, which commu∣nicate their pollution to the parts of the child; and that pollution of the parts doth defile the masse of blood; and being provoked by some occasion, doth make the same to boyle, by help whereof the blood ferments & is purified, both it & the parts aforesaid. Riverius saith farther, that the Arabians do manifest this by a cleare example of Wine, which being poured whiles it is new into a musty or il-qua∣lited vessel, receives that ill qua¦lity frō the vessel, but when it
begins to work and purifie, it cleanseth both it self and the vessel. It is not to be wondred at, that the breaking out of the Small Pox and Measles, is sometimes so long deferred, as that some have them at mans estate: for those im∣purities doe not substanti∣ally remaine in the body, as many imagine; for they would be corrupted by long stay, and acquire a most grievous pu∣trefaction. But onely an evil quality is by them imprinted upon the parts of the child, which in processe of time in∣fecting some part of the hu∣mours, becomes offensive to Nature; which then rouzing her self, doth drive those infe∣cted portions of the humors into the skin.
And although the Small Pox are wont to break forth in the whole body, yet they appeare in greatest quantity in the face, feet, and hands, which are the Emunctories of the Liver: whence it comes, that such as have hot Livers, have red and rubied Faces, and feel intense heat in the palmes of their hands and soles of their feet; it fol∣lowes, that the Small Pox and Measies must come out there more than any where else. The Expulsion therefore of Small Pox and Measles is caused by an Ebullition of the the blood; which Ebullition, saith Avicen, Duplex est, una perfectiva, altera ver ò corruptiva; perfectiv a seu depu∣rativa ea est, in qua partes tan∣tūm impuriores & excremen∣titiae
sanguinis putrescunt, & à natura expurgantur, ut tota massa pura postmodum relin∣quatur. Corruptiva vero est, in qu non solum partes sanguinis ex∣crementitiae, sed etiam sanguis ipse sincerus computrescit. Ʋnde periculosae & lethales variolae oriuntur, &c. This Ebullition of the blood is two-sold, the one Perfe∣ctive, the other Corruptive. The Perfective or Depura∣tive, is that in which onely the impurer and excrementi∣tious parts of the blood are by nature purged forth, that the whole masse may after∣ward remain pure. But the Corruptive is, wherein not onely the excre∣mentitious parts of the blood but the sincere blood it self is
putrefied, whence arise dan∣gerous and deadly Pox. This corruptive Ebullition doth chiefly happen when those diseases are epidemicall, be∣ing occasion'd by a malignant constitution of the aire, by which an Ebullition of the humours, and a malignant pu∣trefaction is caused. Pox and Measles are rec∣koned among acute diseases, because ordinarily they are terminated within the space of fourteen dayes. Some doe observe a double order of times in this disease, viz. the time of ebullition, and the time of cruption; the time of ebullition is commonly terminated in four dayes, so that the 1st. day is counted the beginning, the second the aug∣ment, the third the state, and
the fourth, the declination: for then the feaver and other symptoms are wont to re∣mit. But the beginning of the cruption of the Pox is the fourth day it self, the aug∣ment reaches to the se∣venth, the stae untill the eleventh, the declination unto the fourteenth, at which time the Pox are dried; yet often times they are not dry untill the twentieth day.
Of the externall causes of the Small Pox and Measles. The generall and naturall causes are two, that is, the Causa pro∣catarctica. infection of corrupt Aire, and a preparation and fitnesse of corrupt Humors to take that infection. The Aire becomes vitious and burtfull to men for the most part, by a three-fold meanes. First, if it be not blowne thorough with wholsome winds. Secondly, if it b pollu∣ted with the infection of putrid and stinking exhaati∣ons. Thirdly, if by an excesse or preposterous condition of the first qualities, it doth so alter
men, that thereby evill and malignant putrefactions of the humours be ingendered. For those qualities when they are encreased above their naturall condition, they are the principles of purtrefa∣ctions. Of the difference of Small Pox and Measles. The difference of Small Differentiae variolarum & mor∣billorum. Pox and Measles are taken either from the substance, in regard of which, some are more or lesse flegmatick; or from the quantity, in which regard they are more or lesse in number, greater or lesse, profound or superficiall; or from the quality, in which re∣spect some are red, others white, yellowish, violet-co∣lour'd,
livid, black, according to the diversity of humours, of which they are compoun∣ded. Of the signes of the Small Pox and Measles. De figuis variolarum & morbil∣lorum. Actiones laesae. These following signes de∣clare them to be at hand. Pain in the head, with pul∣sation in the forehead and temples great sleepinesse, ter∣rors in sleep, sometimes ra∣vings, trembling, and convul∣sions, sneezings, frequent yawning, hoarsenesse, cough, Qualitares corporis muta. difficulty in breathing, heat, rednesse, and sense of pricking over the whole body, paines in their backs, a nauseous di∣sposition and vomiting, their eyes are fiery and swoln, their urine-red and troubled. All
which are caused either by many and thick vapours, sent up by the boyling of the blood into the head, Dia∣phragma, and other parts; or from the nature of the Pox themselves, now beginning to invade the parts. Of the Prognosticks. For the Prognosticks, we Prognest: may truly say, that the matter whence this effect takes its originall, partakes of so me∣lign, pestilent, and contagious a quality, that not content to mangle and spoile the fleshy parts; it also eats and cor∣rupts the bones, like the lues venerea (as hath been obser∣ved by divers, in many killed by the malignity of this di∣sease, and dissected) that it
causeth such impression of corruption in the principal parts, as brings the Dropsie, Phisick, a Hoarsnesse, Asthma, bloody Flux ulcerating the Guts, and at length bringing death; Nam si non solum in cute, sed & in partibus inter∣nis, ventre, intestinis, pulmone erumpant, &c. Dan, Sennerti Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 12. They do not onely molest the externall parts, by leaving the impres∣sions and scarres of the Pu∣stles and Ulcers, rooting themselves deep in the flesh, but also oft times they take away the faculty of motion, eating asunder, and weaken∣ing the joynts of the elbow, wrist, knee, and ankle. More∣over, sundry have been de∣prived of their sight by them, others have lost their hearing,
and othersome their smelling; a fleshy exerescence growing in the passages of the nose and eares. But if any reliques of the disease remain, and that the whole matter thereof be not expelled by the strength of nature, then symptomes af∣terwards arise, which savour of the malignity of the hu∣mour, yea and equall the harm of the symptomes of the lues venerta. It is of great moment to fore see the Small Pox, but much more to foretell their event, which thse following prognostick signes will de∣clare. Those Small Pox are void of danger, which come out soon and easily, and do quick∣ly ripen, in which the Feaver
is moderate, without great symptomes, which ceases af∣ter they are come out, in which the voice is free, and breathing easie. Small Pox, which at first are red and white, soft, di∣stinct, few, round, pointed, coming onely in the skin, and not inwardly, are wont to be safe. All the signes aforesaid do signifie the paucity of the morbifick Matter, its obsequi∣ousness, benignity & strength of nature lustily expelling. Contrarywise, dangerous and deadly Pox are known by a great Feaver, which lessens not after they are broke forth; for it signifies the ma∣lignant & venemous humors are not sufficiently expelled unto the skinne, but that the
greatest part of them remains yet in the veins. Great anxiety and un quiet∣nesse, which comes from the same humours boyling in the veines. Difficulty of breathing, which signifies either Pustles or Imposthumes in the Lungs, or a Squinansie, or great de∣cay of strength. Great thirst, which declares the inward burning; and if with the thirst, shortnesse of breath be increased, death is at hand. A Loosenesse, or Bloody flux, which shewes the malig∣nant humours have their re∣course inward, which is a course quite contrary to that of Nature, and therefore deadly; so that few of those which after the Pox coming
out, are taken with such a looseness, do escape. A bloody Urine is a most deadly signe, and likewise if by stoole pure and sincere blood be voided. Sometimes also by the No∣strills, Gums, and other parts of the boby, blood is voided, which are commonly deadly signes; for they signifie the extreme acrimony and ma∣lignity of the blood. Also Pox long a coming out are very bad, which signi∣fie the contumacy of the mat∣ter, or the weaknesse of na∣ture. Many, great, double, and united Pox do shew an over∣abundant quantity of Morbi∣fick matter, and are bad; so are hard ones, which shew the thicknesse and incoctibili∣ty of the matter.
Flat Pox shew the weakness of the expulsive faculty, and they are worse, if they have a black spot in the middle of them, which argues extraor∣dinary malignity. They are worst of all, which when they are come forth do presently vanish, and the tu∣mour of the parts falls; for they signifie the retirement of the humour inwards, and none of those escape who have the Pox on this manner going in againe, but they dye commonly within twenty four hours. They are also dangerous, when spots, like those of the purple or spotted Feaver, are mingled among the Pox, espe∣cially if those spots be livid or black, for they signifie not onely the same light putrefa∣ction,
which is wont to hap∣pen in the Small pox by means of the Ebullition of blood, but also that intense and profound malignity is peccant; from which grea∣ter danger is threatned to the patient. Dung or urines in this di∣sease livid or black, do por∣tend great danger; for they signifie that Melancholy a∣bounds in the veins, and in∣fects the whole masse of blood.
Of the cure of the Small Pox and Measles. River. in his Prax. med. fol. 156. hath these four Iodi∣cations. Curatio variolarum & morbillorum quatuor indica∣tionsbus perficitur; quarum pri∣ma virsatur in humorum quantitate peccantium evacua∣tions. Secunda in motu naturae, seu¦variolarum expulsione adju∣varda. Tertia, in malignae & vene∣natae qualitatis oppugnatione. Quarta deique, insympto∣matm correctione. Qae omnia ut commode per∣fic antur, primum idonea victûs ratio instinenda est &c. That is, That the cure of the Small pox and Measles
is performed in the satisfecti∣on of four Indications; where∣of the first consists in the evacuation of the peccant hu∣mours. The second, in assisting the motion of nature, or helping to expell the pox. The third, in the opposition of the malignant and vene∣mous quality. The fourth, in Correction of Symptoms. All which that they may be conveniently effected, first a convenient diet must be ap∣pointed. As for point of nourish∣men, the Ancients were so se∣verely diligent, as to place the greatest part of the cure in or∣derering the diet. Bcause, say they, there are no kinds of sicknesses that so
weakens the strength, as con∣tagious diseases, it is alwayes necessary, but yet sparingly and often to feed the patient, still having respect unto his custome, age, the region, and the time; for through empti∣nesse there is great danger, left that the venemous matter that is driven out to the fu∣perficiall parts of the body, should be called back into the inward parts by an hungry stomack, and the stomack it self should be filled with cho∣lerick, hot, thin, and sharp exerementall humours, where∣of cometh biting of the sto∣mack, and gripings in the guts. Sweet, groste, moist, and clammy meats, and those which are of subtil parts, are to be avoided; for the sweet
do soon enslame, the moift will putrifie, the grosse and clammy obstruct, and there∣fore engnder putrefact∣ions. Therefore let this be their Diaeta. order of diet; let their bread be of Wheat or Barley, well wrought, neither too new, nor too stale; let them be fed with such meat as may be easily concocted and digested, and may engender laudable juice, and very little excremental, as are the flesh of Lambs, Kids, Partridges, Thrushes, Larks, Pheasants, and such like, a∣voyding Water-fowls, Let the flesh be moistned in the juice of garden and wild Sor∣rell: for sower things are very wholsome in this kind of di∣sease, for they do stir up the appetite, resist the venemous
quality and putrefaction of the humours, restrain the heat of the Feaver, and prohibite the corruption of the meats in the stomack. But those that have a more weak stomack, and are subject to the cough, and diseases of the lungs, must not use these, unlesse they be mixed with Sugar and Cinna∣mon. If the Patient at any time be fed with sodden meats, let the broths be made with Lettuce, Borage, Sorrel, and Marigolds, the Coaling seedes, French barley, and Oatmeale, with a little Saffron, for Saf∣fron doth engender many spirits, and resisteth poyson, To these, if need require, the opening roots may be added to avoid obstructions. Fishes are altogether to be
avoided, because they soone corrupt in the stomack; but if the Patient be delighted with them, those that live in pure & sandy water, & about rocks & stones, as are Trouts, Pearches, Gudgeons, Pikes, and Cravises boyled in milk. Eggs potched, and eaten with the juice of Sorrell are very good. But after the spots appeare, then the chief diet must be Ponadoes, Almond creames, gellies, eullasses, and such like, untill the Feaver be past. For Drink, a decoction of Barley or Harts horn is profi∣tably used, in the begining of the disease especially, and when the Feaver is vehement. But if the Feaver be not very violent a decoction of Barly, Figs, & Harts horn, wil be very profitable.
A decoction of French prunes is very pleasing to the tast? Also the syrup of dried Red Roses, with Barley-water, or small Beer. Foreslus doth much com∣mend a decoction of Barley and figs to be very profitable, to drive the humours to the skin. In the whole course of the disease sleep ought to be mo∣derate, for too sound sleep drawes back the matter to the center. Now that the aforesaid In∣dications may be fulfiled, the cure must be begun by blood∣letting; but we must consider the Small pox ante eruptionem before any spots appeare, and post eruptionem, after the spots appeare; before any spots ap∣peare,
especially in a full bo∣dy, Phlebotomy may safely be done. Incipiente morbo, ubi adist sanguinis redundantia, si vires & aeas permittant, nil melius putatur, quam à venae sectione initium facere: In the be∣ginning of the Small pox, where blood doth much a∣bound, if strength and age prmit, no remedy so safe as letting blood. Hollerius saith thus, Primo Holler. de¦morbis in∣ternis. aut secundo die sanguis detra∣hendus est; on the first or se∣cond day blood is to drawne away; and his reason is this, Sic enim melius transpirat corpus, putredinis causa inter∣cipitur, levatur natura, & si quid vitii reliquum est, celerius in superficiem corporis repur∣gatur, &c. For by letting
blood, respiration is much helped, and the cause of pu∣trefaction is intercepted, na∣ture is eased, and the corrupt humours are more speedily sent from the center to the circumference. Fuchsius hath these words, Si Fuchsius. adulti corripiuntur exanthe∣matis, initio curationis, si corpus plenū fuerit, sanguis mittendus; idque faciendū antequam appa∣reant exanthemata; If adult or grown persons be taken with the Small pox, in the be∣ginning, if they have full bo∣dyes, blood is to be taken away; but let it be done be∣fore the spots appeare: and of this opinion are most of the learned Physitians. In ebullitione were perfecti∣va seu depurativa, sanguis de∣trahendus non est; in corrupti∣va
verò venae sectio maximè necissaria, &c. When there is an ebullition perfective meerely and depurative, blood is not to be taken a∣way; but in a corruptive, blood-letting is very necessa∣ry: so necessary is blood-let∣ting in dangerous Pox, in which the corruptive ebulliti∣on is wont to happen, that the tender age of infants must not hinder it. Amatus Luci∣tanus Venae sectio in infanti∣bus. let a child blood of five years old that had the Small pox, and took away four oun∣ces of blood, who soon reco∣vered. And he let another blood Sennertus tomus se∣cundus, 196. of seven yeares old, and took away six ounces of blood. And Avenzoar let his son blood at three years old, who oon after recovered.
Some give counsell to let blood though the spots ap∣pear in full bodies, where the Feaver is violent. Good tendance is a maine and principall help in this di∣sease, for experience doth manifest, that if they be kept too hot or too cold, or take cold beer or broth, how dan∣gerous it is. You must neither purge nor draw blood, the disease en∣creasing or being at the hight, unlesse there be a great pleni∣tude, or else the disease com∣plicate with other, as with a Plurisie or Squinancy, which require it; for purging causes a motion from the circumse. rence to the center; and to whomsoever having pox, a loosenesse happening, the pox commonly strike in, and the party dies.
But when the height of the disease is over, and in the de∣elination thereof, you may with Cassia, Manna, Tama∣rinds, and syrup of Roses, or some stronger medicine, eva∣cute the reliques of the di∣sease. But if the belly be hard and bound, it may gently be re∣moved, Purgatio; but not provoked; and that by a suppository of Honey alone without Salt, or with a Clyster of Milk, or a decoction of French barley, Raisons and Licoris, with Su∣gar and yolks of Eggs. The next Indication is in the assisting the motion of nature, or helping to expel the Pox, which must be helped forward with Diaphoreticks and Alexipharmicks; that is, with such things as cause
sweat, and resist the venome of the disease. When you perceive the pox coming out either on the Pa∣tients breast or face, make this Posset; Take of Ale or Beer, which the Patient likes best, make a posset with new Milk and take off the curd, and boyle in a pint of the posser∣drink, of rasp'd Harts horne and Marigold flowers, of each one spoonfull, six or eight leaves of Sorrell, a little Li∣corish slced, a few Figs cut in pieces; take this blood∣warm, and drink no other drink for two or three dayes, untill they come out. Some commend this follow∣ing A Sudori∣sick deco∣ction. decoction; of Figs, husked Lentils, Citron seeds, the seeds of Fennel, Parsley, Smal∣lage, roots of Dog-grasse,
Raisons, and Dates; for such a decoction certainly if it have power to cause sweat, hath also a faculty to send forth unto the skin the morbifick humour. Riverius saith this following Medicine is much commen∣ded by Rhasis, Avicen, and the Arabian Physitians, and much used by our later Physitians to drive our the Pox. Take fat Figs seven ounces, Lntills shaled three dramms, Lack two drammes and a half, Gum, Tragacanth, and Fennell seed, of each two drammes, Saffron fifteene grains, Raisous five drammes; boyle all in a pint and half of Fountain-water to the third part, let the Patient drink thereof. The Saffron opens and corroborates, the Rai∣sons
do strengthen the Liver: and Tragaganth, although it do incrassat and astringe, that is thicken and bind, yet it is therefore mingled with the rest, that it may prohibit the over-great ebullition of the blood. But if the malignity be very great, you must chiefly use Antidotes: The best that I know I here give you, and I believe there is not a better. Take of orientall Pearles, of Crabs eyes, of red Corall, of Harts horn, of white Am∣ber, of the roots of Scorzo∣nera, by some call'd Viperaria, or Vipers grasse, of the roots of Contra-yerna, of each a like quantity, of the black tips of Crabs clawes, being wiped very clean, so much as of all the rest: Beat all in a cleane
morter, into very fine pouder, and search them through a fine Lawn searce, make all these into a mass with jelly of Harts horn, wherein you must infuse some store of Saffron; make it like past with conti∣nuall beating of it, then make it into balk, rowling them smooth in the palmes of your hands, and when they are dry keep them in a box wrapped up severall in papers for your use; if they be kept dry it is the better, they will last long without decaying; when you have use for this powder, take one of the balls cut, or scrape some of it, and after make it very fine by brusing it with a knife, or otherwise; it is to be taken in a spoonful of good distilled water, as of Carduus, Scabious, but the best
is Marigold-water, take a spoonfull without powder af∣ter it, to wash it down: you may give of this powder at one time twelve or eighteene graines, and in the highest extremity twenty grains, and that every tweive hours; you may give to a child eight graines, or as you shall see cause. This powder is most excel∣lent against all infectious di∣seases, for the Plague, being taken at first being infected; it is good also for Agues and Feavers, for paines of the heart, for trembling of the heart, it doth restore those that be falling into Consum∣ptions, adding a little syrup of Gilliflowers, it driveth forth the Small pox and Measles; given in a little conserve of
red Roses, it stayeth Fluxes; and being taken in time, it preserveth from all infecti∣ons; it provoketh neither stoole nor vomit, nor giveth offence to the tast, smell, or stomack; it worketh insensi∣bly and without violence to nature, and is of such vertue, that neithr Unicorn's horn nor Beazar stone can equal it, though taken in a double quantity: I have used of it this twenty yeares, and have al∣wayes a good quantity of it by me: I wish all that are able, to have some of it in a readinesse by them. I re∣member my Father did use to call it his Antidotus Contra∣yerva, his Antidote against poyson. Gerhard saith, the pow∣der of the root Contra-yerva taken in Whitewine, is a most
present remedy against poy∣son, Monardus. of what nature soever it be (onely sublimate excepted, whose malignity is onely ex∣tinguished by drinking of Milk.) The root Scorzonera by most called Viperaria, or Viperina, or Serpentaria, because it is of force and efficacy against poysons of Vipers and Ser∣pents; the vertues of this root are many. 1. It is most excellent against the infectons of the Plague, and all poysons of venemous Beasts, being made into fine powder and taken in Treakle∣water. 2. It is good in all pestilent Diseases, taken in posset∣drink with Saffron. 3. It helpeth the infirmities of the Heart, and such as use
to swoun, given in Sack and Borage-water. 4. It doth help Convulsi∣ons in children, given in Sage or Lavender-water. 5. It doth cure the biting of a mad Dog, drunk in Rose∣vinegar. 6. It causeth a speedy Deli∣very, given in burnt Wine with a few Cloves and a little Mace. 7. It is a good Cordiall in all fits of the Mother, given in Rue, Sage, or Lavender∣water. 8. It cureth also them that have the Falling-sicknesse, and such as are troubled with gid∣dinesse in the head, taken in Conserve of Rosemary flow∣ers. The root condited with Sugar, as are the roots of
Eringus, and such like, work the like effects, and so doth the roots of Contra-yerva. The Confection of Hyacinth Confectio de Hyacin∣tho. is a great Cordiall, exceeding good in acute Feavers, and contagious Diseases; it doth much strengthen and cherish the heart, half a dramme is given at a time. There is a Treacle-water which is exceeding good to expell the Pox and Measls, it is much used in Feavers, especially pestilentiall; it strengtheneth the heart and vitals, it is an admirable Counter-poyson; the Com∣position is as followeth. Take of the juice of greene Walnuts four pound, the juice of green Rue three pound, juice of Carduus Benedictus, Aqua The∣ricalis. Marigolds, Bawm, of each
two pound, the roots of Pe∣tasites, or Butter-burres, fresh and green, a pound and a half, the roots of Burres one pound, roots of Angelica and Master-wort, green, of each sixe ounces, Scordion foure handfulls, old Venice-treacle and Mithridate of each eight ounces, Canary wine twelve pints, White-wite Vinegar six pints, juice of Lemmons a quart; digest them two daies in a bath, let the vessell be well stopped, then distill it in send for your use. Gascons powder made with Orientall Beazor, is very good against all malignant and pe∣stilent Diseases, Small pox, Measles, Plague, malignant or scarlet Feavers; the Dose is ten or twelve graines in Car∣duus or Dragon-water.
Conserve of red Roses and Mithridate in Marigold-wa∣ter I have found very good; and recovered many with it, especially when there has been great Fluxes; for the Conserve doth give an effe∣ctuall binding and certaine strengthening quality; and the Mithridate doth expell and keep out the Pox. East India Bezoar pow∣dered small in posset drink, is very effectuall; the Dose is from three to eight grains, according to the strength and age of the Patient. Sennertus commends Be∣zoar, Pulvis ex. pulsivus. with the solution of Pearles; half a scruple in the waters of Sorrell, Scabious, Carduus, and Marigold-flow∣ers. Also these following Poti∣tions
are much commended by the same Author. Take Figs seven drammes, Lentills shalled three drams, Gum traganth and Fennell∣seed, of each two drammes; boyle all in a pint and half of Fountain-water, to the third part, give the Patient drink thereof. Or this: Lentills shalled Potio ad Morbillos. four ounces, Figs sliced ten, Raisons of the Sun stoned 2 ounces, Fennel seeds bruised three drammes, Saffron one scruple, Gum-lacc one dram and a half; boyle all in three pints of water to a pint, give of the strained liquor four or five ounces for a Dose to drink. Or this: Take fat Figs, in number thirty, Lentills three handfuls, Turnep seed seven
drammes, Barley cleansed from the husks ten ounces, Fennell seed ten drammes; cut and bruise all, and put into five pints of water, let it stand and infuse a day on a very gentle fire, close cove∣red, afterwards distill it for your use. Or this, Take Turnep∣seed one dramme, Annis, and Fennel seeds each two drams, cleansed Barley and Lentills each half an ounce, foure Figgs sliced; boyle all in Carduus water in a close-co∣vered vessel; give of the strai∣ned liquor two or three spoonfulls at a time. I have often given Mithri∣date half a dramme at a time, with syrup of Gilliflowers in Carduus or Marigold-water; and so I have Venice-treacle,
London-treacle, and Diascor∣dium, in like manner, with good successe. For Mithridate is an ex∣cellent Antidote, and good against pestilent and conta∣gious Diseases, it is good against Poyson, and such as have done themselves wrong by taking filthy Medicines; it provokes Sweat, and hel∣peth weaknesse of the Limbs, and Diseases comming of cold. Venice-treacle is a good re∣medy in pestilentiall Feavers; it resists Poyson, and the bitings of venemous Beasts; it is good against the Falling∣sicknesse, Apoplexies, the Cholick, and Illiack passion, &c. London-treacle is a good
Antidote in pestilential times; it resists Poyson, strengthens cold Stomacks, helps dige∣stion and crudities of the sto∣mack. Diascordium mightily streng∣theneth the Heart and Sto∣mack; it provokes Sleep, and is used in Feavers for that purpose.
What parts must be armed against, aad preserved from the Pox. The Eyes, Nose, Throat, Lungs & inward parts, ought to be kept freer from the eiu∣ption of Pustles than the o∣ther parts. You must defend the eyes when you first begin to su∣spect the disease, with the eye-lids also, moistening them with Rose-water, a little Camphire and Saffron, with two or three drops of Vine∣gar. Or with Plantine and Rose∣waters, in which a little Saf∣fron is dissolved. Also Womans milk mixed with Rose-water, & often re∣newed.
But if the eyes be much swolne and red, you must strengthen the sight with Fennell or Eyebright-water. White Rose and Eye bright∣waters, with a little Cam∣phire, and with a feather dresse them often in a day. To preserve the Face, that the Pox leave not behinde them pits and scarres, which doth often deform the coun∣tenance: when they are ripe, and are high and white in the middle, then mingle Sper∣maceti and oyle of sweet Almonds together to an oyntment, and with a feather anoynt the face therewith, being a little warmed: this will cause them to scale. Oyle of sweet Almonds new drawn, without fire, is
excellent for the same pur∣pose; and so is oyl of Nute new drawn without fire, and mixed well with a like quan∣tity of Rose-water, till they come to the form of a lini∣ment, then anoynt with a fea∣ther twice a day. This following Liniment is much used. Take of fat Bacon one pound, cut it in thin slices, and hang it in a string before the fire, that it may melt, and let it drop it into half a pint of Rose and Plantine-water, and when it is all melted, let it roole, and then bear it out of the water with a cleane Spatula, then wash it in three  four severall waters more▪ then  out the water, and mix the fat with a dramme
of Spermacete, and anoynt the face with a feather. Oyle of bitter Almonds two ounces, with Spermace∣te half an ounce, is very good to anoynt the face after the pox are dryed, to cause them to fall off. without leaving any marks, The oyle of yolks of Eggs is very good to cleare the skin, and restore hair, and to cure the Malign ulcers, which many times happens after the Pox: it is thus made. Take of new-laid Egges one hundred, boyle them un∣till they be hard, and take out the yolke and cut them in pieces, and put them into a fryingpan untill they turne reddish, and yeild a faity moi∣sture, then take them and put
them hot into a hair bag, and presse out the oyle. It is the practise of many that when the Pox be ripe, to bore them thorough with a golden or silver needle, lest the quittor tarrying long in them, should leave holes in the part: But experience has taught, that, the Pox being bo∣red are longer in healing, and doth longer hold their cruft, because of the weaknesse of naturall heat, caused in the part by boring whereby more deformed scarres are left be∣hind. The internall parts may be preserved with a decoction of Lentils and Tragaganth, de∣scribed before. Such Pox as arise in the Os & faxe. mouth, palate, and throat,
with hoursenesse and difficul∣ty of swallowing, may be hel∣ped by Gargarismes made with Barley-water, Plantine∣water, with some syrup of red Roses and Mulberries dissolved therein. The Lungs are preserved by Pulmo. syrup of Jujubes, deyed Roses, white Poppies, Myrtils, Pom∣granates, Water-lillies and the like. Sometimes tedious itchings solicite the Patient to scratch, especially in the palmes of the hands and soles of the feet, because the thickness of the skin in those parts hinders the eruption of the Pox, which you shall help, if you cause those parts to be fomented pretty hot with a decoction of Marshmallowes, Barley, &
Lupines; or with a decoction of Pellitory of the Wall one handfull, flowers of Cammo∣mel, and Melilote, of each half a pugill; boyle them in a pint of Scabious-water, with this liquor hot, often let the itching pox be moistned. The Excoriations and Ul∣cers, which arise from deep and malignant Pox, are to be cured with Ʋnguentum Al∣bum well camphorated. When the Feaver is past, and the Pox begin to fall, let them eat Bread and Butter, or a potched Egge; let their Beer be warmed with a Toste, and sweetened with a little Sugar, and when they have drunk, let them eat the Toste to cleanse their mouth & throat. As for sucking Children,
such things shall be given to the Nurse, as may infringe and overcome the strength of the malignity; she shall take broths with Purslain, Lettuce, Sorrell, Succory, Borage, and French Barley. She shall shun all salt, spiced; and baked meats; she shall drink decoctions of Licorish, Raisons, and Sorrel roots. She shall also take purging Medicines, as if she were sick of the same disease, that so her milk may become medi∣cinable.
Cautions in Aire and Diet, to prevent the Small Pox and Measles. No prevention seemed more certain to the Anoients, than most speedily to remove into places far distant from the infected place and to be slow in their return thither again. But those, who by reason of their employments, cannot change their habitation, must principally have care of two things. The first is that they streng∣then their bodies, & the prin∣cipall part thereof against the daily imminent invasions of the pestiferous and venerate aire. The second is, that they
amend and purge the corru∣ptions of the venenate ma∣lignity, by smells and per∣fumes resisting the poyson thereof. Let moderate exercise pre∣cede your Meales. Let the belly have due eva∣cuation either by Nature or Art. Let the heart, the seat of life, and the rest of the bowels be strengthened with Cordi∣alls and Antidotes. Make choice of a pure Air, and far remote from stinking places; for a cloudy or mifty air, & such as is infected with grosse and stinking vapours, duls the spirits, dejects the appetite, makes the body faint and ill-coloured, op∣presseth the heart, and is
the breeder of many diseases. Kindle a cleare fire in all the lodging chambers of the house, and perfume the whole house with Aromatick things, as Fankinsence, Myrrhe, Ben∣zoin, Landanum, Styrax, La∣vender, Rosemary, Marjoram, Cloves, pieces of Firre, Juni∣per, and let your clothes be aired in the same. Excesse in diet is to be shunned, for thence proceeds obstruction, and preparation of the body to putrefaction. Women must be very care∣full that they have their cour∣ses duly, for stopping besides the custome, they easily ac∣quire corruption, and draw by contagion the rest of the hu∣mours into their society.
Of the Cordiall remedies to pre∣serve our bodies from the Small Pox and Measles. The roots of Angelica is a singular remedy against all in∣fections taken by evil and corrupt aire, if you hold a piece of it in your mouth, or chew the same between your teeth, it doth most certainly drve away the pestilentiall aire. Zedoary is an excellent root held or chewed in the mouth; so are the roots of Scoizone∣ra, and Contra-yeva, condi∣ted. Treacle-water. two ou∣ces, with the like quantity of Sack, is much commended,
being drunk, and rubbing the nostrils, mouth and eares with the same, The Electuary following is very effectuall. Take of the best Treacle three ounces, Juniper-berries and Carduus-seeds, of each one dramme and a half, of Bolearmoniack prepared half an ounce, of Damargariton Frigidum, the powder of Harts-horn and red Corll, of each one dramme; mix them with the syrup of Citions, as much as will make all into a I quid Electuary; take every morning the quantity of a Filberd in two spoonfuls of Scabious-water. These following Tablets are also very profitable. Take the roots of Angeli∣ca,
Gatian, Zedoarie, Ele∣campane, of each halfe an ounce; of Citron and Sorrel∣seeds, of each a dram, of the dried rinds of Citrons, Cina∣mon, Bay & Juniper-berries, & Saffron, of each two scruples; of Conserve of Roses and Bugloss, of each two ounces, and fine hard Sugar as much as is sufficient; make thereof Tablets of the weight of half a dram; take one of them in a morning, and before meat two hours, one at a time. Mithridate, and London or Venice-Treacle, are commen∣ded above all Cordialls, ad∣ding for every half ounce of each of them, one ounce and a half of Conserves of Roses, or of Bugloss, and two or three drammes of Bole-Ar∣moniack
prepared: Of these being incorporated make a Conserve: it is to be taken in the morning the quantity of a Filberd. Take of preserved Citron and Orange pills, of each two drammes; of Conserve of Roses and the roots of Bu∣glosse, of each six drammes, of Citron seeds one ounce, of Anis and Fennel-seeds, of each two drammes, of Ange∣lica-roots three drammes, sugar of Roses as much as sufficeth: make it into a body of a Conserve, and take a little of it before you goe abroad every morning. The pills of Ruffus are ac∣counted most effectuall pre∣servatives, so that Ruffus him∣self saith, that he never knew
any to be infected that used them: the composition of them is thus, Take of the best Alloes half a dramme, of Gum-Amonia∣cum two drammes, of Myrrhe two drammes and a half, of Mastick two drammes, of Saffron seven graines: make them all into fine powder, and incorporate them with the juice of Citrons, or the syrup of Lemmons, and make thereof a Misse, and take the weight of half a dramme eve∣ry morning two or three hours before meat, and drink the water of Sorrell after it. The Alloes doth cleanse and purge, Myrrhe resists pu∣trefaction, Mastick streng∣thens, Saffron exhilerates and makes lively the spirits.
Of Locall Medicines. All aromatical, astringent, or spirituous things, have pro∣per vertues against ill and in∣fectious aires, and to streng∣then the heart and the brain. Of this kind are Rue, Balme, Rosemary, Scordium, Sage, Wormwood, Nutmeg, Cloves Saffron, the roots of Angeli∣cs, and Lovage, and such like, which must be macerated one night in sharp Vinegar and Aqua vitae, and then tyed in a knot as big as an egg, or ra∣ther let it be carried in a sponge soked in the said infu∣sion. Take Cinamon and Cloves beaten together, with a little Saffron, in equal parts, of
vinegar of Roses, and Rose∣water, into which you must dip a sponge, which rowled in a fair linnen cloth, you may carry it in your hand, and often smell to. Or take of Wormwood half a handful, ten Cloves, of the roots of Gentian and An∣gelica, of each two drammes, of Vinegar and Rose-water, of each two ounces, of Trea∣cle & Mithridate of each one dramme; beat and mix them all well together, and let a sponge be dipped therein, and used as abovesaid. Or you may make Poman∣ders, the form of which is thus: Take of yellow San∣ders, Mace, Citron pills. Rose∣leaves, of each two drammes; of Banzoin, Ladanum, Storax,
of each half a dramme; of Cinamon and Saffron, of each two scruples; of Camphire and Ambergreece, of each one scruple; of Musk three graines: let them all be made into powder, and with Traga∣ganth dissolved into Rose∣water, make a Pomander. And for the same purpose you may carry about with you sweet powders, made of Ambergreece, Storax, Orris, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Saf∣fron, Benzoin, Musk, Cam∣phire, Roses, Violets, Marjo∣ram, and such like; of which being mixed together, pow∣ders may be compounded and made. Many more Receipts I could set down, both for the inten∣tions curative and preserva∣tive,
but I hope these flowers of the most learned & experi∣enced, Sennertus, Riverius, Bar∣tholomeus, per Dulcis, Holle∣rius, Fuchsius, Parius, and divers other Authors, with the known experience of my Father's and my own, may suffice untill the next opper∣tunity. FINIS
