W2147 42475284 151450
THE Poor Distressed People OF HOLLAND, Their humble Thanks and Acknowledgement for His MAJESTIES Gracious Favours profer'd them in His late Declaration. GReat Sir, whilst You these Favours do create For us, You do our Thanks Anticipate: There are no merits on our part, can claim The least from You, Ingratitude's our shame. What Poets talk Achilles Spear could do, Jove's threats and smiles are verified in You; If You but say You'l kill or cure 'tis done, 'Twixt Charles and Jove there's no comparison: You having Conquer'd by Your powerful Armes, Straight by Your kindness salve Your Captives harms; Making Your Conquests double, by these Arts, You've won the Field, and gain'd your Enemies hearts. Had You dealt with us as th' Israelites of old With the deceitful Gibconites, have sold Us and our Families for slaves, then we Had known a precedent for Your Clemencie. Our Lives and Liberties to You we owe, And You to us a Fathers pity show, When we'd forgot those hands that did us feed, And gave's relief in greatest time of need. Yet whilst You such unheard of favours show, From guilty breasts some jealous fears do flow, And run in murm'ring streams, these whine and cry, No favour's offer'd but there's reason why; But let such narrow souls repine in vain, We think Your grace as boundless as Your Main: Great Princes like to gods no merits know, From pity or their will their Favours flow; Since, Royal Sir, you'r pleased to declare Us Your Free Subjects, it shall be our care To Render double Loyalty to you By our obedience, and our actions too. What our Industry hath brought from foreign Is ready to attend Your Royal Commands, Each active hand prepared is to bring Their richest Treasure to Great Britain's King; No Bank, or Publick Faith, being so secure As is the Faith-Defenders Promise, sure. Your Actions are so just, it may be se'd Astraea from this World to Yours is fled; So will Your Land e're long be stil'd the Burse, And only Treasury of the Universe. Thus you'l by Chymick Policy attain What Lully and old Hermes ne're could gain, Whilst the Elixer of Your favours can Attract the India's to Your Ocean, And make the Thames, influenc'd by Your beams, As once Pactolus, run in golden streams. Our Hoogen Moogen's too will think it meet To prostrate themselves and Ships before your Fleet, And lay their Treasures at Your Royal Feet. Thus with these Favours You the World affright, Conquering your Enemies, e're they come to fight; Each Monarch trembles, and of You's afraid, That with a word their Countries can invade: They oft have felt the force of Britains Sword, But ne're the pow'r Magnetick of Your Word; The one at random strikes at any part, But this ne're fails to force and win the heart: So shines Your Virtues that the whole world must own That You're both Charles le Grand, and Charles le Bone. Nescit Fama Virtutis Mori.
