W3149 E401_10 99862276 160418
Carmen Expostulatorium: Or, A timely EXPOSTULATION VVith those both of The City of London, AND The present Armie, VVho have either endeavoured to ingage these Kingdoms in a Second Warre; or neglected the prevention thereof. Intended, for averting (if it may be possible) of that generall Destruction thereby threatened; and to that purpose, hastily (upon the immergent occasion) published. By GEO. VVITHER. 2 COR. 11.19. Suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise. Printed in the Yeere MDCXLVII.
Carmen Expostulatorium: OR, A timely Expostulation with those both of the City of LONDON, and the present ARMIE, who have either endeavoured to ingage these Kingdomes in a Second Warre; or neglected the prevention thereof. THough, I have spoken heretofore in vaine, And may do now; yet, I will speak againe, In hope, that what by Reason, nor by Rhyme, Could be effected, may be done by Time: And, that, although my words be lost to some, They shall not fruitlesse, unto all, become. Hark! how the Drums beat! how the Trumpets are Sounding Alarums to a second-warre, Before the first is done! and, whilst yet green The wounds upon our bodies may be seen! Behold, that, which was coming long ago, Drawes now so neer, that none shall need fore-show What next will follow; or, what will ensue On that: For, we, without a glasse, may view Such things in kenning, that unlesse our GOD, To them shall please to set a period; Or, make some such diversion, as no man Conjecture of, by any symptome, can, An universall Plague, on us will seize, Instead of Remedies, for our Disease. Why, then, shall I, in time of need, with-hold That, which my conscience tells me, should be told? Why should I keep those premonitions back, Which I conceive, my friends at this time lack? A poore-mans counsell, once, (as we heare say) Did save a City: So, perhaps, this may.
Excuse me therefore, if (much grieved at Your rash proceedings) I expostulate, The sad condition, wherein, you to me, By this renewed warre, may seem to be. Renowned Citizens! what do you meane, To make your dwellings, that unhappie Scoene Whereon there shall, in probability, Be acted, now, the bloodiest Tragedie, That e're this Kingdome saw? Are you grown mad? And, is there no Physitian to be had For, this Distemp'rature? But, must it, here, Be Cuckow-moneth, or Dog-daies all the yeare? Have you no drugs, that may lost wits restore? Can Patience, Herbagrace, nor Hellebore, Nor any other Simple, or Confection, Work out that noy some humour and infection, (That hath besotted you) till you grow fit For Bedlam? where, are no such mad-men yet. Will nor Plaine-speakings, Parables, nor Charms, Make you regard, your safety, nor your harmes? But, that, as in despight of all that can Be threatned, or fore-told, by GOD, or man, You will resolved be to hurrie on, Till you beyond all remedies are gone? Are you distemper'd so, that nought can please, Save, what, still more increaseth your disease? Thinke you no Balme, or Salve, or Physick good, But, that which mortifies, or draweth blood, To your destruction? would you faine make void All your late hopes? would you see all destroy'd That, so much treasure; so much blood hath cost; And, let it, everlastingly, be lost, Your humour to fulfill; or, for a toy, Which, also, you perhaps, may nev'r enjoy? Nay, will you now for nothing? or, for worse, Will you to purchase mischief, and a curse To you, and to your children, re-ingage Into a war? and, by a bruitish rage, Expose those Freedomes to an over-throw, For, which your fathers did their lives bestow.
To leave them unto you? And, which might be Confirm'd for ever, if you could agree Upon those principles of common-Reason, Whose violation is the highest Treason? Have you not yet discover'd who be they Who cheat you? nor whose game it is you play, By your divisions? And, when others find Your falshoods for you, will you still be blind; Or, wink, as carelesse of the things you heed, Till, by long winking, you grow blinde indeed? Discerne you not whose Kingdome is befriended, Whilst, GOD and CHRIST, are formally pretended? Nor whose designes, promoted are, the while Some, with faire shewes of piety, beguile Well-meaning men? And, carrie on their actions, By working with, and in, those differing factions Which they first raised? Marke you not, how, by, And in, that duplifi'd-capacity, Their Ingineers doe screw themselves into Most secrets on both sides? how, they undo (By meanes of that their unperceived gin) What, hath most privately contrived been? And, see you not, that thereby they doe bring What, e're the City, Parliament or King, Or any other party, doth propound, Advise or act, to give it selfe a wound, And further their particular designe, Till GOD prevents it by some countermine? Can you not yet discover (through their mist) Those juglings, which the spawne of Antichrist (False Priests, and lying Prophets) practise, now, To raise themselves, and work your overthrow? Nor, with what impudence they spread their lies, Their bitter jeerings, and their blasphemies, To make new breaches, or to widen those, Which Love, and Prudence, had begun to close? And, which ere this, quite closed might have been; Had not they cast untemper'd dirt between? Perceive you not, that, some of both your factions, Do labour an increase of your distractions,
Because they seem not safe from questioning, For falshoods, to the Parliament, or King, Unlesse they shall endcavour to prevent The setling of that peacefull Government Which furthers justice? Yea, and see you not How, they conspire; how, they contrive, and plot To ruine all, in hope they may, by hap, Amidst the tumults, their just doomes escape? Or, by dispairing of a good conclusion, Bring all things, with themselves, into confusion? Is it a time your Quarrells to renew, When all is hazzarded, that's deare to you? Observe ye not, three Factions, like to them Which were the ruine of Jerusalem, At strife within your walls? Doe you not see, What spighfull sparklings in their eyes there bee? How sharply, they at one another whet Their slanderous tongues? how grinningly they set Their teeth against each other? And how they With pens dipt in black poyson, doe assay To re-ingage you; and, by cursed words, Provoke the re-unsheathing of your swords, That ev'ry sonne, and father, friend, and brother, May sheath it in the heart of one another? Are you besotted so, not to perceive Who hath befool'd you? who, the snares doe weave, That have intrap'd you? and who spic'd the Bowle Which makes you drunken, stagger, reel and rowle Into perdition? doth it not appeare, That, to prevent the mischiefs which you feare, You run a hazzard, to draw downe upon you A greater, then they ever could have done you, Whom you distrust? And, that, in hope to shun Uncertainties, to certaine deaths you run? Is GOD, now acting for you, and doth lurk Within a cloud, to hide from you his work? And, will you work against him, to destroy That preservation, which you might enjoy, By living to behold that saving-health, Which he was bringing to this Common-wealth?
Have you concluded never to retire In your Career, till all is on a fire? And you, and yours, lie sprawling in the plashes Of your own blood? or, in your Cities ashes? Or, till you view this goodly spacious frame, (The work of many Ages) in a flame? Have you so often heard it said, from him, (Whose true presages, no man will contemn, But Reprobates) what miserable Fate Attends that House, that City, and that State, Which is divided? Have his Prophecies So often been fulfill'd before your eyes? And, are they, at this day, so likely, too, To be, ere long, fulfilled upon you; And, yet, will you a new-division run, As if you studied how to be undone? Or, as if you resolved on that path, Which to avoid, ev'n GOD fore-warn'd you hath? Have I my selfe, by GOD's permission, too, So often told you, what you would mis-do, What courses you would follow; what, reject? Fore-shown you plainly, what it would effect, If you did otherwise? Have you oft seen Those things fulfilled, which fore-told have been, And spoken of them? Nay, have you oft read, And descanted on that which I have said, And jeered my predictions? yet, will you In ev'ry circumstance fulfill them now? Shall I be made (as me in scorn you call) A Prophet, as it were, in spight of all Which I fore-shewed you, with an intent, That you might take occasion to prevent What was fore-told; and make my true predictions. By penitencie, to appear but fictions? Have you crack'd all my Almonds? And (instead Of making them a meanes of taking heed What course you steer'd) so acted, as if you, From them, had tooke occasion to pursue Forbidden paths? that, future times may know GOD'S providence was pleased to fore-show
What would be done by men impenitent, Though warnings doe precede their punishment? But, let that passe, which cannot be undone; And, to prevent, what you, as yet, may shun, Let me upon the credit gotten from Things past, finde means from perills yet to come, Your City to preserve; and, let me lose Or thrive, as I to you shall things propose To be consider'd on, without designe, For any private, or base end of mine; Or to contribute strength to any Faction, Or, weaken anie Party now in action, But as relating to the preservation Of this indanger'd City, State, or Nation. Have you consider'd rightly of the cause Which on your City, this ingagement drawes? And rightly weigh'd it, with all circumstances Thereto belonging; and what 'tis advances Your quarrell to this height? or how you find Those Leaders, by their principles inclin'd, Whose prudence you depend on? do you know How dim the sight of wisest men may grow By private interest, or by respect, To those men whom they malice, or affect, Or to opinions? If not, have a care How you ingage: especially if warre Be like to follow. For, we daily see By those discourses which divulged bee By disagreeing parties; that, when they Each others writings happen to survey, At ev'rie page they seem to take offence, And judge it void of learning, truth, or sense; When he that is as wise, and in his waies Unbiassed, peruseth it with praise. Have you consider'd, seriously, how strong Your foes may prove? how chargeable, how long This warre may be? who, shall the cost defray? How willingly the Citizens will pay That ayd which you may need, when they are made Unable by a long decay of trade?
Yea, when so many thousands want their bread, Who were by constant labour daily fed, And, shall consume their lives, or strength away, By watchings, and hard dutie, night and day? Have you well-weighed, for how long a space Provisions may be stopped from this place? How greatly, Famine may increase your charge? How, want, and nastinesse, may then inlarge The Pestilence begun? how much, the three Dissenting Parties, which among you bee, Your troubles may augment? Or, doe you know, When you advanced are, to meet a foe Without your walls, what mischiefs may begin By meanes of some, whom you must leave within? Especially, when poverty extreme, Revenge, or avarice, hath tempted them, By unexpected opportunities, To act things for their own advantages? Are you, in these particulars, assured, To bee, at each extremitie, secured? Have you conceiv'd, how truly miserable You shall be rendred, if you prove unable To over-come? And, though you victors be, How little comfort thereof you may see When you have summed up, what you shall lose? And (by removing them) what other foes, You may make way for, to the consumation Of all the strength, and glorie, of this Nation? Yet, once againe, look downe into that hell, Wherein you are preparing now to dwell: Can you suppose, that all, whom you intend To arme, your Cause, and City, to befriend, Will act as you expect? Or, think you, they Can do, as much for you, as they can say? Can you, by any caution, be assured, Your goods and families will bee secured From your owne Party? Or, your persons free From outrage, when, among you, there shall be A generall confusion, and their need? And yours, shall daily new distractions breed?
Which ev'rie day, and week, will still grow greater, Till your afflictions have advis'd you better? Can you beleeve, that all your power and wit, (Which make small shew of such effects, as yet) Shall able be, by force, or, gentle waies, To conjure downe the spirits you may raise? Or, draw a circle, or provide a charme So strong, that none of them shall do you harme? Have you some works, which fain you would have done, For your owne ends? and, thinke you, they have none? Or, that, they who did sleight a greater power, Will conscience make of trampling upon your? Or (if provok'd) of treading on you, too, When they dislike of anie thing you do? Can you conceive, that though you armed were Against all those whom you abroad may feare, That, in your streets, your houses, (nay, within Your chambers) there will not (as there hath been) A Party be, which will assay to make Your hopes abortive, if this course you take? Yea, multiply your sorrowes, till th'event Grow desperate? Or, you too late repent; And, shall be over-whelmed with disorders, Fears, out-cries, violences, flames, and murthers? Do you believe, those listed Reformadoes, Who puffe you up with vauntings and bravadoes? (Mistake me not; I purpose no disgrace To all (who now abiding in this place, Are cast out of imploiment) do you think, Those, who are most couragious in their drink? Those, of the roaring Frenchified-Rout, With untruss'd breeches, with shirts hanging out, And Codpeeces beribanded about With partie-colour'd Inkle? Or, that those Apprentices, who late in tumults rose, And, without check (to your perpetuall shame) To force th'unguarded Senate, rudelie came, (And foamed raging furie at their doore, Like billowes beating on the patient shore) Think you, that such as these ordain'd have been
To save you from the feares that you were in? To be Deliverers, do you believe These likey? or, are those, who to receive New entertainment (and perhaps old pay) Have onely aim'd at, such like men as may Be so reli'd upon; as, to ingage Your Citie now, a second warre to wage? If so; Oh! be more cautious, be more sage. Oh, where! where now, is all that piety, That prudence, and that Christian charity, Which you pretended to? where is that care Of publike safetie which did once appeare? Where is that conscience of the preservation Of your owne families from desolation, Which doth or should in ev'rie Christian dwell, That is not far below an Infidell? Oh! be not wilfull in the prosecution Of an unfit and frantick resolution, Which, doubtlesse, by the malice of the Devill (And by his instruments) is now for evill Instill'd into you; that, he might make void Those hopes, which we, e're this time, had enjoi'd, If want of faith, and love, to one another, Indanger'd not our perishing together. Be, therefore, well advis'd, what will ensue, Before this cursed warre you do renew? Be not deluded, or provok'd by those Who care not how your Citie they expose To hardship, and to hazzard: For, it may Indanger all; if J know what I say. Invite you not, from ev'rie quarter, hither Those plagues, and those confusions, altogether, Of which most places now have had a tast; Lest, all the storm descend on you at last; And you constrained be to swallow up The verie dregs of their most bitter cup, As you by Riddles, intimation had; Though you of them, out small accompt have made; And, as all use to doe, whose sins are ripe, And, take no warnings, till they feel the stripe.
Regard not, what your flatterers pretend, But, rather, hearken to your faithfull friend, Who plainly doth fore-see, the sad effects, To which your course intended, now directs. Be, yet, perswaded, your own selves to pity; Your friends, your little ones, your wives, your City; And do not unadvisedly fulfill Your foes designes; by your perverted will: What is't to me, what course you pitch upon, Who to the world-ward wholly am undone, And ruined alreadie, by neglects, Of justice, on th'one side; and by th'effects Of war, on t'other? and, whose cheef wealth lies In those things, which the world doth most despise? And which (I hope) till I my life shall finish, Nor peace nor war, nor ought els, shall diminish? What have I got? or what can I obtaine By seeking thus, your madnesse to restraine, But their displeasure, who delight in war? And, my despightfull foes, alreadie are? The profit will be yours; And, this alone My recompence will be, that I have done My dutie, in perswading you unto That, which my heart believes, you ought to do. Contemn not, therefore, what I now advise, Though I may seem despised, in their eyes, Who counsell otherwise. Seek to be quiet; And, add this short-receipt unto your diet: To qualifie your selfe-destroying-rage, Take, Time, Rue, Patience; and as much of Sage As may be needfull: Then, mix speedily All these ingredients, and, them so apply As you have oft been taught; So, GOD shall cure Or qualifie this English-Calenture; Which is, an Epidemicall disease, That, on this nation, every where doth seize, As did the Sweating Sicknesse: If we may Confide, in what Chronologers do say. Why will ye perish and indanger all Your neighbours; and, three Kingdomes by your fall,
Since you may shun it, and be safe and blessed? A refuge, to the needie, and oppressed? What moveth you, that, to escape a feare, You flie into a mischiefe, or a snare? What is it makes you feare, where no feare is, And, fearelesse of true dangers, but, ev'n this, That, neither of GOD'S threats, you awefull grow; Nor love your neighbour, as you ought to doe? Some of you, have, it seems, a thirst for blood, And, peradventure, for that reason, GOD Will give them blood to drink. Their heart is far From peace; and, he will come to them, in war. The sons of Consolation have been scorned; And, therefore, he his Messengers hath turned To sons of thunder, who, as they desire, Will speake to them in Sulphure and in Fire. A Spirit of detraction, and of lying, On paper-wings, among you hath been flying, Till, as it seems, GOD hath, for that offence, Expos'd you to a reprobated sense, Believing lies; and, to an Appetite Bewitched with a gluttonous delight In blasphemies, and falshoods; which are vented For every mornings breakfast, newly minted: And, that grosse diet, hath begot in you Those evill humours, which distemper, now, Your Bodie-Politike; and makes your Peace Disrelish, by a loathsome nauseousnesse. You may, perchance, believe, by their delusions, Who have abus'd your trust, to your confusions, And their own shame; that, you your selves are banding, For Christ his Kingdome: And, arm, for withstanding Of his opposers: But, take heed, I pray, Lest you prove, rather, to be such as they, Who, think they do GOD service, when they spill. The blood of those, who seek to do his will. I will, and must acknowledge, that in you There is a zeale: But, this is also true, That, most of you have not obtained, yet, That knowledge, which true Zealots doth befit.
Religious, I confesse, you are; and, so, The Jewes were too, when GOD did overthrow Their greatest City; yea, they never seem'd So worthily devout to be esteem'd, (According to their Law) yet, then GOD shook Their whole foundation, and quite from them took That Law, and place, for which they did not spare Their lives, nor ought, which unto them was dear. Yea, through that means, by which they would prevent That losse, they lost it: Ev'n when innocent, And guiltlesse blood they spilt: And, they who run Their course, will doubtlesse fare as they have done. Your selves therefore delude not, with bare showes Of sanctitie; but seriously dispose Your minds to charity, that Christian peace May setled be; and bruitish discord cease. For, all your pious, and your morall works Are nothing better, then are those of Turks, Or Pagans, till a will renew'd doth move To action, by a principle of love. You preach; but, preach ye Christ, with lesse contention, And, that shall be of strife a good prevention: You write; but, put lesse gall into your ink; And, let not your expressions tast, and stink Of bitter slanders, to the provocation Of vengeance, and of furious indignation: For, when from us unseemingly speeches flow, Although out cause be right, we are not so. You fast: But, if you fast not more from strife, Oppression, pride, and from a wicked life; Your fastings, never will procure your peace, But, rather, your confusions more increase. You pray: But, pray as Phineas did; and wee Shall better fruits of your long-prayer see. You list your selves, the Army to resist: But, to be reconcil'd, have better list Then you have had: And, seek, and follow more The likely way of peace, then heretofore. For, you may conquer more with loving words, Then with your pistolls, and your naked swords: And, you shall get more profit and more praise,
Then by those Forces you intend to raise: And, thousands, who would dying, curse your rage, Shall live, and blesse you, in another age. What makes you, and our Army now to bee, So jealous of-each other as, we see, But, ev'n selfe-love and pride, which you, and they Pursue in others? Or, because each day You more and more, in manners grow like them, Whose guiltinesse you raile at, and condemn? For, most of those, who in these times pretend To Reformation, do but seem to mend Their neighbours faults, that, they, thereby, to make Themselves, and Fortunes, may occasion take; Yea, zealouslie they labour to remove And punish Tyrants: But, it may from love, And not from hate of Tyrannie arise, That, they remove those men who tyrannize. For, it is done, perhaps, that in the roome Of Tyrants, they, like Tyrants may become; Else 'twere not possible, that we should see Suppressed Tyrants, ev'rie day to be Out-vi'd by their Successors; and out-gone By those, who blamed most, what they have done. 'Tis not, because you seek the publike good, That you renew this War: For, letting-blood, (Especially, now when the Dog-starre reignes) So neare the heart, and in those master-veines, Now likely to be op'ned, seemes, to me, Not Physicke, but, true butcherie, to be. 'Tis not for GOD, that you do now promove This Quarrell: For, you know, that GOD is Love; And, when he doth ingage you in a warre, It alwaies evidently doth appeare, How it conduceth to the preservation Of amity, and union, in a Nation; And that we cannot otherwise avoid The having of those Freedomes quite destroid, By which we should conserve it: But, in this Your quarrell, no such thing apparent is. 'Tis not, because one Party doth incline Unto a differing forme of Discipline,
Which t'other side dislikes, from whence arose This Quarrell, (though from thence it partly flowes:) For, prudence, wheresoever love remaines, In any measure, tempers or restraines From all extremes; as you by those may see, Who moderate in either Partie bee, And firm to principles, which do preserve The essence of our Faith: And, they observe That your contentions, rather, do arise From fleshly lusts, and carnall vanities, Then from that zeale pretended; and, there's none Will doubt it, if you wilfullie go on In bloud-sned; and, indeavour not for grace, To make your fury, give discretion place. 'Tis not the fallings, or the imperfections Of your opinions, but, of your affections, Which heightens discords; and a will to please Back-sliding Demas, and Diotrophes, Which hath surpriz'd you. 'Tis a disregard Of Justice, in chastisements, and reward, And, that respect of persons, which each side Is guilty of; if both bee not beli'd. For, if by simptomes, I the truth may gather, The City, and the Army too, had rather Adventure their safe being (by deniall Of yeelding up their minions to triall) Then to permit, that Justice shall proceed Impartially. Both are, it seems, agreed, What ever their well-willers do propose, To save their Malefactors, though they lose Themselves, and all their Tribe, (as, for that crime, The Benjamites once did, in former time) And (which more aggravates) ev'n thus they do, Though they have seen the King, for doing so, Set halfe beside his Throne; And, though they see This Parliament, indangered to bee, Ev'n for the selfe-same fault: So hard a thing, It is, ev'n for the best of men, to bring Their wills, and their affections, to submit To justice, though they cannot fly from it.
But, they will still be trying to avoid Her just injunctions, till they bee destroi'd, And hence, hence, chieflie floweth all those factions, Those mischiefs, discords, and all those distractions, That are among us; And, he that assayes To shew them the disorder of their wayes, (And their unsafenesse) though with no intent, But, their, and your destruction, to prevent: Or, when he minds them of it, though he spares Their persons; And the matter so prepares, By couching it in generalls, that they Who are to blame, correct their errours may, Without disgrace; yet, they return him still, Unkindnesses (at least) for his good will; Deprive him, of his freedome, or estate; Eclipse his credit, or his person hate; Or, at the best, regard what he hath spoke, No more then doth a Starue, or a block. And, ten to one, when some of those doe hear These motives unto peace; they, will go near To question it before Authoritie, As if I had enfeebled much thereby, The peoples hands. The Jewes, to this effect, In such a case, did spightfully object Against the life of Ieremie; but, he Who sav'd him then, will do the like for mee. Oh! let the Citie; Let our Army too, Consider wisely, what they have to do; And, that, among the best, are imperfections Which call to us, for brotherly affections To cover them; and, helps, to cure them, rather, Then Instruments to seek, or, Armes to gather To spoile each other. 'Tis our Ignorances And want of, love and meeknesse which advances Our spleenes against our brethren. We so long Have, at each other, bitter-speakings flung. And shot the Arrowes of revising words; That, they provoke us, to unsheath our swords, And, execute; before it doth appeare Which partie is to blame; and which is cleare: Or, whether any cause may be perceived,
Why both (though guilty) may not be reprieved. Their party, or their single interest Doth, oft, so biasse men from what is best For them to practise: And, vain policy In outward seeming, doth appeare so nigh To blamelesse prudence; that it drawes them on To thinke injustice warrantable done: Or, that, (at least) it warrants them to think, They, at injustice, in their own, may wink: Especially, if they conceive, it may From anie good designe, take strength away. And this false principle, and wrong proceed, Made thereupon, much injurie doth breed. This makes, the Presbyterian-Party mad, That, anie of their side, though nev'r so bad, Should question'd be. This, also blinds them so From seeing what it doth invite them to, That it hath rend'red them much willinger To hazzard all by a renewing-war, Then, leave them to that triall, which perchance Would cleare them; And their innocence advance. This maketh manie, on the other side, As partiall, and unable to abide That, their partakers, should with ought be charged: Whereas, had their impeachments been inlarged With such of their own party, who, by fame Proclaimed are, to be no lesse to blame, Then some accused; And, of whose offence, They might have got as good intelligence; It had prevented all those jealousies, Which from their seeming partialities, Have lately sprung; and, which will be removed, When they, who so advised, have improved Their counsell into practise; As e're this It had been done; but, that, you know there is A Remora in most things; and, that some To all good motions, opposites become. Had they (as I presume they mean to do) Cast resolutely off, all leaning to That, which their party doth denominate, And, only sought the setling of the State,
According to the Lawes; and how to bring An Union 'twixt the people and the King, By bringing all, indifferently to bide Th'impartiall Test, by which they should be tri'd; It had, before this day, a period set, To our chiefe troubles. And, this peace is, yet, But, for a time, deferr'd; unlesse you marre That future blessing, by a present warre. Demur, therefore, a while, e're you pursue Those thoughts or actions, which your hearts may rue, Doe not false courage from those vap'rings take, Or, those high-flying vaunts, which they do make, Who would engage you; though, with fair preten To reason, justice; and with confidence, They would beguile you. For, no men appear More arrogant, more bold, or lesse to fear Then they, whom GOD infatuates, rejects, And giveth over unto those effects, Which their owne wit to put in action those, As in despight of what he doth propose. Let not those foolish, fruitlesse, policies, (Those impudent and those truth-seeming lies) Which they on all occasions do invent, As their most usefull gin and instrument To worke their ends; Let not these draw you to Their course, from that, wherein you ought to go: For, they do but delude you. When ye heare That, they give out, the Counties will appeare To be your aid; believe it not, till you Perceive them coming: For, they do not know Your Quarrell; neither why you should oppose Your most deserving Friends, as greatest Foes. When you shall heare them, for the King pretend, That, they may draw his party, to befriend Their new designe. Or, when they cry, The King! The King! The King! with promises to bring His person hither; and make shew to settle Your peace by him: Believe them, but a little, For, they who so pretend, do neither dare To bring him hither; neither able are. And, though they were; The King so well descries
Where, his best play, and chief advantage, lies; What, with his principles, may best agree; Why, they, who would not have him, willing bee To have him now: Yea, so to him 'tis known, Who for the publike ends; who, for their own, Restrain him, or inlarge him; whom to trust; Who, firm, or fickle were; who false, or just, Either to him, or others; And, hath made So many proofs, of things whereof he had No triall heretofore; that, well I know, His bought experience will permit him, now, To trust to none but them, whose honestie Is their chief honour, and best policie: And, when GOD hath inclin'd him, so to do; He shall trust us, and we shall trust him too. That, this Conjunction may not be prevented, Let that, which you determine, be repented. Quench, ere too late, the fire which is begun; And, lest, to be unquenchable it run, Remove the fewell; powre upon the flame True penitentiall teares; And, grow more tame, More wise, more charitable, yea, more meek; And, in GOD'S grace, your peace and safetie seek: Which, cannot be expected, whilst with them, You are at variance, who are dear to him; Or, whilst you those resist, whom he doth call To do his work; although, perhaps, they shall Not do it for his sake, as they pretend; But, for their owne, and some unworthy end. By, generally, shutting up your shops, Make not a sad obstruction, in the hopes Of your subsistance; which, will over-soone Consumed be, though that were left undone: For, by this Stratagem, your Polititians, Will but accelerate their own perditions, By heightning of their furie, who thereby, Shall feele the gripes of helplesse povertie: Use, rather, what good meanes your wits afford As well to keep off hunger, as the sword; That, you may have a being, till GOD please To consummate the cure of this disease.
Take heed, what those good Priests, and Prophets say, Who preach to you, a charitable way, Unto your peace; And, do not be beguil'd By those, who counsell to divide the Child; But, trust unto his wisdome, and his doome From whom, the sentence, on your wayes, must come: And if you needs will armed be, put on (As you ought, long ere this time, to have done) The Christians compleat Armes. For, then, if you Shall be destroyed, so, will I be too. If, for the publike-weal, that Host appeare, Of whose intents, you seeme to stand in fear; You have no cause of dread. If, they conceale A private ayme, beneath a publike zeale; Or vaile their pride, their Avarice, or hate, With Godlinesse, or service to the State; If they shall seek, one faction to suppresse; Indulge the wicked, or the wickednesse Of their owne partie; And, proceed, as tho God would not heed, what they unjustly do; Then, God himselfe against them shall appeare; And, for your Cities guard, a standard reare: A buckler he shall weild, and interpose 'Twixt you, and them, to ward away their blowes: Then, he shall save you from their crueltie, And, be aveng'd on their hypocrisie, Without your guilt: And, crumble them, till they, With all their hopes, and glories, fume away; As theirs have done, who out of grace were thrust, In former times, for their abused trust. And, this will be, successively, the doome, That shall on all our false Reformers come, Till all such perish; and, till such appear, As, neither will, for profit, love, or teare, Corrupted be. If, for sinister ends, You false have plaid, with your wel-meaning Friends: If, you, to gain advantages, have straid From due performing ought, which you have said: If, out of wilfulnesse, or, out of pride, And haughtinesse of minde, you thus provide To give them battell; GOD will finde it out,
And punish, till amendment he hath wrought. Yea, both of you, if both of you shall be Alike perverse, alike reward will he. But, hark! a strong Alarum I doe heare, The Army, you so dread, is drawing neare, And, will not long be hence; I will therefore (Before the Drums beat, and the Cannons roare Too loud for them to heare me) now direct Some words to them, in hope of good effect: For, thousands of them know me: and, perchance, It may more profit you, then an advance With all your force against them. Howsoever; Ile try, how GOD will prosper my endeavour. Friends of that honour'd Army, by whom, we Have had assistance; and, yet hope to see This War concluded; me with patience heare. And, to that end, a little while forbeare To prosecute that worke, which may be done Yet soon enough. And, oh! I feare, too soone. I come with no defiance; nor to bring A charge against you, touching any thing Wherein you may be censur'd to abuse Your power or trust: For, thereof to accuse, I neither have Commission, nor intent: Nor knowledge, have I, were I thereto bent, Of the determinations, or the waies Which you pursue; save, as that Rumour sayes, Whose contradictions, do so much condemn Her owne Relations, that, I trust not them. Nor do I blame you, though it be confest In your expresses, that you have transgrest The bounds of Common-Order, in some things: Because, to me experience, knowledge, brings Of that Necessity, which lawfull makes What Law forbids: And, that when self-will takes A lawlesse Liberty, which may disable To save the publike, by meanes warrantable, In ordinarie course; the SUMMUM JUS Of humane nature, then, intitles us, Unto a rightfull freedome, to dispense With anie humane Law, in our defence.
Because, our preservation, is that end, Whereto all Lawes do principally tend. Now, whether you necessitated were To such a course, you more concerned are In weighing it then I; and, better know Upon what grounds you have conceived so. I know that such necessities may be; I know, that they, who feel them, best can see, How great they are: I, likewise know, that they And their adherents, who the tyrants play, Have seldome such necessities confest, To light on any, till they were opprest Beyond repaire; And, therefore, leaving, now, This matter to be scan'd, alone, by you, And your own consciences; I will present What, I think, future mischiefs may prevent. If, therefore, now, among you, any be Who need it, take this brief advice of me. If you come armed, not for war, but peace, And, look, that GOD should your proceedings blesse; Remember those main principles, whereon You seem to ground, what hath, by you, been done. GOD's glory, publike safety, and the Lawes, With your just liberty, were all the cause Of your engaging; and, therefore take heed, That, you for no designement, now, proceed, Of private consequence, least you destroy The hope of that, which you might els enjoy. Let, in your sight, your brethrens blood be deare; Let not the riches of this place, appeare A prize, to draw, or tempt you, further then Becometh just, and bravely-minded men. To this renowned City, wherein you Have many Friends, a true compassion show, Though she provok'd you; know, that nobler, far, Are Saviours, then an Executioner. Let Justice have due course, though hand she lay Upon your Darlings: For, one Achan may Indanger your whole Camp; and you have seen How plagued, for Injustice, wee have been. From needlesse violence, with-hold your hands,
Let moderation be in your demands; That, by your actions, they, whose Papers flie, To your dishonour, may receive the lie. To utter now unto you, I have more, Yea, many things materiall, yet, in store. But, whil'st this line is writing, I am told, Oh, Line is enter'd, and our Southerne-Hold. And, therefore, here I pawse— These words are vain; and, all, that we can do, Except, GOD adds his blessing thereunto. "O LORD! thou great Peace-maker, therfore say, "Amen to that, for which I now shall pray. "Out of our present dangers, safety bring; "Out of our darknesse, let thy true light spring; "Peace, out of these our warres; love, out of hate; "Out of disorders, a well-setled State. "Let People, City, King, and Parliament, "And, all dissenting-parties, now, assent, "And, so, unite; that, none may them divide: "Make us well principled; and, so, abide. "Make us sincerely practise, and professe "A single-Truth, in simple-Righteousnesse. "Yea, now, when all the Powers within this Land, "Are in confusion, and amazed stand, "Affrighted by each other; now, when sin "Is like to hazzard all; do thou begin "To work alone; and, raise, thou, out of that, "A Change, which all the Land shall wonder at. "And, if my own corruptions be not, yet, "Too many, such a blessing to permit, "Minde me in mercy too; And, minde me, so, "That, they, who have oppressed me, may know, "I am a Servant, who, to thee, is deare; "What ever, to the world, I may appeare: "And, hasten that Deliverance, O LORD! "Which thy compassion shall to me afford: "For, in my sufferings, I am left alone; "And, friend, or hope, but thee, LORD! I have none. Fiat voluntas Dei.
