W3206 E1217_2 99863803 116018
Vaticinium Votivum: OR, PALAEMON'S Prophetick PRAYER. Lately presented Privately To His now MAJESTIE In a Latin Poem; and here Pub∣lished in English. To which is annexed a Paraphrase on Paulus Grebnerus's Prophecie. With several ELEGIES ON CHARLS the FIRST. The Lord Capel. The Lord Francis Villiers. TRAJECTI. Anno CAROLI MARTYRIS primo.
EPIGRAMMA. REGUM Progenies, cujus Diademate nascens Fulsit apex triplici, quem Tria Sceptra colunt: Quem tria Sceptra colunt Te sors tamen invidet illis; Arcétque à Patrio Gens mal-fida Sinu. Macte animis, sic fata jubent quae stamina Magni Imperii, occultâ sed ratione, trahunt. Extorri sic Dulichio sua Regna videre, Non nisi post long as illa dedêre vices: Ac variis debet terraeque marisque periclis Quicquid ei famae secula longa dabunt.
Natus Maii 29. Ano. 1630. Aetatis suae 19.
To His Majestie. SIR, WIth truce to Your more serious Contempla∣tions, my humble Muse hath here pre∣sumed to re-kiss Your Highness Hands, and once more wait on Your noble Recreations. When shee received her first admission into your Princelie Presence, shee was but in the Nonage of her Minoritie, and indeed in her first Coats; upon these her second Addresses to Your Court, shee hath put on her Richer robes of State; and for her Convoie, shee hath made Choice of som Persons of Honor both to attend and bear up her Train. With her Habit too, shee hath altered her Speech; and shee that the last year Courted Your Majestie in Latin onely, hath now varied her Tone, and breathed forth her dutie in a double Dialect.
This Ode (as I may call it) which was then warbled onely with a single voice, is now Set in Parts, and tuned in a sweeter Symphonie by a select Chore and Consort of the Muses. I hope no jarring or disagreeing Notes here will sound harsh in Your Harmonious ears; if they should, I shall bee verie sorrie that I have toucht the Lyre, and the next Lesson shall be∣gin and end in my own Recantation. 'Tis true, I must confess the Shrine to which these Poems are consecrated, is too Magnificent; and the whole Miscellanie of these Paper-Oblati∣ons is too too mean: let them therefore bee Burnt, and the Flame of them may happily lend mee light enough to see mine own Error, and their Pre∣sumption. In a word; the whole Woof and Warp of these Fancies is weav'd and wound up in the Pious Ejaculations of Your Majesties Liege People, the Epiphonema of whose Pathetick and Votive Acclamations, is a serious Praier for the Advance of Your Sacred Majestie, and Your Glorious Inauguration.
The Popular and spreading Sparkles of this Zeal, which have kindled Beacons and Bone∣fires of Devotion in the hearts of Your Three Kingdoms, have in mee begot a sublimer Flame of Dutie, which hath been both fed and raised by the Fuel and Fomentation of Your Princelie Favors. In this Flame I here humblie Offer up the In∣cens of these Praiers at the Glorious Altar of Your Great Name; and in this better Sacrifice of Obedience, I most submissively acquiesce SIR, The humblest of Your Majesties most Loial, and most sin∣cerely devoted Subjects PALAEMON. —Quo non manet observantior alter Imperiis REX magne Tuis.—
Serenissimo Augustissimóque Principi CAROLO Secundo, &c. Prooemium. REX sacer auspiciis Sceptri felicibus orte! Sola salus Populi, deliciúmque DEI! Quem Figulus magni elegit Supremus Olympi Vas speciale sibi, vas generale suis. Magna Patris magni Soboles! spes alta Britannis, Regius Augustos cui dedit ortus Avos. Ipse ego quae vestris suffundam carmina Sceptris? O quae Te magno CAROLE digna Precer! Vive diu felix; sis Te felicior; aevi, Nulla nec Imperii terminet hora Tui. Exupera meritis Augustum, Nestora seclis, Nervam laude, Numam Pace, favore Titum. In spes cresce novas, quot profert messis Aristas, Vel quot odoriferas terra refundit opes. Cresce, impléque Tuis totum Virtutibus orbem; Albion auspiciis Olbion ipsa Tuis. Dum tibi multiplices superaddant Fata Coronas Et Tibi quot Terrae, tot famulentur Aquae.
Au Roy de la grand Bretaigne. CHARLES II. ODE. DIeux, Protecteurs de l' Innocence, Pouués vous encor resister; A faire bien tost é clatter Les foudres de vostre vengeance? N'aues vous pas assez tenté; De fléchir par l' Impunité Ces âmes pleines de Malice? Et n'est il pas bien tost saison De faire agir vostre Justice Puis qu'on foule aux pieds la Raison? 2. Ie scay bien que vostre Tonnerre, Gronde long temps sur les Humains, Auant q'uil parte de vos mains Pour venir foudroyer la Terre: Les hauts chesnes sont menacez, Premier que d'estre terrassez Par les sé coucesses des tempestes; Et je scay que vostre Bonté Ne frappe q'uà regret nos testes Des coups q'uelles ont merité. Place this between Folio 74, 75.
3. Mais lors que des Perfides Ames, Par leurs desseins audacieux, On porté jusque dans les Cieux Les éclats des Civilles Flâmes: Lors que jusques dans les Enfers Ils ont esté chercher des fers, Afin d'armer Leurs Barbaries; Devez vous pas, Dieux Tout-puissans, Faire choir ces Noires Furies Aux Prieres des Innocens? 4. Desia de buict Hyuers les Marbres Brisent leurs crystaux inconstans. E'desia huit fois le Printemps Rend leur verte depouïlle aux arbres: Depuis que ces Caeurs de Rocher, Qui n'ont que la forme de chair, S'endurcissans dedans leurs crimes; Pillent sans restitution Trois Peuples, rendus les victimes De leur sanglante Ambition.
Nul Sexe, Rang, ny Privilege, Du Roy jusques au Laboureúr, Ná peu décliner la fureur De leur Cruanté Sacrilege: Tous Aziles sont violez, Mille beaux Palais desolez De leur rage portent les marques; Bref, leurs Complots noirs & méchans Ont lassé le Ciseau des Parques Dedans les Villes & les Champs. 6. Leur insatiable Avarice, S'attacquant mesme aux Immortels, De la dépouïlle des Autels A presque fait le Ciel complice: Car déguisant sa Lascheté Sous un masque de Pieté, Qui pour le fruit donne l'écorce: Elle ensorcelle la Raison, Et sous cette traitresse amorce Abbreuue l'ame de poison.
7. Mais c'est en vain, Race Maudite, Que pour colorer vos desseins, Dessous des visages de Saints Vous cachez un Caeur Hypocrite: Vostre Zele malicieux, Deuant le Tribunal des Cieux Découure à nud son imposture; C'est un Flot q'uon ne peut calmer; C'est un Feu, Duquel la Nature Ne prend plaisir quà consumer. 8. Puisse enfin ce Zele prophane, Leur faire auoir le mesme sort Du Grec, quia paya de sa mort Le Temple bruslé de Diane: Que leurs Noms demeurent fameux Dans la race de nos Neueux Parla honte de leurs Supplices; Et puisse la Posterité, Considerant leurs Precipices, Douter s'ils ont jamais esté.
9. Mais non: il faut que ton Histoire, CHARLES, Ressource de nos maux, Pour Chef-daeuure de Tes Trauaux En éternise la Memoire: C'est la volonté des Destins Q'uon voye unjour sur ces mutins Ta juste Colere assouuie; Et que leur Fameux Chastiment Dedans le recit de Ta vie Trouue à jamais son monument. 10. Va donc, que le Ciel Te prospere, Contre ces Titans inhumains, Et consacre Tes jeunes Mains A vanger Le Sang de Ton PERE: O ROY! pour qui tout l'Ʋniuers Fait les mesmes veux que mes Vers, Te souhaittant des jours plus calmes: La rage de ces Aquilons Ne souffle, q'ua fin que Tes PALMES Croissent mieux sous leurs Tourbillons.
De Regis Magnae Britanniae CAROLI I. in Insulam Vectim secessu, Obeunte Anno MDCXLVII. DUm propè septenum Civili in Marte Decembrem, Insula Magna, olim Pacis alumna, subit: Dum petit infando Sceptri pia jura Tumultu, Et ciet iratos in sua Allnsio ad nomen Angl. Vots.Vota Deos: Impia dum tutas CAROLO negat Anglia Sedes: Excipit Hunc parvo Vectis Tunc enim putabatur Regis securitati invigi∣latura, & ab ejus partibus statura.amica sinu. Quid monstri hoc, Britones? Sol vester currit in ortum, Quaerit & Eoäs Phoebus anhelus aquas? Anne Thyestaeam nova monstra aequantia coenam Ipse fugit, radiis ut nocitura suis? Scilicet, & retrò hinc vobis patet omnia ferri, Vestráque in adversas currere fata vices. Definite infensos moniti jam temnere Divos; Sin minùs, aeternâ nocte cavete tegi.
Ad Eundem. Postquam S. M. interfuisset in Insulae Vectis Conventûs tempore, circà finem Anni MDCXLVIII. HAud aliter laeto Phoebum post nubila spectat Lumine jam longo quassa carina Noto: Quàm me nunc Sacrae juvat oscula, CAROLE, dextrae Figere; quàm vultus posse videre tuos. O REX! venturis Pia quem Patientia seclis Commendat, Patriae prodit & esse Patrem. Nunc quoscunque volet nectat Fortuna labores, Sors mihi, Te viso, nulla nocere potest.
Upon His MAIESTIES Arrival at the Isle of Wight. LEt Turkie boast of Empire; France of Law; Venice of Site; Gold, India; Water, Spaw. Trade and Religions, London, Amsterdam; Of Greatness Florence; or the Tartar Cam. All these concenter in one spot, one span, The Isle of Wight, and CHARLS the Ile of MAN. A MAN whose mind's above the Turkish Crest, A KING who make's good Laws, and keep's them best: A PRINCE who like to well-built Venice stand's, In mid'st of Waters, yet in sight of Lands: Whose Roial Breast's an India, where's a Mint Of Golden thoughts; base ones were ne're coin'd in't. Whose Gift (as waters have a fame) can heal Th' Evil, Oh would it might the Common-weal! Hee trade's not in Religions; yet own's one Profest by most, Practis'd by Him, or none. Fortunate Isle! to thee ill fortune bring's If not the Greatest, yet the Best of Kings.
PALAEMONIS Vaticinium Votivum. ALtera vix reducem Floram spoliaverat Aestas, Exquo Caesareas, superatis fluctibus, Arces, Discordem fugiens Populum divisá{que} Regna, Liquerat, ut Gallos inviseret Inclytus hospes CAROLUS; & fati consors haec Regia proles Adstaret carae Genitrici, quam mala dudum Occultis laetata dolis Fortuna, tenebat Immeritis trinos jactatam cladibus annos, Liligeri excelsas ubi Sequana Principis arces Alluit, & Germana Dryas nemus incolit altum. 2. Illic dum variis sua PRINCEPS otia curis Exercet, Phoebique artes colit atque Dianae, Ludicra vel ficti tractat certamina Martis,
(Quae quum fata dabunt veros convertat in usus,) Dúmque pilae alterno modò tempus fallere jactu, Vel saltu juvat aut disco, vel fraena feroci Quadrupedi dare, vel circo componere gressus: Una magis grandes animos infixa remordet Altiùs & toto se volvit pectore cura, Quae vetat hunc placidos occurrens carpere somnos, Nutantis Patriae laesique Parentis imago. Ergò ubi lenta dies Fatorum ex ordine fulsit, Quâ Populo indicat poenas vindicta Rebelli, Et patiens nimiùm Pietas jubet addere coeptis Consiliis jam fessa manum, nè facta ruentis Sit rea & ipsa mali, si perstet parcere ferro, Flectere quum rigidas nequeat Clementia mentes: Haud mora, quò sua fata vocant huc tendere cursu. 3. Dum verò amplexu properat discedere Matris Ille, Patrem volvens animo; discinditur aequis Partibus Illustris Pietas atque haeret utrique. Nota tamen Patris sors undique tristior urgens, Accelerat dubium: sicque impiger advolat oras Ad Batavûm; atque (oculis vix dum lustrata) relinquit Littora, sollicitis ubi dudum Nereus undis
Classem asservabat, grandique immania dorso Gestabat, multo sed non sine murmure, Monstra Quinque & bis septem, terrere valentia Phocas: Has nuper pia cura Dei, de gente rebelli Legitimum Justo tulit oblatura triumphum PRINCIPI, ut illa forent successûs omina fausti. His vectus, multo comitatu insignis & armis, CAROLUS alta petit, cedentiáque aequora sulcat. Tum vota ad Superos multo cum murmure defert, Explosóque quatit vicinum sulphure littus Machina, Coelicolûm cujus vox permeat arces. Exciti raucâ Tritones aëra conchâ Implent, & Nymphae choreas circùm agmine ducunt, Gratóque exultant pressi sub pondere fluctus. 5. Et sic, Heroüm fidâ stipante caterv, CAROLUS oppositas laeto alite tendit in oras. Tum verò Britonum, cui semper chara Tridentis Est & Tergemini Ponto inclyta gloria Sceptri, Littore prospiciens, oculis dum vela recedunt Et rapit aura rates, haec orsus vota PALAEMON. 6. "Nereïdum Glauique cohors, tandem excipe laetas "PRINCIPIS Augusti Puppes. Vos ponite, venti,
"Insanos fremitus; arctis vinctique catenis "Desinite in Pontum rabido saevire flagello, "Immanésque agitare iras: PAX regnet in undis: "Et placidi Britonas cingant fausto omine fluctus. "Ac veluti sacros quum destinat edere foetus "Alcyon, & Thetidi pullos committit amicae; "Sit vobis haec festa dies, quâ CAROLUS altum "Scandit & ulcisci laesos meditatus honores "Et Patris & Sceptri, Gentem & sedare rebellem, "Jamdudum optatos Pacis parat edere fructus. 7. O Regum soboles! cui nostra haec carmina surgunt, Parce precor magnis Tu paulum, CAROLE, curis. Sollicitúmque Tui carmen dignare faventi Lumine, & haec aures mereantur tangere sacras. Quae Tibi fatidico panduntur Apolline vota. I nunc, & Zephyro solùm comitante, carinis Scinde Tuis liquidos illaeso tramite sulcos, Subjectúmque Patris nunc credas Nerea Sceptris; Ille Tuum nam sternit iter, famuláque ministrat Puppibus ipse manu, nociturósque amovet imbres. O quàm se tali dignum laetatur honore, Séque oneri supponit ovans, non pube superbus,
Quippe adeò fuit Heroüm queîs claruit Argos, Thessala quum classis Phryxei littora Regis Diripuit, quamvis multa illos secula jactent, Et sint aeternis Astrorum nomina fastis Inserta, auratâ cum Puppe, & vellere rapto. Graecia nîl etenim, quâ vindice fulget Iason, Ficta tenet, veros quod PRINCIPIS aequet honores Aeternum noménque mei, quo clarus ab Indis Splendet ad Oceanum cui Phoebus lumina condit. 8. Macte igitur, facilémque Jovis sperato favorem Quò te fata vocant Regni, lacerique Penates. Nascitur ecce novum tibi vellus & altera Cholchis: Sed famosa magis quàm quâ se Graecia jactat: Tangit enim Tua Caussa Deos hominésque vicissim, Atque decus laesae Themidis: dum saevit habenis Audaci violátque manu sacra jura Britannûm Gens fera laxatis; quam facta immanibus aequent Titanum Monstris, sua quos audacia fixit Et malè tentatum facinus radicibus Aetnae, Suppliciúmque dedit Cyclopum pascere flammas. Sic propriâ Haec Gens mole ruat, cui infanda superbo Consilia impulsu tantum suasere furorem;
Martis ut in Patriam saevos accenderet ignes, Utqueministerio Regum atria sancta prophano Pollueret, vetitásque manu tractaret habenas Impiâ, & optaret caput inter nubila condi. 9. Vade ergò, Regum ô Soboles! & tuta pererrans Neptuni famulos fluctus, jam Numine dextro Utere; linque moras, nascentésque erige vires Et procerum & Populi, quorum spirantia cultum Pectora fida Tuum mala non infecit Erynnis, Sed mente intrepidâ Tua, CAROLE, fata sequuntur. 10. Certè, aut veridicâ nos lauro fallit Apollo, Nec valet obscuri secreta aperire futuri; Aut quas Eumenidum furialis dextera torsit Conjurata faces jamjam vanescere, nigris Condere séque antris video, simul atque coruscum Fulserit Augusti capitis jubar, & Tua notas Lux optata diu Britonum percusserit oras. Ac veluti, primos quum Titan exerit ignes, Et Thetidis rubicunda sinus Aurora deaurat, Littus in oppositum noctis se lumina condunt, Praecipitántque fugam: medio vel summus in axe Quum stat, & aequalis partitur pensa diei,
Luminis atque idem vitae dator; intima rursum Lustra colunt umbrásque ferae, lemurésque fugati Nocturnaeque striges repetunt feralia tecta: Sic simul ac Patrium rutilis lustraverit Orbem Sol novus hic radiis; vanescent saeva ferarum Portenta, illicitas dudum exercentia praedas, Atque fugam trepido rapient pede, séque nocentis Dira lues Erebi taciturnis condet in umbris. O quàm poeniteat sanctum hunc aliquando rebelli Sacrilegáque manu Sceptri violâsse decorem, Atque Caput Magni Sacrum tetigisse Parentis! Quum Tibi juncta Themis, coelo cum vindice, dextram Diriget, atque animis sua tandem sontibus addet Supplicia, & solvet Captivi vincula Regis. 11. Non meliùs Pietas olim laudata refulsit Illa Anchisiadae, quum praemonstrante Sibyllâ Insignis ramo chari & genitoris amore, Umbrarum petiitque domos, campósque nitentis Elysii, & fecit sibi magnum in secula nomen. Sicut enim natum Phrygius dum suspicit Heros, Haec eadem Te verba manent: (quum dextera victrix Littoris objecti minitantia claustra recludens,
Quà jacet Oceano Vectis non fausta Britanno, Et Regi populos, Regem populisque reducet, Atque expulsa solo Britonum sua gaudia reddet: "Venisti tandem; Tuáque exspectata Parenti "Vicit iter durum Pietas? datur ora tueri "Nate Tua, & notas audire & reddere voces? "Sic equidem ducebam animo, rebárque futurum "Tempora dinumerans: nec me mea cura fefellit. "Quas ego Te terras & quanta per aequora victum "Accipio? Quantis jactatum Nate periclis! "Quàm metui nè visa Tibi tot regna nocerent! Tu contra: Tua me Genitor, Tua tristis imago Saepiùs occurrens, absentem quaerere adegit. Stant sale nunc Patrio classes mihi: jungere dextram, Da Genitor, Téque amplexu nè subtrahe nostro. 12. O Tu! supremo cujus mortalia nutu Omnia volvuntur; Tu, quo custode Monarchis Intemerata vigent jura, & quo vindice nunquam Magnatum scelus aut populi grassatur inultum: Da Nato sua vota Pio, da jura Parenti, Assere justitiam, frangat sua poena Rebelles; Imperióque olim securâ pace fruenti
Auratos Tu redde dies; & damna repende (Quae videt invito jam messis septima Phoebo,) Hisce bonis, per quae Saturnia floruit Aetas, Ter septem sub Patre annis, & prole beatâ Natorum, aeternos dum Sol volvetur in orbes. Nec Tibi ni longis saturo, REX Inclyte seclis Contingat carae dextram disjungere Sponsae, Quúmque pii nôrint Temet monitore Nepotes Parcere subjectis & debellare superbos, Pax aeterna Tui firmet fundamina Sceptri: CAROLUS & propriâ faciens Te prole parentem, Pacatum ipse regat patriis virtutibus Orbem. 13. Talibus orabat dicturus plura Palaemon, Ni Superis ea cura foret plura addere votis: Praeterea, jam fessus equos immergere Ponto Ardentésque rotas properavit tingere Phoebus: Et placidi dudum rapuêre errantia venti Vela oculis; tacitâ tenet ergò caetera mente. 14. Tunc quo{que} nos sequimur paribus Te Carole votis, Dum mala vix aliud nobis Fortuna reliquit Quàm vota, & purae mentis solamina, Musae Intermixta jocis, queîs curae arcentur amarae.
Scilicet esse viae comites nos dura negârunt Et nimis adverso volventia stamine lentas Improba fata dies: ex quo Civilia diris Arma Furor manibus rapiens, laxavit habenas Júsque dedit sceleri, nos ut spoliaret inultos, Et raperet varii compendia prima laboris, (Hei mihi! quanta illis damna exhinc addita damnis!) Gens fraeni impatiens; quae Te quoque cedere Regnis Compulit è Patriis, variisque in gentibus actum Indè novos vindictae animos hausisse coëgit. 15. Ergò ut Alcidae primos tentare labores, Et Britonum Marti primas appendere palmas, In sua damna Tuam doceant haec Monstra juventam; Invitis illas quanquam Tua carpere dextris Et doleat Pietas tali clarescere Lauro.
PALAEMONIS Vaticinium Votivum. SCarce had the Summer with her dounie wing Brush't, & lai'd by the Wardrope of the Spring, When Princelie CHARLS with his fair Train did pleas T' expose His Sacred Person to the Seas; Trusting to th' mercie of the Ocean more Then those Land-Monsters which hee left on Shore. And now great France (in greatness more increa'st,) Court's the Arrival of this stately guest; Whose coming there was onely to resign, And offer up his Sorrows at the shrine Of His dread Mother; who to make Her Moan And Mourning less, did intermix his own.
Sad QUEEN! how hath stern step-dame Fortune tost, And bandied Thee from Britain to the Coast Of France! where Sein displaie's her silver-floods, And grand Saint German vannteth her vast woods. 2. To this calm Rendezvouz sad CHARLS repair's With Sports to cozen and beguil his Cares: Somtimes Hee Hunt's, and with his Vocal Horn, Summon's Aurora, and the loitering Morn: Somtimes Hee read's; and equally impart's His well-divided hours for Arms or Arts. Yet most Hee sport's in Martial Skirmishes, (Wch may b' in Earnest when just Heaven shall pleas.) Somtimes Hee plaie's at Tennis; then again Expert in Feats of Chivalrie, strive's to train The stubborn Steed; and his rough fetlocks bring Within the Cube and Compass of the Ring. But ah! these Pastims are too short and brief To flatter Sorrow, or to dandle Grief. His Cares thus crush't, obtrude; and still abuse His busie Fancie, with the whisper'd News Of good or bad Events, which still relate T' a Kingdom's Fortune, or a Father's Fate.
Yet now since Heaven doth call; Hee's bent to trie The worst of Chance, and out-dare Destinie, Since the designed Time, and hovering Hours At hand to Punish those Ʋsurping Powers; To put a Snaffle in the Head-strong-Jaws Of Hot-spur-Rebels, who have tir'd all waies: Wh' have jaded, spurgall'd Pitie; and let loos Her Reins; and made tame Mercie of no use. 3. Thus Ruminate's sad CHARLS, and float's betwixt Dutie and Zeal; unstable and unfix't, Touch't with the mutual Sens of th' One and Other, Of a Dear Father and Indulgent Mother; At length the Ponderous thoughts of His Sire's fate Weigh'd down the Scales, and ended the Debate. Then from the Frontiers of fair France Hee post's, And re-imbarck'd, arrive's on Belgia's Coasts; Whose Continent before Hee well survei'd Hee left, and in all haste His Anchors weigh'd, Putting to Sea; where Nereus, with a Fleet Of well-rigg'd-shipping, did his Higness greet. A gallant Navie! whose full number might Out-brave the boisterous Billows, and affright
Those huge Behemoths and vast Porpoises, Which Tole the Waters and Excise the Seas. 4. These did propitious Providence provide, And pre-ordain to bee great CHARLS His Guide: Whose just Desertion of a ship-wrack't CAUS, Buoi'd up and born by Usurpation was, Som luckie Omen of Blest CHARLS Success, Which made His Power grow greater, and theirs less. And thus re-ent'ring with His Roial Train, Hee plow's the fertile Furrows of the Main. And with low-bended-knees, but loftie eies Implore's high Heaven to bless his Enterpize. The Cannons clos'd th' Amen: and did inlarge Their wide-stretch't-Organs to Report the Charge: Both Rocks and Rivers trembled at the stroaks Of louder Guns; whose Center-shaking-shocks Like the Cloud-cleaving Thunder, seem'd to tear The troubled Welkin, and affright the Air. The prettie Tritons did that daie belabor Their well-tun'd-shells, which sounded like som Tabor, Whiles the whole Chore of Sea-Nymphs did advance And teach the Capering Surges how to dance.
5. Thus with His Princelie Fleet whiles Hee doth sail Near Britain's Coast, fann'd with a whispering Gale, Tridented Neptune plac't Him at the Helm, Himself doing Homage to his three-fold Realm. But poor Palaemon at His Launching plie's His task, and swell's the Canvass with his Sighs, Whose trickling tears fell down like showers of Rain, Striving to mix fresh Water with the Main. Long in these doleful dumps hee stood for lack Of his lov'd Soveraign, and at last thus spake. 6. "O Thou whose wonders are seen in the Deep "Ʋnbottom'd Bowels of the Ocean! keep "And Crown His Sacred Highness with divine "Glories; whose Scepter is a Type of Thine. "O! let th' obseqvious windes, and waves allaie "Their surlie looks, and studie to obeie. "O! let all storms bee chain'd up in abstruse "And lonely caverns, and no more break loos, "Whiles the whole Rabble of black Tempests sleep, "Lull'd by the warbling Musick of the Deep. "Let this Daie's Jubilee with Peace bee blest "And hush't, as when Halcyon build's her nest:
"Such bee that Daie when great CHARLS doth prepare "T' encounter with Rebellion, and repair "The Ruines of three Kingdoms, to increas "His enemies Horror, but His Subjects Peace. 7. Dread Sovereign! whose verie name give's fire To my dull Muse, which stand's but to admire; And in th' amazement of that Zeal doth greet Thy Sacred Highness with unequal Feet. Pass on in triumph with a prosperous Tide, Whiles Zephyrus is thy Pass-port and thy Guid: Hee, Hee's thy Harbinger who swiftlie clear's The Coast from Tempests when thy Pilot steer's; How doth Hee smile, and smooth His chearful brow Ballanc't with so divine a weight as THOU! The ship which wafted Jason to the shore Of Colchis, which the vulgar did adore And Deïfie so much, that they did prize Each Planck as Trophies to bee fix't ith' Skies; That Ship was but a Cock-boat to thy Sail, Or som poor punie Whiting to a Whale. Had Hee been Fraught with Thee, hee ne'r had thought Of that vain Voiage, and so dearly bought
A lock of Wool, and better-tutor'd Greece, Would brag no longer of her Phrygian Fleece: Those Pageant-pot-gun-Triumphs (if their storie Were true) were but meer Atoms to Thy Glorie, Wch flame's like Heaven's bright blazing lamp through th' whole World, from th' Artick to th' Antartick Pole. 6. Goe then blest Mirror of Great Britain! go, Implore Heaven's Aid above, whiles here below Thy Subjects linger, readie with th' Expense Of their dear Blood, to fall in Thy Defence: Fresh Trophies Court Thee; richer then that old Fleece, fetch't from Phrygia, though each lock were gold: Thy Caus awake's th' whole world, and clamor's high For Vengeance, from a Supreme Deïtie. Angels and Men are mov'd; when Devils dare Intrench on Princes, and usurp the Chair Of Sovereign Power; A Fact that cannot hold Comparison, unless referr'd to th' old Unweildie Giants, threatning to unthrone Their Jove, and scale the Castles of the Sun; But as their brainless Furie was confin'd And nail'd to Aetna; so let these Youths finde
The self-same Fate; whose Villanies have hurl'd Earth from her Center, and unhing'd the World. How would two Houses pull twelv 'bout their ears, Those twelv Celestial Mansions of the Spheres? Whiles Stars, nay Moon and Sun may shine alone, Since our New Lights have Lanthorns of their own. Thus have these Phaëtons fir'd, and turn'd each Town (Heart-burn't before) t' a Conflagration. Strange Babel-By-Blows! t' untile Thrones by a trick Of State, and build a Common-wealth with Brick: Dismantling Earthlie Kingdoms, to prepare Mountains i'th Moon, and Castles in the Air. 9 Then sail auspicious PRINCE! and wafted o're The officious Waves, review Thy Native Shore; New string thy nervless Subjects; and impart Fivers and Arteries to the Peoples heart; Resolv'd to hazard all, and to make good Thy Roial Title, sealed in their Blood. 10. And now I grow Prophetick 'bove all Fiction; And breathe Divinitie in my wish't prediction. Black Clouds dissolv, and gloomie Horror go's Back to that cursed Chaö s whence shee rose.
Not daring to creep nearer, or incroach, When CHARLS shall in bright Majestie approach. As when great Titan Charioter to the daie, Rideth his Circuit in his rich Arraie; The conscious Night retire's, and to bewail Her Guilt the more, put's on a Mourning Vail. Or look as when Sol's melting Beams pearch't high To their Meridian, how the poor Herds flie Head-long in Droves! as though they were affraid Of those pale shadows which their flight hath made! So may those Gobling Ghosts, those Beasts of Prey Sneak to their sootie Hen-roosts, and with-draw At Thy dread-looks: so may those Serpents hiss Back, countermanded to their first Abyss. Let them Repent that Daie, and Text it in Their fatal Rubrick, when they first did sin Against their SOVEREIGN, daring to Conspire And Spawn black Treason 'gainst Thy Sacred Sire. Let them Repent, when Vengeance and Heaven too Shall paie their Score, and give them what's their Due. 11. Thus did that good Anchises son of old By th' Authentick Sybils Oracle grow bold
To rescue his blest Father, and thence made A strange adventure through the Elizian shade; Such was His private Pietie, but Thy Zeal Involv's three Kingdoms and their Publick-weal: Each Act is Sacred, and each aim of Thine▪ Center's in Heaven, and thence grow's Divine. 12. O thou great-wonder-working GOD above! By whom the machine of th' whole Earth doth move; Who rul'st both Sword and Scepter with a Rod, And still'st the mutinous world with thy sole nod: Inspire, inspire great CHARLS, and gently shed Showers of Scepters on our Sovereign's Head; That Justice may return t' arraign those known Loos Outlaries Thine enemies, and their own: That wee may injoie old Saturn's daies of old, To re-convert our Iron into Gold. With these throng'd Blessings was Thy Father Crown'd Thrice seven long Summers, leaving a Renown'd And Princelie Progenie, which shall secure This Throne as long as Sun or Stars indure. But may thy Scepter, and thy Regal Power Brook no Corrival, nor Competitor;
Whiles Princes made thy Tenants, hold the Leas Both of their lives and fortunes to the Peace Of glorious Britain; and preserv'd thus, own Their selvs and safeties to Thy Roial Throne. 13. In this sad plight Palemon did implore Th' Eternal Powers, and fain would have said more, But did referr the sequel of his Praier To Heaven's great Mercie, and th' Almightie's Care: Besides Sol had unsadled (for their eas His Steeds) and drench't his Chariot in the Seas: The Fleet was out of sight too, and t' was best For poor Palemon to conceal the rest. 14. Yet since wing'd Vollies of his wishes may Wait on great CHARLS, as Convoies to His waie, Hee send's them wrapt in Sighs; as griev'd to shew How little hee could paie, how much must ow; But whiles hee breathe's, hee'l deprecate those dire Accursed Band-dogs that have fann'd this fire Of Civil Discords; letting loos th' unjust Reins to licentious Murther, and black Lust: Who welt'ring in their gore, have swam to th' chin In Bloodie Riot, and Seditious Sin.
And here they have rais'd their Crimes by the exile Of Thy blest Presence, from this Brittish Isle. Which last Act, when their Fate grow's mellow, shall Add to their Weight, and Crush them in the fall. 15. Go then great Champion; go; make good the storie That cite's Alcides, O may Thy first glorie Bee vow'd to Mars: whiles miscreants are thence made The Maiden-handsils of thy fatal Blade. And though 'tis pittie such base Blood should stain A Roial Fauchion; and but little gain To kill such Hedg-hogs. Let not this Plea sue Their Pardons, nor debar them of their due: Since the griev'd Realm doth groan, and groan agen, Big with those Monsters, in the shape of men: Whose violent pangs, and long Convulsion-fits Have half bereft, and robb'd her of her wits. Bee Thou then her Lucina, bee, and close Her womb, expanded through her teeming-throws; And as they Brood still quell, and dissipate The abortive Hydra's of an Headless State. May Men and Angels further Thy intent In this great Work, and wait upon th' event;
Since now the Season, and the appointed Times Are near to powr down vengeance on their Crimes: And th' hour's at hand (if Souldiers may divine) To seek their Ruines that have thus sought THINE. FINIS.
An Advertisement to the READER in refe∣rence to the annexed Prophecie. READER, THis Prophecie received from an honorable Person, coming so opportunely to my hand, I thought it but dutie to transfer it to the Publick view; not daring to commit so great a sin in the secret concealment of a business of so general a concernment. Touching the Author, Paulus Grebnerus, hee was a great Astronomer, and a man of surpassing Pietie, and known Inte∣gritie, whose Erudition likewise and excellent Endowments, have received a publick Character from this and other Kingdoms. His Prophecie here need no Panegyrick; and a farther am∣plification, by waie of Apologie, would prove impertinent where so manie thousands have been so throughly prepossest in the truth of his Predictions. In a word, Scismaticks (that speak evil of Dignities, and despise Prophesies) may perchance persist still obstinate; I am sure all ROYALISTS will rest here well satisfied. For my part, I shall therefore praie for the Conversion of the first, and Confirmation of the last; wishing the one more Faith, and the other better Fortune. Farewel.
The PROPHECIE of Paulus Grebnerus concerning these Times. PAulus Grebnerus was here in England with Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1582. and pre∣sented Her with a fair Manuscript in Latine, describing therein the future hi∣storie of Europe, here and there limming in Water-colors som principal Passages. Dr. Nevil, Clerk of the Closet, beeing in favor with the Queen obteined this Book of Her, and bestowed it on the Librarie of Trinitie Colledg in Cambridg, where it hath been published to the view of all persons, till about five or six years ago, by much perusing and ill handling, it was much slurred and defaced. In his Predictions Hee describeth the Troubles of Russia, and the Ele∣ction of a Swedish King, SIGISMUND by name, to bee King of Polonia, by which Hee shall irrecoverably lose his own Inheritance. That of the Swedish Race there should bee one GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS by name, that should take heart from the Distractions of Germanie to invade the Em∣pire with a small Armie; fight manie Battles prospe∣rously, but should at last perish in a pitcht-Field. That about that time should Reign Rex Septentriona∣lis nomine CAROLUS, qui ducet Ʋxorem Mariam Papi∣pisticam
ex quo evadet Regum infelicissimus. Tunc Populus ipsius Ditionis eliget sihi alium Imperatorem, Comitem; qui dura∣bit in Imperio tres annos, aut circiter. At postea idem Po∣pulus eliget alium Imperatorem, Equitem, non ejusdem Fami∣liae nec Dignitatis, cui detrudet omnia sub pedibus suis: du∣rabit aliquantò longiore tempore: & post hunc eliget nullum. Post hunc apparebit quidam CAROLUS è CAROLO descendens, cum immensâ Classe in Litore Ditionis Patris sui, & cum Auxiliariis Danicis, Suedicis, Hollandicis, Fran∣cicis prosrernet Adversarios Suos, & administrabit Imperi∣um perfelicissimè, & longè latéque dominabitur, & erit CAROLO Magno major. Englished thus. About that time a Northern King shall Reign, CHARLS by Name, who shall take to Wife MARIE of the Popish Religion; vvhereupon Hee shall bee a most unfortunate Prince. Then the People of His Do∣minion shall chuse to themselvs another Commander [or Governor] viz. an Earl; whose Government shall last three years, or there about. And afterwards the same People shall chuse another Commander or [or Governor] viz. a Knight, not of the same Familie, nor Dignitie, who shall trample all things under his feet: Hee shall endure somwhat longer time: and after him they shall chuse none at all. After him shall appear one CHARLS descending from CHARLS, with a mightie Navie, on the Shore of His Father's Kingdom; and with Aid from Denmark, Swedeland, Holland, France, shall overthrow His Adver∣saries, and shall govern His Kingdom wonderful hap∣pily, and shall bear Rule far and near: and shall bee greater then CHARLS the Great.
A short Paraphrase on the fore-going PROPHECIE. HOw well could Grebner in those Blinde Times see! And in these Seeing-Times how blinde are wee? Our new-Found-Lights are lost; those squint-ei'd-Elvs, And purblinde Seekers, may now seek themselvs; Who have thus err'd, imagining Prediction Of Sacred Prophesie, but som feigned Fiction. But wee (blest Grebner!) who have still admir'd, And look't upon thee as som Soul inspir'd; Will hold thy Saws no longer in suspens, Wch now w'have reach't with th' Opticks of our Sens; Since what was once Apocalyps, is known The unridled Truth of Revelation. Those two grand Champions (that trode on the Neck Of Nations, and had Kingdom's at Their Beck) Are both exstinct; and Fame can onely give A bare relation that They once did live.
But Thou renowned CHARLS, whose matchless Fate Design'd Thee a Victim to the People's Hate; (Maugre the malice of Thy Foes) wert hurl'd With Haleluiahs from the wondring vvorld, A Conqueror o're Thy doom; from vvhence vvee may Infer, Thou onely liv'dst, vvee di'd that daie. And now look back; look back; and have recours From whence these streams of Mischief had their sours, Whiles those promiscuous Hodg-podg-Powers oppose, Like high-swoln Floods that River whence they rose. The Eagle thus dislodg'd; a Wren-like race Of dunghil-Dors, soon pierch't-up in His Place. And Lapwing-Libertie e're fleg'd, take's flight, First hath her Champion-Earl; the next a Knight, Whose heavie Pressure hath so imp't her wings, Shee hath lost by Consuls what shee got by KINGS. And now (but life's in Prophecie) wee might Die, and despair to see Thy Second Light, Great CHARLS, who like the Bridegroom of the daie, Shalt gil'd sad Britain with Thy glorious Raie; Whiles all those shower-shot Mushroms, and those new Created Brats, melt like the morning dew;
And all those Ignes fatui shrink and run Like Exhalations at the rising Sun. This is the Wish great KING, and pious Care Of those who piece-forth Prophecie with their Praier; O may blest Grebner bee added to the Small Prophets! and prove each line Canonical; Whiles what in th' old Queen's Reign hee did divine, May bee fulfill'd, and ratifi'd in Thine: O mai'st Thou Reign in Thy known Realms, who art Inthron'd alreadie in Thy People's heart! O mai'st Thou Rule! and spread Thy Fame through th'whole Earth; from the Artick to t' Antartick Pole. Till the just world with Grebner shall maintein Thee a mightier Monarch then brave Charlemain. FINIS.
Aeternae Memoriae, ET SANCTIS MANIBUS. CAROLI I. Nuper MAGNAE BRITANNIAE REGIS Pientissimi; Nunc verò Angliae Proto-Martyris-Regii Gloriosissimi, SACRUM. In iniquitatibus illorum Gloriam Tuam per∣fecisti. Typis excusum Anno CAROLI Martyris primo, 1649.
Aeternae Memoriae CAROLI I. &c. NE jam, Roma tuis Catilinae crimina chartis Devoveas, jactésve tuos (ô Brute!) triumphos: Major enim quàm quum vidisti haec Monstra, Britanne Disque exosa magis tractatur Scena Theatro. Non Patriae furtim ferales subdere taedas Conjurata manus tentat, non Publica caecis Nunc petitur Res consiliis, non dira recessus Infandum molita nefas jam quaerit Erynnis: Sed testem te, Phoebe vocat, quem caena Thyestae Crimine velavit quondam polluta minori. CAESAR enim periit, justè quum Roma Tyrannos
Extimuit, veróque nefas culpante Senatu, Plaudente hîc Illegitimo REX CAESARE MAJOR Fata subit laetus, Themidis faedátque secures: Dum non visa priùs Populis spectacula praebet Turba ferox, Regis Sacram & scelerata prophanat Cervicem Proprii sub limina Sancta Palati; REGIS, quo Melior nunquam vel Justior alter Lubrica vesanis admovit fraena Britannis. White-hall, sive alba aula, Regii Palatii pars nobilissima, Publ. quondam Le∣gatorum auditionibus, & praeciputs aulae solennitatibus inserviens, funestissimi spectaculi Theatrum & executionis locus deligitur. Hîc ubi vicinis quondam responsa Legatis Ipse dabat, toto spargens Oracula Mundo Insignis Triplici Diademate, saeva securim Dextra parat; verùm immoto jamjam ultima vultu Fata videt, Mortémque Hostésque in Morte triumphans Calcat, & intrepidus minitantem despicit Ensem: Non minus Augusto spectandus lumine, Coeli Mox ut abiturus sacras sublimis ad Arces, Quàm Populo quum jura dabat: Sic CAROLUS astra Divorúmque domos petit, & Ob pietatem seil. insignem ipsique supra exemplum familiatem. * Ipsissima ejus verba in secundâ compellatione Westmon. I die a Martyr for My Parlia∣ment and People. I stand for the Laws of England, and the Libertie of My People.sibi cognita Regna: Indomitóque Tuas animo, Themis Anglica, Leges
Asserit, & propriae tua praefet jura saluti: Sed cadet hoc fulmen nec totum terreat Orbem? Legibus ô MARTYR Populóque! ô victima nostris Non benè caesa malis, mundóque ignota priori! Sic prophetico quodam spirtu afflatus aliâ compellatione expressi. That the childe yet unborn may curs the sad events of these violent courses taken against Mee. Ovos venturi lugete haec damna Nepotes! Quanta etenim tantos placabunt funera manes? Caussa Dei, Caussa haec Regum est: quà lumina condit Quáque oritur Phoebus, tangent Tua Fata Monarchas CAROLE, dum Coelo volvetur Lucidus axis. At conjuratae tandem Tibi sanguine dextrae Litabunt, proprióque cadent Tibi victima ferro, Dúmque Tuo è cinere ut Phoenix renovabitur alter (Proxima quem Sceptri faciunt Tibi jura secundum.) CAROLUS, atque Tuos vindex exsurget in hostes, Tota secundabit Terrarum Machina votis Justa ejus conata Suis, intérque Nepotes Heroüm in numero potiorem sera locabit Posteritas, Tecúmque olim post fata beabit Suprema hunc Coelique domus, Divúmque Corona. Amen, ô Deus! (O vindex scelerum Regúmque custos)
To the Sacred Memorie of that late High and Mightie Monarch, CHARLS the FIRST; Hee who fell Jan. 30. 1648. the Princelie Proto-Martyr of Great BRITAIN, &c. NO more of Annals; let great Rome grow mute In quoting Catiline, or recording Brute▪ Britain now wear's the Sock; the Theater's clean Transplanted hither, both in Place and Scene. No Vail nor Periwig-vizor; Murther, here Without a mask dare's on the Stage appear, Out-facing even the Sun, which oft hath fled, And at less crimes shrunk in his frighted head. Rome had som Plea (though shee ne're justifi'd) Those fatal Swords by which great Caesar di'd.
But here a greater far then Caesar fall's By a spurious Senate and her Cannibals. How do that Monster-headless-multitude Gaze on the Beams, and giddily intrude On's Sacred Person! murthering Him before The eies of Heaven! and at His own Door! A Prince so sweetly Pious, Rebels must Confess 'tis they were guiltie, but Hee Just! And now behold the Scene! White-hall's decreed The fatal shambles where the Lamb must bleed; White-hall! from whence Hee oft dispers'd and hurl'd His Sacred Oracles through the Peaceful world: There with an uncontrolled Courage, (higher Far then that Scaffold) did His Soul asspire In glorious Elohims, making His last state His Haleluiah, or Magnificat. Thus Great AUGUSTUS falling, did bequeath New Edicts to the world, even at His Death, Such as did Screen His Memorie from the rust Of black Oblivion; and embalm His Dust. But Thou blest CHARLS, whom Historie shall stile The Princelie Proto-Martyr of this Isle.
Fell'st Champion of the Church; and did'st make good The Realms grand Charter sealed in Thy Blood. And could this dismal shock of Thunder light Onely on Britain's breast? and not affright The Ʋnivers? to let us understand, The general Dooms-daie of the world's at hand? Children unborn shall still bewail the time Of this sad Hour; and deprecate the Crime Of those dire Regicides, whose blushing guilt, For Vengeance crie's loud as that Blood th' have spilt. Thy Caus invoke's just Heaven, and doth implore Confederate Princes to the farthest Shore Of all the world; as far as Phoebus raie Doth guild the Zodiack, and proclaim's the daie. And yet should all these fail; Blest CHARLS 'tis known Thou'st left a Princelie Progenie of Thine own. Who 'l expiate Thy Murther, OF resign Their own Lives too, as Offerings at Thy Shrine. And now see! see! another Phenix rise! From the blest ashes of this Sacrifice! A Second CHARLS! who shall in fame asspire, And grow more Mightie then His Princelie Sire.
And now, O may th' unanimous world inthrone Him soon! and re-invest Him in His Own. May Hee out-live old Nestor's daie and go Not hence, but cloathed in a Robe of Snow; And then when envious Heaven too shall remove His Swaie from Earth, O may Hee Reign above! And meet His Sire, wh' (having past this flood In Robes of scarlet di'd in His own Blood) Sit's now a Crowned Martyr, and hath free Title to add a Fourth Crown to His Three.
Sur la mort de CHARLES I. Deffunt Roy de la Grand Bretaigne. SONNET. ANGLOIS, est il donc vray que ce PIEUX MONARQUE Que Trois Peuples ont veu Regner si Justement, Ainsy q'un Criminel assiste en jugement; Et puis souffre le coup de la Mortelle Parque? Est il vray que Charon ose amener sa Barque, Jusques dessus le seuil de ce Grand Bâstiment Qui fut de son Palais le plus bel ornement; Et que son sang l'ait teint d'une Eternelle marque? Ouy; mais malaisement chez la Posterité, Ce recit passeroit pour vne verité, Tant de cet attentat les coups sont effroyables: Si la Foy n'enseignoit un Christ persecuté: Ou que lon ne s' ceust pas, Que regnersur des Il Rè d'Engelterra Rè de los Diabolos El Rè di Francia Rè de los Asnos, &c. Carol. V.Diables Est un pas dangereux pour tant de Pieté.
In MARTYRIUM CAROLI I. Epigramma. DUm Populi curas, REX, per Tua damna salutem, Jure novo veniunt jam nova Regna Tibi; Quarta etenim Triplici superadditur ista Coronae, Quòd moriens Populo MARTYR es atque Deo. E vivis ereptus IIII. Kal. Febr. Anno Aerae Christianae, MDCXLIX.
In CAROLI I. obitum Epigramma. GRex erat, & viridi carpebat gramina campo Grex felix; fidus cui modo Pastor erat. Lex erat, & justae lis omnis subdita legi: Lis felix, Legis cui modo Lator erat. Rex erat, & placido Rexit Moderamine; Pastor Et Legis-lator (plangite) justus obit. Nunc sine lege Duces; sed non sine lite furores; Nunc sine Pastore est Grex, sine Rege Thronus. Omnia, Rex, Lex, Grex, jam sunt pessundata; Terris Quid superest? nisi Faex: Plebs ferè victa jacet.
Epigramma Historicum De Termino Hilarii Juridico in Angliâ in∣tercalato, Anno Dom. 1649. TErminus en Hilar I fuit hoc tristissimus Anno, Purpura Regalis tincta cruore Togae. In terra retinent spinas Diademata Regum; In Coelo electis grata Corona datur.
Memoriae Sacrum Optimi Maximi CAROLI I. GReat SIR, Your pardon that my ruder Vers Dare's with her Feet profane Your Sacred Hers; True Grief no Manners know's; and to begin With Courtship, were but ceremonious sin. Whiles You surviv'd, blest SIR, my Loial breath Still waited on Your Service; and since Death (Sent by the Actors of so black a Treason, As puzzles Faith, and quite confounds all Reason) Hath hurl'd You hence; You justly SIR may call My Bodied thoughts to wait Your Funeral. My dwindling-dwarf-like-Fancie swell's not big, Nor know's to wear a borrowed Periwig Of Metaphors, nor from Parnassus rise To ransack far-fetch't Phrases from the Skies; Since all those pidling Epithites are too brief, Great CHARLS, to shew Thy Glorie, or my Grief.
Go thou grim Conqueror; search thy kingdom through, Examine everie Ʋrn and Pitcher too; Taste all thy Earths, and call at everie Grot, Even those whose Names, Rust & the Worms have got; And tell mee if in all thy Dark-hous bee Snch a Prince faln, and Prince though faln, as Hee. Greatness and Goodness too, which seldom fall Within the Compass of the self-same Scale, In Him were poized, and divinely met; Whose Meekness made Him Good, and Mercie Great. His Meekness, oh! that inexhausted Mine And Magazine of Moral and Divine Graces, which like the influence, and the bright Beams of the Sun, fill'd Britain with their Light. But why am I thus partial? when that all His Thoughts, Words, Actions, were Angelical? Which like fix't Load-stars, did direct most men To sail by th' Compass of His Life and Pen: Each pious action was so chaste, and such As held it sin to think, but death to touch; His Mercie such, as if Hee did but live To know His Subjects failings, and forgive.
Unheard of Love! which could offences mask And sooner grant their Pardon, then they ask! Thus was His Life un-pattern'd! but His Death! Oh how the sens which suffocate's my breath Curdle's my blood! and, like swift poison, flie's, In curling flames through all my Arteries! Hee di'd by th'barbarous hands of such a Frie As fed on Furies, and have dreined Drie The Lerna of all Murthers, to new-stock Mankinde with spreading Crimes; such as may mock Preceding Treasons, and the world supplie With a strange Mould to cast all Future by: All former Acts were fictions unto this; Raviliacks too is a Parenthesis; A Murther so transcendent, Annals shall Henceforth grow faithless and Apochryphal. But Thou blest Martyr, who hast here laid down, And chang'd a Temporal for a Glorious Crown; Hast finish't Thy great Work, and by th' event, Attain'd more then they promis'd, but ne'r meant. Rest ROYAL SIR, rest in Your Sacred Hers While wee embalm Your Memorie with our Vers,
And trickling Tears, which shall like Pearls refine Your Urn, and serv for Diamonds to your Shrine. You need no other Monument, who have No less then three whole Kingdoms for Your Grave: Whiles from the melting Marble of their Eies Is Crystalliz'd this Epitaph Here lie's "Honor's rich Fountain, the True Faith's Defender; "Religion, and the Law's Prop, and Extender; "The purest quintessence of Christian Zeal, "Best Father both of Church and Common-weal! "Virtues rare Patern; Wedlocks chastest Mirror; "Rebellions and bold Treasons, Scorn and Terror; "The spotless Sacrifice, for the wilde flood "Of's People's loud sins. CHARLS the Great, the Good.
CHRONOSTICHON Decollationis CAROLI REGIS, &c. tricesimo die Januarii, secunda hora Pomeridiana, Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII. Ter Deno IanI Labens ReX SoLe CaDente CaroLVs eXVtVs SoLIo SCeptróqVe SeCVre. CHARLS!—ah forbear, forbear! lest Mortals prize His Name too dearly; and Idolatrize. His Name! Our Loss! Thrice cursed and forlorn Bee that Black Night, which usher'd in this Morn. CHARLS our Dread Sovereign!—hold! lest Out-law'd Sens Bribe, and seduce tame Reason to dispens With those Celestial Powers; and distrust Heaven can Behold such Treason, and prove Just.
CHARLS our Dread Sovereign's murther'd!—Tremble! and View what Convulsions Shoulder-shake this Land; Court, Citie, Countrie, nay three Kingdoms run To their last Stage, and Set with Him their Sun. CHARLS our Dread Sovereign's Murther'd at His Gate! Fell Fiends! dire Hydra's of a Stiff-neck't-State! Strange Bodie-Politick! whose Members spread, And, Monster-like, swell bigger then their Head. CHARLS of Great Britain! Hee! who was the known King of three Realms, lie's murther'd in His Own. Hee! Hee! who liv'd, and Faith's Defender stood; Die'd here to re-Baptize it in His Blood. No more, no more. Fame's Trump shall Eccho all The Rest in dreadful Thunder. Such a Fall Great Christendom ne're Pattern'd; and 'twas strange Earth's Center reel'd not at this dismal Change. The Blow struck Britain blinde, each well-set Limb By Dislocation was lop't off in Him. And if Shee yet live's, Shee live's but to condole Three Bleeding Bodies left without a Soul.
Religion put's on Black. Sad Loialtie Blushe's and Mourn's to see bright Majestie Butcher'd by such Assassinates; nay both 'Gainst God, 'gainst Law, Allegiance, and their Oath. Farewel sad Isle! Farewel! Thy fatal Glorie Is Summ'd, Cast up, and Cancell'd in this Storie. FINIS.
OBSEQUIES ON That unexemplar Champion of Chivalrie, and Pattern of true Prowess, ARTHUR Lord CAPEL. T'Is fals Astronomie.—Nor are wee yet In utter darkness, though the Sun bee set; Since Thy star-beaming-influence prove's all Those Rules Excentrick, and Apocryphal. Thou'rt hight'ned by Thy Fall, and dost now shine With doubled lustre, since Thy last Decline. Bright mirror of our Sphere! who art no less Then Valor's wonder; Virtue's Master-piece; Filling whole Volums with Thy Fame; to tell The World Thy Worth was her own Chronicle: To tell the World, those Praises in the Wars Thou'st purchas'd, might bee numbred with the Stars;
And had Thy well-proportion'd-Daies been Spun Out by Thy Deeds, Thou had'st out-liv'd the Sun; Forcing the World's great Luminarie t' have His Chaös climacterick with Thy Grave. Thus Thy renowned Meeds like Incens hurl'd On flaming Altars, have Perfum'd the World With such rich Odors, that scarce Envie knew Whether Thou wer't to King or Realm most true. Let State-Chronographers admire, and plead Those Rites they ow to Honor; when they read Thy rare Atchievements; studying to refine The truth of Modern Historie by Thine. Carthage bee dumb! our Colchester stand's now Corrival with thee, and dare's more then Thou; And all those Punick Wars, thy Walls could boast, Have o're and o're been travers'd on her Coast. Rome's three Horatii are pos'd; our Isle Hath bred a Capel, Lucas, and a Lisle: Whose matchless deed's have Dub'd them with that late And glorious title of Triumvirate; Whiles their transcendent merit strut's, and strive's To stand on tip-toe in Superlatives.
And still there's somthing more; for, what was mixt Promiscuously in these, in Thee was fixt. In Thee that Pythagorean Maxime's true; And what was stale Philosophie, prove's new Divinitie, since th' Souls of all those Nine Renowned Ones Transmigrated in Thine. But why do wee Adore Thee, made immens And far sublim'd above our Sphere of Sens? Scorning bright Obelisques of Brass, or Stone Should rais Thy Monument, who art Thine own. Yet should'st Thou exspect a Shrine on Earth, wee must Make Colchester th' Exchequer of Thy Dust: Nor is it more then reason, since 'twere pitie To give Thee a less Church-yard then that Citie, T' Interr Thee in her Breaches, and o're-turn Her stately Bulwarks, to support Thine Urn; Whil'st the throng'd streets would justle to make room And spread their Towrs, as Trophies o're Thy Tomb. But this grand Task I recommend to those, Who can limm Fancies in more lively Prose; Whose Rhetorick may richly guild this Pile, And rais Invention to a loftie stile;
Such as may Conjure Horror, and oblige Faith-founder'd-Zelots to confess that Siege, That fatal Siege, whose Trenches were or'e-spread With mangled trunks and bodies of the Dead; Till the discolour'd Earth, thus di'd in Grain, Blush't to behold such Shambles of the Slain: And the pale Furies stood like heartless Elvs, Trembling, to see Men do more then Themselvs. The Center-shaking-Brass grew hot, and spoke In Flames of Lightning, and in Clouds of Smoke; And Charon fainted, Ferrying Souls to Hell, When Hecatombs of the Besiegers fell. Amidst these Tragick Triumphs did'st Thou rear Thy brave Top-gallant, 'bove the reach of Fear; Undauntedly exposing Thy bold Head To shocks of Thunder, and thick showrs of Lead: Those Bullets were then Tame; and wee may tax The partial Sword that spar'd Thee for the Ax. The Field (th' Asylum of great Spirits) clean Is changed here; the Citie is the Scene; The Cannon shew'd fair-plaie: But Thou wer't pack't Away, not by an Ordnance, but an Act.
The Scaffold turn'd a Stage: Where 'tis confest, The last Act (though most Bloodie) prov'd Thy Best: It prov'd Thy solemn Coronation, since The Yard's Thy Palace; and a Glorious Prince Thy President: Who after Him art hurl'd To meet Thy Sovereign in another World. Transferr'd from Earth to Heaven, to remain A fixed Star, and wait on CHARLS his WAIN.
OBSEQUIES Offered up to the Memorie of the ever Re∣nowned and never to bee forgotten, ARTHUR, Lord CAPEL. DO; paddle still in Blood, for 'tis not strange Now if your thirstie dropsi'd Blades do range On the whole stock of Man; or that they spread To Trunck and Boughs, since they have lop't the Head: For since the KING, who like one general Soul, Did through each nerv and agile muscle rowl; And like som publick Conduit did dispence To everie Vein, both Sap and Influence; Shine's in His Crown of Martydom above, Guilt and enamel'd with the Beams of Love; The Cement thus unfix't and slack't, wee must Needs languish in to shuffled heaps of Dust: And as in Bodies, where the Head is lop't From off the weeping Stem, som Spirits drop't
From that great Magazine, into each part, And left as Legacies unto the Heart; Contract the Joints and Hands, then make them spread As if they catch't at the dislodging Head; So after this vast Ruin, though the Frame Of Nature were both discompos'd and lame; Yet in this crippled Structure, there might bee Som starts and leaps, wch flow'd (brave Lord!) from Thee; On whom, as som not yet discovered Sours, Which doth to th' suppled Earth fresh Sap disburs, And through her veins melt's in a purling rill, Th' exspiring KING His Vigor did distil. And as som sullen Vapor which was spun From th' Earth's cours Wardrobe, by the glaring Sun, To som wilde Meteors, hover's in the Air, And on each Cloud shed's its unravel'd hair; But wanting Active Heat to waft it higher, Doth in dull Slime and sluggish Mists exspire: So before CAPEL was (like th' early Flower Which ruder Hands tore from the mangled Bower) Rent from His Bleeding stalk, wee might perchance, Like vapors wing'd with His brave heat, advance
Above the Common-level, yet but now His Flames shot-up no new Supplie t' allow. Wee crumble shall to Ruin streight, and run Into a wilde Precipitation. And as when Morning from the Azure Towers Powr's out the daie, and pluck's out th'unfledg'd hours; The Earth unlock's its womb, each flower unweav's Its odorous tresses, and untie's its leavs, That so they may bee spangled by that blaze That from the blooming Sun's gilt lustre strai's; So now vvhen Hee like a nevv-budded Star That stud's the Orb's above, doth from a far Point out his Beams to us, let their clear Light Steer us through the perplexed maze of night; And our benum'd and frozen Souls so thavv, Hee may both our Example bee and Lavv; For though that Man's a vvorld vvithin himself; In Him no Passion svvell'd into a Shelf To split His even thoughts, no Rock of Pride Did intercept or justle the free Tide Of vvell-poiz'd actions, and no Mountain there Was by Ambition made, or Gulf by Fear.
His beauteous Actions too vvithout did meet, Still in such comlie and vvell-ballanc't feet, And vvere so fairly knit, you'd think they'd been Each one the Transcript of His Soul within; No Byas His Religion vvarp't avvrie Into a crooked Excentricitie, 'Tvvas sullied vvith no Ends; Hee could not tell Hovv to vamp Calvin vvith dark Machiavel. No Widdovvs cooler sighs did fan His Cup, Hee drank in's Wine no Tears of Orphans up; His Pregnant Fields vvere moist'ned by the Skies, Not vvet vvith shovvers rain'd from His Tenants eies; And having thus vvith Virtue pav'd the Track Which to His Ʋrn did guid His foot-steps back; Hee, vvhen His full-fledg'd Soul cast off her Claie, To bathe in Tides of never-ebbing daie, Did in so soft a Calm dismiss His breath, As if 't vvere His Espousals, not His Death; And that in His cold shroud Hee vvere to meet The Portraict onely of His Genial sheet.
In Praematurum Obitum Baronis CAPEL, ET Casum Mortis-Sociorum, VII. Id. Mart. MDCXLIX. TRes cecidêre simul, Fato non dispare, Caussâ Quamvis dissimili, Hamilton,MARCHIO, Capel,BARO, Holland. Capite multati in Palatii Westmon. Areâ Publ.COMES; Dispar enim fuit haec ratio, (licèt omnibus idem Supplicium inflixit praecipitata Themis;) Quòd Hamilton,Primus meritas Tibi solvit, CAROLE, poenas, Immerita ast Capel,Alium MARTYRA poena facit: Holland. Capite multati in Palatii Westmon. Areâ Publ. Tertius at dubii quondam damnatus amoris, Se Tibi nunc Sic Petrus nutantis fidei poenitentiam egit lacrymis.moerens reddere Justa putat.
Illustrissimi Herôis Domini FRANCISCI VILLIERS Epicedium. QUisquis amicus ades, nec moestos scindere crines, Nec pigeat madidas Ungue secare genas; Occidit illustris jnvenum fortissimus Heros, Quem subitò Fati carpsit acerba manus; Ille alios tantùm vicit Virtutibus omnes, Ante alios, quantum Pegasus ibat equos. Hei mihi! cur tetricae ruperunt fila Sorores? Cur stabat vacuâ tam citò Parca colo? Cúrve ferox Miles vultus laniare decoros Sustinuit? ferro durior ipse suo; Dulce decus Patriae! cur te temerarius ardor In medios enses, saeváque tela tulit? Sors levis ut solita est rapit optima, praeterit ima, Hei mihi tam dubias injicit illa manus!
Quam vellem hostiles pro Te cecidisse cohortes; Cum Duce non tanti tota caterva fuit: Tu tamen, heu facinus, turmis jugulatus ab istis, Pressisti duram sanguinolentus humum; Nec Species, Virtúsve Tibi, nec profuit Aetas; Pro Patriâ (Patriae Gloria) magne jaces. Semper honos, laudes, & splendida facta manebunt; Nunquam Lethaeis ista dabuntur aquis. Vos igitur tristes tandem compescite luctus, Nec calido madidas imbre rigate genas: Qui modò plorâstis, Lacrymas teneatis, Amici; Non potuit fato nobiliore mori. G. F.
OBSEQUIES On the untimely Death, of the never to bee too much praised and pitied FRANCIS Lord VILLIERS. HEnce fond Philosophie! it cannot bee; The crazie World crawl's t' his last Jubilee; And though the Circle of the Year hath been A Snake in embleme, it can't cast his skin. At least I can't beleev't; when everie daie, Som stately piece is swallowed up in claie; When Cedars feel the fate of Shrubs, and when Great Peers expire, and tamely die like men. How could'st Thou els thus steal away unheard, Without a Troop of Angels for thy guard? Without th' Artillerie of the Clouds, at this Thy great and glorious Metempsycosis? The Age is sure forgetful; or perchance Nature Her self laie Bed-rid in a Trance,
And those Torch-Constellations which shine At others Herses, were all set in Thine; As if they fell with Thee, and Fate would have Their Chaös clymacterick with Thy Grave. But, why do I epitomize a Theme In this small Scedule which deserv's a Ream? A Theme whose charming Magick might inspire A cold Carthusian; and with Enthean fire Kindle such raptures, as may re-ingage Those Buskin-Bonaerges of our Age To Personate Thee with more lively tread, And in loud language shew the world who's dead. Let brave Bellona, who hath lately known Thy Meeds, proclaim them; and with War-like tone, High as the sulphur-breathing-Brass, inlarge Thy spreading triumphs, and report her charge; Shee, Shee shall rear Thy Trophies, and displaie Thy matchless Chivalrie, on that black daie Thou copd'st with Destinie, and did'st resign Thy Temporal-Title, for a more Divine. Nor could Thy Courage stop, or make a paus, Where Honor call'd so loud; and such a Caus
As might provoke an Hermit, and make room With His own Flame to meet His Martyrdom. Armed with these resolvs, encountring Fear Thou foild'st her quite, whil'st in a brave career Thou did'st out-dare the Destinies, and tread A loftie measure through whole showres of Lead; (Spight of the furie of th' opposing croud) Cleaving Thy waie, like Lightning, through a Cloud. Thus mid'st these tragick Triumphs wer't Thou hurl'd With loud Field-Musick from th' affrighted world, A Conqueror o're Thy doom; witness that Peal And vocal Vollie which chim'd forth Thy Knell; To tell the world Thy Merit, maugre Fate Still, still survive's, and is Invulnerate. How large the storie, or how ample; wee'l Not now remember, since 'twas writ with steel And register'd in Blood. Th' indented Face (Though no great Volume) was the Common-Place, And Index of Thy Valor: everie scar Seeming at least som mistick Character; While's wee admire those Marginal Notes, and vext, Wee cannot Comment on so deep a Text.
But why do I revolv the short-writ-storie Of fading Youth; or recollect the Glorie Of Thy blest Beautie (which though once the Throne Oth' Lillie and Rose) was blasted before blown? Prepo'strous Fate! t' anticipate and bring On Winter e're Thou did'st enjoie Thy Spring! To obnubilate Thy Morning-Sun, and shroud Thy dawning splendor in a gloomie Cloud! But ah! Complaints are shadows, and too brief To shew the world Thy Goodness or our Grief; Nor can wee circumscribe, or with weak sens Define Thy Merit, which is so immens. Alas! wee knew 't was not the Cob-web-shrine Of Flesh could lodg so bright a Soul as Thine; T' was not a Cabinet of Claie could hold So rich a Jewel; nor the brittle Mould Of Earth contain a Seraphin, in all His blest dimensions so Angelical. Why should wee fondly then repine; or why Thus pitie Him, wee rather should envie? His state transcend's our Passions; nor may wee Revers or Counterman'd Heav'ns grand Decree:
Though Wee could weep a deluge to ingross Our Griefs, and make them ample as His Loss. And You blest Madam (mirror of Your Sex, And wonder of our Age) surceas to vex Your Soul wth sad Remembrance; whiles You smother And burie quick all Comforts in a Brother. Those Diamond-Tears You daily shed (of more Account then all those on the Indian shore) Are spent in vain; and You profusely prize His loss, to waste the Treasure of Your eies. His Fame require's no Monumental-stone, Nor Epitaph; why should You then bemoan His Funeral-Obsequies, and thus make room Ith' Tablet of Your Heart, t' erect His Tomb, Where You, blest Votaress, piously resign Your Sighs, as Incens, offer'd at His Shrine. Whil'st in the Torrent of these Tears You swim; Madam, You do bewail Your Self, not Him Who soar's above Your Sorrows; and sit's in Commission, with som blest Cherubin, Inthron'd in those Celestial Mansions, where Hee shine's like Heaven's bright Champion, in His Sphere
On the MARTYRDOM Of His Late MAJESTIE, &c. COm, com, let's Mourn; all eies, that see this Daie, Melt into Showrs, and Weep your selvs awaie: O that each Private head could yield a Flood Of Tears, whil'st Britain's Head stream's out His Blood; Could wee paie what His Sacred Drops might claim, The World must needs bee drowned once again. Hands cannot write for Trembling; let our Eie Supplie the Quill, and shed an Elegie. Tongues cannot speak; this Grief know's no such vent, Nothing, but Silence, can bee Eloquent. Words are not here significant; in This Our Sighs, our Groans bear all the Emphasis.
Dread SIR! What shall wee saie? Hyperbole Is not a Figure, when it speak's of Thee: Thy Book is our best Language; what to this Shall e're bee added, is Thy Meiösis: Thy Name's a Text too hard for us: no men Can write of it, without Thy Parts and Pen. Thy Prisons, Scorns, Reproach, and Povertie (Though these were thought too courteous Injurie) How could'st Thou bear? Thou Meeker Moses, how? Was ever Lion bit with Whelps till now And did not roar? Thou England's David, how Did Shimei's Tongue not move Thee? Where's the Man? Where is the King? CHARLS is all Christian. Thou never wanted'st Subjects, no; when they Rebell'd, Thou mad'st Thy Passions to obeie. Had'st Thou regain'd Thy Throne of State by Power, Thou had'st not then been more a Conqueror. But Thou, thine own Soul's Monarch, art above Revenge and Anger, Can'st Thou tame Thy Love? How could'st Thou bear Thy Queen's Divorce? must Shee At once Thy Wife, and yet Thy Widdow bee?
Where are Thy tender Babes once Princely bred, Thy choicest Jewels, are They Sequestred? Where are Thy Nobles? Lo, in stead of these Base savage Villains, and Thine Enemies: Egyptian Plague! 'twas onely Pharaoh's doom, To see such Vermin in His Lodging-room. What Guards are set, what Watches do they keep? They do not think Thee safe, though lock't in Sleep. Would they confine Thy Dreams within to dwell, Nor let Thy Fancie pass their Centinel? Are Thy Devotions dangerous? Or do Thy Praiers want a Guard? These faultie too? Varlets, 't was onely, when they spake for You. But lo a Charge is drawn, a Daie is set, The silent LAMB is brought, the Wolves are met. Law is arraign'd of Treason, Peace of War, And Justice stand's a Prisoner at the Bar. This Scene was like the Passion-Tragedie, His Saviour's Person none could Act, but Hee. Behold what Scribes were here, what Pharisees! What bands of Souldiers! What fals witnesses!
Here was a Priest, and that a Chief one; who Durst strike at God, and His Vicegerent too. Here Bradshaw, Pilate there: This make's them twain, Pilate for Fear, Bradshaw condemn'd for Gain. Wretch! could'st not thou bee rich, till Charls was dead? Thou might'st have took the Crown, yet spar'd the Head. Th' hast justifi'd that Roman Judg; Hee stood And washt in Water, thou hast dipt in Blood. And where's the Slaughter-Hous? White-hall must bee, Lately His Palace, now His Calvarie. Great CHARLS, is this Thy Dying-place? And where Thou wer't our KING, art Thou our MARTYR there? Thence, thence Thy Soul took flight; and there will wee Not ceas to Mourn, where Thou did'st ceas to Bee. And thus, blest Soul, Hee's gon: a Star, whose fall, As no Eclips prove's Oecumenical. That Wretch had skill to sin, whose Hand did know How to behead three Kingdoms at one blow. England hath lost the Influence of Her KING, No wonder that so backward was Her Spring. O dismal Daie! but yet how quickly gon? It must bee short, Our SUN went down at Noon.
And now, yee Senators, is this the Thing So oft declar'd; Is this your Glorious King? Did you by Oaths your God, and Countrie mock, Pretend a Crown, and yet prepare a Block? Did you, that swore you'd Mount CHARLS higher yet, Intend the Scaffold for His Olivet? Was this, Hail Master? Did you bow the knee That you might murder Him with Loialtie? Alas! two Deaths! what Crueltie was this? The Ax design'd, you might have spar'd the Kiss. London, did'st thou Thy Prince's Life betraie? What? could thy Sables vent no other waie? Or els did'st thou bemoan His Cross? then, ah! Why would'st thou bee the cursed Golgotha? Thou once hadst Men, Plate, Arms, a Treasurie To binde thy KING, and hast thou none to free? Dull beast! thou should'st, before thy Head did fall, Have had at least thy Spirits Animal. Did You, Yee Nobles, envie CHARLS His Crown? Jove beeing fal'n the Punie-gods must down: Your Raies of Honor are eclip'st in Night, The Sun is set, from whence You drew your Light.
Religion Vail's her self; and Mourn's that shee Is forc'd to own such horrid Villanie. The Church and State do shake; that Building must Exspect to fall, whose Prop is turn'd to Dust. But ceas from Tears. CHARLS is most blest of men; A God on Earth, more then a Saint in Heav'n.
Vota Phileireni Anglici. Faedere Matrimoniali, cum Galliâ inito. LIlia Cârle, Foedera tulit domus Lancast. & Ebor.Rosas Henrice, & Scotiae & Angliae.Regna Jacobe Junxistis; coeänt Lilia, Regna, Rosae. Associata diu maneant, unáque morentur Grata, virescentes, Lilia, Regna, Rosae. Sit CAROLUS Magno Major, sit Maximus, & quo Nomine Roma stetit, Roma superba ruat. Te Hyberniae.Lyra mulcet, avétque Scotiae.Leo, observántque Angliae.Leones, Galliae. Insignia in scuto Regio. Lilia cúmque Rosis Te recreare student: Una Fides, consórsque Salus, Deus unus Iernum, Scotum, Anglum, Wallum, Pace vigente beent. Consilium Phileireni Anglici. REgi Sceptra, Deus Regi sacraverat Enses, . Quae Regis Regi redde, Deique Deo.
Vaticinii Votivi Palaemonis Coronis. VEr rediît, spiránsque Pater per cuncta vigorem Cynthius, obliquum jam penè retrogradus orbem Exegit; vicibúsque suis nova pensa revolvens Dispulit è Coelo nimbos, Terráque fugavit Squallentes Hyemis vultus, Austrósque furentes: Ex quò jam meliore olim concepta PALAEMON Spe sua vota fovens, animo tua fata recurrit, Gens Britonum malesana, & te miratur in illis Non periisse malis, & adhuc spirantia vitae Signa dare, ac propriis nondum occubuisse ruinis. Jam propè bis senas variis erroribus actam Latonam peragrâsse Domos stellantis Olympi, Flora redux, Floraeque suis Philomela querelis Indivisa comes, torpenti nunciat Anglo: Ex quo, Fatorum non sat benè conscius, oris Tunc discedenti Batavûm Tibi Vota PALAEMON CAROLE justa dedit: sed quamvis justa, supremo
Res aliter tunc visa Jovi qui fata gubernat. Quippe ausis nimiùm laxas immisit habenas Criminibus, totámque dedit cumulare furorum Mensuram Sceleri, Vindicta ut grandior aequas Indicet poenas Titanum crimine lapsis. Sic visum est: ut quae nimiâ torpedine damni Conscia Plebs fuerat proprii, mutabile vulgus (Sed nimis heu! serò tandem!) sua fata doleret: Sic visum est superis: majori ut CAROLUS astris Insereret radio caput immortale coruscans; Quadruplicique inter divos fulgente Coronâ Martyrii aeternam sacro in Diademate palmam Necteret, & veros ferret de Morte Triumphos. Sic visum est: ut Tu cui Jus Virtúsque secundum CAROLE jam spes nostra, Locum Titulúmque dedêre, Herculeos primá tentans cum pube Labores, Dignus Avis & Patre, Tuis scelerata Triumphis Colla Rebellantum calcares, Justáque tandem Supplicia inferres vindex Titanibus istis; Quorum ausis eversa jacent Tria Regna: prophano Quae aggressi (ceu Thessalicis quum dextra Gigantum Montibus avulsum substravit Pelion Ossae)
Consiliò junxisse simul; Sacrúmque Cacumen Scandere in his Sceptri In binis eâ de re conciliis habitis, Ʋxbridg. & Westmon.violatâ Pace Britanni, Et Regum Divûmque imâ radice revulsas Evertisse Domos, atque altitonantis Olympi Derisisse minas, complêsse & caedibus Orbem Pacis amatorem, Pacisque insignia Beati Pacifici.Sacris Gestantem in Titulis. Ah! Quis nam talia fando Temperet à lacrymis? Sed Tu qui fata gubernas, Summe Pater, rerúmque gyris moderamine justo Ac sapiente praees, quondam haec versurus in usum Permittis meliorem: atrox sua poena sequetur Ausa nefanda, olim & seros vindicta nepotes Abjurare Patrum detestarique docebit Nomen, & aeternis viventia crimina chartis. Talia, sed volvens animo majora, PALAEMON Verba, animi testes, moestas ad Tamesis oras, Tristior ipse ciens (nam tunc in Tamesis oris Luctus eum tenuit, postquam Te CAROLE, nobis Eripuit violenta manus, Caelóque locavit) Cantabat. Sed quis valeat cantare dolendo?
Dúmque silent Nymphae attonitae? vel arundine motâ Ceu cantus imitata Syrinx peccâsse veretur; Hispidus obscuro latitat dum Glaucus in antro Fata gemens Britonum: dum sparsae hinc indè Napeae In fontes oculos vertunt, Dryadúmque choreae In cursus incompositos, & Panis amores In luctus abeunt; dum Nereüs ipse Tridentem Excussum cecidisse timet; dum stagna profundis Penè refusa vadis Divisos orbe Britannos Concutiunt, mersámque videt sub pondere Gentem Quam magè dilexit terris ille omnibus unam. Talia quis valeat calamos inflare videndo? Quis lacrymas cohibere? istas linque ergò PALAEMON Et Batavûm citus adnando te transfer in oras. Hic & enim amissi radians ut Imago Parentis CAROLUS alter adest, cujus spes Gloria nostras Eriget exoriens, Tempestatúmque furentes Dispellet nimbos, & reddet gaudia Coelo Atque solo Britonum, postquam satis ira Deorum Saevierit, Dextráque Jovis jam fracta revellent Pectora vindictam minitantes sontibus ignes. Hîc erit & votis locus amplior, hîc & Apollo
Agnataeque novem, tranquillâ Pace fruuntur, Litora tuta silent illic. Dúmque ora tueri Principis & sacro dabitur Tibi lumine vultûs Posse frui tandem meliores fistula cantus Exeret, & calamos inflabunt vota, PALAEMON, Tunc magè certa tuos; seu se se accingere Marti Ille paret, laesósque Patris cum sanguine manes Lustrare, ac, Ʋmbris offerre piacula Tantis: Seu Pedibus prostrata ferox Audacia, Sacram Porrigat, Illiúsque legat Clementia, Olivam.
Ad ANGLOS jam novennali Bello Civili inter se dissidentes. . TErtia ter jam dissidiis Civilibus aestas Exarsit, nec Hydrops spoliis discordia vestris Insanam propè rupta sitim satiare valebit, O Britones! certè vos infelicia Trojae Fata manent, decimum si tandem insanus in annum Vos furor hic rapiat, nec saevo parcere ferro Pacis amor, Divúmque metus, Rectique cupido Edoceant, propriae metam & posuisse ruinae. Una medela tuis superest tantùm, ANGLIA, damnis: Da Regi Sua Jura Pio, da Justa PARENTI. FINIS.
