W540 E81_21 99870185 122577
CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS MADE By Sir William Waller, At the Surrender of Arundell-Castle. Together with A List of the Names OF The Commanders taken in the said Castle. Also, Verses Gratulatory. Licensed, and Printed according to Order. Printed by JOHN FIELD, Jan. 11. 1644.
A Gratulatory, as it was presented to the Lady Waller upon her Husbands taking of Arundell Castle. MAdame, Bay-crowned Victory and Fame, Your husbands Pages, bade me in his name Salute you, and (though it be no news) tell Of his renowned Acts at Aurndel. Your pardon then, that I thus rudely presse To kisse your hands in a poetlick dresse; At such a time too, when the most do see, All, as antick, set out in Poesie. But yours are not vulgar eyes; nor the stone Lesse precious which a Swine hath trampled on: Nor do I think you will more lightly set A Jemme, though in a worthlesse cabinet. I here present a Jewell, which I dare Pronounce, though from mean hands it come, most rare; Your husbands honour, from whose brighter flame These borrowed sparks, pay tribute to his name; And must confesse, that they can nothing give Worthy of him, by whom themselves must live. That goodnesse of that cause for whom he fights, In alarms and arms, spending the tedious nights, Were praise enough, though he, perhaps should come (Which heav'n forbid) to us, successesse, home: But when, unto our joy, we see him goe With triumph, on against the common foe,
And raise his Trophes, there, within those walls That had conspir'd, and vow'd his funeralls, Me thinks, our narrow language is too poor To entertain his honours wealth and store. Me thinks, I already read that larger page Of Chronicle, in the ensuing Age, Which shall contain his Name, unlesse that he Goe on so far, it must a Volume be: Then, as I turn the leaves, perhaps, I finde Some lofty strain to speak his gallant minde, And tell our after-nephewes part of all That made him up a perfect Generall. And what may he not do, to whom successe Is due, except our sins do make it lesse? Why then may it not written be as well, He conquer'd all the South, as Arundell? Or shall we think his active spirit meant, Only to stop the passage into Kent? The yet half Pagan Welch, that have no sight To distinguish, because they want true light, Except him: may he on then, to display Together with his standard, a bright day To that dark corner, and expell from thence, The enemies advantage, rude ignorance: And on his name may this due honour rest, He made good one side, all from East to West. This is enough; it were not mect to pray, Or wish all fortune from the rest away, When other Heroes, now, in every field, Command opposers to despaire and yeeld: On one side Fairfax, t'other Manchester, The Scots behind, brave Essex every where; Whose peerlesse honour is, thus to retain Himself supreme of such a noble train;
The lustre of whose Crests, in marching forth, Will shine more bright in conquest of the North. Thus Madam, in our thoughts, the work is end ed, Religion, and the State, by you befriended: All must confesse thanks, who know what a mind You bear beyond the rest of woman-kind, That can with so much willingnesse, expose Your chiefest Iewell to the reach of foes; Dispend with all your marriage joyes so far, To hazard them upon the chance of war. But doubtlesse, 'twill be greater joy to see Him laden back with prize, and victory; And then some pen, more able, shall rehearse His worthy deeds in Chronicle, not Verse.
Propositions made by Sir VVilliam Waller, to the besieged in Arundle-Castle. 1 I require the Castle of Arundell to be delivered in∣to my hands by to morrow morning ten a clock. 2 That all Collonels of Horse, and Foot, and all Horse, Arms, Ammunition, and military provision, what ever be then delivered unto me entire, and unspoyled. 3 That all Commanders, Officers, and Gentlemen, have fair quarter, and civill usage. 4 That all Souldiers shall have quarter for their lives. 5 That for security of performance, Sir Edward Bi∣shop, and Sir Edward Foord be immediatly delivered into my hands. Will: Waller. Explication. 1 By fair quarter I understand, giving life to those that yeeld, with imprisonment of their persons, but civill usage, which is sufficient security, they shall not be plun∣dered. 2 Concerning the place where they shall be sent, I will not determine, but will be left to mine own freedom, with∣out further capitulation. 3 The Ministers are included in the Articles, and are prisoners as well as the souldiers. 4 When I send away the Officers, I shall take care, that they shall not want horses to carry them, but will not be bound to let them have their own horses.
A List of the Names of the Commanders taken by Sir Will. Waller, at the surrendring up of Arundel Castle. Colonells. Bamfield. Bishop. Foord. Lievt. Colonells. Walker. Rawlins. Majors Bevill. Mullins. Gaudy. Mills. Capt. Gabriel Thomas Martiall Generall. Edw. White Quarter∣master Generall. Captains of the Horse. Crosland. Ashford. Ashcott. Hagidott. Buckley. Capt. of Foote. Shanckes Taylor Edmonds Anthony Garret Beale Rawlins Leach Reeve Riche Garret Thomas Resormado's. Mulbancke Kempe Leivt. of Horse. Thornton Rockey Munckton Leivt. of Foote. Garret Masters Atkins Eaton Blacke Shipton Ildish Masters Allot Leach Talborne Mackridge Warren Rene Sorrey Scott Turkey Coyle Lightford Cornets. Powell Rochley Williams Halcy Hooke. Ensignes. Duellinge
Jones Riche Stechseame Sadler Williams Channon Cowlis Earles Lichford Prynne Cooper Gilbert Martin Goringe Weymer Glosse Sutton Gentlemen. Gilbert Beckingham Arthur Creswell Henry Goringe Mr. Ennerfield Robert Allen Thomas Marlett Iohn Pay Surgeons. Will. Rosse Will. Berey Will. Pell Iohn Greenfield Iohn Beacher Richard Serley Henrv Baveninge Will. Welbe. Qartermaster. Robert Lurbord Floyde Richard Spurhford Richard Lewis Richard Cubbe Iohn Easton. FINIS.
