C5894 99887362 182088
The conquering Virgin: OR, The Maiden Triumph; To an excellent new Air. This may be Printed, R. P. I. WE all to Conquering Beauty bow, it's pleasing Powers admire; But I ne'er saw a Face till now, that like yours could inspire; Now I may say I met with one, amazes all Mankind; And like Men gazing on the Sun, with too much light am blind. II. Soft as the tender moving sighs, when longing Lovers meet; Like the Divining Prophets Wife, and like blown Roses sweet; Majestick gay, reserv'd yet free each happy Night a Bride; A Mean like awful Majesty, and yet no spark of Pride. III. The Patriarch to gain a VVife chast, beautiful and young; Serv'd fourteen years a painful life, and never thought it long; And were I to reward such Care, and life so long would stay, Not fourteen, but four hundred years, and think it as one day. IV. Thy Virgin-Innocence does move Diana's beauteous Train; And make them both admire and Love like some resistless swain: I had resolv'd no charming Art should e'er my mind subdue, But Strephon's tender yielding Heart, owns Cupid's Power in you. V. As when the Indian first does spy the dawning of the Fight It Captivates his wondring Eye so charming is the sight, But as the morning grows more bright, his pleasure still encrease, Untill the sullen sable night, do's cause those Joys to cease. VI. Let us upon soft silken Flowers enjoy our bloom and prime, And sweetly pass away those hours, that glide away with Time; The light-foot minuits will not stay, and Lovers hours are few; My fairest then do not delay, but give great Love his Due. VII. Thy Blushes and each charming Grace, that can so sweetly please, And all the Beauties of thy Face were made for Lovers Ease; To recompence that restless Pains, those Torments and those Fears, Those Sighs, (of which we all complain) in our most happy years. VIII. Then fairest Nymph let Strephon find the Pleasures of thy Arms, Be like a beauteous Goddess kind, and yield me all thy Charms; The Pleasures of the Gods above, I will not envy then, Such are the mighty Joys of Love, ordain'd for Happy Men. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden Ball in Pye-Corner.
