E2851A R176187 52612157 179451
A True COPY of the PETITION OF THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, For the Calling of a Free PARLIAMENT. Together with His Majesties Gracious Answer to their Lordships. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble PETITION of the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal; VVhose Names are Subscribed. May it please Your Majesty, WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, in a deep Sense of the Miseries of a War now breaking forth in the Bowels of this your Kingdom, and of the Danger to which your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be Exposed, and also of the Distractions of your People, by reason of their present Grievances, do think our selves bound in Conscience of the Duty we owe to God, and our Holy Religion, to your Majesty, and our Country, most humbly to offer to your Majesty, That in our Opinion, the only visible way to preserve your Majesty, and this your Kingdom, would be the Calling of a Parliament, Re∣gular and Free in all its Circumstances. We therefore do most earnestly beseech your Majesty, that you would be graciously pleased with all speed to Call such a Parliament, wherein we shall be most rea∣dy to promote such Counsels and Resolutions of Peace and Settlement in Church and State, as may conduce to your Majesty's Honour and Safety, and to the quieting the Minds of your People. We do likewise humbly beseech your Majesty, in the mean time, to use such means for the preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood, as to your Majesty shall see most meet. And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, &c. W. Cant. Grafton. Ormond. Dorset. Clare. Clarendon. Burlington. Anglesey. Rochester. Newport. Tho. Exon. W. Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. Paget. Chandois. Osulston. Presented by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Exon, Ely, and Roche∣ster, the 17th. of November, 1688. His MAJESTIES Answer. I Agree with You as to the Calling a Parliament when it can be done, as You propose, Regularly and Free, in all its Circumstances; and that it may be so, I desire You will tell the Temporal Lords, that I expect they should joyn with Me to suppress this Invasion and Rebellion; and that the Lords Spiritual should Preach Loyalty, and exhort the People to stand by Me, as becomes Loyal Subjects. Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1688.
