N970 99885006 182816
Nevvs from Hide-Parke: OR, A very merry strange Passage which happened betwixt a North-Country Gentleman, and a very Gaudy Gallant Lady of Pleasure, whom he took up in the Parke, and Conducted her (in her own Coach) home to her Lodgings, and what chanced there, If you'l venture Attention, the Song will declare. To the Tune of, the Crost Couple. 1 ONe Evening a little before it was darke, Sing Tan tara rara Tan-tivvee, I call'd for my Gelding, & ride to Hide∣parke One Tan tara rara Tan-tivvee: It was in the motley Moneth of May, When Meadows and Fields were gaudy and Gay, And Flowers were Apparell'd as bright as the day, I got upon my Tan-tiwee. 2 The Parke shone brighter then the Skies, Sing tan tara rara Tan-tivvee. With Jewels, and Gold, and Ladies Eyes, That sparkled, and cry'd, come see mee: Of all Parts in England, Hide-Parke hath the name, For Coaches and Horses, and Persons of Fame; It look'd (at first sight) like a Field full of Flame, Which made me ride up Tan-tivvee. 3 There hath not been seen such a sight since Adam's, For Perriwigg Ribbon and Feather; Hide-Parke may be term'd the Market of Madams, Or Lady-Faire, chuse ye whether; Their Gowns were a yeard too long for their Leggs, They shew'd like the Rain-bow cut into Raggs, A Garden of Flowers, or a Navy of Flaggs, When they did all mingle together. 4 Amongst all these Ladyes, I singled out One, To prattle of Love, and Folly: I found her not coy, but jovial as Jone, Or Bette, or Marget, or Molly; With Honour, and Love, and Stories of Chances, My Spirits did move, and my Blood she advances, With twenty Quonundrums and fifty five Fancies; J'de fain have been at her Tantivvee. 5 We talkt away time, untill it grew darke, The Place did begin to grow privvee; For Gallants began to draw out of the Parke; Their Horses did gallopp Tan-tivve: But finding my Courage a little to come, I sent my Bay-Gelding away by my Groome, And proffer'd my service, to waite on her home: In a Coach we want both Tan-tivvee. 6 I offer'd and proffer'd, but found her straight lac'd, She cry'd, I shall never beleeve ye: This Armfull of Sattin, I bravely imbrac'd, And fain would have been at Tan-tivvee: Her Lodgings were pleasant, for scent and for sight, She seem'd as an Angell by Candle-light, And (like a bold Archer) I aym'd at the White; Tan-tivvee, tan-tivvee, tan-tivvee, 7 With many denyalls, she yeilded at last, (Her Chamber being wondrous privie) That I all the night there might have my repast, To run at the Ring Tan-tivvee, I put off my Cloathes, and I tumbled to bed, She went in her Closset to dress up her head, But I peep'd in the key hole, to see what shee did, Which put me quite by Tan-tivvee. 8 She tooke of her head-tire and shew'd her bald-pate Her Cunning did very much grieve mee Thought I to my self, if it were not so late. I would home to my Lodging beleeve me: Her haire being gone she seemed a Hagg, Her bald-pate did looke like an Estritches Egg, This Lady thought I, is as right as my legg, She hath been too much at Tan-tivvee. 9 The more I did peep, the more I did spy, VVhich did to a mazement drive mee, She put up her finger, and out dropt an eye; I pray'd that some Power would releeve mee; But now my Resolves were never to trouble her, Or venture my Carkais, with such a blind Hobler, She look'd (with one eye) just like Hewson the Cobber, When he usd to ride Tan-tivve. 10 I peep'd, and was still more perplexed therewith, Thought I (though't be at Mid-night) J'le leave thee, She fetches a yawn, and out fell her Teeth; This Quean had intents to deceive mee: She drew out her Handkercheif (as I suppose) To wipe her high forehead, and down dropps her Nose; Which made me run quickly, and pull on my Hose: The Devill is my Tan-tivvee. 11. She wash'd all the Paint from her visage, and then She look'd just (if you will beleeve mee) Like a Lancashier Witch, of four score and ten; And I (as the Devill did drive mee) I put on my Clothes, and cry'd Witches and Whores, I tumbled down staires, and broak open the doores And down in the Country agen to my Boores, Next morning I rid Tan-tivvee. 12. You North Countrey Gallants, that live pleasant lives, Let not curiositie drive ye. To leave the fresh Ayre, and your own Tennant Wives, For Sattin will sadly deceive yee: For my part, I will no more be such a Meacock, To deal with the Plumes of a Hide-Parke Peacock, But find out a Russet coat Wench, and a Hay-cock, And there I will ride Tan-tivvee. FINIS. London, Printed for William Gilbertson dwelling at the Bible in Giltspur street, without Newgate.
