P2704A 52614842 176010
A POEM To His HIGHNESS, the PRINCE of ORANGE, To Welcome Him into the CITY of LONDON. Written by a SON of the Church of England. IN Lawless Times, when Romes devouring Jaws, Swallow'd our Peace, Religion, and our Laws; When Subjects Rights lay crush'd beneath the Throne, And that Debauch'd by th' Whore of Babylon, When Loyal Wits by Popish Knaves were fool'd, And all the State by Romes dark Counsels Rul'd: When Lyes confirm'd were, and the Truth run down, And Beads became the Jewels of the Crown: When all the Nation in a deep Despair, Lay groaning, Crush'd beneath a load of Care: When Legal Order was by Priests confus'd, The Laws corrupted, and the Just abus'd; The Crown and Cross in subtle Union joyn'd, Made Private Leagues, for publick Ills design'd: Thus England lay expecting of its Doom, Expos'd to all the Greedy Woolves of Rome. But Heaven, who their Black Stratagems had seen, With a Blest Care divinely stept between, Their close infernal Treacheries to prevent, Resolv'd to Chuse some Humane Instrument; And none so fit on Earth, (could Heaven see) For this blest Enterprize, Great PRINCE, as Thee. O Mighty SAVIOUR, whom just Heaven has Chose, To keep Us from the Violence of our Foes: How shall we set forth Thy Immortal FAME, Or in fit Accents Celebrate Thy NAME! Humane Abilities it far exceeds, To speak at large, the Greatness of Thy Deeds: 'Tis Thou (O PRINCE) has set the Nation free, Redeem'd us all from Romes vile Slaverie, And Plac'd us in our Antient Libertie.
We through Thy Aid (by Heavens Decree imploy'd) Possess those Rights we heretofore enjoy'd, Religion, which the Good delights to see, Establish'd in its splendid Propertie, By false Authority was Trampled down, And basely Worried 'twixt the Cross and Crown: But now behold Her foes Thy Justice shun, And into dark Obscurities they run, Like gloving mists disperse before the Sun. Great PRINCE! Thy Coming does no less presage, Than the Blest Sun-shine, of a Peaceful Age; Who would their Fortunes from thy Service spare, Since ev'ry one will the Advantage Share; Or who'd deny the Homage justly due, (For our Deliverance) Mighty PRINCE, to you; He deserves bondage who omits the pains Of strugling, to release himself from Chains. O Happy Albion, didst thou rightly know The Blessings Heaven upon Thee doth bestow; Thou'st pray His Power might as a Screen indure, Whose Potent Arm has kept our Peace secure; Who at one Blast has all our Cares o'reblown, Restor'd those Rights we Justly call our own, And frighted Rooms Black Agens from the Throne. Ye Sons of Englands Church your fears destroy, For Heaven assures us of an Age of Joy; Let us a Chearful Gladness now express, Due to the prospect of our Happiness: Welcome Great PRINCE, more welcome let us say, Than to the Persians is the Rising day. Long may He live, and ever youthful be With Honour Crown'd, Cloath'd with Felicity; Pursu'd by Fame, by all Diversion met; Free from the least Misfortune or Regret: May all Prosperity His Life attend, And every Action with a Blessing end; May Heaven to each Adventure give Success, And all His Days and Undertakings bless; And may He Crown'd be, whensoe're He dyes, (For this Great Deed) with Everlasting Joys. FINIS. London, Printed for I. C. in Holbourn. 1688.
