p67 47012563 174530
REASONS Humbly offered to the Consideration of PARLIAMENT, why STOCK-FISH and Live EELS should be Imported into ENGLAND: Notwithstanding the same being at present Prohibited by the ACT, which Prohibits the Importation of Irish CATTLE and Forreign FISH. Firstly, THE said Cod-fish, alias Stock-Fish, is Caught and Cured in Iseland, which is in the King of Denmarks Dominions, and no where else; and is Cured without Salt, by the Coldness of the Air and Frost; only which Fish is made use of by all our Ships trading to the East and West Indies, Guinney, and other parts, where no other s;ort of Fish will keep good, but decay. Secondly, The said Stock-Fish is never made use of in any other place then where our own Fish will never keep or hold good: So that there is never the less of our English Fish spent, by the Stock-Fish imported into the Kingdom; in as much as no Person will Eat that if they can get our English Cod or Ling. Thirdly, This sort of Fish is absolutely necessary for our Seamen; and is observed and allowed to have been of great use and benefit to them, by preserving them in their long Voyages from the Scurvey, which they are subject unto, by reason that all other of their Provisions are extreamly salt: So that divers Commanders have affirmed that for want of that sort of Fish, two thirds of their Men have in some Voyages fallen down with the Scurvey, to that degree that they have hardly had Men enough on Board able to stand on their Legs for managing their Sails. Fourthly, If our Shipping cannot be furnished with Stock-Fish here, they will have it from other parts beyond the Seas, Holland, or some other places: And therefore better for the English to Import it than For∣reigners. As for the Live Eels prohibited in the same Act, they are taken at or near Copenhagen, within the said Kingdom of Denmark, and brought to London Market. Firstly, The said Eels are taken in Fresh Water within the Land, and are of the Natural Growth of that Coun∣trey; and therefore no way prejudicial to the Fishery of this Kingdom. Secondly, That the Trade of bringing Live Eels from Denmark to London Market, is but for one Voyage in the year, which time is about Michaelmass, and that but only for two Ships or Hoys which are built on purpose for that Trade. Thirdly, That formerly (as Ancient Men affirm) there hath been Fourteen Ships or Hoys at one time in the River of Thames (all Foreigners) all which Eels were sold in London Market, although the number of People then in∣habiting in and about the City, not half so many as now; which Places where those Ships or Hoys were Laden, are since drained, and great Towns built in the room thereof. Fourthly, That our Fenns in England being now drained also, there is not the hundredth part sufficient taken in England to supply the Kingdom. And whereas there can be but two Ships imployed upon that Trade, if there were Lading to be had for more than twenty, they would be all sold in London Market. Fifthly, That the aforesaid Trade of bringing live Eels into London Market, hath been Practised time out of mind, as will appear by all the Ancient Mapps of the City of London, where you will find the Eel-Ships alwayes figured out in the River of Thames, lying at Anchor over against Queenhithe. Sixthly, That the said Live Eels are Esteemed (as in Truth they are) most Excellent Food (The Price being set by the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor of London) are bought and sold, at very reasonable Rates. Seventhly, That the said Trade hath heretofore been managed by Dutchmen who Sayled from Holland to Denmark, and bought them there, and brought them to London Market, but is now solely managed by the English, who are Fishmongers in London (No Forreigner being concerned with them.) Eighthly, That the aforesaid Stock-Fish and Eels are the Returns and Effects of our own Manufactories and Growth of this Kingdom, Our Woollen Cloth, Serges, Perpetuanes, Norwich Stuffs, Stockings, Pewter, Cheese, and Spirits; going out of this Land in Exchange for the same. Wherefore it is most humbly prayed, That the said Stock-Fish and Live Eels may be Imported, notwithstanding the Prohibitions aforesaid, or any new Act that shall be made to perpetuate the aforesaid Acts.
