S1109A R187400 52614927 176091
EDINBURGH 10. February 1647. ACT FOR VPLIFTING OF ane Moneths maintenance, for disbanding of these Regiments Horse and Foot, that are not to be kept up for the service of the Countrie. THe Estates of Parliament now conveened in this sixth Session of the first triennal Parliament, ta∣king to their consideration the present necessitie of money for disbanding of the Regiments of Horse and Foot that are not to be keeped up, and for payment of the assignements for the service at Philiphauch, and providing Magazines of Victuall for the forces to be keeped up: And finding no readier way for getting money for this effect, than to ordain a ful moneths maintenance to be pre∣sently payed by the Shires and Burghes of the kingdome; There∣fore the saids Estates, do hereby enact and ordaine, that a full monthes maintenance be uplifted, and payed by the whole Shires and Burghs of the Kingdome, ilk Shire and Burgh according to their own proportion and quantity, except and the lands and Burghs possest by the enemy, or burnt, or wasted, or which are exeimed from payment of maintenance by warrand of Parliament: And ordaines the saids whole Shires, and Burghs of the King∣dome to make payment, ilk one of them for their own parts and proportions, of ane full monthes maintenance, according to the quantities and proportions, for ilk Shire and Burgh, to Collector appointed by the Estates for receiving there∣of, as followes, viz. These Shires and Burghs be-South the wa∣ter of Dee, betwixt and the twentieth day of February instant, and these Shires and Burghs be-North Dee, at the rates and dyets to be appointed by the General Act of maintenance, and as shall be pre∣scribed by the same Act. And it is hereby declared, in respect the summes presently imposed by this Act upon the Shires in part of payment to some Shires of their maintenance, is only for the present occasion, while the Act of Maintenance be fully esta∣blished: That therefore the same summes now imposed, shall bee payed out of the Lands which are not possest by the Enemie, nor have beene burnt nor wasted by the Enemie, nor our own forces, or the plague, so that the Heritours thereof are disabled there-through, to make payment of their severall proportions imposed upon the saids Lands, providing the same do not exceed the pro∣portion due by any Heritour, by the Act of maintenance at Saint-Andrews. And also the Estates Ordaines the Commissioners of the Shires and Burghs, for this Session of Parliament, to acquaint the
Commitees of War of the severall Shires, and Magistrates of Burghs respectivè, for providing and paying of their proportionall parts of the foresaid Moneths maintenance, betwixt and the day and times respectivè above specified, appointed for that effect. And the saids Estates Declares, that who shall failʒie in payment there∣of, betwixt and the times foresaids (except such as before ex∣cepted) shall be quartered upon, while the payment of their own proportions: And ordaines the foresaids Moneths Mainte∣nance to be sent by the Committees of War, of the several Shires and Magistrates of Burghs, to their Commissioners of Parliament respectivè, to be delivered by them to the Collector foresaid, to be appointed by the Estates for that Effect. And to the effect the saids Moneths Maintenance may be the more readily and timously payed, The Estates gives heereby warrand to the Committees of War of the severall Shires, to appoint such numbers of Horse and Foot of their own Shires, to quarter upon the Deficients in Burgh or Land of their Shires, for payment of their proportionall parts of the saids Moneths Maintenance, as the Commitee of War shall think fit, ay and while they make payment of their proportionall parts of the foresaid maintenance. And because these summes which are restand unpayed of the assignements to the Regiments at Philip-haugh must be presently payed to these Regiments, be∣fore they will disband; The Estates do therefore ordain the parti∣cular summes and fines respectivè aftermentioned, to be presently advanced and payed by thir Burghs, Shires, and persons follow∣ing, to the Regiments underwritten, viz. The sum of 31766. l. 13. s. 4. d. To the Lord General, the Lieutenant General, and Major General Midletoun, their three Regiments, to be payed as followes, to wit, By the Shirefdom of Berwick, 3555. l. By the Burgh of Lawder, 45. l. By the Shirefdom of Roxburgh, 5778. l. By the Burgh of Jedburgh, 126. l. By the Shirefdom of Selkirk, 1278. l. By the Burgh of Selkirk, 126. l. By the Shirefdom of Pebles, 1638. l. By the Burgh of Pebles, 108. l. By the Shirefdome of Lanerk, 5382 l. By the Burgh of Lanerk, 162 l. By the Burgh of Glasgow, 1530 l. By the Burgh of Rutherglen, 45. l. By the Shirefdom of Fyfe 6642. l. By the Burgh of S. Andrews, 780. l. By the Burgh of Dysert, 270. l. By the Burgh of Kirkcaldie, 600. l. By the Burgh of Cowper, 216. l. By the Burgh of Anstruther easter, 180. l. By the Burgh of Pettinweyme, 120. l. By the Burgh of Dumfermline, 162. l. By the Burgh of Bruntiland, 206. l. By the Burgh of Carrail, 216. l. By the Burgh of Kinghorn, 108. l. By the Burgh of Anstruther we∣ster, 54. l. By the Burgh of Innerkeething, 90. l. By the Burgh of Kilrynnie, 27. l. By the Shirefdom of Linlithgow, 1746. l. By the Burgh of Linlithgow, 324. l. By the Burgh of Queensferrie, 108. l. By the Shirefdom of Edinburgh principall, 134. l. 13. s. 4. d. Item, To the Earl of Dalhousies regiment the sum of 7001. l. 13. s. 4. d. whereof by the Shirefdom of Hadingtoun, 3384. By the Burgh of Hadingtoun, 324. l. By the Burgh of Dumbar, 180. l. By the
Burgh of Northberwick, 36. l. And by the Shirefdom of Edinburgh prin∣cipall, 3077. l. 13. s. 4. d. Item, To Colonel Frasers Regiment 10050. marks, whereof 7000. marks by the Laird of Blindlie, in full satisfaction of his fine of 10000. marks; And the other 3050. marks by the Shirefdom of Drumfreis, out of the first and readiest of the 4446. l. payable by that Shire. Item, To the Lord Kircudbrights Regiment, 12963. l. whereof the sum of 10000. l. to be payed by the Lord Herries, for rescinding of his forefaulter, and in satisfaction of his contravention of 10000. marks, for his good behaviour, for the which the L. Kirkcudbright is caution, and 2963. l. by the Shirefdom of Wigton, and Stuartry of Kirkcudbright. Item, To the Lord Montgomeries Regiment, 992. l. 6. s. 8. d. by the said Shirefdom of Drumfreis. Item, To the Lord Cowpers Regiment the sum of 4266. l. 13. s. 4. d. whereof 4000. l. by the Shirefdom of Perth, 108. l. By the Burgh of Culros, 148. l. By the Shirefdom of Kinros, And 14. l. 13. s. 4. by the Shirefdom of Edinburgh, which with 10000. marks assigned to that Regiment, for the Earle of Nithisdales forefaulter, compleats their moneths assignement for Philip-hauch. Item, To fourtie Troupers of Colonel Barkleyes Troup, for a mo∣neths pay, at 14. s. per diem, 840. l. and 48. l. for a moneths pay to a Lieutenant, and 36. l. for a Moneths pay to a Cornet, to be payed by the Shirefdom of Edinburgh, which compleats the moneth main∣tenance for that Shire, except 33. l. 13. s. 4. d. which yet rests thereof. Item, To the Lord Balcarras 15000 merks, in compleat payment of his former precept of 10000. l. granted to him at Perth, and in satisfaction to him and his Regiment, of the summe assigned to them by the Act at Glasgow: And ordaines this summe to be payed out of the first and readiest of the superplus of the forsaid moneths mainte∣nance, now ordained to be advanced, and not assigned or otherwise destinate to be payed in maner before rehearsed. Which particular summes respectivè above mentioned, the Estates ordaines to be presently advanced and payed by the present Commis∣sioners for Shires and Burghs, and persons respectivè abovenamed, to the forsaids Regiments and others respectivè above designed: And ordaines the saids Commissioners for Shires and Burghs, to be repayed of the foresaids summes, hereby ordaine to be advanced by them as said is, by their saids Shires and Burghs, with the anualrent thereof, from the time of their advancement while the repayment: And or∣daines the like execution to be direct at their instance for their relief and payment, as is appointed to be direct for payment of the forsaid moneths maintenance to the publike, by poinding and distreinʒing of the Shires, Burghs, and persons deficients for the same: And the Estates declares, that the particular summes above written, shall be al∣lowed to the Burghs and Shires payers thereof, in payment of the forsaid monthes maintenance ordained to be uplifted from the whole Shires and Burghs of the Kingdome. Alex. Gibsone Cler. Regist.
