S1240A 51617458 175358
At STIRLING the 12. of June 1645. FOrsameikle as the Committee of Estates Taking to their serious consideration, The many practices and endeavours used against this Kingdom, by some unnaturall Countrey-men and Traitors, joyned with Irish Rebels within the same; And by the Armies that are preparing in Ireland and England for subversion of Religion, did by their Act of the 28. of March last, give warning thereof to the Shires, That they might have their Forces in readinesse upon advertisement. And the Committee now finding the dangers that threaten this Kingdom, still to continue, and a pressing necessity of the raising of some Forces for streng∣thening the Armies, and enabling them to encounter their Enemies abroad. And being confident, That all who are zealous of Religion, the honour of their Native Countrey, and their own safety, will heartily concurre herein: And rather send out their own Forces to meet the Enemie, nor lye still while the Countrey be over-run, and themselves, and their Families destroyed at their own Doors; Have therefore thought fit, Statute and Ordained, That the whole Shires under-written, and Burrows within the same, and Committees of Warre thereof, Shall presently leavy and raise the number of men following, and have them in readinesse, furnished with eight dayes provision: And that they deliver them to these Officers that shall come from the Generall, to receive them for making up of their Regiments, betwixt and the 4. of July next, under the pains contained in the Acts made concerning the former Lea∣vies, and farther to be esteemed and censured as betrayers of the Kingdom and Cause in hand. The numbers to be as follow∣eth: The Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk, 1000 Foot, whereof 400. for recruting Colonell Scots Regiment: 400. for the Earle of Lowthians Regiment in England: And 200. for the Master of Cranstouns Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Ber∣wick, 600. Foot, for recruting Wedderburne and Aitouns Regiments, according to the numbers they formerly had out of that Shire: The Sheriffdom of Hadintoun, 600. Foot for the Lord Humbies Regiment, except the Master of Yesters proporti∣on, which he is still to have out of these Bounds he had his first Leavy: The Sheriffdom of Edinburgh principall, and Baillierie of Lauderdaile, 600. Foot for the Earle of Lauderdailes Regiment, except the Master of Yesters proportion out of these Bounds he formerly had: The Town of Edinburgh, 600. Foot for Colonell Raes Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Peebles, 200. Foot for the Master of Yesters Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Lithgow, 250. for the Earle of Callenders Regiment: The She∣riffdom of Dumfreis, 600. for Kalheids Regiment, except the Master of Yesters proportion thereof: The Sheriffdoms of Wigtoun and Kirkcudbright, except the Earle of Cassils division thereof, 600. Foot for the Vicount of Kenmure, and Colonell Stuarts Regiment equally betwixt them: The Sheriffdom of Air and Renfrew, 1000. Foot, whereof 600. out of Kyle and Cunninghame, for the Lord Chancellours Regiment, 200. out of Renfrew for Glencairnes Regiment, and 200 out of Carrick for Cassils Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Lanerick, 750. for the Generall of Artilleries Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Fyffe, 1200. Foot, for the Earle of Crawfurd, Dumfermlings, and Elchoes Regiments, according to their former proportions, al∣lowing what Forces they have already put out by publike Warrand beside the former Leavies: And for the Leavies of the re∣manent Shires, Recommends to the Committee of Estates in the North to give orders therefore. And the Committee of Estates do farther recommend to the whole Gentlemen and Heretors of the Kingdom, To have their whole Forces Horse and Foot in readinesse, to march to the Borders upon advertisement: And to be the more carefull in putting out this Leavy, that the Publike are content for ease of the Shire, to bear the Burden of furnishing Arms to thir Forces. Arch. Primerose. Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie. 1645.
