S1811 52528973 179056
A PROCLAMATION For Adjourning of the Parliament, From the 20 of December to the 1 of March thereafter. FOrasmuch as the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, by their Pro∣clamation of the date, the First day of October last by past, in obedience to, and by vertue of, His Majesties special Command and Authority, did in His Majesties Name Adjourn this Current Parliament, from the Eighth day of October then ensuing (to which day the Parliament was for∣merly Adjourned) until the Twentieth day of December instants, And diverse great and weighty Considerations moving His Sacred Majesty to continue the said Adjournment from the said Twenty day of December, to the First of March next, in the year One thousand six hundred and ninety; and that the Mem∣bers thereof may not be put to the trouble and charge of meeting upon the said Twenty day of December, His Majesty hath by His Royal Letter, of the date at Holland-House, the Thirty day of November last by past, Authorized and Re∣quired the saids Lords to issue forth a Proclamation in His Name, Continuing the Adjournment of this Current Parliament to the First day of March next; And if His Majesty shall find it necessary that the said Parliament meet sooner, he will signifie the famine by a Proclamation to Anticipat that Dyet: Therefore the saids Lords of Privy Council do in His Majsties Name, and by His special Command and Authority, Declare the said Parliament Current, and Continue the Adjournment thereof until the said First day of March next en∣suing the date of the present; and Require and Command the Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Privy Council, Pursevants, Mes∣sengers at Arms, Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, that inconti∣nent these presents seen, they pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of this Kingdom, and there in His Majesties Name and Authority foresaid, by open Proclamation, make In∣timation of the Continuation of the said Adjournment, from the Twenty day of December instant, to the First day of March next; Requiring hereby all the Members of Parliament to attend that day, in the usual Way, and upon the ac∣customed Certifications Declaring hereby, not with standing of the present Ad∣journment, that if His Majesty shall find it necessary, the Parliament should meet before the said First day of March next, he will be favourably pleas∣ed to signifie the famine, by a Proclamation for Anticipating that Dyet: For doing of all which, the saids Lords commit to them conjunctly and sseverally, His Majesties's full Power by these presents, delivering the famine by them du∣ly Execute and Indorfaragain to the Bearer. Given at Edinburgh, the Fourth day of December, One thousand six hundred and eighty nine years. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Privy Council, Anne DOM 1689.
