S2495A 52615103 176126
The Pack-Man's Pater Noster. On which to think, it makes me sweat for sham As are these Rites maintain'd in Romes Theatre; And first the casting of their holy Water. Their Exorcisme, their Images, their Altars. Of Crosses, Cups and Pals, Popes are exalters, Of Candles, and of Churches consecration. With vestments in the Church for Decoration, Their Hypocritical hid Hermitages, Their Pennace and Polluted Pilgrimages; Free-will, and humane Merit for Offe▪ With jugling, Jubilees, and Indulgences, And of the Saints their idle invocation, And by the Pope their Curst Canonization. Auricular Confession, vile pollution, And for their Sins a-pay'd for Absolution. Their privat Masses, and their muation, Their Elevation, Transubstantiation. Sir John, if you would hear me bot record, Some Verses on the Supper of our Lord: It was a Friend of mine to me did send them, Hee's not a Christian will not commend them. Priests make Christs both Body and Soul, we need not doubt, They Eat, Drink, Box him up, they bear about, One is to little, Bread and Wine, Holds not him several so we Dine; Thou with thy Christ, I with mine. Is thy Mouth the Virgins Womb? Is bread he seed Are thy words the Holy Ghost? Is this our Creed? O presumptuous undertaker! Never Cake could make a Baker, Yet the Priest can make his Maker.
What's become of all these Chistshe Priests have made? Do these Hostes or Ostes abide? or do they fade One Christ abides the rest do flie: One Christ he lives, the rest do Die: One Christ True, the rest a lie. R. S. Into the Gospel, Take Ye, Eat Ye, Christ saith, For which Receive Ye, Swallow Ye, your priest saith. See how by popes the Sacraments are driven, Where Christ makes two, they ad five, so make seven. For Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, These only two did Christ to us afford. With Christ his Institution not content, To these two True, Five Bastards they augment. A Bastards name doth duly them be fit; For they were never Re-abled as yet; Nor ever shall, but still will be abhor'd, Because they have no Warrant from the Lord, As Confirmation, Pennance, Extream Ʋnction, With Priestly Orders to adorn their Function; And Matrimony they maintain as One. But here's a wondrous Thing to think upon, How Popes do call themselves, Servi Servorum; Yet in Procession keep a Strange Decorum, They tread on Necks of Kings upon the Street; And forcing Emperors to kiss their Feet. Doth God the Father in his Law allow These vile Inventions your Church doth Avow? Doth Christ his Son into his Gospel give Such wayes to walk in, such Faith to believe? Or doth the Holy Ghost in us inspire,
More than the Law and Gospel doth require? The Father hath perscrib'd to us a Law, To keep us in obedience and Aw: And Christ his Son our Saviour, did Provide us His Glorious Gospel always for to Guide us; The Holy Ghost doth from them both proceed, To Guard us from our Sins in time of need. If we transgress the Law of God the Father, Then neither Grace nor Confort can we gather. If we believe not in his only Son, Then our belief is doubtlesly undone; And if we breath not of the Holy Ghost, Then is our Labour all our life-time lost. But Gods Commandments your Church renverses S me she conjoyns, and others she disperses: She trust in Saints and Angels many one, And should Trust in the Trinity alone: Wherefore Gods Holy Spirit can nev'r attend her▪ Nor in distress or danger ever defend her, And though she Reign a while in pompe & pride▪ I hope in God my good and gracious Guide, To her the True Religion hee'l advance. Ere lng, and bring her out of ignorance, Wherein she hath these many Hundreth Years Lyen wilfully, which manifest appears, By her unwillingness from thence to part, She is so obdurate, and hard of heart; So that except God by his mighty hand, Her power, her pride and Cruelty, withstand, And force her from her Filthinesse to flie. Of Errors great, and Gross Idolatry: So if she follow not Christs True Instruction,
I fear her Final dangerous Destruction: Which God forbid: I hope in his own Time, Hee'l both forgive, and purge her of all Crime. Heard ever ye, Sir John, a purpose Quicker, To prove the Pope to be Christs only Vicar? S. J. S. And though he were full Vicar to our Lord, Should not his words and Christs keep one accord? Priest. Doubtless tho do, and never are contrary, In Pater Nosier, Creed: nor Ave Mary. Pack-Man. But Christs Disciples when they made their mtion. To Christ their Master, how to make Devotion, As I have done to you, Sir John, to day, I pray you, in what tongue bade He them pray? Christ did not one w tin to them speak: Their talk was all in Syriack, Herew, Greek. He bade all Nations pray after one Manner: But bade not all tak Latine for their Banner. Your Latine is but one of the Translations: Why should it then exclude all other Nations? And on my Soul, Sir John, if I but say, mine own Mother tongue, when I do pray; ord, help me, Lord, forgive me all my Sins; a, why not, Lord, increase my pack and pins, d every thing whereof I stand in need;
For this depends upon our dayly bread; I hope in God, to more comfort herein, Than Latine ye would make me so parquier in. And since some tongues have more Antiquity, Than Latine, were it not Iniquity To force all People to pray like the Pope? No, good Sir John, ye'l not say that, I hope. Priest. But Pack-Man, one Point would I fain make plain Let us come back to our Ladie again; And if thou had as much Capacity, As raving wit, with great audacity, The case is clear, that Virgine Mary meek, She could all Languages perfitely speak. Hast thou not heard, Man, how the Holy Ghost Came down like cloven tongues at the Pentecost, And fild the House where all the twelve were ready. And one Tongue Truely lighted on our Lady? And lest thou think I talk of idle themes, Consult the reverend Jesuits of Rhemes; I pray thee, Pack-Man, earnestly this note. Pack-Man. In Faith, Sir John, it is not worth a Groat. Will I believ't, think ye, because they say it? Priest. No; but they prov't as no Man can deny it.
Saith not the Text, that when the Lord ascended, Unto the Twelve he earnestly Recommended, That from Jerusalem they should not go, Untill the Comforter should come; and so Into an upper Room they went together, Where Marie still was one, you must consider, With many mo in number full six score, That with the Twelve did daily God Adore; And then he saith, when Pentecost was come, They were together in one place, all, and some, And (all) were filled with the Holy Ghost. Pack-Man. O good Sir John, ye count without your host. Now I see well your Jesuitical Tongues Have cloven the Text even to the very Lungs: That (all) which first was spoken of six Score, Is here meant only of the Twelve, no more, Now Mary is not named now, as than; What need I then believe it, holy Man? On with your Spectacles, Sir John, and Read, And credite this as a Point of your Creed: The Holy Ghost could fall upon no more Than He was promised unto before. Doubtless He took not a blind-folded Flight, Like fyled Larks, not knowing where to light. Now, He was promis'd only to the Twelve, Look on the Text, Sir John, and judge your selve; Speak man, and be not silent: I am sorry To see you ignorant of such a story. And, as the stories in themselves are divers, Flowing and falling into sundry Rivers; n divers Chapters so they stand divided,
Whereof ye have no Warrant in the Word; And yet pursue us both with Fire and Sword, As Hereticks, fot not doing as ye do; Yet what the World bids, and no more, that we do, Think ye that any man can be so mad, As to hold Christ his Saviour; and so bad, As to hold Marie for his Saviours Mother, And not to love her still above all other? We love her then, tho' we believe not in her. Nor by will-worship think we for to win her. We hold her blessed, for Christs flesh conceiving, But far more blessed, for Christs faith receiving She is his Mother, and the Church his Wife. Which was to him more dearer than his life So if the one could fall out with the other, He would respect his Wife, more than his Mother; For this is every Spouses carriage, But most in this spiritual Marriage, And as she's Mother of his humane life She's but a Daughter of his heavenly Wife, And by his Mother, member of Christs body; Who thinks not so, is but a very Noddy. All this, Sir John, I do but briefly say, To let yov see, that ye play us foul play. Priest, Well, Pack-man. tho' thou bear about that trunk I fear thou be but some foreloppin Monk, Of Luthers lore, or crooked Calvins crew, And sent abroad, such business to brew; Transformed in the person of some Pedler Pack man. Now, good Sir John; in faith I am no medler,
Nor have I mind nor means so high to Mount; I can but Read a little, and lay a Count, And seek my Meat through many an unknown Maison. I know not what you call your Kyrie Laison; So help me GOD, Sir John, I know not better, Nor in your Latine can I Read one Letter. I but believe in GOD and sometimes say, Christ help me when I Wander out the Way. Priest. R. S. I pray thee, Pack Man this much for to tell me, Since thou presumes so far for to excell me. Were't not a very Reasonable Thing; If one were going to an Earthly King, To get forgivenesse for some great Transgression. That he should shortly suite the Intercession Of some great Favourite, and he for to pass To purchase pardon for his high Trespass; And not the guilty person to proceed Presumptuously before the King to plead; But use his moyen by His Highness minion. Pack-man. Sir John, that motion is not worth an Onion. What if the King shall hear the Poor Man's Suite, Should he stand silent as if he were mute? No: he should, prostrat, lay his Fault before Him, And he himself for pity should implore him; For Intercessors oftimes lurks and lingers, Except the Pleaders largely fill their Fingers.
Be here to mw just 'tween six and seven, And thou w thyself half way to Heaven. Pack-Man. Content quoth I, but there is something more, I must have your Opinion in before. In case the holy Prior have leure, To speak of every purpose at our pleasure: There was but one Tongue at the birth of Abel, And many at the building up of Babel: A wicked Work which God would have confounded, But when Christ came all Tongues again resounded, To build his Church by his Apostles teaching, Why not in praying, as well as in Preaching? Since prayer is the True and full perfection Of holy Service: saying your Correction: So if our LORD to mine own Tongue be ready, What need I then with Latine trouble our Lady? Or if both these my prayers must be in, I pray thee, tell me at whom to begin? And to pray Joyntly to them both as one, Your Latine prayers then are quickly gone: For Pater Noster never to accord, With her, nor Ave Mary with our LORD, If I get him what need I seek another? Or dare he do nothing without his Mother? And this, Sir John, was once in Question, Disputed long with deep digestion, Whether the Pater Noster should be said, To GOD, or to our Lady, when they pray'd When Master Mare of learn'd Diversitie, Was Rector of our Ʋniversitie: They sate so long, they cooled all their Kail, Untill the Master-Cook heard of the Tale,
Who like a Mad-Man ran amongst the Clergie, Crying with many a Domine me asperge: To give the Pater Noster to the Father, And to our Ladie give the Ave's rather; And like a Welsh-Man swore a great Saint Davies She might content her well with Creeds and Ave's And so the Clergie fearing more confusion. Were all contented with the Cooks conclusion, Priest. Pack-Man, this Tale is coyned of the new. Pack-Man. Sir John, I'le quite the pack, if't be not true. Again, Sir John, ye learned Monks may read, How Christ himself taught us of his own Head, That every Soul that was with Sin opprest. Should come to him, and He would give them rest. Come all to me, saith he, not to another, Come all to me, saith he, not to my Mother: And if I do all as Christ did Command it, I hope her Ladiship will not withstand it. And so, Sir John, if I should speak in Latine Unto the LORD, at Even-Song and at Matine, And never understand what I were saying, Think ye the LORD would take this for true praying, No: that ye cannot; for ye may consider, My Tongue and Heart should pray to GOD together. And hereupon ye shall hear what befell, To certain Clerks that Latine well could spell; With whom by chance, I Lodged at an Inne, Where an old Wife upon a Rock did spin; And towards Evening she fell to and pray'd;
But neither they, not I knew what she said. One said, the Carling Counterfeits the Canting. Another said, it's but the Matrons manting. Some call'd it Cibbers, other call'd it Clavers But still the Carling speaks, and spins, and slavers, Now good Sir John, what think ye of this Hussie? Where was her Heart, when her Hands was so busie? In end, one said, Dame, wot ye what ye say? No, not, said she, but well I wot I pray. Ye pray, said he, and wots not what? I grant. Alace, how ye can be so ignorant? The Matrone musing little at the Motion, Said, Ignorance is Mother of devotion, Then Dame, said he, if Ignorance be the Mother. Darknesse must be the Daughter, and none other. Pray'd ye, said he, when all the Time ye Span? What reck of that? said she, God's a good Man, And understands all that I say in Latin, And this I do at Even-Song and Matine. Alace, Sir John, was not this Wife abused, Whose Soul and Senses all were so confused? Ye know these unknown Tongues can profit no Man, And one tongue is enough for any Woman. But when one prayes in true sincerity, As God commands, in Spirit and Verity; The heart sends up the Tongue as Messenger Unto the Lord a Pleasant Passenger. Priest. But Pack-Man here's a pretie little Book, Wherein if thou will listen for to look,
Set out by a true Catholick Divine. And out of doubt will settle thine ingine, Faith, Read it, Pack-Man, for it is but little. The gadge of the new-Gospel is it's tittle. He clearly proves by Zacharias Example. When He did Sacrifice within the Temple, And all the People stood and pray'd without, They knew not then what Tongue He spake, no doubt; Ergo the Masse may both be said and Sung, In other Language than the Mother Tongue. Pack-Man. Sir John, I see your holy Catholick, Upon the Truth, hath put a pretty Trick. Have ye not heard this Proverb oftimes founded, Homo qui malè audit male rounded? So if the People heard not what he said, How could they know in what Language he pray'd? Since understanding cometh by the Ear, He cannot understand that doth not hear. Or how proves this that Zacharie the Priest Spake Latine, then the Language of the Beast? Were Liturgies under the Law but so In such a Tongue that all the Jews did know? What e're He spake, himself sure understood it And so your Catholick did ill conclude it: Because a learned Priest may pray in Latine, And mumble o're his Even-Song, Masse and Matin Ergo a Pack-Man to the LORD may Pray, And never know a Syllable he doth say: For when you put me to my Pater Noster, I seek an Egge, and ye give me an Oster.
