T2741 99887319 182142
True Lovers Extremity; OR, The Maidens miserable Moan. This Charming Fair, through deep Dispair, did end her Days in Grief: To Death alone, she made her moan, who yielded her Relief. To the Tune of, Charon make hast,&c. This may be Printed, R. P. I Having an hour of time and leisure, straight to the Valley I did repair, And where I resolved to take my Pleasure, among the Lillies so sweet and fair. I in a moment was amazed, hearing a youthful Damsel cry, As in a Passion her Voice she raised, never was Lover more true than I. Then I being willing to know the reason of the sad moan which the Damsel made, There I resolved to tarry a season, straight with a sorrowfull sigh she said, He made a Vow and now he forgoes it, I never knew the reason why; While I was with him, full well he knows it, never was Lover more true than I. Down from her Eyes then her Tears they were flowing so that her Passion encreased sore; To her alas! I would fain have been going, but that I fear'd to offend her more: Her very Tears and Sighs did grieve me, the which did seem to pierce the Sky, Saying, alas! though my Love does leave me never was Creature more true than I. When he did call me his dear Love and Iewel, making to me a most solemn Vow, I never thought he could have been so cruel as to my Sorrow I find him now. By his fair Words I was deluded therefore I here in Sorrow lye, Tho' from his presence I am excluded never was Creature more true than I. Strephon he oftentimes su'd for my favour, never was any young Swain so kind, But my Affections was settled for ever, I cannot waver with any Wind No other Swain shall e'er enjoy me, I for his sake had rather dye, Tho' by Vnkindness he does destroy me, never was Creature more true than I. Long was I woo'd e'er he once cou'd obtain me, fearing, alas! what I find too true, He most unworthily now does refrain me, here may I bid all my Ioys adieu: This yielding Heart has prov'd my ruine, here in this silent Grove I'll dye, Nothing but Sorrows I find ensuing, never was Creature more true than I. I'll bid adieu to that ungratefull Creature which is the cause of my grief and woe, Death I desire, there's nothing more sweeter to the Elizium Shades I'll goe; Where with young Lovers I will wander, free from this sad Extremity; I cannot bear what I now lye under, never was Creature more true than I. With that her speech began for to fail her, saying, Farewell to my unkind Love. Every Creature did seem to bewail her, nothing was pleasant in all the Grove: Her silken Locks, alas, she rended, saying, I here for Love must Dye! With these last words then her Sorrows ended. never was Creature more true than I. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-corner.
