U54 99887971 183637
The Unfortunate Forrester, Or, Fair Elener's Tragedy. Shewing how Lord Thomas, once a bold Forrester, fell in love with the fair Lady Elener, but his Mother would not suffer him to Marry her, but told him of another that was far Rich∣er: then the Lord Thomas not willing to be undutiful to his Mother, appoints his Wedding Day, and invites fair Elener to come to his Wedding: who contrary to her Mothers know∣ledge came, and having seen his Bride she Stab'd her self, which Lord Thomas seeing, took the same Dagger, and Kill'd himself. Tune is, Chevy Chase With Allowance. a lady standing in front of a house with a fan a man standing, hat in hand AMongst the Forresters of old, one Thomas of great fame; A Champion great, both stout and bold, Lord Thomas was his name. In shooting too his aim was good, the Kings Deer he did slay, He did excel bold Robin Hood, and often won the day. Lord Thomas as they did him call, with beauteous Elener, So deep in love did chance to fall, he could love none but her. She also loved him as well, and no love there was lost; But mark what afterwards befel, both in their loves were crost. This Elener that was so fair, no portion had at all; Lord Thomas if be come but near, would always on her call. Lord Thomas had a Mother who his love did understand, She made him swear he would nothing do unless she did command. He promis'd her he would obey, and hearken to her voyce; Therefore desir'd her for to say, where he should make his choice. Oh Son, quoth she, this Elener, is fair enough 'tis true; And thou mast chance to beg with her, such matches fit not you. I know a pritty black-brow'd Lass, though not so handsome quite; She her in wealth doth far surpass which will give thee delight. Well Mother, since it is your will, Lord Thomas humbly said, I straight way will the same fulfil, and Marry the Black-brow'd Maid. This thing did much his Mother please, and so she went away; But Lord Thomas he could find no ease, by night, nor yet by day. He on the morrow mounts his steed, and to Elener did ride, His Love-sick heart with grief did bleed, to think what would betide. When to fair Elener he was come, he knockt hard at the gate; The fearful Virgin being at home, ask'd who 'twas knock'd so late. 'Tis I fair Elener my dear, his voice she streight-way knew: And as soon as e're she heard him there, the gates streight open flew. Lord Thomas uttered then his mind, and with great grief he cry'd, My Mother to me is unkind, and hath gotten me a new Bride. You to my Wedding I invite, and I must not be deny'd; They crying kist, then bid good night, and Lord Thomas away did ride. Fair Elener with grief and woe. was stricken almost dead, She to her Mother streight did go, and told her what he said. She ask'd her Mother leave to ride to see if he had got, Instead of her, another bride, for she believ'd him not. Her Mother would not give her leave, that she should go to see, But she her Mother did deceive, and slipt out privately. She cloath'd her servants all in green, and with her they all did ride, She did excel beauties fair Queen, in all her glorious pride. When to Lord Thomas she was come, she ask'd to see his Bride, He took her into a private room, where both together cry'd. He bid her look at that window, for there she might be seen, Methinks quoth she, good sir, you know I am to her a Queen. Her self to Murder she was bent, and turning to a bed, A Dagger to her heart she sent. and straight way fell down dead. Lord Thomas seeing she was slain, the self same Dagger took; He vow'd in Heaven her to obtain, then to his heart he strook. Let Parents therefore have a care, how that they do deny Their childrens choice, lest that they share, those lovers destiny. London, Printed for W. Thackeray, T. Passenger, and W. Whitwood.
