T725AA 52612362 179665
The Tenour of the Oath to be taken by all Persons in publick Trust. I A. B. Solemnlie swear in the presence of the eternal GOD, whom I invocat as Judge and Witness of my sincere intention of this my Oath; That I own, and sincerelie profess the true Protestant Religion, contained in the Con∣fession of Faith, recorded in the first Parliament of King James the sixth, and that I believe the same to be founded on, and agreeable to the writters Word of GOD. And I promise and swear, that I shall adhere thereto, during all the dates of my lifetime, and shall endeavour to educat my Children therein: and shall never consent to any change, or alteration contrair thereto: And that I dis∣own, and renounce all such Principles, Doctrines, or Practises, whether Popish, or Phanatical, which are contrare unto, and inconsistent with the said Protes∣tant Religion, and Confession of Faith. And for testification of my Obedience to my most Gracious Soveraign CHARLES the second, I do affirm, and swear, by this my solemn Oath, That the King's Majestie is the only Supream Gover∣nour of this Realm, over all persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: And that no forraign Prince, Person, Pope, Prelate, State, or Potent at, hath, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superioritie, Preheminencie or Authoritie Ec∣clesiastical or Civil, within this Real And therefore I do utterlie renounce, and forsake all Forraign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, And do promise, that from henceforth, I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Majestie, His Heirs, and lawful Successors, And to my power shall assist, and defend, all Rights, Jurisdictions, Prerogatives, Priviledges, Prheminencies and Authorities belonging to the King's Majestie, His Heirs and lawful Successors. And I farther affirm and swear by this my solemn Oath, That I judge it unlawful for Subjects, upon pretence of Reformation, or any other pretence whatsoever, To enter into Covenants or Leagues, or to convocat, conveen, or assemble in any Coun∣cils, Conventions, or Assemblies, to treat, consuit, or determine, in any matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastisk, without his Majesties special command, or express li∣cence had thereto, or to take up Armes against the King, or those commissionated by Him: And that I shall never so rise in Arms: or enter into such Covenants, or Assemblies: and that there lies no obligation on me from the National Covenant, or the Solemn League and Covenant (so commonly called) or any other man∣ner of way whatsoever, to endeavour any change or alteration in the Government, either in Church or State, as it is new established by the Laws of this Kingdom. And I promise and swear, that I shall with my utmost power, defend, assist and maintain His Majesties Jurisdiction foresaid against all deadly: And I shall ne∣ver decline His Majestie's Power and Jurisdiction, As I shall answer to God. And finallie, I affirm and swear, that this my solemn Oath, is given in the plain genuine sense and meaning of the words, without any equivocation, mental re∣servation, or any manner of evasion whatsoever; And that I shall not accept, or use any dispensation from any Creature whatsoever. So help me GOD. EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, 1681.
