W1649A 99889366 183612
The Whig Rampant: OR, EXALTATION. Being a Pleasant New Song of 82. To a New Tune of, Hey Boys up go We. My book you see, Remember me: Then the Old cause, We will set free. NOw now the Tories all shall stoop, Religion and the Laws, And Whigs of Common-wealth get up, to Top the Good old Cause: Tantivy-Boys shall all go down, and Haughty Monarchy; The Leathern-Cap shall brave the Crown Then Hey Boys up go We. When once that Anti-ceristian Crew are Chrush'd and overthrown, Wel teach the Nobles how to bow, and keep the Gentry down; Good Manners has a bad repute, and tends to Pide we see, We'l therefore cry all Breeding down, And Hey Boys up go We. The Name of Lords shall be a bhor'd, for ev'ry Man's a Brother, What Reason then in Church or State, one Man should Rule another? Thus having Pill'd and Plunder'd all, and Level'd each Degree, We'l make their plump young daughters fall And Hey Boys up go We. What though the King and Parliament, cannot accord together, We have good cause to be content, this is our Sun-shine Weather: For if Good Reason should take place, and they should both agree, ʒ—who'd be in a Round-Heads case, For hey then up go We. Remember the good old Cause WE'l down with all the Versities where Learning is profest: For they still practice and maintain the Language of the Beast: We'l exercise in e'ry place, and Preach beneath a Tree: VVe'l make a Pulpit of a Cask, For hey then up go we. The VVhigs shall rule Committee-Chair, who will such Laws invent, As shall Exclude the Lawful Heir by Act of Parliament: VVe'l cut his Royal Highness down, e'n shorter by the Knee: That he shall never reach the Throne, Then Hey Boys up go We. VVe'l smite the Idol in Guild-Hal, and then (as we were wont) VVe'l cry it was a Popish-Plot, and Swear those Rogues have don't: His Royal Highness to un-throne, our Interest will be: For if he e're enjoy his own, Then Hey Boys up go we. Rebellion was a Thrveing Trade on this our English Coast: VVhen Pauls-Church was a Stable then Troopers Rul'd the Roast: Then Loyalty was call'd a Crime, in Anno Forty-Three: A Godly Reformation time, For Hey then up went we. VVhen three great Nations sweat in and many thousand slain: The bosome of the Earth bestrew'd, then Godliness was Gain: But now the Days are alter'd since, as College plain did see: If we Rebel against our Prince, to Tybh go we.ury We'l break the Windows which the of Babylon has Painted, And when their B—s are pull'd down, Our Deacons shall be Saied: Thus having quite Enslav'd the town, pretending to set Free, At last the Gallows claims its own, Then Hey Boys up go We. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in West Smithfield.
