W3244B 49521038 174254
The wofull Lamentation of Mistris Jane Shore, a Goldsmiths wife in London, sometimes King Edward the seconds Concubine, who for her wanton life came to a miserable end. Set forth for the example of all lewd women. The tune is, Live with me. If Rosamond that was so faire Had cause her sorrows to declare. Then let Jane Shore with sorrow sing That was beloved of a king. then wanton wives in time amend, for love and beauty will have end. In Maiden years my beauty bright. Was loved dear of Lord and Knight, But yet the love that they requir'd Then was not as my friends desir'd. My Parents they for thirst of gain, Husband for me did obtain, their pleasure to fulfill, orcd to wed against my will. atthew Shore I was a Wife Lust brought ruine to my life, then my time so lewdly spent ow makes my soul for to lament In Lumbard street I once did dwell, As London yet can witness well, Where many gallants did behold My beauty in a shop of Gold. I spread my Plume as wantons doe Some sweet and secret friend to woe, Because my love I did not find Agréeing to my wanton mind, At last my name in Court did ring, Into the ears of Englands King, Who came and lik'd and love requird But I made coy what he desird. Yet Mistris Blague a neighbour neere Whose friendship I esteemed dear, Did say it was a gallant thing To be beloved of a King. By her perswasons I was led For to defile my marriage bed. And wrong my wedded husband Shore, Whom I had lovd ten years before, In heart and mind I did rejoyce That I had made so sweet a choyce. And therefore did my state resign To be king Edwards Concubine. From City then to Court I went, And reapt the pleasures of content, I had the joyes that love could bring, And knew the secrets of a King, When I was thus advanc'd on high, Commanding Edward with mine eye, For Mistris Blague I in short space Obtain d a living of his Grace. No friend I had but in short time I made unto promotion climb. But yet for all this costly pride My husband could not me abide, His bed though wronged by a King, His heart with grief did deadly sting. From England soon he goes away To end his life upon the Sea. He could not live to see his name Impared by my wnton shame, Although a Prince of peerlesse might Did reap tha pleusurs of his right, Long time I lived in the Court, With Lords and Ladies of great port For when I smil'd all men were glad, but when I mourn'd my prin. grew sad But yet an honest mind I bore To helpless people that were poore, I stil redrest the Orphans cry, And sav'd their lives condemn'd to die I still had ruth on widows tears, I succour'd babes of tender years, And never lookt for other gain But love and thanks for all my pain. At last my Royall King did dye, And then my days of wo grew nigh, When Crookback Richard got ye crown K. Edwards friends wer soon put down I then was punisht for my sin, That I so long had lived in, Yea every one that was his friend That tyrant brought to shamefull end. Then for my rude and wanton life, That made a strumpet of a Wife, I penance did in Lumbard street, In shamefull manner in a sheet, Where many thousands did me view, Who late in Court my credit knew, Which made ye tears run down my face To think upon my foule disgrace. Not thus content they took from me, My Goods, my Living and my Fee. And charg'd that none should me relive Nor any succour to me give. Then unto Mistris Blague I went To whom my Iewels I had snt, In hope thereby to ease my want When riches fail'd and love grew scant. But she deny'd to me the same When in my need for them I came, To recompence my former love, Out of her doors she did me shove. So le did vanish with my state, W now my soule repents too late Thore example take by me For friendship parts in poverty, But yet one friend among the rest, Whom I before had seen distrst And sav'd his life condemn'd to dye Did give me food to succour me For which by Law it was decréed That he was hanged for this déed. His death did grieve me so much more Then had I dy'd my selfe therefore Then those to whom I had don good Durst not restore me any food. Whereby in vain I beg'd all day, And still in stréets by nights I lay My gowns beset with pearl and gold, Are turn'd to simple garments old My chains and gems and golden ings To filthy rags and loathsome things. Thus was I scorn'd of maid and wife, For leading such a wicked life. Both sucking babes and children small Did make a pastime at my fall, I could not get one bit of bread Whereby my hunger might be fed Nor drink but such as channels yields,, Or stinking ditche in the fields Thus weary of my life at length, I yéelded up my vitall strength Within a ditch of loathsome scent, Where carrion dogs do much frequent The which now since my dying day, Is Shoreditch cal'd as writers say, Which is a witnesse of my sin, For being Concubine to a King. You wanton wives that fall to lust Be you assur'd that God is just. Whoredom shall not escape his hand, Nor pride unpunisht in this Land. If God to me such shame should bring That yéelded only to a King, How shall they escape th dayly run To practice sin with every man? You husbands match not but for love, Leest some disliking after prove. Women be warn'd when you are wivs What plagus belong to sinfull lives. then maids and wivs in time amend. for love and beauty will have end.
T  his wives wantonnesse, the wrongs of marriage, the fall of pride being a warning for all women to take heed by. To the same tune. IF she that was fair Londons Pride For beauty fam'd both far and wide. With Swan-like Song in sadness told, Her deep distresses manifold. Then in the same let me also Now bear a part of such like woe Kind Mathew Shore men called me, A Goldsmith once of good degree And might have lived long therein Had not my wife bin wool to sin: Ah gentle jane thy wanton Race Hath brought us to this foule disgrace Thou hadst all things at wish and will Thy wanton fancy tu fulfill No London dame nor Marchants wife Did lead so sweet and pleasant life, Then gentle Iane the truth report, Why leftst thou me to live in Court, Thou hadst both gold and silver store, No wife in London then had more And once a k to walk the field, To see what pleasure it would yeeld, But woe to me that liberty Hath brought us to this msery, I married the whn thou wert young Before  st what did belong To husb lov or marriage state, Wch no  le repents too late Thus w  thee unjust, And  my trust, But  possest my roome, And cropt m  allant boom. Fair L me and my joy, My he  in deep annoy, To th  blike shame: Thy  ht my good name. And  ch man and wife, In je  my life, And e  ther said That Sh  the wanton plaid. Where  to change My dw  Country strange. My Lands  ds I sold away, And so from  went to Sea Opprest with g  wofull mind. But left my cause of grief behind. My loving wife whom once I thought Would never be to lewdness brought, But women now I well espye Are subject to unconstancy. And few there be so true of love, But by long suit will wanton prove. For flesh is frail and women weake When Kings for love great suit do make But yet from England my depart Was with a sad and heavy heart. Whereat when as my leave I took, I sent back many a heavy by look. Desiring God if it might be To send one sigh swéet Jane to thée For if thou hadst but constant bin These dayes of wo I ne'r had séen. But yet I grieve and mourn full sore, To thik what plgus are left in store For such as carelesse tread awry The modest steps o y. Ah gentle Jane if thou didst know The uncoth pahs I dayly oe. And wo tears for the I shed For wronging thus my marriage bd Then sure I am thou wouldst confesse My love was sure though in distresse. Both Flanders France. & Spain I past And came to Turky at the last And there within that mighty Court I lived long in honest sort, Desiring God that sits in Heaven That Lovers sins might be forgiven. I there advanc'd thy loving name, Of living Wights he fairest Dame. The praise of Eds beauty stain All which thy husband did maintain. And set thy picture there in Gold For Kings and Princes to behold, But when I thought upon thy sin thy wanton thoughts delighted in, I griev'd that such a comely face Should hold true honour in disgrace. And counted it a lucklesse day Wherein thou first didst stray away. Desiring then some news to hear, Of her my soule did love so dear, My secrets then I did impart to one well skil'd in Magick Art, Who in a Glasse did truly show Such things as I desir'd to know. I ther did see thy Courtly state, thy pomp thy pride, thy glory great, And likewis there I did behold. My Jane in Edwards arms enfold. thy secret Love I there espy'd, thy rise, thy fall, and how thou dy'd. thy naked body in the Street I saw due penance in a sheet, Bare foot before a Beadles wand, With burning Taper in thy hand, And babes not having use of tongue Stood pointing as she past along, Thus ended was the shame of thine, Though God gave yet no end to mine When I suppos'd my name forgot And time had washt away my t, And in an other Princes Reign I came to England back again, But staying theyre my friends decay' My Princes Laws I disobey'd And by true Iustice Iudg'd to die For clipping Gold in secresie By gold was my best living made, And so by gold my life betrai'd Thus have you heard the wofull strif That came by my unconstant wife Her fall my death wherein is shewd The storie of a strumpet lewd. In hope thereby all women may Take heed how they the wantons pla The Description OF Jane Shore. THis womans beauty hath bin highly praised by a famous writer that lived in her time, Named Tho∣mas Moore who de∣scribed her in this manner. Before her death she was poor & a∣ged, her stature was mean, her hair of a dark yellow, her face round and full her eyes gray, her body fat, white & smooth, her coun∣tenance cheerfull like to her conditi∣ons. There is a picture of hers to be seene in London, it is such as she was when she rose out of her bed in the morning, ha∣ving nothing on but a rich Mantle cast under her arm, over which her naked arm did lye. what her Fathers name is, or where s;he was born is not certainly knowne, but her Husband Matthew Shore, a young man of right good Parentage, wealth and behavi∣our, abandon'd her bed after the King had made her his Concubine. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson,
