B158 R170413 [ocn]124064092 192200
It helps a Stomach that is Weak, Cold, Weak, Cold Sto∣machs of hard digestion, & . and of Hard Di∣gestion, and doth greatly strengthen the same, Consumes cor∣rupt Phlegm, and helps concoction, being taken with White-Bread and Sugar, two or three spoonfuls at a time. A double Linnen cloath may be dipped in the warm Spirit, and applied to the Cold and Weak Stomach, for it helps difficulty of con∣coction, stops vomittings, and mitigates all pains, and Sobbings (or Hickoughs) which proceed from a cold temper, or win∣dy humour. It is observable that weak and cold Stomachs are oftentimes oppressed after moderate eating, and sometimes the strong, Surfeit by some contrary meat, or ill Cookery, whence proceed Surfeirs, which if not prevented, many times beget Feavers, and so death. Very large experience of this Spirit, hath been found in this case for many years; it never failing to remove any such inconvenience from the Stomach, if timely used; for which purpose, take One or Two Ounces, once in 6 hours, or 12 hours, until no more of the undigested matter remains in the Stomach; which it commonly expels, at first or second taking. It is of great virtue in Diseases of the Intestines, Bowels. for by means of its Diaphoretick quality, it dissipateth not only in the Sto∣mach, but also in the bowels all tough and clammy Phlegm, with other viscid, thin, or serous humours. It warmeth by its penetrating heat, the Entrals, Cholick. made cold by drink, air, or other accidents; expels wind, and both in∣wardly taken, & outwardly applyed, it asswageth those vehement pains which arise from the Colick, which Disease hath been in a short time dissipated by this means, in one, with whom it was familiar, and upon the least occasion bred. It is of great profit in all Fluxes of the Bowels, Lienter. Diarhaea. Diseuter. which are occasioned by the weakness of the retentive faculty of the Sto∣mack, & Intestines, proceeding for the most part from a cold and moist distemper, therefore two or three spoonfuls of it may be
given in Sugar, as often as shall be needful, with a Tost of Rye or Wheat bread, and let a double Linnen cloath be moistened in it, and applyed warm to the Stomach and Bowels. In the obstructions of the Mesentery, ructions  Me∣ry, Li∣ver and Spleen. Liver, and Spleen, from whence proceed the Scurvy, Yellow and Black Jaundice, after the humours have been sufficiently carried away by proper Me∣dicines, this Spirit very fitly takes place, which opens the stop∣pages and crammings of the Mesentery, Liver, Milt, and Gall, cuts and prepares the thickness of humours, and by its penetra∣ting virtues provokes Sweat, In the Scurvy after purging and cutting Medicines, Scurvy. the great∣est hope of health is placed in evacuating the Serosities, by sweating, for which purpose a quantity of this Spirit may be ta∣ken, according to the Constitution, as often as need shall require. In the Dropsie and Timpany, Dropsie. when the Body is emptied by proper Medicines, as aforesaid, if the Liver be not hot, nor the Urine red, this Spirit may be used with good success; two or three spoonfuls, more or less in two or three ounces of the wa∣ter of Elder Flowers, and one ounce of the Syrrup of Elder ber∣ryes. Then in bed provoke Sweat. Also two or three spoon∣fulls of the Spirit, may be taken alone, at any time, with a Tost made of white bread and sweetned with Sugar. In the stoppage of the Monthly Terms, Terms stop∣. after the body hath been disburthened by some Purging Physick of that putrid filth, which is occasioned by the obstruction, this Spirit is very use∣full, which by its subtility passes through the whole body, and through the least Vessels thereof, cutting and attenuating the grossness of the humours: it may be taken the same time the Courses use to flow, one, two, or three spoonfuls in White-wine, and Sugar, Mornings and Evenings.
In the Suffocation of the Matrix, Suffocation of the Ma∣trix. the Womb being first purg∣ed of the malignant and foetid humours, one or more spoonfuls of this Spirit greatly availeth, both out, and in time of the Fitt; for it powerfully discusses those cold, and poisonous vapours, evacuates by Urine, vindicates the more noble Entrals from their infection, and restores freer breathing. Take of the Pith that is in the middle of the Elder-stick, Stone. and of Juniper berries of each four ounces, which put toge∣ther into a strong glass bottle that will hold a pottle, pour there∣on a quart of this Spirit, stop it very close, and let it stand 7 daies in a bath of warm water, or in the Sun, at Summer; then dress it strongly, and keep it in a glass close stopped, The use of this is excellent in breaking, and expelling the Stone, some spoonfuls of it being taken in a glass of White-wine and Sugar, as often as there shall be occasion, the Stomach and bow∣els, having by purging Medicines, been first cleansed of the thick slimy Phlegm, and Tartarous humours, The Gout is so stiff and stubborn a Disease, Gout. that often∣times it contemns the best prescriptions; wherefore to hinder the increase of those serous humours which most commonly do occasion it, and also to evacuate those which are already sprung up, Purging Medicines must be often taken at the Spring and Fall; and sweating used once or twice a Month, after the body hath been treated with some convenient Purga∣tive. The serous matter gathered in the body, is easily dis∣cussed by sweat; and assoon as natural or artificial sweat appears, there is great hopes of safety: for which purpose take one ounce of this Spirit with ntimon. Diaphoret. and Hartshorn prepa∣red without burning, of each ten Grains, in a glass of good wine in the morning, cover your self warm in your bed, and sweat after as long as may be convenient. If it be taken a little before the Fitt, it disappoints it. It hath been the common practice of some, for many years, assoon as any one is taken suddenly sick, whether Children, or
Persons of riper years, to give from one spoonful of this Spirit to six spoonfuls, according to the age and Constitution, and to cover them warm on their bed; which soon expells what∣ever hurtful matter occasioned their sickness, although they have oftentimes appeared to be affected with much violence. THe Tarter Dyet drink opens all obstructions in any part of the body, cleanses and purifies the Blood, causes a fresh and lively habit of the body, procures a chearful frame of Spirit, corrects all evil humours, and effectually purges Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, and waterish humours, from all parts. It frees the head from what ever annoyeth it; quickens the senses; re∣moves any humours which affect the Sromach, Heart, Lungs, Li∣ver, Spleen, and Bowels, strengthning them exceedingly: It is very available in Agues of all sorts, (the use of it hath often∣time cured Quartans) in the Hypocondriack Melancholy, Scur∣vy, Madness, Jaundies, Green-sickness, Dropsie, Sciatica, Gout, pain in the Joynts, Cholick, Fluxes, the Kings-Evil, Rheumes, Coughs, Shortness of breath, Whites, Worms, and Rickets. It cleanseth the Reigns, Kidneys and Bladder, provoketh U∣rine, expelleth Wind, and by removing all superfluous humours, prevents whatsoever diseases usually proceed from them, or may be occasioned by them. It may be used by Men, Women, and Children, according to their several ages, and its operation, from one spoonful to half a Pint, or more. For the prevention of Diseases, take it at Spring and Fall, in the morning fasting, for many daies together: For the keeping off, and removing any distemper, take it at any time, when cause shall be seen, whether it be Summer, or Winter. In Quartan Agues, Scurvy, Dropsie, Hypocondriack Melancholy, and such lasting diseases, it must be used fifteen or twenty daies, and that either without any intermission, or once every other day, or twice a Week, until the Humours be overpow'red and the disease mastered. In very hot weather, 'tis good to avoid
whatsoever motion might occasion sweat, and in Extream Cold to keep your self by the fire, or if neither of these happen, you may do as at other times. He that will eat a dish of Broath, drink a draught of Whey, warm Posset, Beer or Ale, 2 hours af∣ter taking the Dyet-drink, may use which is best liking to him, and he that regards neither, may forbear: 'tis good to eat some warm Broath, and Meat for dinner. Take a Firken that will hold between three and four Wine Gallons, fill it with good Beer from the Kyve, well hopped, and boiled, so as it may keep long; when it hath done working, put into it a thin linnen Bag, and let the mouth thereof hang out of the Bung, until all the Ingredients in the Paper are put in; then tie it fast, and let it lye in the Firkin, stopping it close, the string being left out of the Bung, when it is a Fort∣night old begin to use it, which, before it grows low and flat, bottle, and keep in a cold place for use: The Firkin may be filled again with good Beer from the Kyve, and when 'tis clear, and fit to drink, may be used any time upon an empty Stomach, what quantity shall be seen convenient. Tinctura Mirabilis Purgeth all Viscous and Clammy Hu∣mours without trouble, as also Choler Phlegm, and Melan∣choly; is an Excellent Medicine in the Dropsie, in all Diseases of the Brain, Nerves, Joynts, Breast and Lungs; and therefore is to be exhibited to Persons affected with Fluxes of Rhume, Old Coughs, the Gout, Colick, Scurvy, the Jaundies, Agues of all sorts, Apoplexy, Epilepsy, and Vertigo. It is said to be a perfect cure of the Gonorhaea, the use of it being continued until the party is well; 'tis likewise of great benefit, and very help∣full in all accidents of Venereal diseases: the Dose is three spoonfuls, but it may be varied according to the strength and constitution of the Patient, from one spoonful to four. Take it in the morning fasting, in a glass of Sack, or strong Beer; or by it self, drinking a glass of either, as soon as the Tincture is down; two or three hours after, eat a dish of warm Broath,
and for dinner something that is warm, and of easy digestion. If it gives not three or four Stools that day, take three spoon∣fuls of it also at night going to bed, three hours after a light Sup∣per: Continue the use of it every morning, or other morning, without any other observation, but follow your business as at o∣ther times, until the desired benefit be found. 'Tis a familiar Medicine, agreeable unto Nature, leaves no nauseousness in the stomach is Cordial, reviving, and chearing the Spirits, removing whatever clogs and annoys them. THe Aromatick Tincture purgeth Choler, Phlegm, and all corrupt, stinking and putrid humours from the Stomach, Entrals, Hypocondria and Mesentery. It clears the Senses, re∣stores a good Colour to those that have lost it, cleanses the Blood, opens Obstructions, and strengthens the Stomach and Bowels exceedingly; kills Worms, cures all Head-aches, leaves no impurity in the body, and is found to be good in Agues by removing those humours which continually nourish them; 'tis very Cordial, and exceedingly helps such as are troubled with Faintings, and subject to Vomiting and Purging. It is a very familiar and safe Medicine, friendly to Nature, and may be u∣sed by all ages and sorts of people, at any time of the year. The Dose is from half a Childs spoonful, to three or four large spoonfuls, according to the age and constitution: Take it in Beer, or Wine, or alone, if what is taken in the morning, works not, the like, or a sufficient quantity may be taken at night going to bed, three hours after Supper, or you may take it at any time on an empty stomach, two or three hours before Meals, a dish of warm Broath is best to be eaten the next thing after it, and what else you have most minde unto, so as it be warm, and of good digestion. THe Lenitive Electuary gently opens the Bowels, and Purges all humours without any trouble, an Ounce of it being ta∣ken at night going to bed; Eat some Broath the next morning
for Breakfast, and walk abroad as at other times: 'Tis profitable in Feavers to keep the body soluble, and to carry off the offend∣ing humours: It may be safely used by all persons, and in all distempers where gentle opening means are required, Morn∣ings, or at any time upon an empty stomach. THe Spleen Pills do gently purge Choler, Phlegm, and Me∣lancholy, from the Stomach, Head, and Bowels, they are with good success used in the ill habit of the body, and all de∣fects of the stomach, proceeding from foulness, an abounding of Humours, and Wind, in the Jaundice, Dropsie, long lasting putrid Feavers, Worms, and Agues of all sorts: They open the obstructions of the Liver, and Spleen, and are an excellent Me∣dicine against all Melancholick and Windy distempers, pro∣ceeding from the Womb, Spleen, or any other part. The frequent use of them works good effects in the Scurvy and Hy∣pochondriack Melancholy; they may be given without danger to all Constitutions, Ages and Sexes. Take out of the Mass a quarter of an Ounce, make twelve Pills and swallow down three of them every night, or other night, three hours after a light Supper, or twice a week, so long as the distemper lasts: the next morning for Breakfast eat a dish of Herb Pottage, and follow your business, as at other times, if the three Pills taken at night, give not three or four Stools the next day, three more may be taken next morning, and so continue the use of them Mornings and Evenings. THe Common Pills do purge Choler, Phlegm and Melan∣choly, with other moist, tough and gross Humours from the Head, Stomach, Breast, Liver, Spleen, Womb, Bowels, Veins, Joints, Sinews, and Muscles, or any other part of the body; and so, they remove all Diseases occasioned by the abounding of such like humours, as Pains, Giddiness or Swimming of the Head, all defects of the Stomach and bowels,
Coughs, Shortness of breath, the Cholick, Gout, Sciatica, & other pains of the Joints and Sinews, the Jaundice, Dropsie, and all other Melancholick Diseases. The Pale Colour in Girls proceeding from obstructions, with Agues of all sorts. They open the stoppages of the Liver, Spleen, and other parts; strengthen all the inward faculties, and may be used with safety in all cases where purging is necessary, having been found by long experience and much use, to conduce greatly to the preserving of health, and to the removing of many stubborn Diseases. Take one Dram at a time, in the morning fasting, made into six Pills, once in four daies; about two or three hours after, rise from your bed, drink warm Posset or broath and keep in. Take them three or four times following, or oftener if need require. A person of reasonable strength may take one Dram, others half as much, or two Scruples, made into 3 or 4 Pills. THe Strong Pills purge all humours from the deepest and remotest parts of the body, as the Brain, Nerves, Muscles, Joints, Breast and Womb. They may be used for inveterate pains of the head, Apoplexy, Falling sickness, Palsey, Madness, or any difficult distemper throughout the body. Give them only to strong Constitutions, half a Dram, two Scruples, or one Dram at a time, in the morning fasting: two or three hours after, drink warm Posset or broath, and keep in: the use of them may be repeated three or four times, or oftener, if there shall be occasion. THe Purging Powder is known by long experience to be a safe and good Medicine, purging gently Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy and Waterish humours, from the Head, Stomach, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and Bowels: It cleanses those parts of evil humours, opens all Obstructions, strengthens the Senses, procures Mirth, purifies the blood, causes a fresh and lively Ha∣bit of the body, and is good in all sorts of Agues: Persons of
ripe years may take one Dram and half at a time in the morn∣ing fasting, in White-wine. Syder, or Posset; fast two hours after, then drink now and then some warm Posset, and keep within doors. Take it once in two or three daies, for three or four times. Children may take from ten Grains to a Dram, ac∣cording to their age, and strength. 'Tis a proper Medicine to be given after the Small Pox and Measles, to prevent the in∣conveniencies which oftentimes happen by the neglect of purg∣ing Physick. THe Rheume Pills have a marvellous operation in all man∣ner of Thin and Subtle Defluxions and Distillations of Rheum, whether it falls upon the Breast and Lungs with a Cough, or into the Teeth, or any where else, they procure sleep, and have been known absolutely to cure any new Cough, though never so violent, in four times taking. In the incurable Cough they give much ease, free the Breast from foul humours, open Obstructions, and strengthen the body exceedingly. Take three of them at a time every other night going to sleep, for four times: or until the Cough be gone, using the Drink made of Liquorice, Figs, and Anniseed, half a Pint, or more at a time warm, mornings and evenings, first and last. Those nights you take the Pills, the drink may be used an hour or two sooner. THe Pectoral Roles are an excellent Medicine; they very much open the Wind pipe, and help its roughness, whees∣ings, hoarsness, and difficulty of breathing: Ripen the Cough, bring forth Phlegm, quench thirst, are good against sour and offensive belchings, the heat of the Mouth and Stomach, as also the heat in the breast, called by some Heart-burning, all griefs of the Chest, and Lungs, Ptisick and Consumption. Hold some of them in your mouth, to dissolve, at any time, especial∣ly at night in bed.
Pectoral Drink. TAke of Figs a quarter of a Pound opened; Liquorice one Ounce bruised, Anniseed half an Ounce, boil them in three quarts of water to two quarts, strain it, and take it warm half a Pint or more at a time, Mornings and Evenings, first and last, for Coughs of all sorts. The use of this hath often proved very successful. For Stuffing of the Breast and Lungs with Phlegm, add to a pint of this Liquor two Ounces of Syrup of Scabious, and take a good draught at a time. Pectoral Drink. TAke of Fair water Four Quarts, dryed Hysop one handful, Liquorice half an Ounce, Raisons of the Sun stoned and Figs of each two Ounces, boil all gently till a quart is consu∣med, strain it, and add of Honey a quarter of a pound; boil it again a turn or two, Scum it well, bottle it, and use it as the former for the same purposes, with Syrup of Scabious, or with∣out it, as there shall be cause. THe true Elixir Proprietatis, so highly esteemed for its great virtues, and sold at so many places in London, is here also to be had, rightly and exactly Prepared; whose Virtues follow. It is moderately hot and dry, preserves from putrefaction, is admirably effectual against corrupted Air, and affects of the Head, Breast, Stomach, and Lungs. It expels crude humours from the Stomach, procures a good Appetite, and Digestion, strengthens a weak stomach very much, and is profitable in Rheums, Coughs, Shortness of Breath and Consumptions: it comforts the Heart, strengthens the Memory, revives the Senses, drives away Dimness of sight, dissolves the Stone of the Reins, preserves from the Palsey and Gout, removes Melan∣choly, causes Cheerfulness, cures all sorts of Agues and Feavers,
heals all inward Wounds and Ulcers, expels all Crudities, and other inconveniencies occasioned by excess in eating or drink∣ing; 'tis said to be the Balsom of the Antients; by most strong conservation it hinders Age from surprizing Youth too soon, & may with good success be used by Aged persons against what∣ever Malady they are subject unto. It cures every Disease both hot and cold, which is incident to the body of man, neither is there any Vegetable Medicine that exceeds it. The Dose is from six to twelve drops, or more, in Wine, Ale, or any other appropriated Liquuor. MIthradate and Ʋenice Treacle have been esteemed of all other Confections the most renowned, and worthiest, for more then 1600 years. The admirable effects they have, and do still produce, is the cause they are so much in use, and disposed of in such vast quantities, throughout the greatest parts of the world. Mithridate is good against Poison, the stinging of Adders and bitings of Mad dogs, being taken inwardly in the largest quantity, and applyed outwardly; expels from the body all ill humours, and Diseases coming of cold and wind, from head to foot; warms and strengthens the Brain, removes the stopping of the passages of the senses, by cold; heals the infirmities of the Mind, drives away vain fears from persons af∣fected with Melancholy, helps a cold waterish Stomach, and strengthens it much, is profitable for such women as cannot Conceive by reason of cold, provokes sweat, hath a peculiar power to preserve against bad Airs, the Plague, and all Pesti∣lential Diseases, opens the Breast, allays the Cough, and pro∣vokes the tough humours to be coughed up. It is good to re∣move all Agues in the beginning, and all bruises caused by falls, or other waies. The same directions are to be observed in the taking of it, as are prescribed in Venice Treacle, and the same quantity to cause Sweat, the Virtues of both being the same. Mithridates King of Pontus, a most Potent and Learned Monarch, was the Inventor of this Noble Antidote,
who being vanquished by Pompey, and fearing he would lead him in Triumph to Rome, took Poyson, from which he received not the least trouble, having before made frequent trial of this Medicine for the prevention of such poisonous practises, which he suspected might treacherously be used against him, and it proved indeed so great a Counter-poyson, that although he wanted not skill to frame his deadly Potion, yet could not his body feel any ill effect by it, whereupon he called a Souldier to him, desiring him to kill him, whose slow and trembling hand Mithridates himself forced to his own slaughter. A∣mongst his Treasuries and Spoils, a great many Medicinal Re∣ceipts were found, which the King had laid up most safely, as great secrets. Pompey brought these to Rome and gave them to Damocrates and Andromachus Roman Physitians, who ap∣proved of all the Remedies, but especially of the Mithridate, whose description Damocrates set forth, and therefore it is called by the Antients Mithridatium Damocratis. This Mithri∣date hath been most in use until the last great Plague, since which time, in some parts of the Country, Venice Treacle (called Theriaca Andromachi, because it was set forth by Andromachus, one of Nero's Physitians) hath been in greater request. Mithri∣dates is justly made the Author of both, for Damocrates & Andro∣machus only disposed the matter whereof they consist, more or∣derly, & added some few things. It is not without good Ground that they call Mithridate the Father, and Theriack the Mother of Medicaments, seeing in Dignity and Excellency they far exceed all others, and comprehend all others Faculties; for there is scarce any preternatural affection whereunto one of these, duly prepared doth not conduce. THeriaca Andromachi, or Venice Treacle resists all Poyson, Diseases, and Evils which may happen unto the Body of Man. Cures Head-Aches, Giddiness, Dulness of Sight and Hearing, the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Difficulty of Breath∣ing, Old or New Coughs. Helps Concoction, Cold Stomachs, all Gripings and Wind in the Bowels, the Jaundice, Dropsie,
Gout, hardness of the Spleen, Vain Fears and Melancholy, Pains in the Joints and Kidnies; It kills Worms, represses the immo∣derate beating of the Heart, comforting and fortifying it greatly, together with the Brain, and whole Body. Is good against Swoonings and Weakness, preserves from Contagion in Pestilen∣tial times, Expels the Monthly Flowers, casts out the Dead Child, as also the Stone in the Reins and Bladder. It helps the bitings of Mad Dogs, and Stinging of Adders, if inwardly given, and outwardly applyed. It opens all Obstructions, gives a good and lively colour to those who want it, and hath been found upon long Experience to be of singular use and benefit in the begin∣ning of all sorts of Agues, and Feavers, especially Quartans. In Feavers, Agues, all cold Distempers of the Limbs, and Joynts and other inconveniences occasioned by cold and Bruises, a Man or Woman may take One Dram and half, or Two Drams, in Carduus Posset, or Mace Beet; to Children the quantity must be proportioned according to their several ages. Cover your self warm in the Bed, and Sweat three or four hours, or so long as shall be thought convenient, drinking either Carduus Posset, or Mace Beer in the time of Sweating, at the end of which, have an hot Shirt in readiness to be put on, and wipe off the Sweat with warm Cloaths. In other cases a Dram or half a Dram may be taken at a time Mornings and Evenings, in Sack or Beer: To preserve from Contagion, mix one Ounce of the Confection of Gilliflowers with half an Ounce of this, and take the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time, Mornings and Evenings, or when there shall be occasion. DIascordium is an Exccellent Cordial in the Plague and Pe∣stilential Feavers; settles and composes the Spirits when disturbed by Feaverish, or any other Distempers. Allays the pains of the Head, & is good to be used by Women in Child bed to hasten their Labour, and help their usual Sickness at that time. It stops Fluxes, strengthens the Stomach and Heart, and pro∣vokes Sleep. VVeak People and young Children may take from five Grains to a Dram; those who are stronger, a Dram and half, or somtimes two Drams.
LOndon Treacle is a good Antidote in Pestilential times, re∣sists Poyson, helps Digestion, strengthens cold Stomachs, and is a good Cordial in any Disease whatever. A quarter of an Ounce, or half as much may be taken at a time, or it being mixt with an equal quantity of Confection of Gilliflowers, the quantity of a Nutmeg, or more may be taken, Mornings and Evenings, or once in six hours. COnfection of Gilliflowers is of a temperate quality, and a ve∣ry choice Cordial. It resists the Plague or any Venom, the Small-Pox and Measles, as also any sort of Feaver or Ague: strengthens Nature. and is good against Consumptions, and all other Weaknesses. Give the quantity of a Wallnut, so often as cause shall be seen. If one Dram of Confection of Hya∣cinth be mixed with one Ounce of this, it will add to its Cordial virtue in Feavers; and if one Dram of Confection of Alkermes be mixed with a like quantity, it will render it the more Effectual in any kind of VVeakness. One Ounce likewise of this Confection being mixed with half an Ounce of Diascor∣dium, Mithradat, or, Venice Treacle, and the quantity of a Nut∣meg taken, when there shall be cause, will be of great benefit in such cases, wherein those Medicines may be used; as also a good preservative against any Infection, or ill and Corrupt∣ed air. THe Tincture of Roses corrects and strengthens the Stomach mightily, is an approved Medicine in violent Vomitings and Purgings, also when digestion is Weak, and Natural Ap∣petite to Meat Defective. It is highly profitable in the Disease called Cholera, which is a violent Vomiting and Purging both at once, and useth to kill very suddenly. But in this case it must be taken in a great quantity at a time, as Glasful after Glasful,
till a Quart, three Pints or more be drankt, and if the party hap∣pens to Vomit up the first draughts, he ought nevertheless to keep on drinking, until it staies in the Stomach. It causes even to admiration, a wonderful calm in the Body, by appeasing of those hot Tempests, which sharp Cholerick humours have stirred up; and by mixing it self with the humours offending, and taking away whatever is acrimonious in them. Also it is a very pleasing and useful Liquor in all hot Feavers, continual or intermitting, to be used for ordinary Drink; its constant use being that, which takes away the cause of those Diseases, and this being done, the effects must necessarily cease. To make this Tincture, take of dryed red Rose leaves one Ounce, put them into a stone or well-glazed Earthen Vessel, with as much boiling Water as will moisten them, drop in lea∣surely four Scruples of Spirit of Vitriol, continually agitating and moving the Rose leaves: after which, pour upon them four Pints of boiling Water, cover it close until it be cold, then let it run through a Flannel Cloth, or Filter Bag, and add to the Liquor half a Pound of VVhite Sugar. Barly Water. TAke two Ounces of French Barly, boil it a Turn or more, in two Quarts of Spring VVater, then throw it away, and put to the Barly so much more VVater, boiling it the second time, as at first, throw away that VVater likewise, and Once more add to it the like quantity, which boil gently, till a third part be consumed; let it stand to settle, after which pour off the clear VVater into a Bottle, and mix with it Syrrup of Vio∣lets and Wood-Sorrel, of each three Spoonfuls, Spirit of Vi∣triol thirty or fourty drops. It moistens, cools and cleanses the body, allays the Acrimony of sharp humours, and is an excel∣lent Drink in Feavers, hot affections of the Stomach, Liver, Reins, or any other part. It may be used for all those in∣tents and purposes to which the Tincture of Roses doth conduce; and should be taken in a large quantity at a time
by which small and gentle means, extraordinary effects have been oftentimes produced: for as fierce and blustering winds and tempests are frequently allayed by a suddain shower of Rain: so in like manner, the greatest commotion imaginable, in the Microcosm, discovering it self by continual Vomitings, Purgings, and Swoonings, have been many times quelled by such drinks as this, and the former, when the highest Cordials have procured no better an effect, than the return of the faint∣ing Fit. If the Constitution of body, and the Disease require it, you may mix Cinamon or Bezoar water, Spirit of Elder, or of Mints, in such a proportion, that the largest Dose of them, may serve for as much of the Barly water as you take at once. The Decoction of Hartshorn, in the next place to be spoken of, greatly avails, being mixed and used in all respects, as Bar∣ly water. RAsped Hartshorn helps Putrefaction, corrects Malignity, provokes Sweat; stops Vomiting, Fluxes of the Womb, and Bowels; kills Worms, and strengthens the Natural Bal∣som in our bodies, is very good in the Small Pox, and Mea∣sles, in Putrid and Malignant Feavers, allayeth all sharp hu∣mours, and is exceeding useful for Children, as well as for per∣sons of riper years. Take one Ounce of Rasped Hartshorn, boil it in two quarts of water close covered, to one quart: strain it, and add half an Ounce of Sugar, with two or three spoonfuls of Rose-water, then let it be bottled, and give it plentifully in∣stead of drink. Being boyled with Vinegar, it helpeth Ring∣worms; being warmed and steeped in Vinegar and applied to the Gumms it strengthens them, helps the pain of the Jaws, caused by the breeding of Teeth; and also fastens loose Teeth.
THe Hartshorn Balls are very good for Children, and those of riper years, in the Small Pox, Measles, Fea∣vers, Worms; and in any Malignant Distemper. They are good in all Fluxes, Loosnesses, Spitting of Blood, and Dy∣sentery; they dry up all moist humours, strengthen much, and may safely be given to Children in any Disease that shall hap∣pen unto them: Take from ten to sixty Grains, Mornings and Evenings, or once in six hours, in any convenient mix∣ture, or in a spoonful of the above-prescribed Drink, taking a draught of it presently after. If you mix them with Un∣guentum Pomatum, and anoint the Lids and Corners of the Eyes with it, it helps their Ulcers and Defluxions. The Teeth being rubbed with the powder of the Balls, upon a cloth, every day, will be whitened by it, and the Gumms strengthned. SPirit of Hartshorn is an excellent Remedy to cleanse the whole mass of Blood, by Urine and Sweat, and by in∣sensible Transpiration. It is a true Specifick against the Scurvy, and all other Diseases which proceed from alte∣ration of the blood. It refisteth Putrefaction, comforteth Nature, and openeth Obstructions. Good effects have been found by it in Feavers, Plurisies, stoppings of the Spleen, Coughs, distempers of the Brain, Epileptical Fits, Madness, the Worms, Quartan Agues, &c. It may be taken from six drops to twelve in Carduus water sweetned with Sugar, or in Beer and Sugar. A Child may take one, two, or more drops, according to the age, but before the use of it, it is good to cleanse the body by some purging Medicine, in those cases where it may be done safely.
THe Hysterical water is very good against Fits of the Mo∣ther, provokes the Terms, and cleanses the Womb ex∣ceedingly: It expels both Birth, and After-birth, and is like∣wise an excellent Remedy if afterwards any stoppage happens, or Nature be defective in throwing forth what it ought in Child-birth; to forward the birth, and when there appears an inability in Nature to expel it, you may giue three spoon∣fuls of this, with a spoonful or two of Cinamon water, and in this case, once taking of it doth oftentimes produce the de∣fired effect; provided, that it be made use of in due time, for if otherwise used, whether too soon, or out of season, the afore∣said effects cannot be expected. The same quantity may be tak∣en for expelling the After-birth, and for removing any stop∣page occasioned by taking cold, or other accident. In Fits of the Mother, and such like affects it may be used as often as there shall be cause. Women with Child must by no meanes meddle with it, until the fullness of time be come, for the Child to be born. TReacle water is very good in Feavers of all sorts, es∣pecially Pestilential. It is an admirable Remedy a∣gainst the Plague, Poyson, the biting of Adders, or any Venomous Beasts. It expelleth Venomous Humours, by Sweat, fortifieth the Heart and Spirits against them, and is of singular use in the Small Pox and Measles. One, two, three or four spoonfuls may be taken in Carduus water, sweetned with Syrup of Gillislowers, and lye to Sweat. PLague water is a Soveraign Cordiall for the Heart, and an excellent Antidote against the Plague, Pestilential and Malignant Feavers, Poyson, the biting of Mad Dogs, also
stinging of Adders; and may be used with good success be∣fore the Fits of Agues, to hinder their coming, and to drive them away. 'Tis an Excellent Remedy for a Surfeit, also for the Wind, and other cold griefs of the Stomach. It helps inward Bruises, and discusses Congealed Blood. Take two or three spoonfuls of it, for a Surfeit, once in six hours until the undigested matter in the Stomach be concocted: For the Wind, and all other griefs of the Sto∣mach, and to comfort the heart, a spoonful may be taken at a time, or more when cause shall be seen: In all other cases three spoonfuls or more, may be taken in warm Posset, or some proper water, when you first find your self to be ill, being covered warm in the bed to sweat well afterwards. Cinamon Water is very Cordial, comforteth a weak and cold Stomach, helpeth Griping pains in the Bowels, occasi∣oned by cold, causeth a fresh and lively colour in the Face, provoketh Urine, and the Terms. It sweetneth the Breath, resisteth Poyson, stops Fluxes and Vomitings, hastens the Birth, helps the fainting Spirits, and trembling of the Heart, strengthens the Retentive Faculty, comforts the Brain and Sinews, and is exceeding good for Cold and Moist bodies, Spirit of Mints comforts the Head and Memory, warms the Stomach and Bowels, expels Superfluous Humours, causes Digestion, stirs up the Appetite, stays Vomiting, and the Hiccough; helps a Cold Liver, and removes its Ob∣structions. It is also good for women in Child-bearing, in their hard and sore labours.
BEzoar water is a very great Cordial; it expels from the Heart and Spirits evil Vapours, and Humours, which annoy them. It drives forth Pestilential and Malig∣nant Feavers by Sweat; resists Melancholy, and wonder∣fully relieves the Spirits being overwhelmed therewith. It is Excellent in Swooning Fits, a spoonful being taken at a time, mixt with Borrage water, and a little Syrup of Gilliflowers: it may be taken otherwise, alone, or in Sack, or in any Cordial water: but in Swoonings, and to provoke Sweat, if there be cause, two or three spoonfuls may be ta∣ken at a time. AQua Coelestis doth exceedingly help such as are loaden and oppressed with Melancholy, by expelling annoy∣ances from the Heart, and cheering the Spirits. It en∣livens the dull and stupid Senses, is available in all Malig∣nant Feavers, and in swoonings, half a spoonful being taken at a time in a draught of the Decoction of Hartshorn, or in cold distilled, Cordial, or Imperial Water, and sweetned with Syrup of Gilliflowers. AQua Mirabilis comforts and strengthens the Heart, Stomach, and Brain, and is of great use in Faintings, and Swoonings, and for Women in Travail with Child; for which purpose, mix with it Cinamon water, Spirit of Mints, Bezoar water, or Aqua Coelestis, and Imperial water, which being sweetned with Syrup of Gilliflowers, or fine Loaf Sugar, give two or three spoonfuls at a time, as often as there shall be cause.
IMperial water is of a Milde and Moderate Temper, and may safely be used, two or three spoonfuls with Syrup of Gilliflowers, at any time, against Faintings and Swoon∣ings, and is a Preservative against Consumptions. TIncture of Ambergreise Strengthens, Comforts, Warms, and Refreshes the Brain, and Senses exceedingly, quickens the dulness of them; eases the pains of the Head, dissolveth the Cold Defluxions of Humours, which fall thereon, and on the Nerves and Sinews. It likewise strengthens the Memory, and is very beneficial to the Heart, and Fainting Spirits, takes away the Passions and Tremblings of the Heart, making it Merry and Joyfull: It expells Sadness, removes Barrenness, proceeding from a cold cause, and is accounted conducible to Venereous actions; it most conveniently agrees with Aged Persons, for it Warms, Comforts, and Strengthens their Cold Decayed Spirits. A few Drops of this Tincture will Perfume any Cordial water, Wine, or other thing, and impregnate it with its Virtue. It is made thus: Take of Ambergreise two Drams, Musk half a Dram; let the Amber be very finely shaved, or cut as thin as may be; put it into a thin Lin∣nen bag, tye it close, and let it ly in a strong Glass bot∣tle, with half a Pint of the best Spirit of Wine, stop it well with Cork and Bladder, and set it in a warm Bath, or in the Sun for a Fortnights space, then pour off the Tincture and keep it in a Bottle close stopped, for use: put to the Ambergreise half a Pint more of Spirit of Wine, stop it close, and set it in the Sun, as before, after which preserve it for your use.
BEzoar Stones are much commended against the bitings of Venomous Beasts, stinging of Vipers, and against all Contagious Diseases, as the Small Pox, Measles, Pesti∣lence, Malignant Feavers, and the like. They also cure Swoonings, long Sorrows, Hysterical Passions, with many other ill Affections. A Man or Woman may take ten or twenty Grains at a time. A Child three or four Grains, or more, according to the Age. GAscoign Powder is good in all sorts of Feavers, in the Small Pox, Measles, Swoonings, and Tremblings of the Heart. It cheers the Heart, and Vital Spirits exceeding∣ly, and is a safe and harmless Medicine, which may be given in any case, six eight or ten Grains at a time to Children, and twenty or thirty Grains to Persons of full Age. Take it in any thing you like best, once in six hours, as long as there shall be cause. THe Red Cordial Powder is a special remedy, and is given with great success in all Malignant and Pestilential Di∣seases, in Feavers of all sorts, Small Pox and Measles. It is very profitable against Poyson and stinging of Adders, re∣sists Putrefaction, strengthens the Heart and Brain, puri∣fies the whole Mass of Blood, and is an excellent powder to dissolve congealed Blood, occasioned by Falls, Bruises, Imposthumes and the like. It may be taken from Ten to Sixty Grains according to the age, in any convenient mixture, which is most proper to the occasion.
MEtheglen is a Drink, which the ancient Britains did put an high value upon, keeping it in their Houses as Nectar, and affirming thar it was more pretious than Malmsey: for when it is old, 'tis reckon'd a wine most agreeable to the Stomach, which it strengthens exceedingly; it potently concocts cold Hu∣mours, hinders Crudities, restores the lost Appetite, and is good for those who are troubled with the Cough, and shortness of Breath. It helps Expectoration, Expells Wind, Mitigates the Pains of the Colick, is profitable in the Yellow Jaundies, in Diseases of the Brain, and in those which proceed from Me∣lancholy, as the Quartan Ague, Scurvy, &c. It conduceth much to cold Constitutions, is very nourishing to the Body, and by the use of it, many have lived to extream old Age: Pertinent hereunto is that relation, of one of an Hundred Years Old, who being demanded by Augustus Caesar, what means he chiefly used to preserve that Vigor of mind and Body, which he was observed at that time very briskly to retain; made this reply to the Emperor, that he imputed his long continued health to nought, besides this Drink, which he verily thought to be the greatest cause thereof. Mr. Butler discoursing of it, in his Treatise of Bees, saith that as good and Old Methe∣glen Excelleth all VVines, both for pleasantness of tast, and preserving of Health: so being burnt, it is better than any burnt Wine whatsoever, to comfort and settle a Weak Sto∣mach, and to procure natural heat. The manner of burning it, is first to set on the Fire a deep Skillet, or Kettle almost full of Water; when it boils, put in a Pewter Pot full of Metheglen, which you must Skum before it begins to boil, and put into it two or three bruised Cloves, with a branch of Rosemary; then beat the Yolk of an Egg in a Dish, and mix with it a spoonful of cold Metheglen, stirring all together to keep the Yolk from Curdling; add to that a spoonful of the hot Me∣theglen, after which another, and another; alwaies beat∣ing them together. Afterwards, by degrees pour all into the
Pot, continually stirring it about; assoon as it boils, take the Pot out of the Kettle of Water, and pour the Metheglen into another warm Pot of the like bigness; Fireing it, as it passeth from one to the other; which must be done until the Flagration ceaseth, and it will burn no longer. A Methe∣glen Posset hath the same virtues. JUniper Ale Comforts the Brain, Strengthens the Memo∣ry, and all the Senses, is good against the Palsie, and Convulsions, the Cough, Shortness of Breath; with o∣ther Diseases of the Breast and Lungs. It Strengthens the Stomach very much, Dissolves the Swellings, and Windi∣noss thereof, and Eases the Griping Pains and Torments in the Belly. It provokes the Terms and Urine, and greatly a∣vails against the Stone, Strangury, Hysterick Fits, Dropsie, Scurvy, the Quartan, and all other cold Agues, the Gout, and Sciatica. It fortifies all the Members of the body, and (to be short) is effectual for all Diseases proceeding from a Cold Cause, and is likewise a very good preservative in Pestilential times. To every Ale Gallon of good Wort, well Maulted, put One Ounce and half of Juniper-berries, bruised, and a suf∣ficient quantity of Hops: Let it be well boiled, and when 'tis cold, strain it; afterwards ripen it, and when it comes to be fit for drinking, you may take of it at any time. It will be convenient to have it Bottled in due season. DAucus Ale breaks Wind, cures Stitches in the Sides, as∣swages the Tormenting Pains of Gripeing in the Guts, provokes Urine, and the Terms; breaks, and expels the Stone and Gravel. It is good against the Dropsie, and for those Persons whose Bellies are swollen with VVind, also a∣gainst
the Strangury, Painful making of water, and the rising of the Mother. It helpeth Conception, and is good to ripen an Old Cough. To every Ale Gallon of good Beer, well boiled, and hop∣ped, put one Ounce and half of the Seeds of wild Carrats bruised, in a thin linnen Bag; assoon as it hath done working, and when it is come to Maturity Drink of it at any time. Scurvy-grass Ale. SCurvy-grass Ale or Beer, is a very antient Drink of this Isle, against the Scurvy; it was held in great esteem by the old Britains, who accounted it the most approved Liquor in the World, and later Experience hath conferred much to their opi∣nion, by the good effects it hath produced in that Disease. It opens Obstructions, Evacuates Cold, Clammy and Phlegmatick Humours, from the Liver and Spleen, softens and takes away the Hardness, and Swelling of those Parts, and reduces the Body to a more chearful and lively Colour. To make it; put a Peck or more of bruised Scurvy-grass into half an Hogshead of Ale or Beer, while it is working: Then put into a thin Bag, long Pep∣per, Grains, Anniseed, and Liquorice of each two Ounces, which hang in the Ale, and when it is clear, Drink of it at any time. TO take away Redness in the Face, Sun-burn, Morphew, Freckles, Pimples, Pushes, or any Inflammation: Take of Sacchar. Saturni, & Sal. Gem. of each half an Ounce, dis∣solve them in two several bottles, in each of which put a quarter of a Pint of Plantain Water, afterwards when there is an occasion to use it, mix an equal quantity of both in another Glass, and it will be like Milk.
The INDEX. THE Spirit. 1 The Tarter Dyet-drink. 6 Tinctura mirabilis. 7 The Aromatick Tincture. 8 The Lenitive Electuary. ibid. Spleen Pills. 9 Common Pills. ibid. Strong Pills. 10 The purging Powder. ibid. Rheum Pills. 11 Pectoral Rolls. ibid. Two Pectoral drinks. 12 The true Elixar Proprietatis. ibid. Mithradat. 13 Venice Treacle. 14 Diascordium. 15 London Treacle. 16 Confection of Gilliflowers. ibid. Tincture of Roses. ibid. Barly water. 17 Rasped Hartshorn., 18 Hartshorn Balls. 19 Spirit of Hartshorn. ibid. Hysterical water. 20 Treacle water. ibid. Plague water. ibid. Cinamon water. 21 Spirit of Mints. ibid. Bezoar water. 22 Aqua coelestis. ibid. Aqua Mirabilis. ibid. Imperial water. 23 Tincture of Ambergriese. ibid. Bezoar stones. 24 Gascoign's Powder. ibid. The Red Cordial powder. ibid. Metheglin. 25 Juniper Ale. 26 Daucus Ale. ibid. Scurvygrass Ale. 27 Saccharum Saturni & Sal Gemm. ibid.
ERRATA Page 1. Line 11. for crums or Whitebread, read of. p. 2. l. 30. for root, r. roots. p. 5. l. 12. for dress, r. press. p. 7. l. 2. for felf, r. self. p. 10. l. 18. for it, r. they. p. 12. l. 4. for first, r. first. p. 13. l. 16. for world, r. world. p. 13. l. 29. for fall, r. falls. p. 15. l. 6. for cast, r. casts. p. 15. l. 21. for and, r. an. p. 15. l. 24. for of a Gilliflowers, r. of Gilliflowers. p. 15. l. 26. for of Nutmeg, r. of a Nutmeg.
