B6242 R233756 [ocm]64551010 184403
THE CASE OF Thomas Bushell, of Enston in the County of Oxon, Esquire. TRULY STATED. Together with his progresse in Mi∣nerals, and the desires of severall Merchants and others that are willing and ready to advance so good a work for the benefit of the Nation. Humbly tendred to the serious consideration of the Honourable House of COMMONS, And all other persons in Authority, whether Civill or Martiall, that are desirous to advance the TRADE of the NATION, supply the Necessities of the Poor, by discovering the hidden Treasures of the Earth, preserve the lives of many poore Creatures from untimely death (who now are de∣stroyed in their prime for petty Fellonies) which might otherwise be made serviceable to the COMMON-WEALTH. London, Printed in the Yeere 1649.
THat whereas the right and interest in and to all Mynes Royall, which are fountains of the Treasure of the Nation, hath alwaies been an undoubted and legall right belong∣ing to the Crown, and alwaies enjoyed by severall Letters Patents, and Farms taken from the Crown, and to that purpose in all grants of Lands from the Crown, the said Mynes either by ex∣presse word, or else by implication of Law have alwaies been excep∣ted and reserved, for that it hath been found by experience, that the owners of Land, who receive a constant profit by the Herbage and other fruits of the Earth above ground, are seldome willing to adventure any part of their fortune for discovering the hid Trea∣sure in the bowels of the Earth: And whereas all Subjects were invited and encouraged by severall Proclamations from his late Majesty, and his Royall Father King James, to spend their times and pains in discovery of the said Mines. And I Thomas Bushell having had many yeers relation to that great Secretary of Nature, the late Lord Chancellor Bacon; and thereby from him learnt many secrets in discovering and extracting Mine∣rals; and that it was not onely the harmliest gain, and greatest good to the Common-wealth, but the principall study and industry of the best bred persons of other Nations, and the honourablest improve∣ment that this world is capable of, which was the first inducement that encouraged me to look after the search thereof, being by good and learned Councell satisfied touching the legallity of the title and also having found out a new way of discovering the concealed trea∣sure of the Earth, with more certainty and lesse hazard, by means of a Portugall with whom I advised, and likewise was assured, that in the Mountains of Broomfloid, Tallibont, Geginan, Combmerven, & the Dar∣ren, there was great quantities of Silver & Lead, of which I informed his Majesty, moving him to undertake the worke; but his Majesty, for some reasons to himselfe known, declined the same, and com∣mandd me (the Lady Middleton holding the said Mynes Royall in Wales, by vertue of a Grant from King James) to buy the same, and to take the Mynes, which I accordingly did, paying unto the Lady Middleton 400 l. in hand, and 400 l. per annum, during the conti∣nuation of her interest therein, by vertue of the said Grant; having first obtained from his said Majesty (upon my engagement to cut through the said five Mountains, at My own charge, by a new way
of discovery) not onely a confirmation of the said Letters Patents, formerly granted to Sir Hugh Middleton, together with the severall Leases from the Governours, Assistants, and Society of the City of London, but also an absolute engagement upon his Majesties honour, and under his Signet and privy Seale, for the performance of any other Act of Grace, or assistance, that I or my Counsell should at any time desire, not being detrimentall to his Honour, or the Common∣wealth, as by the ensuing Grant appeareth. CHARLES R. TRusty and welbeloved, We having taken into consideration your late Relation concerning your proceedings and intentions for the perfecting of that great work happily by you begun in our County of Cardigan in Our Principality of Wales, concerning those hopefull Mynes by you discovered, approving well of your beginnings, proceedings, and intentions, We have thought good out of Our Royall disposition, to the encouraging of you and all such as are studious or industrious, to do to Ʋs or Our Commonwealth profitable service, to assure you by these Our Let∣ters that you shall not onely by Our protection peaceably enjoy the Contract and bargaine by you made with the Lady Elizabeth Middleton, concer∣ning the said Mynes, with all things thereunto belonging: but also be well assured that both you, your Agents, Assistants, or Coadjutors shall from time to time have all the furtherance and favour We can vouchsafe to you or them. And for the better encouraging of you to go cheerfully and confidently on with the works, when your learned Coucll at the Law shall advise you to pray any further Act or Acts from Ʋs, whereby the designe may be advanc'd, and you and your Assistants secured, you shall finde Ʋs ready to grant unto you any your lawfull desires: And in the mean time these Our Letters shall be a good and sufficient testimony of Our Royall in∣tentions towards you, and Our good wishes to the prosperity of your under∣takings. Given at Our Court at Whitehall under our Signet the three and twentieth day of February, in the twelfth yeer of Our Raigne. To Our trusty and welbeloved Subject and Servant Thomas Bushell, Esqu. This is entred in the Signet Booke 23 Febr. 1636. Ja. Store.
And further to prevent all disturbances which might discourage my proceedings, His Majesty gave Warrant to Mr. Atturney generall to proceed by information in the Starch amber against all such as should be so great enemies to their Country as to interrupt so pub∣lique a good. The copy of which Warrant followeth. CHARLES R. TRusty and welbeloved, We Greet you well. Whereas we have ta∣ken into our serious consideration, of what consequence the proba∣bility of increasing our Mynes Royall may prove to Ʋs, and Our publique weale, being diligently searcht into. And for the better incou∣ragement of Our loving Subjects and speedy pay of the poore Myners; E∣rected a Mynt in Our Castle of Aberustwith and intrusted Our designe to the sole care and Government of Our Servant Thomas Bushell, whose industrius proceedings We so well like and approve of, that Our resolution is absolutely bent to further the prosecution of his endeavours on Our behalf, for the perfecting so good and pious a work: As We will and Command you that you take speciall care, that you speedily proceed in Our Court of Starchamber against such malicious persons as have, or doe goe about, not onely to Eclypse Our Prerogative in Myneralls, and so frrustrate Our Princely Pleasure in a Common good, for the benefit of their own private ends, by endeavouring to make those Mynes theirs, which hold Silver worth the refyning, and of Right belonging unto Ʋs; But also such persons as have of late practised Combinations of Affronts against those intrusted by Ʋs, and Our Mynes Royall to Our dishonour, As by the Certificates hereun∣to annexed will informe you; Authorizing you likewise for the better regu∣lating of unruly Myners complained of, to draw up a Warrant for a Stan∣nary Court fit for Our Royall signature, that We may be troubled no fur∣ther. And this shall be your speciall Warrant, Given at Our Court at Whitehall this seven and twentieth day of Febr. 1638. To Our Trusty and welbeloved Sir John Banks Knight, Our Atturney Generall, or Sir Edward Littleton Knight, Our Sollitor Generall. By vertue of which Grants from his Majesty, I being interessed in some of the Mynes Royall in Wales, Devon, and Cornwall, and being desirous to know what was a Myne Royall in the sence of Law, I
obtained the opinion of divers learned men in the Law, who decla∣red their judgements therein, as followeth. The Declaration of learned Lawyers, what a Myne Royall is, according to former Presidents. Although the Gold or Silver contained in the base Mettall of a Myne in the Land of a Subject, be of lesse value thn the baser Mettal; yet if the Gold or Silver doe countervaile the charge of the refining, or be of more worth then the base Mettal spent in refining it, this is a Myne Royall, and as well the base Metall as the Gold and Silver in it, belong by Prerogative to the Crown. Sir Ralph Whitfield, his Majesties Serjeant at Law. Sir Edward Herbert, Attourney Generall. Oliver St. John Sollicitor. John Glanvill, Serjeant. John Wilde, Serjeant. Rich Cresswell, Serjeant. Orlando Bridgman, the Princes Sollicitor. Robert Holborn. Iohn Hern. Ed. Bagshaw. Tho. Lane. Rich. King. Edmund Prideaux. Iohn Maynard. Edward Hide. Iohn Glinne. Charls Fulwood. Harbottle Grimston. Iohn White. George Peard. Iohn Franklin. Richard Weston. Iohn Glover. William Ellis. Tho. Culpepper. Iohn Goodwin. William Sandford. Iohn George. James Haward. THat shortly after my first entrance upon the Mynes in Wales, there were drowned 80. plumps, by reason of a great deluge of water then happening, whereby my underta∣king became unlikely in the judgement of others, to pro∣duce any good effect, either to my selfe, or the Nation, that I was by my friends pittied, and by my foes laughed at; so that had I not duly considered the Justice of the undertaking in respect of God, the honour in respect of my Countrey, and the possibi∣lity in respect of my self, meeting with so many discouragements I had certainly desisted: but God, who is the Author and Finisher of all just undertakings, supported me under, and carryed me through that great work; and after nigh four years night and day spent in recovering of the said decayed Mynes, by the continued mainte∣nance
and industry of five hundred Families, and the expence of about 7000 l. as a reward of my hazard, expence and labour, brought me to reap the harvest of my hope, with discovering far distant by the Art of dyalling, where the Veines of Silver and Lead Ore sprang at the superficious of the Rocks, from the old Works in new places, which the malice or ignorance of some, that knowes not the generation of Mettals, nor the largenesse of their extent in creation, of depth and length, for mans use and Gods glory, would needs affirme that it was a new worke, and not a branch of the old Myne, formerly deserted through the said deluge of water; which, to confute their incredulity therein, I have been at 10000 li. charge, for to thred the supposed new Myne to the old worke, that others of my profession might as well be verst in the mystery of Myning, and encouraged therein, when all other hopes are frustrated of re∣ceiving profit from their deeper search for Mynerall treasure, as I was assured of the truth by the aforesaid L. Chancellor Bacon, and a Portugals description of such a Mynerall experiment. Having made the discovery as aforesaid, and bing satisfied in the Legality of my undertaking in respect of man, I endeavored to proceed therein according to the Law of God, striving to do unto others as I would they should do unto me. In order where∣unto (having discovered a branch that issued from the old Myne (at the mountain of Geginan) I at the generall Assize held for the County of Cardigan (Judge Turner being on the Bench) publickly propounded unto the Gentry and Freeholders of the said County, being Owners of the Herbage, That if any of them would (by my example) adventure to discover the concealed Treasure in any Herbage, belonging unto them, at their own charge, they should (although the Grant was particular to me from his Majesty) en∣joy the benefit of my Grant and Mint, for their encouragement therein; But if they did (in respect of the great charge and hazard) decline the same, That then, if afterward my endeavours were cround beyond present probability or expectation, they would not envy or repine at that blessing which Gods providence as a reward of my labours, bestowed upon me: Further adding, That if, in the prosecution of the said work, I might commit any Trespasse upon the Herbage of any Gentleman, or others, I would give such answerable satisfaction as should by the next Justice of
Peace be judged double to the damage sustained by my trespasse thereupon: which promise I have constantly performed ever since my first undertaking: The Mynes mo commonly being discove∣red in such Grounds as are worth not above three pence per Acre, which hath been proved upon a full Hearing this Parliament. But to proceed. Having by the mercy of God raised a considerable benefit, I did not cast about how to hide, but to improve my Talent for the good of my Native Country, which my gracious Maker had bestowed: As an evidence whereof I improved my ability for the recovering of severall drowned Mynes, and discovering other new branches of the old Mynes wrought by the Romans, (viz.) at the Mountains called Tallbont, Broomfloid Combmervin, Geginan, Commustwith, Comsum-Lock and the Beacon hill of the Daren; by which means Trade was greatly encreased the Common wealth inriched, and many thou∣sands of poor people relieved. I applyed my self to finde out some more facile, lesse chargeable, and more expeditious way, (not only to discover new, but to re∣cover the old decayed Mynes. In order whereunto I contrived a way of Addits, cutting levell through the lowest part of the Moun∣tain, (and not beginning at the top, and sinking downward,) whereby the work was made more profitable, and lesse subject to the casualties of damps, and drowning, by preserving a constant water course, which was extream incident to the other way of myning, whereby most commonly the Myners were drowned out before they could attain half the riches of the Myne; and also avoyding the tedious and chargeable sinking of air-shafts, by con∣veying air through the Mountain many hundred Fathoms, with Pipe and Bellows, away never before used by any undertakers, but now approved by all. And because I found that the wood of the Countrey was exceedingly wasted, by extracting the said Minerals; and that it could not be possible to afford sufficient supply, or if it did, it must be at such a rate as would devour the greatest part of the gain, besides the prejudice that would redound to the Countrey by the decay of Wood, being forc't to use such great quantities thereof; I made tryal of many expensive conclusions, and ceased not till I had contrived a way to make the defects of the Valley answer the fer∣tile Mountain, by a supply of fuell; so that with Turf and Sea-coale
charked, I have and doe refine the Silver and Lead without Wood and Charcoale, by which means the undertaking is of much more advantage as well to the Commonwealth as to the persons ingaged in the prosecution thereof. His late Majesty having received sufficient testimony of the Pre∣mises, and being sensible of the great good that was like further to redound to the Nation, by my charge and industry, for my better incouragement, and to the end that others might be induced to joyn in assisting me in a worke, conducing so much to a generall good; and in pursuance of his promise made at my entry thereupon in the year 1636. did, by and with the advice of his Privy Councel, grant the Impost and Customs of all Lead that should be transported out of England and Wales, for the Rent of 6000 l. per annum, to be paid by me to His Majesty, his Heirs, &c. for 21 years: giving me also full power to deduct out of the said Rent all such sums of money as I had formly disburst for his service, with 8 l. per Cent. for the forbearance thereof. His Majesty seeming to be convinced by his Councel at a full debate: That it was much better that I should enjoy the Customs for a certain Rent (though happily (some years) beneath the value thereof) for that by my charge and industry the staple Com∣modity of the Nation would be greatly encreased; so that if I, by the discovery of the concealed Treasure got 100 l. the Com∣mon-wealth would gain 1000 l. by the advancement of Trade, in respect of exportation and Importation, then that the said customs should be trusted to the generall Farmers or Collectors, who could adde nothing to that Nationall work (unlesse it were discourage∣ment to me and my fellow undertakers;) and also that the Grant of the said Customs could not be lesse then 21 years, for that no man could be encouraged otherwise to adventure his estate in the promotion thereof, since a short Lease would be expired before a man could possibly obtain the fruit of his charge and hazard, a dozen yeares being many times spent before a Myne could be at∣tained. But in the unhappy difference betweene the King and Parliament I was forced by the power of the Parliaments Army, and neces∣sitated to retire my selfe into the Island of Lundy, of which His Majesty made me Governour, where I remained peaceably, with∣out
doing prejudice to any, untill the Lord Generall in his Letter bearing date the 8 of April, 1646. sent me by a Drummer this fol∣lowing Order. Die Sabbati, 12 Ianuary, 1645. At the Committee of both Kingdoms at Darby house. Jt is Ordered, That a Proposition be made to Mr. Bushell, That if he will deliver up the Isle of Lundy this Committee will use their endeavors with the Parliament, that he may be restored to his Interest in the Silver Mynes. GUALTER FROST Secretary to the same Committee. Together with which Order his Excellency sent a safe Conduct for me to come to the Head Quarters to treat with the Lord Say, or with such as he should appoint touching the said Proposition made by the said Committee. Some moneths after the said Committee sent another Order, thereby promising their Endevours to the Par∣liament, for the taking off the Delinquency of the Souldiers that were with me in Lundy, &c. After receipt whereof (having first obtained his Majesties con∣sent for the Resignation thereof,) I informed my Lord Say by Letter, That I could willingly yeeld obedience to the said Orders, if the sight thereof would relieve my losses, or cancell my Obligati∣ons; But since I could receive neither satisfaction or security by those, I proposed, That the Honorable Committee of both King∣doms would be pleased to procure the restitution of my estate with all other immunities thereunto belonging by an Ordinance of Par∣liament, that thereby I might be enabled to pay my debts, and pro∣secute that publike employment which I had formerly undertaken, and that before my Surrender thereof, otherwise I should be con∣strained to retain it as the refuge of my fortune, &c. Many Messages, Letters and Replies passed for some months about the Surrender thereof, after which it pleased the honorable Parlia∣ment to grant my desire, as appears by the ensuing Order. Die Sabbati, 10 July, 1647. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That up∣on the delivery up of the Jsle of Lundy to the Lord Viscount Say and Seal,
The sum of my desires are, That since his late Majesty, in pursuance of his said promise made at my entrance upon the Mines in the year 1636. being convinced by his Councel at a full debate: That it was much better that I should enjoy the Customs for a certain Rent (though happily (some years) beneath the value thereof) for that by my charge and indu∣stry the staple Commodity of the Nation would be greatly encrea∣sed; so that if I, by the discovery of the concealed Treasure, got 100 l. the Nation would gain 1000 l. by the advancement of Trade, in respect of exportation and Importation, then that the said customs should be trusted in common to Farmers or Collectors, who could adde nothing to that Nationall work (unlesse it were discourage∣ment to me and my fellow undertakers;) and also that the Grant of the said Customs could not be lesse then 21 years, for that no man could be encouraged otherwise to adventure his estate in the promotion thereof, since a short Lease would be expired before a man could possibly obtain the fruit of his charge and hazard, a dozen yeares being many times spent before a Myne could be attained: for these and the other reasons before specified, his Majesty was pleased to sever the said Custom of Lead from the great Farm, and to grant the same to me and my Assigns for the term of twenty one years, for the Rent of 6000 l. per annum, giving me power thereby to deduct out of the said Rent, all such sums of money as I had formerly dis∣bursed for his service, with an allowance of 8 l. per cent. for the for∣bearance thereof, as by the said Grant appeareth: By vertue of which Grant, as by my Councell I am advised, I have a legal interest in the said Customs during that term. And forasmuch as the Custom, which formerly was 2 l. 8 s. pr Fodder, hath been by the Parliament, for the good of the Common∣wealth reduced to 20 s. per Fodder; And for that the quantity of Lead now transported, is nothing near so much as was ship'd and transported formerly, as by the certificate of Customs annexed may appear: That therefore, although I might justly claim the benefit of the said Grant from His Majesty by vertue of the former recited Or∣der of Parliament, which provideth, that I should upon the perfor∣mance of the Conditions therein specified, be restored to all my E∣state, with such right as I, or my Assigns, had, or ought to have had, in the Mines, &c. Yet declining my Interest herein, by vertue of the
said Grant, I humbly submit my self to the Judgement of Parlia∣ment, not doubting their readinesse to give all just encouragement to my endeavors, which shall tend onely to the advancement of the publique good. In pursuance whereof I humbly propose and desire. That forasmuch as by my charge, vast expence and hazard (be∣ing thereby damnified many thousands of pounds) the Trade of Lead being a Staple Commodity, hath been, and is likely to be ad∣vanced, That therefore I may be permitted to farme the said Cu∣stoms of Lead, for the term of years abovesaid, paying 2500 l per annum for the same; which according to the due computation of the quantities of Lead transported for two seven years last past (abating the reducement of the Customs by the Parliament, from 2l. 8 s. per Fodder, to 20 s. per Fodder, together with the deductions and allowance of the charge of the Collection thereof, which a∣mounted to above 1000 l. per annum) as a Rent sufficiently propor∣tionable, as by the Certificates from the Farmers and Commissio∣ners, who by order of the Committee of the Navy have examined and certified the same, may fully appear; the substance of which cer∣tificates, for better satisfaction, are here inserted. It appeareth by the Certificate from the Farmers of the Customs herewith presented, that there was transported in An. 1634. and from thence till the end of the year 1640. (being seven years) 40772 Fodders, three quarter of Lead, and no more. For which, if there had been received (as the Book of Rates now allows) onely 20 s. per Fedder, the Customs of Lead for these seven years, would then have amounted unto 40772 l. 15.s. 0. d.   Which being divided into seven parts, it appeareth that the Customs did yeeld yearly. l. s. d. 5824. 13. 6. It appeareth also by the said Certificates, that in the year 1641. and to the end of the year 1646. (being six years, there was transported 25483. Fodders and a quarter of Lead, and no more. For which, if there had been received onely 20 s. per Fodder, the Customs for those six years, would have amounted unto 25483 l. 5 s. which being divided into six parts, it ap∣peareth that the Customs did for that time yeeld yearly (besides above a twentieth part that payes double Customs) l. s. d. 4247. 4. 2.
But in case it shall not be judged convenient for me to Farm the same, that then I may be permitted to enjoy the Lead and Oar Custom free, which I already have, or hereafter shall (at my own cost, or the charges of such as shall adventure with me) discover out of new Mynes, or such as have been drowned and discerted for many Ages: And to the end that a work of such Nationall advantage may not be retarded, nor my self and other undertakers discouraged; but rather, by all just wayes and means enabled to prosecute and carry on the same: I further humbly pro∣pose, That for the future, the Parliament would be pleased to Or∣dain, That all persons convicted of petty Felonies may be employed in the said Mynes, giving sufficient security for their true service therein, untill such time be exspired as shall be adjudged meet for the expiation of their Crimes; by which means I conceive many poor Creatures will not onely be preserved from untimely death, and removed from their idle company, but being forced to work, be made serviceable to the Common-wealth, and sensible of their own follies; the charge greatly lessned to those who venture their for∣tunes in the said undertakings, for the reasons following: VVHereas it hath been the custom in all Kingdoms, States and Commonwealths, where Mines are hapily discove∣red to give all encouragement to Miners and Adventures in Mine∣rall Works, by the Grant of severall Charters, Franchises, and Pri∣viledges, whereby they might the more diligently attend the same; and in pursuance thereof so to be governed and ordered under a particular jurisdiction in all places; as Georgius Agricola, who was the most expert Mineralist of these latter Ages, and himselfe King of the Mines of all Germany, doth testifie and affirm; as the Stane∣ries heretofore in England in some sort were. And whereas the late King Iames, who was truly stiled, The King of peace, and mirror of mercy, was graciously pleased for saving the Lives of such Male∣factors as were condemned to Death by the Law for Petty Felonies, being such as were not any Scandall to the Church or State, nor had imbrued their hands in blood, to admit their Transportation by the East India and Virginia Companies, for their furtherance of Plantations: In which action he did also cast his eyes upon the war∣rantable
proceedings and presidents of other most famous Princes in the like kinde; as the late Queen Eliz. who built certain Galleys of purpose for imployment of such kind of Offendors, of strong and able bodies, as might attend her memorable designs at Sea, especial∣ly upon all sudden and resolute Enterprizes, it being the usuall way and course not onely of the ancient Romans, to adjudge persons condemned for notorious crimes to work in the mettall Mines, but also of other Christian Princes, as the King of Spain both for the supply of his Galleys against the Turks and Moors, and especially for the Enlargement of his Indian Mines of Gold, Silver, Quick∣silver and the like; and his Conquests of Moloceo, Goa Ormus, and other rich and populous Islands; The King of France, for his Galleys of Marsellis; The State of Venice; The Duke Florence, who by such kinde of saved Offendors built Ligorn (one of the most fa∣mous Sea Ports within the Straits.) In all which States and Services, divers of these Malefactors, by good encouragement, have sought not so much by surviving as by their incredible Labors, effecting matters otherwise held invincible, to obliterate their former Igno∣mies by merit of Reward. And whereas in this Commonwealth too many such Offendors are most untimely cut off, in their best abilities of Service; so there is means of employment for such per∣sons, to redeem their lost Reputation, by endeavoring to do faith∣full Service for their Countrys honour, and the Commonwealths good, in the happy work of discovering Minerals out of the barren Rocks: My humble Suit therefore is, That you would be pleased, out of all these weighty considerations, and beneficiall consequen∣ces, tending so much to the good of the Commonwealth, to grant me power for the choosing of such severall persons out of the Pri∣sons in this Nation, as are and shall be condemned for small Of∣fences, and of able serviceable bodies, by the approbation of the Judges; as shall implore your mercy, to be imployed by me in the works of the Mines Royall, they giving security for their good behaviour, with such limitation of time, and allowance for their sustentation, as to your Wisdoms shall be thought fit; that by their dutifull and laborious performance therein, they may after∣wards come into the happinesse of your Pardon for their former Offences.
Thus having given you a perfect Narrative of my Rise, Growth, and Progresse in this common good; together with the sum of my desires, as matter of encouragement in the further prosecution thereof, I will onely adde some few particulars to manifest the ad∣vantage that would by the said Grant, redownd immediately there∣upon, to the Honour and Profit of the Nation, and then leave the premises to the serious consideration of the Parliament, & all others that desire to further a work of such publique concernment. As for example. 1. If in three or four thousand Tuns of Lead yeerly raised, (which for some yeeres last past have been, and now is) the Trade and Cu∣stomes both by Transportation and Importation, be kept up and encreased to many thousand pounds profit yeerly, then it must be inferred (and cannot be denied) That if double and treble the quan∣tity be so raised, by the charge and practice of my selfe and fellow-undertakers, The result thereof must of necessity be equivalent, and encrease the value of the Customs imported; whereby the Nation is advantaged, and the Adventurers encouraged. I desire to propound this Quaere, Whether 2. If the concealed riches of our Nation so discovered (with lesse danger and greater honour) be not much more advantagious for the inhabitants to seek them (by Gods providence) at home, then to imbark their thoughts and Estates upon the hopes of Forraign parts to enrich themselves, by advancing the Trade of another Countrey, since by the practique experience of a private man, the generall Charge of a Miners profession is reduced to half the value of former disbursments, and as much more certainty in the way of discoveries. Tho. Bushell. These considerations, and my late practique experience at Comb∣martin in Devon, did not onely invite the worthy Merchants of Barnstable and Bydifford to write this ensuing Letter unto me, for Transporting all my Lead and Oar Fraight-free in stead of Bal∣last; but also divers other Merchants, by their good example, were induced to adventure upon my having a Farm of the Customs, according to the proportion of my Rent abovementioned, the severall sums hereafter expressed, as to a publique work, and in hope of enriching themselves by the same providence.
SIR, SInce, you have been pleased at your own great charge to discover those deserted Works at Combmartin for the publique good of our Countrey: And whereas you are interessed in the Mynes of Wales, which furnish you both with Lead and Lead-Oar, These are to request you, to be pleased to make this our Harbour partaker of the Benefits may proceed therein, and what we buy not from you for ready moneys, we shall be ready to transport for you Fraight-free instead of Ballast, you rendring it aboard to all such Ports, as our Vessels shall commerce withall: In so doing, we suppose the result thereof will more properly conduce to your hopefull procee∣dings in the said works of Comhmartin, which we wish all happy successe, and remain Your Loving friends, Richard Harris. William Leigh. George Shurt. Robert Dennis. Iohn Tucker. Thomas Horwood. Anthony Benny. William Palmer. Lyonel Becher. Richard Harris. William Nottel. Iohn Down. Walter Tucker. R. Flemming. Richard Medford. William Wood. Francis Newton. Edward Flemming. Tho. Cox. Nathaniel Fisherleigh. Robert Frayn. Barnstable 6 Octob. 1648. WHereas Thomas Bushel Esquire, Farmer of the Mynes Royall, is willing and ready to adventure his pains, and a great part of his Estate, in discovering of the deserted Mynes of Combmartin in Devonshire, and in cutting through divers Mountains in Wales, or elsewhere in Darbishire, for the discovering of Silver and Lead Mynes. And whereas by his Relation, he is in good hopes that he shall get an act of Parliament freeing the said Mines, so to be disco∣vered and recovered, from payment of any Customs for twenty one yeeres, or else that he shall become Tenant to all the Customes of
England and VVales, at such a Rent as they are now worth, for which he hath already Letters Patents from his Majesty: Now for that the said Thomas Bushell, doubting his owne Estate will not be sufficient to go through with, and perfect these chargeable Adven∣tures; and being contented to admit of such persons as will adven∣ture with him in the Mynes, to have a proportionable charge of the profits thereof Custome free. We whose Names are hereunder written, being desirous to forward the publique good of this Kingdom, and hoping (by Gods Providence) to gain profit to our selves, do hereby declare, That so soon as the said Mr. Bushell shall by an Act of Parliament have the said Customs granted unto him, we will each of us according to our severall Subscriptions, lay down and pay the said severall summes of money, to be im∣ployed by the said Mr Bushel in the said Mines as aforesaid; to the end we may have a proportionable share of the profits arising by Ad∣ventures, as aforesaid. We whose Names are underwritten, will adventure in the busi∣nesse abovesaid, as followeth: Martin Iefferson 800 li. VVilliam Parkhurst 300 li. Timothy Lumm 500 li. Francis Ottley 500 li. Henry Seley 500 li. George Goodman 300 li. Iames Ingram 300 li. Robert Mees 500 li. Henry Archibold 300 li. Edmund Goodyer 500 li. Many others have profered and promised to adventure, if the Customs be granted as desired. Which publique Service was likewise a great motive to his Excel∣lency, and the Lord Viscount Say and Seal, to direct the Letter of Request, at followeth: To the Honourable William Lenthal Esq. Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons. Mr Speaker, I Formerly granted safe conduct unto Thomas Bushel Esquire, who had the command of the Isle of Lundy, to come hi∣ther to Treat concerning the surrender of that place, and he like a Gcntleman truly performed on his part such Articles as were agreed on; since which time he hath been very indu∣strious in finding out of Lead Mines, which are like to produce
good quantities of Silver, proof whereof you may please to see, and having seen a Letter under the hands of the Merchants of Barnsta∣ble, to further his endeavors for the publique; I could not but out of a sence I have the generall good will be exceedingly advantaged by the way of his industry humbly offer it as a request of mine, That Mr. Bushel may have for his better incouragement, your best assistance in restoring him to all his Estate, according to mine agreement, and the Order of both houses, dated the Tenth of Iuly, 1647. And al∣though by that agreement and Order, he humbly conceives he may justly claim the Customs of Lead of England and Wales, at such Rent as the same were formerly granted him by Letters Pattents from His Majesty under the Great-Seal for a good Term of years unexpi∣red, yet he hath been, and still is contented to decline that claime, and submit to such a reasonable Rent for the same, as the Commit∣tee of the Revenue shall propose; And in pursuance hereof, the then Farmors of the Customes have by Order of the said Committee of the Navy (as I am informed) returned a certificate, whereby the true values of the said Customs of Lead may appear; I have there∣fore thought fit, humbly to recommend the said Certificate, toge∣ther with the Petition of the Myners of Derby-shire and Devon, and his Propositions for the publique good and make it my request that he may speedily Farm the said Customs of Lead, during the time of his former Grant, whereby his adventures for discovering Minerals, and recovering the deserted works of this Kingdom, may be incou∣raged to joyn with him in so common a good, least hee be inforced to leave this Realm, and so good a work perish by his absence: For truly Sir, this last discovery of his in the County of Devon, with the port of other his proceedings, hath almost perswaded him to be∣come an Adventurer; Who remains, Queenstreet 14. Martii, 1648. Your humble Servant, THO: FAIRFAX.
