I426C R229301 [ocm]61297044 180590
AN ORDINANCE For the Speedy Raising of Moneys FOR HIS Majesties Service. royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT March the 1. 1660. Ordered, That this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published. MAT. BARRY Clerk of the General Convention of Ireland. Dublin Printed by William Bladen, by special Order, Anno Dom. 1660
AN ORDINANCE For the speedy raising of Money for his Majesties Service. THE General Convention of Ireland being by Proclamation set forth by the right Honour∣able the Lords Iustices and Council, bearing date the seaventh day of January last past, and grounded upon his Majesties Letter of the eighteenth of December last, required to as∣semble and meet together, and in obedience thereunto, being accordingly assembled, and taking into consideration his Majesties said gracious Letter directed unto the said Lords Iustices, and by them communicated to this Convention, purporting an absolute necessity for the raising of a supply of money for the present support of the Army here, and the pre∣venting of Free-quarter, and the other inconveniences which might otherwise arise, until the Parliament shall provide for the same; And expressing his Majesties desire that some pro∣vision might be speedily made accordingly; And also upon due consideration of the weighty reasons and earnest desires of the said Lords Iustices for the speedy doing thereof for some short time until a Parliament shall sit; And finding upon account taken aswel of the monthly charge of the Army, as of his Majesties Revenue both certain and casual, and his other Incomes to defray the same, that they do fall very much short to discharge the present pay of the Army. And this Conven∣tion
likewise having a deep sence of his Majesties gracious favours and concessions to his Subjects of this his Kingdom, by his late Declaration bearing date the thirtyeth day of No∣vember last past for their establishment and continuance in their possessions, and for the speedy calling of a Parliament as the onely visible and effectual remedy for the settlement of this Kingdom; And being in all things ready to comply with his Majesties most just and reasonable desires, and in gra∣titude to his Majesties most gracious said concessions, not∣withstanding the present poverty which the Inhabitants of this Kingdom are reduced unto by the late confusions thereof, and also for the satisfaction of so much money of the debt due from divers Members of this Convention, to Alderman Bel∣lingham by Statute-Staple entred into by Order of this Con∣vention for his Majesties service, as the money already rais∣ed, and that hereafter shall be raised by the last Ordinance of this Convention for Pole-money shall fall short to satisfy. This Convention upon the grounds and reasons aforesaid, doth think fit to Ordain, and it is accordingly by this Con∣vention and the authority thereof Ordained, That all and every person and persons within this Kingdom of Ireland, of the several Ranks, Qualities and Degrees hereafter menti∣oned, shall pay the several and respective sums of money par∣ticularly hereafter in and by this Ordinance set down and ap∣pointed, (viz.) That every Baronet shall pay six pounds Sterl. That every Knight shall pay four pounds Sterl. That every Esquire shall pay forty shillings Sterl. That every Gentleman shall pay one pound four shillings Sterl. That every Yeoman or chief Farmer shall pay fourteen shil∣lings Sterl. That every Husbandman or petty Farmer shall pay six shil∣lings Sterl. That every Widdow respectively according to her Hus∣bands degree, shall pay the third part rated by this Ordinance upon that degree of which the Husband of each Widdow was in his life time; And that every such Widdow for every Ten pounds she hath per annum, shall pay two shillings more, for every Ten pounds she so hath per annum as aforesaid. That every Heir, Male and Female of what age soever, shall pay according to their respective degrees, qualities, and Estates as if he, she, or they were of full age.
That all common Handicrafts-men not residing in Corpo∣rations or Sea Towns, shall pay equally with the Husband∣man and petty Farmer. That all Car-men and Carriers shall pay equally with the Husbandman and petty Farmer. That all In-holders and Shop-keepers not in Corporati∣ons, shall pay equally with the Yeoman and chief Farmer. That every person of what degree soever, under the degree of a Baron that can dispend Ten pounds per annum in Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Beneficial Leases, Offices Ci∣vil or Military, or otherwise, shall pay (over and above the sums in the former Qualifications mentioned) two shillings Sterl. for every such Ten pounds a year he hath. That every other person or persons of either sex of what de∣gree or quality soever, as well Souldiers as others being above the age of fifteen years, and not comprised within any of the said Qualifications before mentioned, shall pay two shillings Sterl. And it is further ordained by the authority aforesaid, that all & every person and persons chargeable with any sum of money by this Ordinance, shall be rated and charged for his or her degree and quality in such place onely, where he or she, or his or her Family was resident for the space of three months next be∣fore, or where he or she shall be found resident at the time of putting of this Ordinance in execution, and no where else. And that all and every person beforementioned, and every absentee under the degree of a Baron, that hath neither Fa∣mily, Stock, or habitation within this Realm shall pay for all and every ten pounds per annum, which he or she shall have in Lands, Leases, Tenements, or Offices, the sum of two shillings for each ten pounds in the County or place where the same shall respectively accrew or arise, which said sum every Tennant or Deputy holding the same, shall be liable to pay, and shall and may defaulk the same out of the Rent or sums due to the said Landlord, or other person that shall so be absent as aforesaid, unless by Contract, or Covenant between such Landlord and Tennant it be otherwise agreed or provided for. And it is further ordained by the authority aforesaid, that all the sums of money due and payable by virtue of this Ordi∣nance, shall be paid unto the high Collectors hereafter named, or to be named by virtue of this Ordinance, at two distinct payments, by even and equal portions, the first moyety there∣of
to be paid on or before the tenth day of April next ensuing; And the second moyety thereof to be paid to the said high Col∣lectors on the feaventh day of May then next following; And the said high Collectors within six days after receipt of each of the said several moyeties respectively, are hereby required to pay the same to the Vice-Treasurer and other persons hereaf∣ter appointed for the receipt thereof, accordingly as hereby is afterwards limited. And whereas there is very great reason that in Cities, Burroughs, and Towns Corporate in respect of the several degrees and qualities of persons therein residing, there should be a more exact distinction of such persons, then will or can be assertained under the aforementioned distinctions; Therefore it is hereby ordained, that the more particular proportioning the sums to be paid by the several persons residing within such Corporations as aforesaid, (for which Commissioners are in and by this Ordinance named and appointed) shall be left to the order and discretion of the said Commissioners, or some of them of that County where the said Corporations respe∣ctively are, (being not counties of themselves) being joyned unto certain other honest and substantial Inhabitants of eve∣ry of the said Cities, Burroughs, and Towns Corporate as are herein named to be Commissioners for such Cities Bur∣roughs and Towns Corporate by this Ordinance. And the Commissioners hereby appointed for the County wherein such City, Burrough, or Town Corporate doth lie, and the Com∣missioners hereby appointed for such City, Town, or Bur∣rough are required within four days after notice of this Ordi∣nance to meet together, and they or any three or more of them, (whereof one Inhabitant within such City, Town, or Bur∣rough, and one Commissioner for the said County are always to be two) are to set such rates and sums of money upon the Inhabitants of such respective Cities, Towns, or Bur∣roughs as to them shall be thought fit, due and equal regard being had to the profits and advantages arising out of each persons Traffick, Trade, Stock, Profession, or Manufa∣ctory, so as no such rate or sum of money to be set upon any person or persons, be under the rate before expressed, for their respective qualities, degrees, offices, and Estates, and as they would have been assessed if he or they did not live in any City, Burrough, or Town Corporate. Provided that every Baronet, Knight, Esquire, and Gen∣tleman, and every other person or persons, residing in any
City, Burrough, or Town Corporate, not using any Mer∣chandize or Trade, shall pay according to the rates aforemen∣tioned and no otherwise; And the said proportions so set, are to be leavyed and received in manner as hereafter in this Or∣dinance for the same and the other sums hereby limited is pro∣vided, And where such Cities, Towns, or Burroughs are Counties of themselves, then to the discretion of the Com∣missioners for such Cities, Towns and Burroughs. And also that every Alyen or stranger born out of the Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, being Denizens or not Deni∣zens, of what degree or quality soever, and being of the age of seaven years or above, shall pay double the sum of money which a free born Subject of these Realms being in the same degree or qualification which the said Alien is by this present Ordinance to pay. And be it further ordained by the authority aforesaid, That every such person or persons of the several degrees or qualities aforementioned, as well such as be born within England, Scot∣land, or Ireland, as every other person, stranger born, Deni∣zen, or not Denizen inhabiting within this Realm or else where, which at the time of the said ratings so to be had or made shall be out of this Realm, and have Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements, Fees, or Annuities, or other profits within this Realm shall be chargeable, and charged for the same where such Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements, Fees, Annuities, or other profits then shall be, or in such other place where such person or persons, or his or their Factors, Depu∣tie, Agent or Attourney shall have his or their most usual resort unto within this Realm, in like manner as if the said person were or had been at the time of the said rating within this Realm. And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That every Master or Mistress being sole with whom any Servant is or shall be abiding at the time of the ratings aforesaid, liable to the payments in this Ordinance, as also every Guardian, Father, or Mother being a Widdow, with whom any Child or Children are residing at the time of the ratings aforesaid, not being marryed, and lyable to the payments in this Ordi∣nance, and also every Husband is, and are, and shall be charged for such respective payments due from their Wives, Children, or Servants, for lack of payment thereof by such Wives, Servants, or Children, And that it shall and may be lawful for every Master or Mistress to defaulk such sum or
sums of money as he or she shall deposit or lay down for their Servants, out of such wages as are or shall hereafter grow due to such Servants. And be it further ordained by the authority aforesaid, That for the better and more regular ordering of the said moneys to be rated, charged and paid, that the several persons hereafter in this Ordinance named, or any three or more of them be, and are hereby appointed Commissioners within the several Coun∣ties, Cities, Burroughs in which they are so named and ap∣pointed, who hereby have full power and Authority to put the same in effectual execution, and that by the authority of this Ordinance after notice thereof given them, they may by their assents and agreement sever themselves for the execution there∣of in the several Baronies, and other places within the limits of their said County, in such form as to them shall seem expe∣dient to be ordered; And the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them shall direct their several or joynt precept or pre∣cepts unto such a number of the able and discreet Protestant Inhabitants if they may be had, to be named by the said Com∣missioners as aforesaid of and in the Baronies, Parrishes, Towns and other places within the limits of their County, straitly by the said precept or precepts, charging them to appear in their proper persons before the said Commissioners, or such number of them as they shall divide themselves into, at a certain day and place as by the discretion of the Commsssioners as aforesaid shall be limitted and appointed, regard always to be had where with conveniency it may be that such place ap∣pointed be for the most indifferent ease and travail of the Inha∣bitants of the said County, whose appearance shall be necessary towards the execution of this Ordinance commanding further by every such precept, that he to whose hand such precept shall come, shall shew, and deliver the same to the other Inhabitants named in the same precept, and that none of them fail to accom∣plish the same upon pain of forty shillings. And it is further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That at the said day and place prefixed and limitted in the said precept, every of the said Commissioners then being within this Realm, not having sufficient excuse, shall appear in his proper person, and there the said Commissioners being present, or any three or more of them, shall call, or cause to be called before them the said Inhabitants to whom they have directed their precept, and if any person so warned make default, unless he then be letted by sickness or other lawful excuse, or if any appearing, refuse
to serve in form following, then every such person so making default or refusing to serve, shall forfeit forty shillings, and upon the same appearance had, they shall be charged before the Commissioners by all convenient ways and means to in∣quire of all and every person within the respective places limit∣ed to their care of each sex, of and above the age of fifteen years and of what Rank, Quality, or Degree he or they are, and also of what Estate he or they have by the year in Lands, Of∣fices or otherwise chargable by virtue of this Ordinance, and of the dwelling and abiding places of such persons within the limits of the places that they shall be charged with, and of all others which shall have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargable with any sums of moneys by this Ordinance, and of all other things requisite touching the said Ordinance, and according to the intent of the same, and thereupon as near as it may be, or shall come to their know∣ledge truly to present and certify before the said Commissio∣ners the names, and sir-names, and the qualifications and estates of every person residing within the limits of the places that they shall be charged with, without any concealment, love, favour, or affection, dread or malice, upon pain of for∣feiture of five pounds, to be taxed, extracted, and leavyed in form as hereafter in this Ordinance shall be limitted and ap∣pointed, and thereupon the said Commissioners shall openly there read, or cause to be read unto them, the several qualifi∣cations of the persons, and the sums by such persons under such qualifications payable as is in this Ordinance mention∣ed, and in what manner and form they ought to make their Certificate, and of all manner of persons as well Alyens and strangers, Denizens or not Denizens inhabiting within this Realm, as of such persons as be born within the said three Realms, and of persons being in the parts beyond the Seas, having Goods and Chattels, Lands or Tenements within this Realm as aforesaid; and of all goods being in the custody of any person or persons to the use of any such absentee: by the which information and shewing the said persons shall have such plain knowledge of the true intent of this present Ordi∣nance, that they shall have no reasonable cause to excuse them∣selves by ignorance. And after such charge, and this Ordinance, and the man∣ner of the said Certificate to be made in writing, and every thing requisite and necessary to their said Certificate to them declared, the said Commissioners there being, shall by their
discretion appoint and limit unto the said persons another day and place to appear before the said Commissioners, and charg∣ing the said persons that they in the mean time shall make dili∣gent inquiry by all ways and means of the premisses, and then and there every of them upon pain of forfeiture of fourty shil∣lings to appear at the new prefixed day and place, there to cer∣tify unto the said Commissioners in writing according to their said charge, and according to the true intent of this Ordi∣nance, as to them in manner aforesaid hath been declared and shewed by the Commissioners, at which day and place so to them prefixed, if any of the said persons make default, or ap∣pear, and refuse to make the said Certificate, then every of them so offending to forfeit forty shillings; except there be a reasonable excuse, and of such as appear ready to make the Certificate as aforesaid, the said Commissioners there being, shall take and receive the same Certificate, and if the Com∣missioners see cause reasonable, they shall examine the said presenters thereof, and thereupon the said Commissioners at the said days and place by their agreement amongst them∣selves, shall from time to time there openly prefix a day at a certain place or places within the limits of their County by their discretion for the further proceeding in the execution of this Ordinance, and thereupon at the said day of the said Cer∣tificate, as is aforesaid taken, the said Commissioners shall make their precept or precepts to such persons or Offcers as they shall think fit within their jurisdiction, comprising in the said precepts the names and sir-names of all such persons pre∣sented before them in the said Certificate, of whom the said Commissioners shall have cause to suspect to be of a different qualification, or value in Lands, Offices or otherwise, then under what they are in the said Certificates returned, (except the Commissioners upon their own knowledge can assertain the same, in which case they have power by this Ordinance to amend the said Certificate) accordingly, to warn such per∣sons whose names shall be comprised in the said precepts at their mansions, or to their persons, that the same persons, and every of them shall personally appear before the said Com∣missioners at the same new prefixed day and place, there to be examined concerning the premisses, at which day and place so prefixed, the said Commissioners then and there being, shall cause to be called the said persons, whose names are comprised in the said precept for their examination, and if any of those persons which shall be warned, which at any time after the
warning, and before the prefixed day, shall be within such place where he may have knowledge of his said appearance to be made, make default and appeare not, unlesse upon reason∣able cause or excuse shown, that then every of them so making default, to be charged and rated according to such Qualifi∣cation or Value as aforesaid, as he or they are supposed or suggested to be comprized in, and Power and Authority is hereby given to the said Commissioners to inlarge or increase or other wise to abate or diminish the ratings of such persons, as they shall find by due examination, or upon their own knowledge to be falsly returned under any Qualification. And if any person or persons that ought to be rated and charged to any of the payments in this Ordinance mentioned, by reason of his or their resorting, and removing from place to place, or by reason of his or their saying that he or they were else where charged, or by reason of any priviledge of his or their dwelling or abiding in any place not being foreprized in this Ordinance, or otherwise by his or their covin or craft, or by any words or sayings, or otherwise, or if any that is a Commissioner, or Presenter, or Assessor of others, happen to escape from the said chargings, and be not rated and charged according to the true intent of this Ordinance, and that pro∣ved by presentment, examination, or information, or other∣wise, before the said Commissioners, or any three of them; then every such person that by such means, or otherwise wil∣lingly by covin, or without just cause, shall avoid the pay∣ments or chargings aforesaid or any of them, shall be charged upon the knowledge and proofs thereof with and at treble the value of so much as he, or they, should, might or ought to have been rated and charged at by virtue of this Ordinance for his or their degree or quality, onely a third part of which penalty or treble value, the Commissioners of each County, or any three or more of them, are hereby impowered to allow to any person or persons that shall discover the frauds aforesaid or any of them, and the same treble value to be gathered, leavyed and of his or their Goods, and Chattels, Lands, and Tene∣ments in manner as hereafter is expressed. And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the said Commissioners which shall be or inhabit in any Coun∣ty, or place within the limit of that County, or the greater part of them, shall have full power and authority by this Or∣dinance, to rate, charge, and sess every other Commissioners joyned with them in that County, according to their respe∣ctive
qualifications, and the said Commissioners within every division, shall also rate and charge every Presenter or Assessor within his or their division according to their respective qua∣lifications and estates as aforesaid, and that as well the sums upon every of the said Commissioners and Presenters so set, rated, and charged as the sums made and presented by the presenters shall be written, certifyed, set and estreated, and the estreats thereof to be made with the other Inhabitants of that part, and within the limits of the said County or division, so to be gathered and leavyed in like manner as it ought or should have been if the said Commissioners or Presenters had been private persons. And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that after the said rates and charges of the said sum upon and by the said Assessing, and Certificate as is aforesaid made, the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them shall with all convenient speed by their writing, estreat the said rates and charges thereof under their seals and signes manual, and the same shall deliver unto such sufficient and substantial Inha∣bitants of the Baronies, Parrishes, and other places afore∣faid within their limits, as shall be approved by the high Col∣lectors hereafter to be appointed, containing as well the par∣ticular names and sir-names, as the remembrance of all sums of moneys not in Figures but in writing at large, charged and set of and upon every person chargable by this Ordinance according to their several qualifications and estates as afore∣said, by Authority of which writing and estreat so delivered, the same persons so named and deputed severally, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Ordinance, imme∣diately after the delivering of the said writing or estreat, to demand, leavy, and gather of every person therein specified the sum or sums in the said writing or estreat comprized, and for non-payment thereof, to distrein the said person or persons so being behind by their Goods and Chattels, and the distres∣ses so taken, to keep by the space of six days, at the costs and charges of the owner thereof: and if the said owner or owners do not pay such sum or sums of moneys as shall be rated or charged upon him or them by authority of this Ordinance within the said six days, then the same distress to be apprized by two of the Inhabitants where such distress is taken, and then to be sould by the said Collectors for the payment of the said moneys, and the overplus coming of the sale and keep∣ing thereof (if any be) immediately to be restored to the owner
or owners of the distress, which said persons so deputed to take, ask, gather, and leavy the said sums, shall answer and be charged for the portion onely to them assigned, and limited to be gathered and leavyed, and comprized in the said writing or estreat, so to them (as is aforesaid) delivered, and the said sums in that writing or estreat comprized, to pay unto the high Collector of that County for the collection of the same in man∣ner and form under written thereunto to be named and de∣puted. And further be it ordained by the said Authority, that the said Commissioners which shall be present at their first meet∣ing, or the major part of them, shall then name and appoint one sufficient and able person, as by their discretion shall be thought fit, residing within the limits of their County to be high Collector, and to have the collection and receipt of the said sums set and leavyable within the said County, and the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them with all convenient speed, after the whole sum be rated and charged in all the divisions of their County, shall under their Seals and Signes manual, deliver unto the said high Collector, one estreat indented, comprizing in it the names of all such persons as were assigned to leavy the said particular sums, and the sums of every Barony, Cantred, Hundred, City, Town, Parish, and other place aforesaid, with the names and sir-names of the persons so chargable according to the estreats thereof made and delivered as aforesaid, and the said high Collectors to be assigned, shall be charged to answer the whole sum comprized in the said estreat limited in his colle∣ction. Provided alwayes, and be it ordained, that before the de∣livery of the aforesaid Estreats unto the said high Collector, the said high Collector to enter into Bond with sufficient Se∣curity to the use of his Majestie, his Heirs and Successors, before the said Commissioners or any Three or more of them, to be bound in double the Summe of his Collection upon Condition, that if the said Collector his heires or Executors do truely content and pay unto the Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer at Warrs for the time being, his Deputy or Deputies, or his or their Order, all and every the summe and summes of Money, which he shall receive within the Limits of his Collection accordingly, as from time to time he shall receive the same, That then the said Obligation to be void, or else to remaine in full force and vertue, which
said Obligation so taken, the said Commissioners shall send and cause to be delivered unto the said Vice-Treasurer and Treasurer at Warre for the time being, his Deputy o Deputies, with the severall Estreats of the said Chargings and Rates within the Limits of their severall Iurisdicti∣ons, and also Abstracts thereof, under the hands and seales of the said Commissioners, or any Three, or more of them, to the Lords Iustices, or other Chief Governor or Go∣vernors for the time being, on or before the foureteenth day of April next, and the said Vice-Treasurer, his Deputy or Deputies, upon payment of the said severall Collections at the times herein limitted for the payment thereof, shall cancell and deliver the said Obligation to the said high Col∣lector without any Fee or Reward, and every high Colle∣ctor so deputed having the said Estreat as is aforesaid, shall have Authority by this Ordinance, to appoint daies and places, within the Divisions of that County, whereof he is high Collector, for the payment of the said Summes to him respectively to be made, and thereof to give Notice to all such persons, having the Charge of the perticular Collecti∣ons within the Barronies, Cantreds, Hundreds, Parishes, Townes, or other places, to make payment of the perticular Collections of every Sum as to them shall appertaine, and if at that same day and place so prefixed and limitted by the said high Collector, the said persons appointed for the par∣ticular Collection, within such Barrony, Cantred, Hundred Citty, Town, Parish, or other place, do not pay unto the said Collector the sum within the several Barronies, Cantreds, Hundreds, Towns, Parrishes, and other places due and com∣prized within the said Estreat thereof to them delivered by the said Commissioners, or some of them, or so much there∣of, as they have by any meanes received, that then it shall be lawfull to the said high Collector and his Assignes, to distrein every of the said persons for their said several and particular Collections of the said Summes comprized in the said Estreat to him (as is before expressed) delivered, or for so much of the same Summe, as to them shall happen to be gathered and levied, and to be behind and unpaid, by the Goods and Chattels of every of them so behind and unpaid, and the Distresses so taken to be kept and appraised and sould as aforesaid, and thereof to take and levy the Sums so then being behind and unpaid, and the overplus comming of the Sale of the said Distresse (if any be) to be restored
and delivered to the Owner in Forme above remembred. And it is also by the said Authority Ordained, That if any person charged to and for the Collection and Receipt of any part or portion of the Summes comprized in the said Estreats according to this Ordinance, after all lawfull meanes and endeavours by him used to collect and ceee the same, yet if by the dying of any person, or departure of any person from the place where he was so charged, and set or being an Absentee, or that his Goods and Chate s be so eloyned, or in such privy or covert manner kept, as that the said person or persons charged with the same by Estreats, or other Writing from the Commissioners, can∣not or may not Levy the Summe or Summes comprized within the said Estreats, by Distresse within the Limitts of their Collection, then upon Relation thereof, and due Examination of such person or persons as shall be charged with and for the Receipt and Collection of the same before the said Commissioners, or any Three of them, where such person or persons were rated and charged, and upon plaine Certificate therein made unto the said Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer at Warre for the time being, his Deputy or De∣puties by the said Commissioners, of the dwelling place, Names and Summes of the said persons, of whom the same Sums cannot be levyed and had, then the said per∣sons appointed for the same particular Collection against the high Collector, as the high Collector upon his Account to be discharged thereof, And over that the said Commissio∣ners, to whom all such Declaration of the Premisses shall be made in Forme aforesaid, from time to time shall have full Power and Authority to direct their Precept or Precepts to the said person or persons charged with any Sum of, for and upon any such person or persons, or to any other person, or to any Sherriffe, Steward, Bayliffe, or other whatsoever Officer, Minister, person or persons of such place or places where any such person or persons so owing any such Sum or Summes shall have Lands, Tenements, or other He∣reditaments, or reall Possessions, Goods and Chattels, whereby any such person so indebted, his Heires, Executors Assignes, or other having the Custody, Governance or Disposition of any Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements or other Possessions, whereof such Summe and Summes which by any such person and persons may or ought to be levyed, be it within the Limit of such County, where
such person or persons was or were charged, or without in any place within this Realme of Ireland, by which Precept as well such person or persons shall be charged to Levy such Money, as the Officer of the place or places where such Distresses may be taken, shall have full Power and Authority to distraine every such person indebted, charged, and chargeable by this Ordinance, or his Executors or Ad∣ministrators of his Goods, Chattels, his Guardians, Fa∣ctors, Deputies, Lessees, Farmors and Assignes, and all other persons by whose hands, or out of whose Lands, every such person should have Fee, Rent, Annuity, or other Profits, or which at the time of the said Rating or Charging, shall have Goods or Chattels, or any other thing moveable of any such person or persons being indebted, or owing such Summe, and the Distresses so taken, cause to be kept, appraised and sould in like manner and forme as is afore∣said. And if any such Distresse for non-Paymenc, happen to be taken out of the Limits of the said persons charged and assigned to levy the same, the person so charged for lea∣vying any such Summe by Distresse, shall have for the Labour of every such person going for the execution thereof for every Mile that any such person so laboureth for the same two pence, to be levyed upon the Partie making default by Distresse, over and above the Summe charged on the said Party, every such Farmor, Tennant, Guardian, Factor, or other whatsoever person being distrained, or o∣therwise charged for Payment of any such Sum or Sums, or any other Summe by reason of this Ordinance, shall be of such Summe or Summes of him or them so leavied and taken, quitted and discharged at his next Day of Payment of the same, or at the Delivery of such Goods and Chattels as he that is so distrained had in his Custody or Govern∣ance against him or them that shall be so charged, and set any Grant or Writing Obligatory, or other whatsoever mat∣ter to the contrary made heretofore notwithstanding. And be it further ordained by the authority aforesaid, That all penalties mentioned in this Ordinance which shall happen to be incurred by any person or persons, shall be set down par∣ticularly in the estreat which shall be delivered to any person or persons particularly appointed to collect and receive the several sums in their respective divisions where such person or per∣sons are residing, by whom such penalty shall be incurred, and to be leavied and received in such manner and form by the
said Sub-Collectors, and paid over to the High-Collector as if such penalties had been imposed upon such persons for the sums rated and charged upon them for their respective quali∣fications, and in the same estreats to be returned to the said Vice-Treasurer and Treasurer at War for the time being, his Deputy or Deputies, that thereby a particular account of such penalties may be had, as also the sum or sums being be∣hind or unpaid by any person or persons which are to be leavy∣ed and gathered by virtue of the aforesaid process to be made by the said Commissioners, that further Order may be taken therein; And if any Collector or other person, charged with any receipt of any part of the said several sums, or any other person rated or otherwise by this Ordinance charged with or for any part of the said several sums, or with any other sum, penalty, or other forfeiture, happen to die before the Collect∣ors, or other whatsoever person or persons have executed, ac∣complished, satisfyed, or sufficiently discharged, that which to every such person appertain or belong to do according to this Ordinance, then the Executors and Heirs of every such person and all others, seized of any Lands and Tenements that any such person being charged by this Ordinance, and deceasing before he be discharged thereof, or any other to his use, onely had of Estate of Inheritance, at the time that any such person was named, Collector, or otherwise charged with or for any manner of thing to be done, satisfyed or paid, by reason of this Ordinance, and all those that have in their pos∣sessions or hands any Goods, Chattels, Leases, or other things that were to any person or persons at the time of his death, or any Lands or Tenements that were to the same persons at the time he was (as is aforesaid) charged by this Ordinance, shall be by the same compelled and charged to do and accomplish in every case as the same person being so charged should have done, or might have been compelled to do if he had been living after such rate, of the Lands and Goods of the said Collector, or other person as abovesaid, as the party shall have in his Lands. And it is further ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners hereby appointed in the several Counties, Cities, Towns and Burroughs in this Realm, are and shall be hereby authorized, out of the moneys that shall be raised by virtue of this Ordinance, to make such allowances to the High-Collectors, and other Collectors, and Clerks that shall be by them imployed, or for any other charges that shall to
them seem requisite for the better leavying and bringing in the several sums of money herein formerly mentioned as to them shall be thought fit and necessary, so as the allowances so to be made by the said Commissioners, do not exceed the sum of Twelve pence in the pound, which said Twelve pence in the pound is to be allowed by the said Treasurer unto the several High-Collectors upon their respective accounts. Provided always, that this Ordinance, or any thing there∣in conteined, in any wise extend not to charge the Provost, Fellows and Schollers of the foundation of the Colledge of the Holy Trinity near Dublin, nor to any Hospital men, or people living upon Alms. And whereas it hath been declared to this General Con∣vention, that the insolvencies and deficiencies of the two for∣mer Polls hath principally risen from, and been occasioned by the removeal of many of the Vnder-tennants, and meaner sort of people out of the Towns and Villages wherein they did inhabite at the time of making up the Estreats, or Lists of the Inhabitants of such Townes and Villages, and that purposely to avoid the Payments of the said Pole-monies, so that the Collectors of the severall Counties and Barro∣nies could neither finde them, or their Distresses, to make Payment of the Summe or Summes chargrd on them in the said Estreats, to the great dis-service of his Majestie, and disappointment of the Expectations of this Generall Convention: And forasmuch as the same could not happen without the Connivance of the Land-Lord, Farmor, or Head-Tennant of such Towne or Village. Be it therefore ordained by the authority aforesaid, that where any person or persons inhabiting in any of the Townes and Villages of this Kingdome at the time of Laying in of this present Poll, shall go about to remove him or themselves, out of such Towne or Village as aforesaid, That then it shall and may be lawfull for such Land-Lord, Farmor, or Head-Te∣nant, residing in any such Towne or Village to distraine, and he is hereby Ordered to distraine on the Goods or Chattels of such person or persons to double the Value of the Pole-money, rated on them by this present Ordinance, and the same to deliver to the Collector of that Barrony, who is to dispose of the same, as by this present Ordinance he is appointed to dispose of other Distresses. And where any Land-Lord, Farmer, or Head-Tennant of any of the said Townes and Villages, shall neglect or faile to distraine
as aforesaid, That then the Collector nominated and ap∣pointed for that Barrony, shall demand the Summe or Summes rated on such person or persons so departed from such Land-Lord, Farmor or Head-Tennant, and upon non Payment, to distraine on the Goods or Chattels of such Land-Lord, Farmor or Head-Tennant, and the same to dispose of, as by Vertue and Authority of this Ordinance in other cases of Distresse he is authorized and appointed. Provided alwayes, and it is hereby Ordained, That Sir William Vsher Knight, and Thomas Boyd Merchant, Mem∣bers of this Convention, shall be, and are hereby impowr'd by this Generall Convention, from time to time to take an Account of what money is, or shall be raised by Vertue of the second Ordinance of this Convention for Pole-money, towards Satisfaction of the said Money due by Statute Staple to Alderman Daniell Bellingham from severall Mem∣bers of this Convention, and of what part thereof, the said Money so raised, and to be raised, shall fall short to satisfie. And the high Collectors of the severall Counties in the Province of Leinster, are hereby required within the times above limitted, to pay the severall Summes of Money that shall be raised by vertue of this Ordinance in the se∣verall Counties in the said Province of Leinster, to the said Sir William Vsher and Thomas Boyd, who out of the said Monies are to satisfie and pay to the said Alderman Bel∣lingham, what shall remaine due unto him upon the said Statute Staple, by the Dificiency of the money raised, or to be raised by the said second Ordinance for Pole-money. And after Satisfaction of the said Money so due by the said Statute Staple, and the Interest thereof, the said Sir William Vsher and Thomas Boyd are hereby required to pay the residue of the said Money, that shall be so by them re∣ceceived to his Majesties Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer at Warre, for his Majesties use. And the said Sir William Vsher and Thomas Boyd, are to make such allowances out of the said moneys to be by them received as by the said Vice-Treasurer, is to be made out of the residue of the moneys to be paid unto him by virtue of this Ordinance. And be it further ordained by the authority aforesaid, That these persons under written and no other, be, and are nomi∣nated and appointed to be Commissioners for putting in execu∣tion this Ordinance within the several Counties, Cities, and Buroughs of this Realm of Ireland, That is to say,
For the City and County of the City of Dublin, the Mayor and Sherifs for the time being, William Davis Esq; Recorder of Dublin, Robert Deey, William Smith, William Bladen, Ra∣phael Hunt, Richard Tign, Daniel Hutchinson, John Preston, Tho∣mas Hook, Ridgley Hatsield, Thomas Waterhouse, Peter Wibrant, Daniel Wibrant, Robert Mills, George Gilbert, John Cranwel, William Cliff, Richard Cook, John Desmineer, Daniel Bellingham Mark Quin, John Forrest, Ralph Vizard Aldermen. Sir William Vsher, Sir Robert Newcomen, Sir Robert Meredith, Sir Paul Davis, Sir Wil. Domvile, Sir Hierom Alexander Knits, Wil. Knight, Philip Fernely, Wil. Dixon, Rob. Shapcot, Rob. Kennedy Esquires, Doctor Ralph King, Doctor Dudley Loftus, Thomas Richardson, Richard Palfrey, William Sands, Abraham Yarner, Thomas Boyd, Abraham Clements, Enoch Reader, Lewis Desmi∣neer, Samuel Salterson, John Beuchamp, John Smith, Thomas Howard, Thomas Pooley, Robert Hughes, John Povey, John Ket, Thomas Maul, Thomas Kennedy, Patrick Tallant, William Cory, Iohn Moor, Iohn Burniston, Ralph Allen, Thomas Worsop Esq; For the County of Dublin, Lord chief Baron Bysse, Sir Sir Henry Tirchborne, Sir Theophilus Iones, Sir Iohn Hoy, Sir William Domvil, Sir William Usher, Sir Richard Kennedy Sir Iohn Cole, Sir Walter Plunket Knights, Col. Chidley Coot, Doctor Dudley Loftus, Robert Kennedy, Philip Fernely, Edward Cook, Thomas Richardson, Francis Peasly, Daniel Hutch∣inson, Iohn Baxter, Ralph Wallis, Thomas Vincent, Robert Cu∣sack, Richard Bulkley, Iohn Povey, Thomas Maul, Iohn Burniston, Esquires, William Dixon Esq; William Davis Esq; Recorder of Dublin, Richard Barry, William Hoy, William Titchborne, Ed∣ward Barry Thomas Kennedy Esqus; For the County of Wicklow, Sir Henry Titchborne, Sir William Vsher, Sir Iohn Hoy, Sir Theophilus Iones, Sir Ri∣chard Kennedy Knights, Robert Kennedy, William Knight, Roger West, Philip Fernely, William Hoy, Robert Hassels, William Toxteth, Richard Renal,  Whitehead, Doctor Abraham Yarner, Edward Harrington, Samuel Pepys, Iohn Boswel, Hum∣phrey Abdy, Thomas Bowls, Cromwel Wigfield, Thomas Ken∣nedy, Edward Billingsley, William Warren, William Matthews, Iohn Povey, Philip Harris, William Pinson, Thomas Brereton, William Rieves Esquires. Thomas Waterhouse Alderman, Tho∣mas Boyd Merchant, Iohn Humphreys, Walter Walsh Gent. Robert Stradford Esq;
For the Burrough of Wicklow, The Portrif of the Bur∣rough for the time being, Iohn Hacket, Edward Hartshorn, Iohn King, Iames Stanley Gent. For the County of Kildare, Sir George Blundel, Sir Wal∣ter Burroughs, Sir William Meredith Barronets. Sir Robert Meredith, Sir Paul Davis, Sir Iohn Hoy, Sir Theophilus Iones Knights, William Hoy, Iohn Salt, Henry Warren, Raphael Hunt, Thomas Harman, Dudley Cooley, George Blunt, Richard Tompson, Iohn Browne, Richard Teigh, Daniell Hutchinson, Iohn Annesley, Iohn Ewers, Thomas Iefford, Walter White, Hen∣ry Sanckey, Thomas Browne, Phillip Ferneley, Charles Reeves, Francis Peasley, William Warren, Edward Bermingham, Esq. Will. Davies Esq. Recorder of Dublin, Francis Nest, Gent. For the Town of Naas, the Soveraign for the time being,Charls Ryves, Nicolas Stafford, Esq. For the Town of Kildare, the Soveraign for the time being Francis Peasly, Nicolas Rutlidg, Esquires For the Town of Athie, the Soveraign for the time being, William Scot, William Weldon Esqs. For the County of Catherlogh, The Sherriffe for the time being, William Temple, Henry Warren, Edward Harman, Thomas Burdet, Iohn Aston, Henry Smithick, Abraham Highmore, Rob. Browne, Walter Badley, Robert Michael, Richard Andrews, Iohn VVarren, Osborne Edwards, William Hudson, Oliver Iones, Richard Norris, Thomas Harman, Thomas Bolton, Henry Ward, Samuel Bathurst, Esqs. George Hartop, William Bernard, Richard Fisher, Peter Flowre, Richard Doys, and Iohn Corbet, Esqs. For the Burrough of Catherlogh, The Portrieve for the time being, Thomas Reynolds, Edward Reynolds, Iohn Clerk, Iohn Smith, Richard Courtess, Esquires. For the County of Wexford, Iohn Fountaine Esq. high She∣riffe of the said County, Nicolas Loftus Senior, Timothy Stamp Nicolas Devereux, Thomas Scot, Iohn Brett, Thomas Hart, Iohn Tench, Edward Withers, Nicolas Loftus Iunior, Henry Master∣son, Alexander Barrington, Thomas Barrington, Matthew Stod∣dard, Spencer Vincent, Thomas Knox, Iohn Cliff, Nathaniel Boyse Richard Ousley, Iohn Totty, Esqs. The Mayor of Wexford for the time being, Constantine Neale, Francis Harvey, The Soveraigne of Ross for the time being, Thomas Pitts, The Portriff of Eniscorthy for the time being, Iohn Sands, Edmund Highgate, Roger Levesey, Richard VVilbore, Iohn Swan, Rich∣ard Row, Esqs. Sir Richard Clifton, Sir Walter Plunket,
Knights, Roger West, Iohn Warren, Roger Lyndon, Edward Rotheram, Iohn Kitchingman, Robert Hassells, Nicholas Cod, Samuel Shepheard, Richard Kenny, Osborne Edwards, Esquires, Edward Chichister, Gent. For the County of Kilkenny, Sir Patricke Weymes, Sir William Flowre, Sir Iohn Ponsonby, Knights, Daniel Redman VVilliam VVarden, Oliver VVheeler, Thomas Evans, Oliver Iones, Iohn Campel, Henry Baker, Joseph Cuff, James Weyms, Bryan Manswer, Thomas Burrel, John Ieoner, Thomas Sanford, Iohn Powel, Lt. Col. Iackson, Anthony Horsey, Abel Warren, Hum∣phrey Hurd, George Bishop, Edward Butler, Thomas Burdet Henry Martin, Thomas Butler, Robert Lloyd, Henry Slade, Ionas Wheel∣ler Esqs. William Baker Gent. Henry Fog, George Lodge,  Haford, Charls Hawkins, Dudley North, Iohn Iones, Robert Walsh, Francis Rowlston, Thomas Bowers, Emanuel Palmer, Io∣seph Wheeler, Simon Blackmore, Iohn Woodcock, Enfign Norse Allen Tentch Gent. Lt. Col. Richard Stephens. For the City and County of the said City of Kilkenny, Tho∣mas Evans Mayor Esq. the Recorder and the two Sherifs for the time being, Sir Patrick Weymes, Knt. William Warden, Daniel Redman, Thomas Burrill, Henry Baker, Ioseph Cuffe, Thomas Butler, Peter Goodwin, Valentine Read, Esqs. Iosias Hadock, Gent. For the Burrogh of Callen in the County of Kilkenny, Iohn Warren Gent. Soveraigne, Iohn Campell, Henry Baker Esqs. Patrick Vance, Darby Dingle, Iohn Pressick, Gent. For the Burrough of Thomas-Towne in the County of Kilkenny, Christopher Hewetson Soveraigne, Gent. Thomas Burrill, Anthony Stamp, Esqs. Henry Rogers, Phillip Young, Thomas Hill, Gent. For the Burrough of Goran in the County of Kilkenny, Tho. Hussey Portriffe, Gent. William VVarden, Iohn Powell, Esqs. Charles Eager, Gent. For the Burrough of Ennisteige,  VVhaley Portriff Gent. Sir Iohn Ponsonby, Alexander Castle, Esq. For the Queene's County, The high Sherriffe for the time being, The Burgesse-Master of Mariborrough for the time being, Sir Amos Meredith, Sir Oliver ST George, Knights and Barronets, Sir VVilliam Flowre Knight, Henry Gilbert, Thomas Coote, Oliver VVheeler, Geoge ST George, VValter VVarnford, Thomas Burrell, Thomas Vincent, Iohn VVeaver, Gilbert Rawson, Thomas Prior, Francis Barrington, Iohn Raw∣lins, VVilliam Scot, Nathaniel Marks, Henry Syballs, Adam
Loftus, Edward Bolton, Barnaby Doyne, Thomas Piggot, Francis Cosby, Vincent Kidder, Robert Meredith, Iohn Gilbert, Iohn VVhitny, Iohn Piggot, VVilliam Weldon, William Bowen, Rich. Warburton, Esqs. Edward Burrell, Richard Smith, Iohn Tanner, Robert Gough, Thomas Ogle, Phillip Sergeant, VVilliam Le∣strange, Iohn Rhoades, Gent. For the Burrough of Marriborugh, the Burgesse Master, Henry Gilbert, Iohn VVeaver, Esqs. For the Kings County, The Sherriffe for the time being, Cary Dillon, Sir George Blundell, Sir George Herbert, Edward Herbert, Thomas Gifford, Henry Sanckey, VVilliam Hamilton, Henry Lestrange, Iohn VVeaver, VVilliam Purefoy, Robert Lloyd Iohn Moore, Robert Busbridge, William Candler, Laurence Parsons, Michael Herbert, Iohn Hallom, Iohn Nelson, Iohn Mit∣chell, Iohn Wakely, Samuell Rolls, Richard Warburton, Thomas Vincent, Walter Lambert, Cap.  Done, Peter Purefoy, Iohn Baldwin, Iohn Rose, Robert Chafe, Anthony Atkinson, Geo. Sanckey, Francis Peasly, Esqs. Francis Nest, Gent. For the Burrough of Phillips-Towne, The Burgesse Ma∣ster, Robert Lloyd, Charles Lyons. For the County of Meath, Arthur Dillon Esq. high Sherriffe Col. Cary Dillon, Sir Robert Forth, Sir George Wentworth, Sir Thomas Meredith, Sir Theophilus Iones, Sir Hierome Alexander, Sir Edward Sutton, Randle Moore, Thomas Gifford, Thomas Loftus, Iames Napper, Iohn Bramhall, Iames Lesly, Robert Gorges, William Ca∣dogan, Iohn Bligh, William Toxteth, Henry Packenham, Ioseph Fox, Hen∣ry Morton, Thomas Worsop, George Peppard, Iohn Forth, Arthur Pu∣refoy, Edward Dowdall, Henry Dowdall, Miles Sumner, Robert Lill, Tho∣mas Wren, Symon Crane, Iohn Bevans, Thomas Ash, Alexander Ieph∣son, Iohn Barnes, Hanse Graham, Iohn Franck, Iohn Hatch, William Blygh, Thomas Chillingsworth, Iames Nangle, Arthur Hethrington, Rich∣ard Iannes, Iames Mortimer, Thomas Bringhurst, Roger Pierce, Thomas Vincent, Robert Harrison, Robert Shreld, Iohn Ford, Michael Iones, Esqs. For the Corporation of Trym. The Portriffe of Trym, Robert Lill, Alexander Iephson Esqs. William Malone, Gent. For the Corporation of Navan, The present Portriff, William Cadogan, Henry Packenham Esq.  Tynt, Gent. For the Corporation of Kells, Henry Morton Esq. Henry Gwither Gent. Cornet  Haynes, William Cadogan, Richard Stephens, Esquires. For the Corporation of Athboy, The present Portriffe, Iohn Bligh Esq. William Bligh, Gent.
For the County of Lowth, Iohn Howke, High Sheriffe, Sir VVilliam Aston Knight, Marcus Trevers, Sir Robert Starling, Garret Moor, Henry Bellingham, VVilliam Toxteth, Iohn Rux∣ton, VVolston Dixy, Brent Moor, Thomas Fortescue, Francis Moor, Iames Hopton, Nicolas Moor, Richard Bolton, Iohn Cham∣bers, Bryan Herne, Edward Brabazon Esquires, Iames Brabazon, Iohn Bernard, Nehemiah Donnelan, Humphrey Barry, Robert Wynn, Rowland Trolly, Iohn Tomlinson, William Peppard, Peter Ashenhurst, Thomas Clerk, Samuel Ireland. For the Town of Dundalk, The Bailifs for the time being, Iames Smallwood, Richard Price Esqus. Walter Cox, Arthur Buckley, Henry Wetherel Gent. For the County of the Town of Drogheda. The Mayor and Sherifs for the time being, Sir Iames Graham Knight. VVil∣liam Toxteth, Iohn Trevors, Rowland Trolly, Samuel Stanbridge, VVilliam Elwood, Edward Martin, Thomas Dixon, Moses Hill, Robert Bridges, George Peppard, Edward Harrington, Samuel Os∣bourn, Iohn Towers, David Shepheard, Thomas Cockain, Gabriel Mead, Francis Pool, Joseph VVhirloe, Thomas Leigh, Edward Graves, Hercules Langaridge Esqus. For the County of Longford, Richard Thomson Sherif, Sir Arthur Forbes Bar. Sir Rich. Lane, Iohn Edgworth, Henry Sankey, Tho. Vincent, Adam Molineux Esqs. Tho. Waterhouse, Iames Grigges, Simon Sands, Ed. Knight, Tho. Robinson, Iohn Kennedy, Andrew Adare, Will. Longford, Cornet Tho. Flood, Henry Crofton, Oliver Iones, Iohn Edmonds, Hanibal Seaton, Iohn Aghmonty Arthur Aghmonty, Mat. Wilder Gent. Sir Robert Newcomen Barronet. Thomas Newcomen Esq. For the Burrough of St. Iohns-Town, Iohn Edgworth, Andrew Adare Esqs. Mr.  Newton. For the County of Westmeath, Ridgley Hatfield Esq; High She∣rif of the County of Westmeath, Sir Theophilus Iones, Sir George Blundel, Sir Henry Pierce Baronets. Oliver Lambert, Walter Lam∣bert, Thomas Long, William Handcock, William Markham, Lawrence Hide, George Peyton, Robert Cook, George Neverel, Iames Leigh, Philip Packenham, Fulk Bookby, Dennis Brown, Oliver Iones, Edward Birtles, Iohn Iones, George Talbot, William Moor, Alexander Iephson, Henry Packenham, Henry Baker, Thomas Hopkins, Edward Knight, Iohn Quelsh Robert Bromwel, Francis Gibbons, Iohn Edmonds, Adam Molineux Stephen Coyn Esqs. William Rowls, Godfrey Keeler, Hansalbert Widman William Pountney, Henry Iephson, Henry Purdon, William Venner, Ben∣jamin Chapman, Faustian Collins, Thomas Newcomen, Thomas Nugent Abraham Michaelburn, Iohn Salisbury, Peter Stern, Iohn Brittaine George Wilton, Richard Bradburn, Philip Brathwait, Thomas Gibbons Thomas Gilbert Gent.
For the Burough of Mullingar. Richard Smith William Wilson, Christopher Gilbert, Iohn Douglase Gent. For the Burrough of Athlone. The Soveraign, Oliver Iones Esq; Recorder and Bailifs, Edmond Donnelon, Walter Staplehil, Arthur St. George Esqs. Enoch Golbourn, Richard Kelly, Iohn Knot William Moorhead Gent. For the Burrough of Kilbeggan, Provost for the time being, Iohn Fleetwood, Iohn Nelson, Henry Dey. For the County of Cok, Sir William Fenton, Maurice Fenton Iohn Percival, Sir Henry Tint, Nicolas Purdon, S. John Broderick Peter Courthorp, Richard Rise, Richard Townsend, Henry Bat∣hurst, Randolph Clayton, Alexander Piggot, Garret fitz. Gerald, Mayor and Sherifs of the City of Cork Soveraign of Kinsale Mayor of Youghal, Provost of Bandon, William Supple, Iohn Hodder, William Hodder, Francis Foulks, Redmond Barry, Walter Cooper, Richard Smith, Robert Foulks, Robert Southwell, Iohn St. Leiger, Samuel Brown, Howard St. Leiger Esqus. Sir Boyl Maynard, Robert Gookin, Iohn Baker, Iohn Wakeham, Henry Pyne, Christopher Oliver, William Mead Pierce Power, William Dant, Benjamin Crofts Esq. Iohn Bellew, William Bellew, Iohn Brocket Gent. Abraham Savage, Walter Dawly, Richard Goodwin Andrew Ruddock, William Harmer, Iohn Iepson, William fitz Gerald, William Thornhill, Roger Bretrage Esqus. William Ar∣nold, George Prater, Gent. Peter Carew, Timothy Rutter, Richard Gothing, Robert Hide, Arthur Hide, Iohn Sweet, Peter Petsworth, George Syms, Edward Townsend, Edward Deny, Beverly Usher, Richard Covet, David Iermin, Anthony Woodly, Francis Alcock Iohn Read, Archilles Daunt, Francis Smith Esqs. For the City and County of the City of Cork, The Mayor, Recorder and Sherives for the time being, Peter Courthorp, Iohn Hodder, William Hodder, Philip Matthews, Iohn Baker, Wal∣ter Cooper, Thomas Woodlif Esquires, Christopher Oliver, Iames Vanderlew Aldermen, Benjamin Crofts, Edmond Crofts Esquires Richard Scudmore, Theophilus Carew, Philip Parker, Zachary Tra∣vers, Giles Bursted, Ionathan Perry Gent. Richard Travers Esq. For the Town of Youghal, The Mayor, Recorder and Bai∣lifs for the time being, Sir Henry Tynt, Richard Meirs, Ioseph Cox, Iohn Farthing, George Giles, Thomas Vaughan, Owen Silver Gentlemen. For the Town of Kinsale, The Soveraign and Recorder for the time being, Robert Southwell Esq. Iohn Stepney, William Howel, Lancelot Stepney, Iohn Suxburie, VVilliam Brodbeare, Iohn Mountford, Iohn Martin Gent.
For the Town of Bandon-bridge, The Provost for the time being, Samuel Browne Abraham Savage Esqs. William Wright, Iohn Iackson, Thomas Beamish Gent. For the County of Waterford. High Sheriff of the County, Francis Foulk, Sir Boyle Maynard, Iohn Fitzgerrald, Thomas VValsh, Nicholas Osbourne, Richard Poer, Pierce VVelsh, Iohn Cole, Andrew Lynn, William Halsey, Boyl Smith, Thomas Taylor, VVilliam Hubbart, Iosuah Boyl Esquires. Philip Harris, Iohn Smith, Nicolas Stout, Iames Oldfield, Iohn Poer, Richard Silver, Edward Rogers, William Bradley, Iames Briver, Robert Taylor, Henry Gee, Alexander Dean, Michael VVilson, Richard Williams Gent. For the City of Waterford, The Mayor, Recorder and Sheriffs for the time being, Francis Foulk, William Halsey, Thomas Dancer Esquires Thomas Exten, Iohn Heaven, Benedict Claybrook Aldermen, Robert Lynn Gent. Iohn Lapp, Thomas Christmas Merchants. For the County of Kerry, the Sherif of the County for the time being, Sir Arthur Denny Knit. Iohn Blenerhasset Thomas Herbert, Iohn Blennerhasset Iunior, Lancelot Sands, George Dillon, Henry Ponsonby, Richard Chute, Redmond Fitzmorris, Thomas Amery, William Collis, Iohn Steers, Robert Blennerhasset Nicolas Munckten, Thomas Hasset, Iohn Walker, Humfry Barrow, Edward Allen, Ralph Conyer, Walter Langden, Iohn Love, Wil∣liam Hall, Garret Rieves, Lt. Witherston, Iames Conway, Patrick Crosby, Edward Shewel, Edward Heally Esqs. For the Burrough of Dingle, Henry Hussy, Samuel Renshaw Gent. For the Burrough of Traly, Major Philip Camine, Provost William Colls. For the Burrough of Ardfert, Thomas Crosby, Edward Shewel. For the County of Limerick, Lt. Col. Simon Eaton High She∣riffe, Col Ralph Wilson, Cap. Thomas Southwell, Maior William King, Maior George Ingoldsby, Lieut. Col. William Piggot, Cap. Gerald fitz Gerald, Cap. Robert Oliver, Maior William Wade, Cap. Lewis Griffith, Gamaliel Walter, Esqs. Cap. Humphry Hartwell, Cap. Iohn Purdon, Ma. Richard Hart, Cap. Iohn Gileard, Lieut. Iohn Odett, Maior Richard Magwyre, Cap. Thomas Butler, Cap. Vere Hunt, M. Rebrt Taylor, Cap. Authur Blenerhasset, M. Richard King, Cap. Drury Wray, Cap. Arthur Ormsby, M.  Dixon, Cap. William Pope, M. Brook Bridges, M. Henry Rogers, Cap. Maurice Downs, Col. Michael Serle, M. Marcus Harrison, Cornet William
Weeks, Cap. Iohn Mansell, Lieut. Thomas Lloyd, Lieut. Rob. Kent, Cap. Iohn Friend, Cap. Robert Wilkinson, Lieut. Nich. Moncklone, M. Iohn Crooker, Cornet Giles Powell, M. Thomas Holmes, M. Ephraim Monell, M. Darby Grady, Cornet Iames Dogherty, George Purdon, Esqs. For the City and County of the City of Lim erick, The Mayor Recorder and Sheriffs for the time being, Col. Henry In∣goldsby, Col. Ralph Wilson, Maior William King, Maior George In∣goldsby, Cap. Garret fitz Gerrald, Standish Hartstrong, Esqs. William Hartwell, William Yarwell, William Wade, Humphery Hartwell, Thomas Miller, Aldermen, Iohn Comin, Henry Bindon, Peter Ash, Henry Salsfield, Christopher Kyes, Dermitius Coghlan, Iohn Crabb, William Pope, Thomas Martin, Iames Banting, Henry Price, Robert Shute, Patrick Dowdal, Burgesses, Iohn Cripps, Thomas Bealey, Zachary Holland, Samuel Foxon, Iohn Syms, Nathaniel Whaples, Daniel Hignet, Nathaniel Webb; William Ioint, William Allen, Iohn Miller, Authur Carter, William Ken, Henry Lee, Iohn Collins, Bennet Whittington, Gent. Iohn Friend Esquire. For the County of Clare: Thomas Cullen High Sherriff of the said County, Col. Henry Ingoldsby, Col. Raph Wilson, Lieut. Col. William Purefoy, Iohn Cooper, Samuel Burton, George Pourdon, Thomas Hickman, Lievt. Col. Benjamin Lucas, Isaac Graniers, William Rumsey senior, Thomas Curd, Iohn Copoise, Richard Hart, Neptune Bloud, Iohn Gore, George Ross, Giles Vandelure, Henry Lee, Thomas Hewet, Peter Graniers, George Norton, William Goff, Patrick Lysugh, Nicholas Bourk, Isaac Vanhogarden, Robert Nightingale, William Hobson, Esqs. Walter Hickman, Henry Colpoyse, Arthur Smith, Henry Eveers, Robert Pea∣cock, Gentlemen. For the Burrough of Inish: William Cuff, Provost, William Purefoy, Anthony Bernard, Robert Hord, Iohn Pyne, Charles Chattin, Ar∣chibald Young, Gentlemen. For the County of Tipperary, Gamaliel Water, Esq. high Sheriff, Iohn Booker, Charls Blunt, Simon Finch, Solomon Cam∣by, Henry Paris, Bartholomew Fowke, Robert Knight, Griffith Howard, Nicolas Everard, Edward Dinham, Iohn Peck, Arthur Purefoy, Sampson Towgood, Iohn Harrison, Robert Cole, Iohn Iordan Daniell Abbot, Iohn Godfrey, Iohn Ewers, Henry Shrim∣pton, Richard Lehunt, Eliah Green, Thomas Sadlier, Giles Gre∣gory, Samuei Clark, VVilliam VVoodward, Mathew Iacob, Henry Legg, Charls Alcock, Iohn Dawson, Francis Peisley, Anthony Stamp, Esquires. Iohn Matthews, Giles Martin, Iohn Pike, Tho. Poe, Iohn Otway, Nicholas Toller, Wil. Heydon, Archiball A∣dare, Michael Gwinn, Wil. Palmes, Oliver Latham, William Ba∣con,
Richard Hamerton, Francis Legg, Thomas Manby, Richard Moore, Walter Baker, William Brooks, Christopher Perkins, Iohn Cuffe, Mathew Pennifeather, Thomas Cotton, Godfrey Greene, Humphrey Minchin, Iames Barker, Anthony Atkinson, Gent. For the Citty of Cashel, Peyton Lehunt Esq. Humphrey Wray, Richard Hatton Gentlemen. For the Burrough of Clonmell, Samuel Foley, Esq. Robert Lovelace, Richard Perrot, Gent. For the Burrough of Fetherd, Peter Cook, Robert Powel, Gentlemen. For the Burrough of Carrick, Michael Lamot, William Sheffield, Nicholas Towler, Gentlemen. For the County of Roscomon, Lord of Castle Coot, the High Sherif for the time being, Sir Oliver St. George Barronet, Sir Richard Lane, Barronet, Richard Iones, William Handcock, William S. George, Oliver Iones, Edmund Donnelan, Edward Crofton, Iames King, Richard Crofton, Thomas Caulfield, Tho∣mas Lovelace, Iohn Moore, Allen Povey, Richard St. George, Mi∣chael Stanley, Arthur St George, Owen Lloyd, Nicolas Ma∣hown, Robert Folliot, Ellis Goodwin, VValter Iones, Alexander Atkins, Henry Crofton Esqs. Edward Crofton, Charles Crofton, Robert Drury, Christopher Matthews, Iohn Crofton, Brian Cun∣ningham, Nathaniel Evanton, Gent. For the County of Leitrim. The Sherif for the time being, Sir Oliver St. George, Sir Arthur Forbes, Robert Parks, Own Wynn, William St. George, Bryan Cunningham, Iames Bathurst VValter Iones Esqs. Christopher Matthews, Edward Woods, Thomas Ellis, Iohn Akmooth, Alexander Atkins Gent. Humphrey Reynolds. Bryan Iones Esqs. For the County of Sleigo. The Sherif for the time being, Robert Park, Arthur Gore, Francis King, Lewis Winckfield, Lewis Iones, Robert Morgan, William VVebb, Charls Gore, Keyan O Hara, Thomas Hart, William Ormsby, Thomas Griffith, Ed∣ward Cooper, Henry Tifford, Thomas VVood, Iames Beirn, An∣thony Ormsby, Francis Gore, Thomas Crofton Esqs. For the County of Gallway, The High Sherif for the time being, the Lord of Castle Coot, Sir Oliver S. George, Thomas Caufield, Henry VVaddington, VVilliam Edwards, Iames Cuffe, Henry Greenway, Henry VVhaley, Richard Bingley, Thomas Cuff, Edmund Donelan, Francis Gore, George S. George, Gilbert Carter, Iohn Morgan, Iohn VVhalley, Iohn Bullenbrook, Matthew Tub∣mn, William Brooks, Michael Stanley, Henry Davis, Richard VValdot, William Spencer, Gabriel King, Iohn Groom Esqs.
For the County of the Town of Galway, the Mayor, Recor∣der and Sherifs for the time being. For the County of Mayo. the High Sherif, Sir Oliver S. George, Lt. Col. Arthur Goe, Cap. Arthur Swanwik, Sir Francis Iackson, Cap. Lewis VVinkfield, Cornet Iohn Crofton, Mr. Francis Knight, Mr. Robert Palmer, Cap. Ioseph Bond, Cap. Henry Waddington, Philip Gallature, Thomas Kigh, Iames Cuff Esqs. Francis Brent, Cornet Robert Miller, Foulk Hughes, Cor. Philip Ormsby, Iohn Ormsby. For the County of Fermanagh, Sir Iohh Cole, William Gore Sir Iohn Humes Barronets. Michael Cole, Stephen Butler, Hen∣ry Blannerhasset, Nicolas Willoughby, William Davis, William Cosby, Robert Cole, William Archdale, Hugh Rowley, Hum∣phrey Shingly, Iohn Madden, Adam Cathcart, Henry Horsdenel, Roderick Mansel Esqurs. Doctor Edward Cook, Bartholomew Droope, William Hamilton, Iohn Cheslin, Iohn Carleton Gent. Iohn Curry, Gilbert Eccles Merchants. Edward Rowley, Iames Galbrith Esquires. For the Burrough of Eniskillen, the Provost of the said Burrough for the time being, Iason Hassard, Thomas Picken, Iohn Chelling Gent. For the Town and County of the Town of Carickfergus. the Mayor and Sherifs for the time being, George Rawden Esqs. Roger Lyndon Recorder, Iohn Davis, Richard Dob Esqs. Her∣cules Davis, Iohn Orpin, Iohn Harris, Edmund Davis, Iohn Dol∣way, Henry Davis, Gilbert Wye Gent. For the County of Monoghan. The High Sherif for the time being, Richard Blaney, Richard Barret, Thomas Coot, Oliver Auceil, Arthur Dillon, Iohn Foster, VVilliam Borston, Nicolas VVilloughby, Tristram Carey, Michael Pockerish Simon Richard∣son, Roger Smith, VVilliam Davis; Peter Beaghan Esqs. For the Town of Monoghan. The Provost for the time be∣ing, Mr. VVade, Cap. Richard Blaney Mr.  Owens. For the Citty and County of London derry, The Mayor of London-derry, The Maior of Colraine, The Sherriffes for the time being, Tristram Beresford, Iohn Rowley, Iohn Godbold, Stephen Cuppage, Dudley Phillips, George Phillips, Richard Clutterbooke, Ralph King, Alexender Staples, Iohn Gorges, Edwad Cary, Randle Beresford, Samuell Hb, Paul Canning, Robert Blair, Richard Brazier, Francis Howard, Esqs. Thomas Bourk, Thomas Moncriefe, Iohn Plunkett Gen. Sir Robert Stuart, Edward Rowley, Hugh Rowley, Mathew Draper, William Godfrey, Esquires.
For the County of Ardmagh, The Sherriffe for the time be∣ing, Sir George Atcheson, Toby Pointz, Hance Hamelton, Roger West Edward Richardson, Thomas Chambers, Francis Chambers, Edw. Rowley Henry Cope, Foulke Martin, VValter Cope, VVilliam Draper, Thomas Clerk, Edward May, Robert Gray, Iames Maxwell, Esqs. For the County of Donegall, the high Sherriff for the said County for the time being, Sir Arthur Fourbes, Sir Willam Gore, Barronets, Sir Paul Davies Knight, Charles Hamilton Richard Perkins, Henry Brooks, William Cuningham, Iohn Folliot George Cary, Thomas Stewart, Iames Erskin, William Dutton, Thomas Dutton, Andrew Knox, Iohn Hamilton of Cavan, Tho. Groves, Albert Conningham, Andrew Linsey, Peter Benson, Iames Collun, Iames Coningham, Iohn Collun, Iohn Nisbit, Iames Ha∣milton, George Butler, Andrew Nisbit, David Stewart, David Mortimer, The Warden of Lifford for the time being, Capt. William Stewart, Henry Vaughan, Bassill Brooks, Tho. Golborne Esqs. Robert Murray, Knight, William Davies, Archibald Pierson Esqs. For the County of Downe, The high Sherriffe for the time being, Vere Essex Cromwell, Oliver Cromwell, Sir George Blundell Barronet, Arthur Hill, Marcus Trevor, Nich. Bagnall, William Montgomery, George Rawden, Hugh Savage, Bernard Ward, Moses Hill, William Hill, Esqs. Henry Maxwell Clerk, Iohn Weaver, Iames Trll, Roger West, Tobias Norris, Archibald Hamilton, Nicholas Ward, Charles Bolton, Edward Muschamp, Iames Lesly, William Hamilton, William Lesby, Iohn Magill, Richard Pierce, Iohn Savage, Iohn Reynolds, Esqs. Hugh Shaw, Nicholas Fitz Symons, Iames Hamilton, Iames Magill, Iohn Swadling, Nicholas Trurk, Bernard Magenis, Michael Smith, Collen Maxwell, Gent. The Provost of Newton, The Provost of Kil∣leleagh. For the County of Antrim, The high Sherriffe for the time being, Sir Iohn Skevington Barronet. Arthur Hill, George Rawdon, Esqs. Doctor Alexander Colvill, Doctor Kalph King, The Maior of Carrigfergus, VVilliam Adare, Iohn Davies, Tris∣tram Beresford, Archibald Stewart; Moses Hill, Robert Colvill, Archibald Upton, Roger Lyndon; Iames Shaw, Iohn Shaw; Mi∣chael Harrison; Henry Spencer; Peter Beaghan; Esqs. Henry Davies; VVilliam Huston; Maior mac Awly; Daniel O Neale; Thomas Dobbins; Adam Boyd; Daniel mac Kay; Gilbert VVye Simon Hilmon Gent. For the County of Tyrone; The high Sherriffe; Sir VVil. Usher; Sir Arthur Forbes; Sir Audley Mervin; Sir Arthur
Chichister; Fardinando Davies; VVilliam Richardson; VVilliam Moore; Lt. Coll. Robert Stewart; Henry Mervin; Iames Stewart Esqs. Thomas Golborne, Matthew Combs, William Cahoon Iames Shaw, Richard Palfrey, Alexander mac Castlan, Quarter, Mr. Douglas, Iohn Young, Iohn Lesley Iunior Gent., David Michael, Patrick Hambelton, Richard Adams, Richard Perkins Ralph King, Edward Cook, Thomas White, Robert Lindsey, Iohn Morris, Thomas Morris,  VVallis Esquires. Nathaniel Boyl, Iohn Gladston, Iohn Fixer Gent. For the County of Cavan the high Sherif of the County for the time being, Oliver Lambert, Wlter Lambert Esqs. Sir Francis Hamiltton Knit and Barronet Charls Hamilton, Thomas Cook, Edward Philpot, Thomas Cooch, Stephen Butler, Thomas Waldron, Robert Saunderson, Tristram Berisford, Lewis Cragg Thomas Whine, William Moor, Humphrey Perrot, Thomas Ri∣chardton, Samuel Townley, Ambrose Bradle, Thomas Guillin Ri∣chard Lewis, Thomas Ash, William Cosby, Thomas Newburgh, Thomas Burton, Hance Hamilton, William Hamilton, Iames Hamil∣ton, Abraham Clements, Thomas Burrows Esqs. the Soverain of Cavan for the time being. the Provost of Belturbat for the time being. Hugh Culme, Henry Palmer, Richard Burrows Ri∣chard Gibson, Daniel Clements Thomas White Esqs. March the 1. 1660. ORdered that this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. Matt. Barry Clerk of the General Convention of Ireland. Imprinted at Dublin by William Bladen, by special Order, Ano Dom. 1660.
