L2852F R223973 [ocm]64551370 184642
Directions of the Right Honourable the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London in Common-Councell Assembled. To the severall Ministers of the City of London, and Liberties thereof; For the stirring up their Hearers to a voluntary and generall Contribution, for the raising of a Stock, For the setting of the Poore of this City at Work as is hereafter expressed. THis Court having received a Narative from the Corporation for the Poore, of their intended Method for setting the Poore at work on the severall Manufactures hereafter mentioned, Whereby the Poore may be kept from idlenesse, and enabled to earn a proportionable lively∣hood for themselves, which as it will tend much to the honour of God, the good of the Na∣tion, So unto the speciall Weal of this City, in that the Poor shall be kept from extream want, the streets cleared from Vagarants, the Unlearned taught, and the Idle kept from such temp∣tations as attend that kind of life. Hereupon this Court have thought fit, for the better carrying on the said work, and encouraging of all well minded persons to a free and liberall contribution, For the advancement of so pious and charitable a work, have thought fit to acquaint all persons with the Intentions of the said Corporation, when they shall bee enabled thereunto by a Stock, viz. 1. To clear the streets of all Vagarants and sturdy Beggers. 2. To imploy the Poore who are any wayes able to work, and have not wherewithall to imploy them∣selves. 3. To take care that such Children that lye under stalls, and wander about streets be set to work, and earn their bread, and also receive fitting Education. 4. That such poore housekeepers, which are in great necessity for want of work, shall have materials home to their own houses, so as they procure persons of credit to engage for the return of the same when its wrought. The way and means (among others) proposed by them to effect the aforegoing particulars, are as followeth. 1. To imploy these Poore in the making of all sorts of necessaries belonging to the Fishing trade, which will accommodate both young and old with fitting imployment. 2. In making Canvas, Pouldavis, Sack cloth, and other Linnen cloth. 3. In picking, sorting, carding and spinning of Cotten Wooll, for the making of Fustians, and all other Manufactures which they are capable of, and the Stock will enable thereunto. In consideration of these preparations to so good a work, this Court earnestly desire you in your severall places to stir up your Hearers with the most Religious and pressing arguments to so pious and charitable a Work, That so this City might not be found guilty of such a neglect as not to provide for the Poore, whom our Saviour hath told us, Wee shall have alwayes with us; knowing that what wee have is received from the riches of his Grace, that respects our thankfulnesse by giving to them that want, we being but Stewards, and shall shortly give an account of our Stewardship. And what God shall move the hearts of his people to give, This Court hath desired that every respective Alderman, Deputy and Common councel-man in their severall Wards and Precincts, shall upon Munday and VVednesday next, meet in their severall VVards; and subscribe themselves, and take the subscription of all and every person that shall willingly Contribute, and appoint Receivers of the same, and return an account of their proceedings therein, unto this Court, who are resolved to their uttermost both in Care and Councell, that the charity received might be wel improved. Sadler. Foote, Major. Commune Concilium tent' in Camera Guildhald. London. sextimo die Februar. 1649. IT is thought fit and desired by this Court, that every respective Alderman with his Deputy and the Common-councel-men shall upon Munday and Wednesday next, meet in his Ward, and send for the Inhabitants thereof before them, and underwrite, towards raising of a Stock to set the Poore on work, and then take the subscriptions of the said Inhabitants, (what sums they shall willingly contribute thereunto) and appoint Receivers of the same; And further that every Com∣mon-councell-man accompanied with such of his Neighbours as he shall think fit, shall repaire to the severall houses of those in his Precinct, (who shall not appear at the said meeting) and take their subscriptions for the purpose aforesaid, and return an accompt of their proceedings to this Court. Sadler. Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honourable City of LONDON.
