N537 R180874 [ocm]62369496 188026
❧ A NEW AND ACCVRATE MAP OF THE WORLD DRAWNE ACCORDING TO THE truest Descriptions, latest Discoveries, and best Observations, that have beene made by English, or Strangers. WITH BRIEFE AND MOST PLAINE NOTES UPON THE WHOLE BODY OF COSMOGRAPHIE. FOR THE EASIE VNDERSTANDING THEREOF Pleasant and usefull for all such as desire to know further than of their owne Home. The Description and use of the Figure with the twelve Signes shewing the Theoricke of the Sunne on the left hand of these two Hemispheares. THe outward circle of this Figure is divided into 365 dayes equall and allowing unto each moneth his proportion of dayes, as Ja∣nuary 31. February 28. March 31. Aprill 30. &c. map of the world, with many small inset illustrations and charts western hemisphere AMERICA was first discovered ye yeer 1492. by Christopher Columb∣us at ye charge of Ferdinand & Isabella K: and Q: of Castill but denominated of Ameri∣cus Vesputius seven yeers after. eastern hemisphere To the Right Honble Henry Mountague, Baron of Kimbolton, Viscount Maundevile, Lo: President of his Ma:ties mos Ho:ble Privy Counsell: this Mapp of the World, With Himselfe, and his best Services. Will: Grent. D D. This South Land vndiscouered commonly knowne by the name of Terra Australis in∣cognita & Magellanica cannot certainly be affirmed either continent or Ilands only Some few coasts thereof haue appeared to Sea men driuen ther∣vpon by extremity of weather whose names are set downe. the rest must remaine clouded in obscuritie till future times and further discoueries produce them to light. border illustrations, beginning top left and proceeding clockwise astronomical table showing the correspondence of the months and the degrees of the astrological signs depiction of a comet flying over a landscape the constellations of the northern hemisphere, held up by Atlas The North Hemispheare the constellations of the southern hemisphere, held up by Atlas The South Hemispheare depiction of four figures labeled Desire, Diligence, Observation, and Peace Peace is ye Nurce of Sci∣ence, and these 3 the mea∣nes to attaine it. figure depicting the division of the heavens into planetary spheres The Heauens and Elements portrait of Thomas Cavendish M Thomas Candishe sailed about the World Ano 1588. portrait of Olivier Van Noort Oliver Vander Nort sailed about the World. 1601. depiction of a solar eclipse The Eclipse of the Sun division of the world into zones, flanked by two figures labeled Geographie and Navigation A Figure of the Spheare depiction of a lunar eclipse The Eclipse of ye Moone. portrait of Ferdinand Magellan Ferdinand Magellan. sayl'd about the world. 1524 portrait of Sir Francis Drake Sr. Francis Drake sayled about the World 1580. The inward circle is divided into 360 Degrees, giving unto each Signe 30 degrees, the Semi∣diameter of the twelve Moneths is supposed to be divided into 60 parts, from which center is supposed another center to be two deg. 9. minutes of the said 60. parts, according to Ticho Brache, who mketh the place or point of the Sunnes Apogeum, to be in the 6. degree of Cancer, in this age of the world. The Apogeum of the Sun is that point in which when the Sunne commeth unto, hee is in his slowest motion, or furthest distant from the Earth, that is to say, Iune 17. then the Sunne shall be in the sixt degree of Cancer, the Perigeum of the Sunne, shall be when it commeth into the sixt degree of Capri∣corne, being opposite to the sixt degree of Cancer. The second moveable part is divided into 29 dayes and one halfe, which doth shew the age of the Moone. The next Circle is divided in∣to 24 Houres, and each houre into foure Quarters, each quarter into three parts, each part being five minutes. The use of this Figure may be this. FIrst, the day of the Moneth being given to find the place of the Sunne in the Zodiack, or the place of the Sun being given to find the day of the moneth: Take the Index of the Sunne and bring it to the day of the moneth, sheweth the place of the Sun in the Zodiack of the 12 Signes. Example, Aprill 14. the place of the Sunne will be found to be in the fourth degree of Taurus. Secondly, the day of the Change or New Moone being given to finde the age of the Moone, the signe and degree shee posses∣seth in the Zodiack, the time of her comming to the South, and time of full Sea or high water in any Haven, knowing the time of the Changes or full Moone after this manner. In some Almanack (or by the Expact) find the day of the change of the Moone going before the day that yee desire; and so many dayes after the Change so many dayes old is the Moone. First, bring the Index of Sol or the Sunne to the day of the moneth, and there stay it. Secondly, bring the Index of the Moone, to the age of the Moone, and it sheweth the signe and degree that she possesseth in the Zodiack, the houre and minute under the age, is the time of her comming to the South. Thirdly, to finde the time of high water. In the Table following find the name of the Port or Haven, and the houre and minute against that Haven is the houre and minute that yee shall adde to the time of the Moones comming to South, is the time of highwater in the said place. A Tyde Table shewing the times of full Sea in the principall Havens in England, or neere about thereunto. Names of the Havens. H. M. Points of the Compasse. Quinborow, Southam. Portsmou. 0 0 South. North. Redban, Aberden. 0 45 S. W. b. W. N. E. b. E, Gravesend, the Downes. 1 30 S. S. W. N. N, E. Dundee, S. Andrewes, Silli. 2 15 S. W. b. S. N. E. b, N. London, Tin mouth, Harlepoole, 3 0 South West. N. East, Barwick, Ostend, Fount. 3 45 S. W. b. W. N. E. b N. Frith, Lith, Dunbar, Narbo. 4 30 W. S. W, E. N. E. Faymouth, Gernsey, Lizzard. 5 15 W. b. S. E. b. N. Foy, Lin, Humber, Way, Dart∣mouth, or Plimouth, Antwerp. 6 0 East. West. Bristoll, Lanion, Foulnesse. 6 45 E, b, S. W. b. N. Milford and Bridgewater, Texel 7 30 E. S. E, W.N.W. Portland, Peter-port, Hage. 8 15 S, E, b E. N.W.b.W Orkney, Poole, Orwel, Shelens. 9 0 South East. North W. Deepe, Lux, Lenoyes, Needles, 9 45 S. E. b. S. N.W.b.N Bolyn, Dover, Harwich, Yarmou. 10 30 S. S. E. N. N. W. Gallis, Rye, Winchelsey, Calsho. 11 15 S. b. E. N. b. W. The use of this Table. ADde the houres and minutes right against each Haven, to the Moones comming to the South, and the whole result will be the time of the Tide or high water. By this Table you may see in what point of the Compasse the Moone is in at the time of the Tide or full Sea. Of blazing Starres. BLazing Starres or Comets are flames drawne into the higher  and long quiet∣nesse in the Ayre: They signifie corruption in the ayre to follow; They are either signes of warres and death, or tokens of earth∣quakes, and dearth of Corne. In the yeare 1618. there happened a fearefull blazing Starre from the 18 of November to the 16 of December following: Jt was seene all over Europe; The Coun∣tries it passed ovr, were Nova Guinea, the Ile of Java, Sumatra, Madagascar, Monomotapa Picora, Nombre de Jesus. The manner of the Moones Eclipse. THe word Eclipse is as much to say as to want light, and to be darkned, or hidden from our sight. The Moones Eclipse is figured at the foote of America, over against your left hand, which is thus: viz.
When the Sunne and Moone are opposite one to the other dia∣metrally, and the Earth in the very midst between both: that is, when a right line drawne from the center to the Sun to the cen∣ter of the Moone, passeth through the center of the Earth: For the body of the Earth being thick and not transparent, casting his shadow to that point which is opposite of the place of the Sun, will not suffer the Moon to receive any light from the Sun, from whom she alwaies borroweth her light: And note, that e∣very time she is at the full, she is opposite to the Sunne, and yet the Earth is not at every such full diametrally betwixt her & the Sun, for then she should be eclipsed at every full, which indeed cannot be, unlesse she be either in the head or taile of the Dragon. Now the Moone is eclipsed in part, when the Sun, the Earth, and the Moone, be met in one selfe diametrall line, but the Moon is declining either on the one side or on the other. But note that eclipses of the Moone may be universall, because the Earth is far bigger than the Moone, and thereby able to sha∣dow her whole body, The manner of the Sunnes Eclipse. THe Eclipse of the Sunne is shewed by that figure at the foot of Asia, against your right hand, and happeneth When the Moone is betwixt the sunne and the Earth, which chanceth in a Conjunction or new of the Moone: and yet not in every Conjunction, but when it falleth either in the head or taile of the Dragon, which may chance (as is said before) either totally, or in part; totally, in respect of those parts of the Earth whereon the shadow directly falleth. For sith the Moone is far lesse than the Earth, she cannot shadow all the Earth, and there∣fore the eclipse of the sun cannot be universall but yet to some part of the Earth it may be totally, to some partly, and to others nothing at all; as may appeare by the aforesaid Figure. Of the Firmament and Constellations. THe two Hemispheares in the middle about; filled with Fi∣gures of men, beasts, fishes, and the like embost with starres, doe represent the face of the Firmament or Orbe of the fixed starres (those that appeare every night) which were by ancient Astronomers divided into and distinguished by certain Constel∣lations, and each of these is knowne by a proper name; Of these Constellations, the number (according to the ancient account) is 48, that are divided into three parts: 1 Northerne Constellations, being 21 in number. 2 Zodiacke Constellations, being 12 in number. 3 Southerne Constellations, being 15 in number. The Northerne Constellations consist of 332. starres. The Zodiacke Constellations, which be also called the twelve signes, consist of 280 starres. The Southerne Constellations, containe 293 starres, Some of these Constellations, consist of more, some of fewer starres, according to their greatnesse or smalnesse, Besides these there are 1205 stars that are exempt out of all the Constellations: so that the number of stars set upon both Hemi∣spheares are 1025, and divers of them have proper Names. But here is to be understood, that all the starres in Heaven are not numbred, nor cannot, for that divers of them are so small; but these 1025 are the principallest amongst them, and all that have yet ever beene accounted of. The two first parts of ll, that is, the Northerne and Zodiack Constellations are contained in that part right against your left hand, and placed over a piece of America; The last, that is, the Southerne, is comprehended in that other Hemispheare on your right hand, and over the European Sea, Of the Figure of the heavenly Orbes and Elements, THe whole world is divided into two parts, viz. Elementall, and Etheriall or Coelestiall parts. The Elementall part is four-fold; viz. Earth, Water, Ayre, Fire, as may be seen in that round Figure of the frame of the hea∣vens and elements one within another; the inmost and middle∣most circle containing Earth and Water intermixed together; The next, the three Regions of the Aire: and immediatly above that Orbe, is the Element of Fire; all which you may easily dis∣cerne by their severall names in their proper places. The Etheriall or Coelestiall parts doe compasse the Elementall part: and containe the ten upper Spheares, viz, 1 the Moone, 2 Mercury, 3 Ʋenus, 4 Sol, 5 Mars, 6 Iupiter, 7 Saturne, 8 the Starry firmament, 9 the Christaline heaven, having no stars at all; the 10 is the Primum mobile, or first Mover, containing all the rest within it; and moving from the East to the West carri∣eth about with it in violence all the other Spheares. The rest of the Spheares have contrary motions, every one in his kinde, though far slower than the other: and their motions are contrary, from the West to the East, and so are carried about oftentimes by the first Mover, before they make one perfect re∣volution in themselves. The Christaline or ninth Spheare his motion is almost immen∣sible, and is called The trembling Motion, and is performed, according to the opinion of later Astronomers, in 49000 yeares. The eight Spheare being the Starry Firmament performeth his motion in 7000 yeares. The rest of the Spheares are the seven Planets; each Spheare containeth in it but one starre; whereof the uppermost and slow∣est is Saturne, which perfecteth his course in thirty yeares. Iupi∣ter being next under that makes his revolution in twelve yeares. Mars beneath him, finisheth his course in two yeares. Sol passeth through the Zodiacke in 365 dayes and six houres, which is one whole yeare. Ʋenus ends her course somewhat more than a yeare. Mercury holds equall pace with the Sunne. Luna cour∣seth about the Heaven once every eight and twenty dayes.
Geographie, and the Principles thereof. Certaine termes of Land and Water plainely defined and described. THe Terrestriall Globe is defined to be a Sphericall body, proportionably composed of Earth and Water: into which two parts it is divided. Whereof the Earth comes first to view; whose parts are either Reall, Imaginary: and the reall parts, either Continents, Islands. Now a Continent is a great quantity of Land, not interlaced or separated by the Sea; in which many Kingdomes and Princi∣palities are contained; as Europe, Asia, Africa, America, An Island (called in Latine, Insula quasi in salo) is a part of the earth, environed round with waters; as Britaine, Java, S. Laurence Isle, Barmudas. These againe are subdivided into Peninsula, Istmus Promontorium. A Peninsula, is almost an Island; that is, a tract of Land, which being almost encompassed round by water is joyned to the firme Land by some little Istmus: as Poloponnesus, Taurica, Cymbri∣ca, and Pervana. An Istmus is a little narrow necke of Land, which joyneth any Peninsula to the Continent; as the Straights of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece, Promontorium, is some high Mountaine, which shooteth it selfe into the Sea, the utmost end of which, is called a Cape, as that great Cape of good hope, and Cape Verde in Africa; Cape Comori in Asia, and that of S. Michaels mount in Cornwall; the North Cape up in Norway, and divers other. There are likewise other reall parts of the Earth; as Moun∣taines, Vallies, Fields, Plaines, Woods, and the like. The other generall part of the Globe is the Water; which is divided into 1. Oceanus. 2. Mare. 3. Fretum. 4. Sinus. 1. Oceanus, the Ocean, is that generall collection of all waters, which invironeth the whole world on every side. 2. Mare, the Sea, is a part of the Ocean; to which wee can∣not come, but through some Straite, as Mare Mediterraneum, Mare Balticum, and the like. These two take their names, Either frō the adjacent places, as the British Ocean, the Germane Sea, the Atlantick Sea. Or from the first discoverer, as Mare Magella∣nicum, Davis and Forbishers straites, &c. Or from some remarkable accident, as Mare Rubrum, from the red colour of the Sands. Mare Aegeum, Pontus Euxinus, and the like. 3. Fretum, a Straite, is a part of the Ocean restrained within narrow bounds, and opening a way to the Sea; as the Straits of Gibraltar, Hellespont, Anian. 4. Sinus, a Creeke, is a crooked shoare, thrusting out as it were two armes to imbrace the lovely presence of the Sea; as Sinus A∣driaticus, Sinus Persicus, and Corinthiacus. To this also belong Rivers, Brookes, and Fountaines, which are engendred of congealed ayre in the earths concavities, and seconded by the Sea-waters, creeping through hidden crannies thereof. Thus much of the Reall parts of the Globe in generall. Of the Circles of this Mappe, and their uses. THe Imaginary parts of the Earth are such, which not being at all in the Earth, must yet be supposed to be so, for the better teaching and learning this Science; and are certaine Cir∣cles going about the Earth, answerable to them in Heaven in name. The Meridian (which comes first to be considered) is a great Circle compassing round the Earth from Pole to Pole; and is that which you see in the circumference of both Planispheares of the Map; and wherein are written the names of the Zones & Climates. This chiefe, first, fixed Meridian passeth through the Islands called Azores, according to the ancient Cosmographers; and there are two reasons why they did there begin to reckon the longitude of the Earth: First, for that at that time there was no Land knowne further to the Westward than that place. Secondly, under that Meridian the Needle in the Mariners Compasse had no variation, but did point directly North and South. There be also many Meridians according to the diverse place in which a man lives, the number of them equall to so many points as may be imagined in the Globe; but the usuall setting them knowne to view, is by ten degrees asunder; and are those blacke lines which you see in both Planispheares, running down along from the North to the South Pole. The use of the Meridian, is to shew the Longitude of any place. Now the longitude of a Region, City or Cape, is the di∣stance of it East from the first great Meridian; and this ongitude is measured and numbred in the Aequinoctiall line by Meridians from the generall and fixed Meridian, into the East, and contain∣eth the whole compasse of the Earth, viz. 360. degrees To prove this by example, cast your eye on London, and you shall see it something to the East of the second blacke Meridian; passe downe with that blacke line to the Aequinoctiall, and looke as much East there, as London is from that Meridian above, then count the degrees of the Aequinoctiall, from the first great Meri∣dian to that place, and that distance is the longitude of London: which you may perceive to be 20. degrees and better: And the like manner of working is to be made for all other places. That line full of degrees crossing both Planispheare: straight a long in the middle, and dividing the world into two halfes (viz) North and South halfes; is called the Aequinoctiall line, or the Aequator; either because it is of equall distance from both Poles of the world, or else because the Sunne comming in this Circle makes the dayes & nights throughout the world of like length; which happens upon the 10, or 11. of March, and the 13. or 14. of September. It passes through Abassia or Prester Johns King∣dome, and Manicongo in Africa, through the grea Island Su∣matra, and the Maldive Isles of Asia; and in America, through Guiana. The use of it is to shew the Latitude of any Countrey, City, Promontory, or the like: Now the Latitude is the distance of a place toward the South or North, from the Aequinoctiall line or middle of the world; and is reckoned and measured upon the Meridian toward either Pole: Those therefore have Northerne latitude that inhabit betweene the Aequinoctiall and he North Pole, as they have Southerne latitude that are betweene the same Aequator and the South Pole. Those blacke lines thwarting the blacke Meridians from East to West, are parallels, & are also called Aequidistants, being distant one from another 10. degrees toward both Poles; and are here set downe for the easier counting the latitude of any place from the Aequinoctiall: as for the latitude of London; count so many decimall parallels, till you come to the parallel which is neerest London, (you shall find them to be five) then follow that line to the Meridian, and see the figures set thereat; they are 50.) moreover, adde to that number of 50. so much as London is stu∣ate
above that parallel, the space is one degree and a halfe; thus shall you finde the latitude of London (that is, the distance thereof from the Aequator toward the North Pole) to the 51 degrees and a halfe: and in the like manner must the Latitude of all other places be sought. Thus much of Longitude and Latitude, by which two the whole earth is reckoned. The Meridian and Aequinoctiall, as also the Zodiacke, are fil∣led throughout with degrees, the number 360. and every degree consists of 60. Minutes, and containes, according to our ordinary account, 20. leagues, or threescore miles. The great Circle that is drawn bending bias in one planispheare up to the Tropicke of Cancer, in the other downe to the Tropick of Capricorne, is the Zodiacke; it is replenished with degrees, and beares on it the Characters of the 12. signes. The uses of it are to shew over what Countries and people the body and beames of the Sunne come perpendicular at some times or other in the yeare; and it shews to all (where the dayes increase and decrease) the longest and shortest dayes of the yeare, for the Sunne (which causeth the same) being alwayes in this Circle, and therein moving about one degree a day, all the while he is comming up from the Tropicke of Capricorne to that of Cancer, the dayes increase in the Northerne Climates; but contrariwise in his course backe from Cancer to Capricorne, they shorten to us, and lengthen to those in the Southerne Climates; and this Circle shewes the foure quarters of the yeare; Spring, Summer, Autumne, Winter. The Tropicke of Cancer, (so called, or the Coelestiall signe Can∣cer) is a circle, whose distance from the Aequinoctiall toward the North, is 23. degrees and a halfe. When the Sunne is come so farre Northward as to touch this Circle, then is our longest day in the yeare. It passes through the Southermost parts of Barbary & Aegypt, Arabia, India, China, Nova Hispania, and the Island Cuba. The Tropicke of Capricorne, (likewise so named of the signe Ca∣pricorne in the starry heaven) is a circle of like distance at the o∣ther Tropicke from the Aequinoctiall Southward, that is 23. de∣grees and a halfe. When the Sunne is gone downe to the circle Southward, it is our shortest day in the whole yeare. This Tropicke passes through Monomotapa, Saint Laurence Island, Peru, and South coasts of Brasile. The Articke, or North polar circle, is distant from the North Pole, 23, degrees and a halfe; so much as the Tropicke of Cancer is from the Aequinoctiall; but the distance betweene that Tropicke and it, is 43. degrees. You may see it passe through Island, Norway, Boddia, Mosco∣vy, Tartary, crosse Davis Saites, and Groenland. The Antarticke or Sout olar Circle, is distant from the South Pole, 23. degrees and a hae; so farre as the Tropicke of Capri∣corne is from the Equinocall. This circle passes thro Magellanica, or Terra Australis In∣cognita onely. Now these foure lesser cles, (viz.) the two Tropickes, and Polar circles, doe fitly pa he Earth into five Zones. The Zones. A Zone is a space of Earth, contained betweene two of the smaller circles, or within the compasse of either polar Cir∣cle: the name signifies as much as a girdle, by reason that each Zone compasseth about the earth in manner of a girdle. Of these there be two kinds, one temperate, the other untemperate. There be two tempere Zones; the one North, the other South. The North temperate Zo, is that space of Earth contained be∣tweene the Tropicke of Cncer, and the North polar Circle. The South temperate Zo is that space of earth stretched along betweene the Tropicke of Capricorne, and the South Polar Cir∣cle. They are called temper Zones, for that the ayre thereof hath a farre better and more erate temperature, and meeter for man to inhabit, than t temperate Zones. The breadth of them is 43. degrees a piece, which degrees, make either temperate Zone to be 2580. English miles broad apiece. The untemperate Zones are twofold; one exceeding in the ex∣tremity of heat, the other as much in cold; they have bin thought in former times altogether uncharitable, but latter experience hath found them more fi for habitation. The Torrid or burnt Zoe (which is the hot untemperate Zone) is that space of heaven which you see contained betweene the Tropicke of Cancer, and that of Capricorne. It hath the name of Torrid, because the Sunne continually passes thereover, and ca∣sting downe direct rayes, ects it with a marvellous heate; there∣by making it not so convenient for the Inhabitants, as the tem∣perate Zones are. The breadth of this Zone is comprehended be∣tweene the two Tropickes, and containes 47. degrees, that is of English miles 2820. The frozen Zones are spaces of Earth inclosed within either of the Polar circles: of these there are two, one North, the other South. The North frzen Zone, is that space of Earth contained within the compasse of the North Polar circle. The breadth thereof reckoned 23. degrees and a halfe, (viz.) from the Pole it selfe to the Polar circle; which of English miles is 1410. The South frozen Zone, is that space of Earth compassed all a¦bout with the South Polar circle: It hath the like breadth from the South Pole, as the other frozen Zone hath from the North Pole and likewise the number of miles is the same. They are called frozen Zones, because they (for the most part) exceed in cold; and that is caused in regard that the Sunne, for a good part of the yeare, is under the Horizon, and sees them not; and when he is come up into their sight, his appearance (which is for a pretty long season together) rather comforts them, than any vertuall heat proceeding from him; for there th ayre is stuft with thicke foggy vapours, and his beames at highe fall but very oblikely on them; so that what through his want and unability to dispel the cold, and the colds force to resist and beare backe the Suns heate; these Zones remaine almost unhabi∣table, and even (as the word is) frozen. The names of all these, set in the right place of each Zone, you shall see in that Meridian going about America and Magellanica. Of the Climats. IN that great Meridian going about Europe, Asia, and Afric are described the Climates; Now a Climate is a space of the Earth included within the space of two Parallels. The use of them is to shew the difference of length, and shortnesse of dayes over all the world, as you may see in the midst of every Climat, set the number of the houres of the longest day in the yeare, un∣der that Climat: the longest day in one Climat, differing halfe an houre from the longest in another. So that there are foure and twenty Climats, consisting of forty eight Parallels, ere the day come to be 24. houres in length, which is twelve houres longer than the ordinary Aequinoctiall day is. Now this is to be under∣stood; Under the Aequinoctiall line, and 13, degrees, that is 3. Parallels, on either side thereof, the dayes exceed not the length of twelve houres, but after in every Clime increase the length of halfe an houre, so that there are numbred (as is said before) 48. Parallels, which make 24. Climats, before the dayes become 24. houres long; the which length they being growne to, their in∣crease is then by whole weeks and moneths, till in the foure and twentieth Clime: about the Pole, the day is ful half a yeare long. And as it is thus betweene the Aequator and North Pole, so is it betweene the said Aequator and South Pole: wherefore there
are two sorts of Climats, that is, 24 Northerne, and as many Southerne. The Climes Northward are thus named: the first is Dia Meroes, because the middle parallell thereof passes through the middest of the Inland Jland Meroe, in the Conti∣nent of Africa; the second is Dia Sienes; the third Dia Alexan∣dria; the fourth Dia Rhodos; the fift Dia Romes; the sixt Dia Ponton; the seventh Dia Borisihenes; the eight Dia Ripheos; the 9th Per Dianam. The South Climes have the same names, save onely that the word Anti is thereto added; as Anti Dia Meroes; the next Anti Dia Sienes, and so along unto the ninth Southward: further than the ninth Clime on either side th Ae∣quinoctiall they are not named; but yet the Climes runne on both wayes to the number of 24. as is seene in the Meridian. That there be but nine named; the reason is, because when these names were given, no more than nine Climats were knowne to those of ancient times; but since though the number of them be increast to 24. the rest are not so knowne by proper names, but remaine innominate. The Division of the Earth, and of the foure parts thereof. THe world in later times hath been divided into the known and unknowne: This last, since obscuritie hides it, silence shall overslip it. The knowne branches it selfe into the four-fold Division, viz. 1. Europe▪ 2. Asia, 3. Africa, 4 America. Europe. TO begin with that quarter wherein we live; Europe (as al∣so the other three) consists of Continent and Jlands. The Continent hereof is shared by the inhabitants of these Countries 1 Spaine, 2 France, 3 Italy, 4 Belgia, or Netherlands, 5 Germany, 6 Denmarke, 7 Norway, 8 Sweden, 9 Muscovia, 10 Poland, 11 Hungary, 12 Dacia, 13 Sclavonia 14 Greece. The European Ilands are these: 1. The British Iles, viz. Great Britaine, (whose possessors are English, Scots, and Welchmen) Ireland, Orchades, Hebrides, Sorlings, and other on the East, South, and Westerne Coasts, 2. The Mediterranean Iles, which are Majorca, Minorca, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicilia, Malta, Candy or Creete, Cephalonia, Zant, The Grecian Iles and some other of lesse note in the North Seas, Island and Frisland. Europe is extended in length about 3800 miles in breadth it exceeds not 1200. On the North the frozen Sea beats the bounds of it, toward the west the Occidentall Ocean washeth it, South∣ward it is girt with the Mediterranean Sea, but the Archipelago the Euxine Sea, Meotis Palus, and the River Tanais, (now called Don) with a line drawne from thence upright Northward, are the Easterne limits: the chiefe Rivers hereof, are Danubius, the Rheine and Vistula. Asia. BEfore any thing be said of the Province of Asia, a few of her prerogatives shall be related which ennoble her. As 1. mans creation. 2. The birth of our Saviour, his divine miracles, and the worke of our Redemption and Salvation: 3. The actions memorized by the holy Penmen of the Old and New Testament: also here were erected the first Monarchies of the Babylonians, Assyrians, Medes and Persians. The Continent of Asia containes these Regions. 1 Natolia, 2 Syria, 3 Palestina, 4 Armenia, 5 Arabia, 6 Media, 7 Assyria, 8 Mesopotamia, 9 Persia, 10 Chaldaea, 11 Parthia, 12 Hircaria, 13 Tartaria, 14 China, 15 India. The Ilands of Asia, are Rhodes and Cyprus, in the Mediterra∣nean Sea: in the Orientall Ocean, Iapan, the Mollucca, the Phi∣lippine, Ladrones, Borneo, Gillo, Iava, Sumatra, Zeilan, and an infinte number of lesse account. The length thereof reaches 5200. the breadth 4560 miles, or thereabout: It is bounded Northward with the frozen Sea, and straits of Anian, all the East along it resists the assault of the Ori∣entall Ocean, toward the South, the Indian, Ocean and Arabian sea wreak their fury thereon; on the West lies the RedSea and that Aegyptian Isthmus where it is parted from Africa, but where it dis-joynes it selfe from Europe, the Western limits are the Ae∣gean and Euxine seas, Palus Meotis, the River Tanais, and a right line drawne to the North. The chiefe Rivers are Euphrates, In∣dus, and Ganges. Africa. AFrica in forme resembles a Pyramis, and is built of these Countries on the Continent: 1 Barbary, 2 Numidia, 3 Ly∣dia, 4 the land of Negros, or Guine, with the adjacent Provin∣ces, 5 Aegypt, 6 Aethiopia or Abassia, Prester Iohns Kingdome, 7 Congo. 8 Monomotapa. The Ilands are Zocotara, in the Sea of Arabia, and that of S. Laurence or Madagascar, in the Indian Sea: but in the Atlan∣ticke Ocean, St. Thomas: the Iles of Cape Verde, Gorgones, or Hesperides, the Canaries, the Azores. Africa runs on in length 4150 miles, and is reckoned 2000. miles broad, or thereabout. The Easterne limits thereof are the Red Sea, and Isthmus of Aegypt, where it is severed from Asia: on the South continually rages the Southerne Ocean: Westward all the Coast is invironed with the violence of the Westerne or Atlanticke waves: on the North beares the Mediterranean Sea. The Rivers of most note, are Nilus and Niger. America. AMerica or the new World, acknowledgeth a twofold par∣tition of Mexicana, Peruana. America is counted in length from the North pole to the Straits of Magellan Southward. Mexicana is that which containes the Northerne Tract, com∣prehending the Nations of 1 Mexico, 2 Quiviro, (in which is included Nova Albion,) 3 Nico, 4 Florida, 5 Virginia, 6 New England, 7 Nova Francia 8. Terra de Labrador, or Corterealis, 9 Norumbergs, 10 Estotilland, 11 on the other side of Davis Straits Greenland, 12 California. This part is in compasse 1300 miles, and lookes Eastward up∣on Mar del North, or the Virginian Sea: West upon Mar del Zur, and the straits of Anian: the Northerne Coasts extend to the Pole: Southward it is joyned to Peruana by the Isthmus, and that but 17. miles broad. The chiefest River hereof is Rio St. Laurence, or the River of Canada. Peruana containeth the Southerne part of America, and com∣prehends. 1 Castilia del Oro, 2 Guiana, 3 Peru, 4 Brasile, 5 Chili, 6 Chica, 7 Patagones. This part is in compasse 17000 miles, being bounded on the North by that forenamed Jsthmus, with which it is joyned to Mexicana, lying East against the Aethiopian Ocean: Westward the Pacificke Sea, or Mar del Zur, presses upon it: beneath Southward the straits of Magellan limit it. Herein are these Ri∣vers of note, Orenoque, Marganno, or the River of Amazons, and the River of Plate. The Ilands of America are, Salomons Iles, which be many in number, & Turbarones, or the unfortunate Iles, all situate in the Pacifick sea, There lie in Mar del Nort, Terra nova, or New-found Land, Bacaleos, Trinidad, Jamaica, Cuba, Hispaniola, hat was first discovered by Columbus, the Lucais 40. in number, the Summer Jlands, or Bermudas, Smiths Ile, and divers other. Are to be sold by Tho: Jenner at the Exchange doore in Corne-hill, 1641.
