O861A R181071 [ocm]62369517 188041
DOMI¦NVS ILLV¦MINA¦TIO MEA blazon of the University of Oxford At a Meeting of the Heads of Houses, April 28. 1690. WHereas great Care hath been taken for Regulating the Apparel and Ha∣bits of all Scholars of whatsoever Rank or Degree within the Univer∣sity, and in order hereunto certain Models and Patterns of Gowns, Capps, and Habits to be worn by all Members of the University, of what Degree, Condition and Quality soever, have according to the Statutes of the same been made and fashioned, and now remain in a Press by the Vestry of the Convocation House, for Recourse to be had unto them upon all Occasions; yet notwithstanding divers Graduats as well as younger Scholars, have of late been Irregular in their Habits, by wearing Unstatutable Gowns and Capps, and also Unde∣cent Apparel, to the Dishonour of the University and the Government thereof: Wherefore to prevent the ill Effects and Consequences which such Irregularities may produce, and to take away all Plea and Pretence of Ignorance or other Excuse, the Vicechancellor and Heads of Houses, after mature Deliberation had of the Premises, did unanimously agree, That the Gover∣nours of all Colleges and Halls should inform all their Scholars in their respective Houses, what Sorts and kinds of Gowns, Capps, and other Scholastical Habits, and Apparel are to be worn in the University, and likewise to cause a Copy thereof to be affixed in some publick Place of their respe∣ctive Colleges and Halls. And moreover, they do prohibit all Scholars of what Degree or Quality soever the use of wearing in publick, Hats, much more Hats buttoned up, Crevatts, and Bands commonly called Crevatt-Bands, or Falling-Bands. And they do further require, that the Names of those that will not be reclaimed by this Admonition, be signified to Mr. Vicechancellor, to be punish'd, as the Statutes of the University in that Case direct. Models and Patterns of Scholastical Habits. I. Servitors Gowns to have round Capes, and Sleeves hanging behind the shoulder without Buttons. II. The Battelars Gown altogether the same with the Servitors, excepting that the Cape be square. III. The Commoners Gown to be distinguished from the former, by having half a Dozen of But∣tons on each Sleeves, not exceeding the price of Five Shillings the Dozen, nor the Bigness in the publick Pattern. IV. The Gentlemen-Commoners Gown to be Half-sleeved, and (if they please) to have Buttons not exceeding Four Dozen, nor the Rate of Five Shillings the Dozen, nor the Bigness in the pub∣lick Pattern. V. A Baronetts and Knights Gown, the same with the former, only distinguish'd (if they please) with Gold or Silver Buttons. VI. Noblemen to wear (if they please) Coloured Gowns of the same with the former. VII. Bachelours of Arts, and Foundation-Men, that are Undergraduats, to wear Wide-sleev'd Gowns, the Sleeves not reaching beyond the Fingers-ends, nor above an Ell in Compass. The Bachelours Sleeves to hang at length, the Foundation-Mens turned up to the Wrist. VIII. None to wear Mourning-Gowns, unless upon a Cause approved by the Head of the House, and to be allowed by the Vicechancellor, and Proctors. And those Gowns so allowed to be made of Cloth. IX. Servitors, Battelars, Commoners, Gentlemen-Commoners of all Conditions, being Un∣dergraduats, to wear round Capps. X. Gentlemen-Commoners to have a Hat-band round their Capps; Knights, Baronetts and Noble∣men being Undergraduats, to have Velvet Capps, with Silver or Gold Hat-bands. The Square Capps not to exceed the Breadth of twelve Fingers; and the Undergraduats Capps to have no Tuffts. XI. That Persons studying the Law, above Four Years Standing in the University, and being Enter'd in the Law Book, be permitted to wear a Half-sleev'd Gown without Buttons, and a Square Cap. And that no other Person of what Condition soever, presume to wear a Square Capp, but only those who are allowed by Statute. It was likewise at the same Meeting of the Heads of Houses agreed upon, That no Taylor within the Precincts of the University, presume to make any Scholars Gown, of any other Fashion then what is above prescribed, under the Penalty of being Discommoned, and Interdicted all Commerce with the University. JONATHAN EDWARDS, Vicechancellor.
